@@@@@


doc= 94935


Post, Julius Ferdinand Hans Ernst (1913-2001), psychiatrist, was born on 25 July 1913 at Berlin-Wilmersdorf, Germany, the only child of Paul Post (1882-1956), director and curator of the Zeughaus Museum, Berlin, and his wife, Clarissa Olga (Clary), 'nee' Daus (1887-1980), daughter of the theatre director Felix Daus. Living in fashionable Charlottenburg, Berlin, Felix, as he was always known, was educated at a series of schools in Berlin, finally attending the Herderschule Stadisches Reformrealgymnasium. He entered medical school in 1932, spending one term each in Hamburg and Berlin. 
Post had been baptized and confirmed, but as his mother was of Jewish descent, and he was left wing, with the rise of Nazism he left for England to continue studying medicine. He qualified at St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school in 1939. During the Second World War he worked with the leading psychiatrists Aubrey Lewis at Mill Hill and D. K. Henderson in Edinburgh. In 1944 he passed the examinations for the membership of the Royal College of Physicians (London) and the diploma in psychological medicine, and his first paper on older people's mental health was published, in the 'Journal of Mental Science'. He then spent eighteen months in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and was promoted major. In the war his emotions were affected by anxiety about his parents (they both survived in Germany), unemployment because of his nationality, internment on the Isle of Man as an enemy alien, marriage on 1 August 1941 to Cecily Elisabeth (Betty) Burnett (1907-1961), the death in infancy of their first child, and the birth of their son (Anthony) Julian in 1944. Their daughter, Deborah, was born in 1949. 
Post was appointed to the staff of the Maudsley Hospital in 1947, where Lewis earmarked him to lead the proposed geriatric unit at the Bethlem Royal Hospital 'I obeyed... to say without enthusiasm would be an understatement', he later said (Post, 'In the beginning', 15). But within a few years any reluctance to work with older people had been transformed into a therapeutic optimism and a zeal for the specialism. His in-patient ward, out-patient clinics, research, teaching, and the Gresham Club (a pioneering after-care club for former in-patients) all flourished. But the medical committee kept a tight rein on further developments, in particular not permitting longer-term treatment of dementia within the hospital, much to Post's chagrin. At the Maudsley and Bethlem hospitals he played key roles on numerous committees, including secretary and chairman of the medical committee. As chairman (1966-9) he demonstrated considerable leadership qualities, as during the difficult transition when both Lewis and David Davies, dean of the medical school, retired at the same time. By the 1970s, however, Post had considerably reduced his committee work. The medical committee's frequent unambiguously negative views, undermining service development for older people, probably influenced this change. It also coincided with a new role focusing specifically on the development of older people's services, as first chairman of the group for the psychiatry of old age at the Royal College of Psychiatrists (1973-8). 
Post always remembered the great inflation during his childhood, saying 'since then I have despised money' (Post and Heuer), a factor probably contributing to his dedication to work within the National Health Service. Despite a predominant interest in older people, he continued to treat, and to contribute significantly to research on, younger mentally ill people. However, his most significant research contributions were two monographs, 'The Significance of Affective Symptoms in Old Age' (1962) and 'Persistent Persecutory States of the Elderly' (1966), both long-term follow-up studies, the former based on his DM dissertation. These clearly demonstrated that older people could be treated as effectively as younger people with the same illnesses, and helped to break the incorrect assumption that all mental illness in old age was part of dementia and therefore untreatable. These observations complemented and reinforced seminal research by Martin Roth, with whom Post worked on the geriatric sub-committee of the research and clinical section of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association (1951-8). Post described 'The Clinical Psychiatry of Late Life' (1965), probably the best-known textbook of old age psychiatry in its day, as 'fun to write', while his other books were 'all blood, sweat and tears' (Post, interview, 'c'.1996). He wrote prolifically: as well as these three books, he was joint editor of two others, and wrote over sixty academic papers, and numerous chapters and conference papers. 
Post's first wife, Betty, died of a cerebral haemorrhage in 1961. He married Kathleen Jane Brittain ('c'.1910-2004) the following year, another close and successful marriage. The family lived at 3 Ridgeway Place, Wimbledon, but after his retirement in 1978 Post and his wife moved to 7 Leeward Gardens nearby. Honours conferred on him included fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians (1963), honorary fellowship of the Royal College of Psychiatrists (1981), a special award from the International Psychogeriatric Association (1995), and the British Geriatrics Society's fiftieth anniversary medal in 1997, 'in recognition of outstanding services to geriatric medicine'. When asked about his greatest disappointment, he replied 'I would have liked to have had a Chair... teaching was my favourite occupation... I would like to have been my own master' (Post, interview, 'c'.1996). 
Post was fortunate early in his career in his serendipitous sharing of common clinical interests and work opportunities in an outstanding teaching hospital with the influential Lewis, later retaining a good working relationship but remaining in awe of him. His contribution to the development of old age psychiatry lay in his dedicated, passionate care of his patients, his ability to pose relevant research hypotheses and to pursue his research to a conclusion, the clarity of his writings, and his charismatic and inspiring teaching of junior doctors, a significant number of whom went on to become psychiatrists for older people, leading the development of the specialism both in Britain and worldwide. Few psychiatrists made such an impact on the development of care for mentally ill older people. He died of a myocardial infarct on 23 March 2001 at St George's Hospital, Tooting. He was cremated at Putney Vale cemetery and his ashes were scattered. He was survived by his wife, Kathleen (who died in 2004 of Alzheimer's disease), and by his son, Julian, and daughter, Deborah. 


@@@@@


doc= 94940


Browne, William (d. 1489), merchant and benefactor, was the son of John Browne (died 1442), a Stamford draper and Calais stapler, and his wife, Margery (died 1460). He was born into a family that can be traced in Stamford back to the mid-fourteenth century. His date of birth is uncertain, though it seems likely that he was born during the decade following 1410. It is possible that he was the William Browne who was alderman (that is mayor) of Stamford in 1435, in which case he must have been born no later than about 1415, and probably considerably earlier. But the identification cannot be regarded as established, and the earliest date at which he is certainly named is 1437, when as William Browne, draper, he took over his father's business. 
William Browne substantially expanded the business that he had inherited, until John Leland could describe him as 'a marchant of a very wonderfulle richeness' (Toulmin Smith, 5.89). His wealth came from a variety of sources. First, he was engaged in the wool and cloth trades both as middleman and exporter, ranging as far afield as Coventry (where he, his brother, and his sister had interests). He was a member of the Calais staple from at least 1449, serving as its mayor in 1478, and with a number of trading partners he exported wool and cloth through Boston, Bishop's Lynn, Ipswich, and London. Second, he built up a large portfolio of properties in Stamford and in the counties of Lincolnshire, Rutland, and Northamptonshire; if his enemies are to be believed, he used ruthless methods to obtain some of them. But despite his acquisition of rural estates he never moved out of Stamford. Third, he engaged in systematic moneylending, against pledges of both property and plate, recording his dealings, in the words of his brother-in-law, 'in my brothers own hand in his rede boke' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/10, fols. 28'v'-29'r'); when he refounded the Guild of St Katherine in Stamford in 1480 and became its alderman for life, it ran as a money-making enterprise. His loans to successive kings obtained for him grants of forfeited properties, licences to export wool free from customs, and at least five general pardons. His purchase of the Northamptonshire manor of Lilford from the seventh Baron Welles, executed for treason in 1470 and subsequently attainted, was twice specifically exempted from forfeiture to the crown. Fourth, he served in a number of potentially profitable offices, mostly in Stamford. Following his putative aldermanship of 1435, Browne was elected alderman of the town in 1444, 1449, 1460, 1466, and 1470. In two of these years his tenure coincided with political crisis; early in 1461 the town was ransacked by Queen Margaret's army, and shortly afterwards negotiations started for a new charter, granted the following year, while in 1470 Stamford was again affected by warfare, this time the revolt of the Nevilles and their allies (who included Lord Welles) against Edward IV. Browne also became alderman of the town's guilds of Corpus Christi and St Mary, and of the Holy Trinity, as well as that of St Katherine. Moreover he and his family became members of the Guild of Corpus Christi at Boston, of which he served as alderman in 1481. 
In 1439 Browne obtained a comprehensive exemption from crown service. He was probably the William Browne appointed in 1446 to an embassy to the duke of Burgundy on behalf of the merchants of Holland, Zeeland, and Flanders, but was otherwise named to very few commissions. Instead his attention was given mostly to Stamford and its neighbourhood. He dominated the town council from at least 1465 until his death in 1489; intervening in a local dispute, he locked up the town seal. He also gave implements to the town gaol. As a justice of the peace he personally heard and recorded cases in the town, including one heard in the bishop of Lincoln's consistory court. Outside Stamford, notwithstanding his exemption, he was elector of the Lincolnshire MPs in 1450 and sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1477-8, both a JP for Rutland and four times sheriff of that county, and appointed to assess the lay subsidy in Kesteven in 1442 and in Rutland in 1483. That he was acceptable to all sides in the troubled period between 1483 and 1485 is shown by his having been confirmed as sheriff of Rutland by the governments of Edward V and Richard III, after being initially appointed by that of Edward IV, and by his ability to obtain confirmations of the foundation deeds for his hospital in Stamford from both Richard III and Henry VII. 
By the late 1430s William Browne had married Margaret Stokes (died 1489) of Warmington, Northamptonshire, where his own family had owned land for many years; she was a member of a close-knit group of like-minded people, clergy and laity, that centred on the Fairfax family of Deeping Gate, Northamptonshire, and enjoyed the patronage of Margaret Beauchamp, dowager duchess of Somerset, and the latter's daughter, Lady Margaret Beaufort, who sometimes resided at Maxey nearby. She is not known to have had any political affiliation, but became active in business with her husband, as her will reveals, and herself acted as executor for a prominent Stamford mercer, Thomas Philip, a former alderman of the borough. With William she had a daughter, Elizabeth, born about 1441, who married John Elmes of Henley-on-Thames, a Calais stapler. While William Browne was generous to his daughter's family, his wealth was mainly used to finance works of charity in Stamford -- a new hall for the Guild of St Katherine, the extensive rebuilding of the parish church of All Saints in the Market, and the building and endowment between 1475 and 1492 of the foundation that he instructed should be called 'the hospital of William Browne', an almshouse that still survives, as a fitting monument to one of Stamford's most important residents. 
William Browne never bore a coat of arms, though arms were attributed to him soon after his death. Indeed, far from claiming gentility he was careful always to style himself 'merchant of Staunford', or stapler of Calais, and to identify himself either by his family's trading mark or his wife's rebus, a stork. He provided himself and members of his family with memorial brasses, some of which survive in the parish church of All Saints in the Market, where he had adopted the north aisle as 'his proper chapel' (Butcher, 71). He maintained his own chaplain, who possessed an English version of 'Advice for Recluses' (BL, Harley MS 2372), and also supported an anchoress in St Paul's Church, Stamford. William died on 14 April 1489, leaving Browne's Hospital to be completed by his executors and trustees, who included his grandson William Elmes. Margaret died six months later, on 28 October 1489. Her brother Thomas Stokes, a canon of York and rector of Easton on the Hill, near Stamford, was her executor and oversaw the continuation of work on the hospital, work that was completed after Stokes's death in 1494 by William Elmes, who put his own arms on the hospital seal. Almost certainly through William Browne's trading interests, his sister Alice was married first to Richard Botoner, fishmonger of Coventry, and second to Robert Bradmeydew, a draper who was mayor of Coventry in 1457, with whom she had a son, John. William and John Browne ['see below'] acted as feoffees in the settlements accompanying both her marriages. After the death of her second husband Alice returned to Stamford, where she died on 10 February 1491; her memorial brass in All Saints' Church commemorates her as 'Alice Bradmeydew sister of William Browne of Staunford'. 
Both in the wool trade and in the government of Stamford William was assisted by his brother 
John and Agnes Browne are also commemorated by a memorial brass in All Saints' Church. As well as recording the date of John's death (13 February 1476) and the fact that he practised the same craft as his father, its inscription adjures Agnes to become the bride of Christ after her husband's decease. She did not remarry and died in 1484. She and John had a son, Christopher, and two daughters. Christopher Browne (died 1516) became a merchant of the Calais staple, and in 1480 obtained a grant of arms, thereafter styling himself esquire. It may have been through his links with Calais that he came to throw in his lot with Henry Tudor, whom he joined in exile and with whom he invaded England in 1485. He subsequently joined the court that the new king's mother, Lady Margaret Beaufort, held at Collyweston, just outside Stamford, and himself moved to Tolethorpe nearby. Although he was three times sheriff of Rutland, a JP in three counties, and mayor of the Boston staple in 1500, he did not sever his links with Stamford, serving both as alderman and MP for the borough on three separate occasions. He was married twice, to Grace, daughter of the lawyer John Pinchbeck, and to Agnes Bedingfeld, a member of a leading Norfolk gentry family. His numerous descendants included the religious separatist Robert Browne. 


@@@@@


doc= 94941


John Browne (d. 1476), with the latter always appearing in a supporting role -- it is doubtless significant that the two men used the same merchant's mark, and that John should have married Agnes Stokes (died 1484), the sister of William's wife, Margaret. John Browne was alderman of Stamford in 1448, 1453, and 1462, but is unlikely to have been the man of that name who was a JP in the Holland division of Lincolnshire and served on a number of royal commissions. In November 1450, as John Browne of Stamford, he was accused of engaging in treasonable acts in that town in support of the duke of York. He is reputed to have joined his brother in the rebuilding of All Saints' Church, but not in the founding of Browne's Hospital. However, he left significant memorials of a different kind. He commissioned a fine Flemish book of hours (now Free Library of Philadelphia, Widener MS 3) that is notable not only for containing a miniature of himself and his wife kneeling at the mass of St Gregory, but also for having preserved its original calf binding, the work of Anthonis van Gavere of Bruges, with silver-gilt clasps and John's name and merchant's mark engraved on the back. 


@@@@@


doc= 94944


Lakshmi Bai, rani of Jhansi (1827/1828-1858), warrior queen in India, was born at Benares, India, probably in late 1827 or early 1828, the only child of Moropant Tambe and his wife, Bhagirathi Bai, a woman versed in Hindu mythology. Her father was an employee of Chimanjee Appa, brother of the peshwa, Baji Rao II. She was given the birth name Manikarnika. On Chimanjee's death in 1832 her father joined the service of Baji Rao, who after his surrender to the British in 1818 lived at Bithur, near Cawnpore. When Manikarnika, a small child, lost her mother, Moropant devoted himself to bringing her up. He remarried after Manikarnika's marriage, and had a son and another daughter. The family was Marathi Hindu Brahman. 
Manikarnika had no institutional education, but her father gave her training fit for a future queen (on the prediction of an astrologer, so it was said). She learnt Marathi, Hindi, Sanskrit, and Persian, and became proficient in riding, fencing, shooting, and other physical feats usually reserved for men. Handsome, intelligent, possessing a pair of 'particularly fine eyes' (Lang, 94), she was a favourite of Baji Rao, at whose initiative, in 1842, she was married to Gangadhar Rao Newalkar, the childless widowed raja of Jhansi (the overlordship of which had been ceded by the peshwa to the British). Manikarnika became Rani Lakshmi Bai. Her father received employment in the state. 
Life was at first difficult for Lakshmi Bai, since Gangadhar was taciturn, and she was confined indoors. Nevertheless she quickly gained her husband's respect and went with him on pilgrimages, when she enjoyed the freedom of outdoor life. In 1851 she gave birth to a son, who died within three months. Gangadhar fell sick, but a day before his death on 21 November 1853 he adopted Damodar Rao, descended from his grandfather, as a son to succeed him. His last request to the British, in a letter personally handed over to the local British official, Major Ellis, was that Lakshmi Bai should be allowed to manage his state as the 'malika' (or regent) until the boy, his successor, grew up. 
Lakshmi Bai, after the custom for Hindu widows, took to wearing white, but unlike most she neither shaved her head nor gave up wearing jewellery. She was described as appearing at court wearing loose trousers, a bejewelled cap of bright scarlet silk on her head, a diamond necklace round her neck, and her waist tightly drawn by a gold-embroidered belt sporting two silver-mounted pistols and an elegant hand-dagger. While she competently administered the principality, gave directions, and heard petitions and reports, she spent long hours in the prayer room, and regularly visited the Mahalakshmi temple in great style. This was as much a political as a religious act. People had a glimpse of their rani and knew who ruled. The Brahmans, impressed by her religiosity -- and munificence to them -- accepted her unconventionality. Her subjects almost worshipped the ground she walked on. 
The problem was with the British. Under the Hindu law of inheritance Damodar Rao was heir and successor to Gangadhar Rao. Yet Lord Dalhousie, governor-general of India, decided to annex Jhansi under the doctrine of lapse, a rule that meant that on the failure of natural heirs the dependent states would lapse to the British. Aware of the policy, and before Dalhousie's decision reached her, Lakshmi Bai sent two petitions to him (the originals were partially drafted in Persian by her) seeking sanction of the adoption. She mentioned the loyalty shown by the rulers of Jhansi, the assistance given to the British on many occasions, and their mutual treaties of friendship. Most important, by the treaty with Ramachandra Rao in 1817, the British had agreed to 'acknowledge him and his heirs ('warison') and successors ('janishan')' as 'hereditary rulers' of Jhansi. Lakshmi Bai argued that treaties were drafted with care. It was not possible that the term 'janishan', along with the term 'warison', with a different meaning, was used 'without a precise understanding of its meaning' (Sinha, 114 and 116). Damodar was accepted as Gangadhar's legitimate successor under Hindu law, and the British should respect the solemnity of a written treaty. Dalhousie's contention, stated in his minute, was that Jhansi was a 'dependent principality' held by a chief under 'grant from the British Government as sovereign', and that the 'dependent nature of the chiefship... does not admit of dispute' (ibid., 19). Under his orders Jhansi was incorporated in the British dominions in March 1854, and Lakshmi Bai, offered a pension, was asked to move to Rani Mahal in the city. Although the rani is believed to have said 'I will not surrender my Jhansi' (Tahmankar, 48), she left the fort, but refusing to accept the decision as final she sent further petitions to Dalhousie arguing for the restoration of Jhansi. 'It is notorious, my Lord', she wrote on 22 April 1854, 'that the more powerful a state may be the less disposed it is to acknowledge an error or an act of arbitrary character' (Lebra-Chapman, 35). Dalhousie did not relent. The rani then appointed John Lang, a British barrister, to help her get the annexation annulled, and on his advice appealed to the court of directors of the East India Company. She asserted that the rulers of Jhansi had an absolute right to its territory, which they had never transferred to the company. Did the 'disowning' of adoption confer on the company the 'right' to 'possess the territory' and 'seize the Government' of Jhansi? (ibid., 37). The arguments were rejected. 
Then came the revolt of 1857, known later as the Indian mutiny, or otherwise the First Indian War of Independence. When the army units in the cantonment at Jhansi -- soldiers of the 12th native infantry and 14th irregular cavalry -- rebelled, the British asked for Lakshmi Bai's assistance, which she extended. The rebels, too, approached her, and she gave them help as well. It is possible that she was playing a double game, and was at heart with the rebels, judging that the time had come to avenge her injury. It is equally possible that she was inclined to help the British, expecting in return the restoration of Jhansi. In June 1857 she wrote to them, saying that she had been forced to assist the rebels, requesting military assistance, and accepting temporary administration of Jhansi on his behalf. Within a very short time she 'proved herself a most capable ruler', throwing 'into every act of her government all the energy of a strong and resolute character' (Kaye and Malleson, 3.126); she established a mint, appointed officers with instructions to maintain order, and defeated invasions from the neighbouring states of Orcha and Datia. However, she had assisted the rebels who had proclaimed her their rani; and her men, including her father, were in league with the rebels, who had unjustly massacred the British men, women, and children who had taken refuge in the fort and had surrendered only on assurance of safe passage. Calcutta was convinced that the rani was an instigator in the revolt and the massacre, and Canning decided that 'she must be tried' (Majumdar, 291). 
Probably Lakshmi Bai was pushed into war. She rose to the occasion, returned to the fort, filled it with supplies and ammunition, raised fresh troops, personally supervised their parade, inspired them by her presence and words, inspected the stores, and held meetings with untiring energy. In March 1858 the British army under General Hugh Rose invaded and besieged the city of Jhansi, which was, according to G. W. Forrest, 'defended by a garrison of desperate and disciplined men' (Forrest, 220). The British mortars opened fire; the rani's soldiers, men and women, in return 'poured a fearful storm of missiles upon the besiegers', while the rani made rounds among them with words of courage and inspiration. They 'sent down from the walls volleys of musketry, rockets, pots filled with powder, logs of wood, every sort of missile which they could lay hands upon' (ibid., 208-9). The rani was expecting assistance from the rebel leader Tatia Topi, who, however, was defeated on his way to Jhansi by Rose. On 5 April the British entered Jhansi. From inside the fortress in the besieged town the rani escaped, dressed as a man, with her adopted son strapped to her body, on the night of 4 April. 
Lakshmi Bai rode hard all night and reached Kalpi, the headquarters of Tatia Topi and Rao Saheb of the peshwa's family. She asked Rao to give her an army so that she could fight. Rao gave the command of the army instead to Tatia Topi, who was once again severely defeated by Rose at Koonch. The rani with utmost exertions transformed the demoralized troops' 'despair to confidence' (Kaye and Malleson, 5.126), yet the brilliant Rose won again at Kalpi. The rebel leaders then decided to hasten to Gwalior, to appeal to Maharaja Jayaji Rao Sindhia's troops and seize the fort. This plan, strategically important, was attributed by Malleson to Lakshmi Bai, who 'possessed the genius' and 'the daring... necessary for the conception of great deeds' (ibid., 144). When the rebels arrived Sindhia marched against them, but his own troops fraternized with them. Sindhia fled, and the rebel leaders marched into Gwalior in triumph, creating a sensation throughout India. Nana Saheb was proclaimed the peshwa. There ensued jubilant celebrations, while the rani, somewhat ignored, furiously protested against the waste of time and money. Her sense of crisis and urgency proved right. The British appeared almost immediately. During the battle that followed -- at Kotah-ki-sarai on 17 June 1858 -- Lakshmi Bai, now entrusted with the command of the forces, mounted on horseback, and clad in her usual military uniform -- a red jacket, trousers, and a white turban -- encouraged them throughout the day. When the British hussars charged she boldly faced them, but her troops were dispersed and she was killed -- differing versions making it impossible to state exactly how. Her followers, determined that the British must not capture her even dead, hastily burned her body, without a proper funeral. Moropant was hanged after Kalpi. Damodar Rao was pensioned off with a pittance. 
Anecdotes and facts intertwine so closely that it is sometimes hard to separate the actual rani from the legend that has grown around her. Young, magnetic, brave, energetic, possessed of great intellect and strong determination, in every sense a leader, Lakshmi Bai, on account of her charisma, and because she proved to be 'the bravest and best military leader of the rebels', as Hugh Rose described her (Forrest, 282), became an icon of the Indian freedom movement. Subhas Chandra Bose, who founded the Indian National Army to fight against the British during the Second World War, named its women's regiment after her. Whether the stories which revolve around her are true is certainly open to question, and clearly her prime aim was to secure Jhansi for her son. What is remarkable is that at a time when women were hardly seen or spoken of, not to mention being involved in riding or fighting, Lakshmi Bai, a woman from a humble background, attracted widespread respect despite her unconventionality, exhibited great administrative acumen, ventured to enter single-handed into a contest with Dalhousie, and gave heroic leadership in a battle against superior armed forces. Her 'great influence over the hearts of her people' (to borrow Malleson's words), and her 'force of character, added to a splendid and inspiring courage' (Kaye and Malleson, 3.126-7), enabled her to offer stiff resistance to the British. When defeated, she courted a soldier's death. The impressive statue in Gwalior with her mounted on a horse, her raised right hand holding a sword, represents how people visualize her. Ballads and folk songs celebrate her prowess, villagers still sing of her valour and virtues, intellectuals produce novels, plays, and films, folk art depicts her valiantly fighting, and legends grow. Often called the Joan of Arc or the Boudicca of India, oftener described as an incarnation of the goddess of power, in public memory she became the most revered heroine in Indian history. 


@@@@@


doc= 94945


Mayo, Katherine (1867-1940), author in the United States of America, was born on 24 January 1867 in Ridgeway, Pennsylvania, USA, the daughter of James Henry Mayo, mining engineer, and his wife, Harriet Elizabeth, 'nee' Ingraham. The Mayos were descended from the Revd John Mayo, who had come to Boston, Massachusetts, from England in 1638. Katherine Mayo was educated in private schools in Boston and in Cambridge, Massachusetts, before the family moved to Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey. Her career as a writer began in 1892 when she sold a short story to 'Life' magazine. Early in her career she sometimes used the 'noms de plume' Katherine Prence and Katherine Monck. Her writings appeared in the 'New York Evening Post', 'Scribner's', and the 'Atlantic Monthly'; but she also supplemented her income by selling indigenous people's relics to various institutions. In 1899 she accompanied her father to Dutch Guiana, where he had gone to prospect for gold. After eight years in the Dutch colony she returned to the United States, where, after meeting her in 1910, she established a permanent home with Margery Moyca Newell (1882-1968), at the latter's estate in Bedford Hills, New York. Her partnership with Newell, an orphaned heiress from a wagon-manufacturing family from Kenosha, Wisconsin, provided Mayo with the financial stability to pursue her writing career. 
Mayo found an early patron in Oswald Garrison Villard, of the 'New York Evening Post', who introduced her to some of the best-known names in American publishing. She was Villard's research assistant on his book 'John Brown, 1800-1855: a Biography Fifty Years After' (1910), a role that was later fictionalized in Russell Banks's novel 'Cloudsplitter' (1998). She was also an assistant to Horace White, editor-in-chief of the 'New York Evening Post', with his book 'Life of Lyman Trumbull' (1913). Villard recruited Mayo and Newell to his campaign for the creation of a state police force in New York to be modelled on the recently created Pennsylvania state police force. Mayo wrote numerous articles and three books for the campaign, providing favourable portrayals of the Pennsylvania state police, notorious among socialists and labour groups as an instrument in the hands of capitalists. Her 'Justice to All: the Story of the Pennsylvania State Police' (1917), which carried an introduction by Theodore Roosevelt, was distributed to every New York state legislator before the successful passage of the 'Albany State Police Bill'. Mayo's next book, 'That Damn Y' (1920), sought to rehabilitate the reputation of the Young Men's Christian Association, which had come under criticism for its international work during the First World War. In 1921, along with Newell, Mayo started the British Apprentice Club in New York to provide hospitality to British seamen. 
Mayo's two subsequent books, on American rule in the Philippines and on British rule in India, were both suggested to her by powerful friends at the Rockefeller Foundation. 'The Isles of Fear: the Truth about the Philippines' (1925) and 'Mother India' (1927) were designed as strong indictments of the post-First World War colonial policy of the devolution of political authority to subject peoples. General Leonard Wood, governor-general of the Philippines, who was host to Mayo and Newell during their short trip to the islands, credited Mayo with helping him to reverse the policy of 'Filipinization' pursued by his predecessor, Francis Burton Harrison. The British writer Lionel Curtis, who wrote the preface to the British edition of 'The Isles of Fear', sent it to British officials in India for use as propaganda. For Mayo's case against political reforms in India, the India Office in London decided to become involved unofficially rather than officially. (Indeed, subsequently both Mayo and the India Office denied any collusion.) Mayo's friends at the Rockefeller Foundation had advised her to make her case by focusing on public health in India, but British officials were sceptical of the efficacy of this strategy. J. H. Adam, an officer in the political intelligence department of the government of India, gave Mayo an alternative focus in the sexual problems of India, especially child marriage and premature maternity. 'Mother India' charged that the cause of all the political, economic, and social woes of India lay not in the impact of British colonialism, but in the sexual degeneracy inherent in Hinduism. 'Mother India' became an instant international 'cause celebre'. 
While Mayo was no stranger to controversy, her earlier writings having courted controversy for their anti-labour, anti-Catholic, and pro-imperialist bias, the uproar over 'Mother India' was unprecedented. Even though both supporters and critics indulged in personal attacks, there was also a widespread consensus that India suffered from grave social problems. Where critics disagreed with Mayo, however, was on the causes of and solution to these problems. Mayo's critics, including Mahatma Gandhi, held British policies rather than an oversexed Hindu culture responsible for the social condition of India. Likewise Indian women's organizations rejected Mayo's diagnoses of Indian women's problems, blaming the obstructionist role of the colonial government for preventing necessary social reforms. Even leaders of the radical anti-caste movements in India, who sympathized with Mayo's critique of Indian nationalism, rejected her belief in the inherent superiority of Christianity and in the benefits conferred by British colonial rule. Despite the book's immense popularity, most liberal and anti-imperialist groups, especially in the United States, remained unconvinced by Mayo's argument. Similarly the American women's movement failed to rally behind 'Mother India', leaving Mayo to seek allies among such conservative women's groups as the Daughters of the American Revolution. Even the British feminist Eleanor Rathbone, who was an early supporter of 'Mother India', eventually parted company with Mayo because of the latter's crusade to absolve the colonial government of any responsibility for the situation in India. By the end of the controversy mainly diehard imperialists like Winston Churchill continued to align themselves with Mayo's attack on further political reforms in India. The controversy had brought the nature of the colonial state, no less than the social condition of India, under intense international public scrutiny. The subsequent mythologizing of Mayo's contribution in 'Mother India', by imperialists, imperialist-feminists, and Indian nationalists alike, obscured the mixed results of her imperial propaganda. 
Although the India Office continued to play a role in Mayo's further writings on British rule in India, none of these attracted the same attention as 'Mother India'. Her last book on India, a pictorial study entitled 'The Face of Mother India' (1935), was ultimately banned by the government of India for its overtly anti-Hindu and pro-Muslim bias. For her later books Mayo returned to focusing predominantly on domestic issues in the United States, though in her final years she had begun work on a book on the international traffic in narcotics. She died at the home she shared with Margery Newell in Bedford Hills, New York, on 9 October 1940. Her funeral service, held at St Matthew's protestant episcopal church at Bedford Center, New York, was a reminder that her career, albeit dwarfed by the notoriety of 'Mother India', extended beyond her most famous book. New York state troopers served as pall bearers and provided a guard of honour at the service, while representatives of the British Apprentice Club laid an elaborate floral tribute on her coffin. Messages of sympathy were received from a number of dignitaries, including Lord Lothian, the British ambassador to the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 94946


Tagore family (per. 1690-1951) traced their connection with the area now occupied by Calcutta, India, back to the end of the seventeenth century, when their ancestors migrated from the district of Jessore in eastern Bengal to the village of Gobindapore on the River Hooghly, where Fort William of Calcutta was later built. In the words of Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), the most remarkable member of a remarkable family dynasty, his ancestors came with the 'earliest tide of the fluctuating fortune of the East India Company' (Tagore, 'My Life', 9). They left their inherited priestly duties as high Brahmans to become 'banians' or brokers to the Europeans. The villagers of Gobindapore addressed their Brahman guests as 'thakur' or 'holy sir', which was anglicized into Tagore as the family's 'padabi' or title. In Bengali their title is still Thakur. According to Blair B. Kling, a historian of the 'age of enterprise' in eastern India, these 'descendants' of 'humble priests' became 'aristocrats' or 'the 'Medici' of Calcutta' (Kling, 10). The Tagore family could boast of the first independent Indian merchant under East India Company rule, of several venturesome landholders and 'banians', of freethinking reformers, of Sanskrit scholars and polyglots, a senior Indian civil servant, and a world-famous poet. 
Oral tradition takes the Tagore pedigree back to Bhattanarayan, who was chief of the five Brahmans of Kanauj in central India. In this semi-historical Tagore ancestry a key figure was Purushottam Vidyavagish, who was supposedly Bhattanarayan's twenty-fifth descendant. (A 'sloka', or chant, sung at the obsequies for Rabindranath Tagore's death listed a further ten ancestors from Purushottam to Dwarkanath Tagore.) In the family mythology Purushottam was responsible for lowering its high brahmanical status to 'pirali' Brahmans, or Brahmans who were contaminated by contact with Muslims. Whatever may actually have happened the family was sidetracked in the Brahman hierarchy. Rabindranath Tagore referred to it as the 'freedom of the outcaste' (Tagore, 'My Life', 7). 
The family records begin with Purushottam's nephew, Panchanan. He and his uncle Sukhdev came to Gobindapore about 1690. Their income came from supplying provisions to the East India Company. Panchanan built a house and a temple to Siva at Gobindapore. His capable son 


@@@@@


doc= 94947


Sarabhai family (per. c.1820-c.2000), industrialists and philanthropists in India, can trace its origins to 


@@@@@


doc= 94949


Rai, Lala Lajpat (1865-1928), reformer and politician in India, was born on 28 January 1865 in the village of Dhudike, in the Ferozepore district of the Punjab, British India, the eldest son of Radha Krishan (died 1923), a teacher of Persian and Urdu, and his wife, Gulab Devi. He was educated at home by his father, from whom he acquired a strong interest in religion and history, before he attended the government middle school at Rupar. He was married at the age of thirteen to Radha Devi, who came from a similar Agarwal caste background. He completed his education at the Ludhiana mission school before joining Government College, Lahore. His studies were increasingly subordinated to activities associated with the Hindu religious reformist organization the Arya Samaj, which he joined at the end of 1882. 
Lajpat Rai left college without a degree. He thus had to take up the relatively lowly post of a 'mukhtar' in legal practice at Jagraon. He moved from there to Rohtak, where he combined legal work with involvement in the Arya Samaj. He qualified as a 'vakil' (or attorney) at the third attempt in 1885. From 1886 to 1892 he worked in the courts at Hissar and established an active Arya Samaj organization. He was increasingly drawn to the wider social and political horizons of Lahore, the capital of the Punjab. It was there that he helped establish DAV College in memory of the founder of the movement, Swami Dayananda. In 1893 the Arya Samaj split into its 'college' and 'vegetarian' factions. Lajpat Rai became a prominent member of the more moderate 'college' faction. He established an Arya Samaj orphanage in Ferozepore and became involved in famine relief in both 1897 and 1899-90. From 1898 he curtailed his legal practice to devote his energies to the Arya Samaj. 
Lajpat Rai first attended the annual session of the Indian National Congress in 1893. It was over a decade, however, before he rose to political prominence. In June 1905 he travelled to London with Gopal Krishna Gokhale as part of an official Congress deputation. This was the first of a growing number of overseas visits. Lajpat Rai was increasingly identified with what became known as the 'extremist' wing of the Congress. The British authorities brought a case against his weekly newspaper, 'The Punjabee', and his involvement in the 1907 agrarian unrest in the Punjab led to his deportation without trial to Mandalay, Burma, in May of that year. His detention lasted for six months. It added greatly to his political reputation. He returned at the time of the split between the 'moderate' and 'extremist' wings of the Congress. In 1909 and 1910 he made two further visits to England. He also played an important role in the formation in 1909 of the Punjab Hindu Sabha. This was the forerunner of the all-India Hindu Mahasabha organization, which was formed in 1915. 
Lajpat Rai began a long overseas sojourn in December 1913. He initially visited England as part of a Congress delegation before travelling to the United States and Japan. He gave lectures in both countries and met a number of Indian revolutionaries. He popularized the Indian nationalist struggle in America through the publication 'Young India' and the Indian Home Rule League of America, which he founded in October 1915. As a result of these activities he was not permitted to return to India during the war years, while his publications were proscribed. It was only in February 1920 that he arrived back in Bombay. His native Punjab province had been the scene in 1919 of the Jallianwalla Bagh massacre, and the subsequent introduction of martial law. He was arrested in November 1921 during the non-co-operation movement (launched by Mahatma Gandhi the previous year, to protest against British rule), under the terms of the 'Seditious Meetings Act'. During his subsequent imprisonment his father died, and his own health deteriorated. He was transferred to Dharmsala prison from Lahore, then released on 16 August 1923. 
The period 1923-7 saw two further visits to Britain, where Lajpat Rai renewed his acquaintance with Beatrice and Sidney Webb, and to Geneva, where he attended the 1926 International Labour Organization conference. Within Indian politics he had a somewhat uncomfortable period as a member of the Swaraj Party, which, under the leadership of Motilal Nehru, contested elections to the legislative councils under the scheme of 'dyarchy' introduced by the 'Government of India Act' of 1919. The British refusal to grant India a new constitution and dominion status had by 1926 ended this tentative experiment in reforming the raj from within. When the controversial Simon commission visited Lahore on 30 October 1928 Lajpat Rai led a procession against it. He received a number of blows when the police baton-charged the peaceful protesters. When he died, after contracting a fever, on 17 November his doctors maintained there was a direct link between the severe beating he had suffered and his demise. He was cremated by the bank of the Ravi River in Lahore that evening. He was regarded as a hero of the nationalist struggle and his death encouraged Bhagat Singh and his fellow Punjabi revolutionaries to take revenge on the British authorities. 


@@@@@


doc= 94951


Pant, Govind Ballabh (1887-1961), politician in India, was born on 30 August 1887 at Khunt, Almora district, United Provinces, India, the son of Manorath Pant, a court official who rose to be a 'naib tahsildar' (revenue collector), and his wife, Govindi. He was educated by private tutors at home and went to school at the age of ten. He passed his matriculation examination in the first division, but at the age of fourteen suffered a heart attack. His illness interrupted his studies and might have stunted his academic career altogether if he had not insisted on enrolling for further studies at Allahabad University. Because of his fragile health his family had been reluctant to send him away from home, but his health improved in Allahabad. He chose to study English literature, politics, and mathematics, which turned out to be an excellent combination for his future career in law and politics. In 1907 he joined the law college. As a student he was conscientious to a fault; even an occasional hour spent in gossip left him with feelings of guilt. He became an avid reader of newspapers, including Lucknow's British-owned 'The Pioneer'. From his notebooks and diary from this time it is clear that he was thrilled by the visits of Congress leaders to Allahabad, such as those of B. G. Tilak and G. K. Gokhale. The most enduring influence on him was that of Gokhale, who was noted for his earnest study of problems and their articulation in measured language. When Gokhale died at the age of forty-eight in 1915 Pant wept. 
Pant was married three times. His first two wives died in 1909 and 1914. In 1916 he married Kalawati, with whom he had one son, Krishna Chandra Pant ('b'. 1929), later a politician and government minister in independent India, and two daughters, Laxmi and Pushpa. On leaving Allahabad Pant started his legal practice at Almora, his home town, but he clashed with the local British magistrate and finally settled in Naini Tal, the summer capital of the United Provinces, where he made his mark at the local bar. He took an interest in social and educational reforms but was cautious in entering into active politics. He attended the historic session of the Indian National Congress at Lucknow in 1916, but did not join Mahatma Gandhi's non-co-operation movement against the British raj until January 1922, when Gandhi was poised to launch civil disobedience. Pant was ready to go to gaol, but following an outburst of popular violence in the eastern United Provinces Gandhi called off civil disobedience. The result was the collapse of the non-co-operation movement and the emergence of a group within the Congress -- the Swarajists -- led by Motilal Nehru and C. R. (Chittaranjan) Das, who called for the revocation of the Congress boycott of legislatures. This unexpected twist to nationalist politics opened new vistas for Pant's political career. He fought and won the election to the United Provinces legislative council on the Swarajist ticket. He caught the perceptive eye of Motilal Nehru, and thanks to his support was elected leader of the Congress party in the United Provinces council in preference to better-known Congress leaders from the province. 
In 1928, during a demonstration at Lucknow against the Simon commission (which was charged with inquiring into a future constitution for India), Pant was severely beaten up by the police, which gave him lifelong back pain. His parliamentary career was in abeyance between 1929 and 1934 during the civil disobedience movement, when the Indian National Congress was outlawed and thousands of its members imprisoned. By a happy coincidence he was a fellow prisoner of Jawaharlal Nehru in Bareilly and Dehra Dun gaols in 1932. They hit it off very well. In his gaol diary Nehru described Pant as 'a lovable person' and 'a brave, highly intelligent and absolutely straight man. Always in pain, yet always with a smile' ('Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru', vol. 5, 1973, 364, 401). This close contact laid the foundation of their mutual esteem and loyalty which lasted until Pant's death. In 1934, when the Congress ended its boycott of legislatures and contested elections to the central legislative assembly, Pant was elected to it and made deputy leader of the Congress party. This marked his entry on the national political stage. His association with the Congress parliamentary board signified his rising political stature. His political acumen and debating skills won the appreciation of the highest leaders of the Congress, Gandhi, Nehru, and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. 
In 1937, after the provincial elections held under the 'Government of India Act' of 1935, Pant became the chief minister of the United Provinces. He managed to win the confidence and co-operation of British members of the Indian Civil Service. Sir Harry Haig, the governor, wrote to the viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, that Pant was 'an interesting and rather attractive personality', and 'essentially a conciliator and not a dictator' (Rau, 183, 184). However, the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 (and Linlithgow's declaration of Indian belligerence, without consulting Indian representatives) led to a clash between the British government and the Indian National Congress, and the resignation of the Congress provincial ministries. Neither the British cabinet, headed by Neville Chamberlain and later by Winston Churchill, nor the government of India, headed by Linlithgow, proved capable of the bold and imaginative stroke of policy needed to conciliate Indian nationalism. The crisis came to a head in 1942 with Gandhi's 'Quit India' call to the British. Pant spent the next three years in Ahmednagar Fort along with other members of the Congress working committee. He was released in 1945, and after the election to the provincial legislatures ordered by the Labour government which came to power in 1945 again headed the Congress ministry in the United Provinces in 1946. A year later came the transfer of power and the end of British rule. 
Pant's urgent task in 1947 was to save the United Provinces from the wave of communal bitterness and bloodshed which had swept over the whole of western Pakistan, eastern Punjab, and Delhi in the wake of the partition of the country. He was able to maintain relative peace in the United Provinces and thereafter to address himself to tasks of administrative and economic rehabilitation. His two years' experience as chief minister during 1937-9 stood him in good stead. He made a concerted effort to foster the economic development of his province. He was an outstanding administrator, but did not build up a second line of leadership, which could have maintained the pace of economic progress initiated by him. Moreover, without his conciliatory presence, the Congress party in the United Provinces was rent with faction. 
In 1950 the prime minister, Nehru, had offered Pant the post of finance minister in the union cabinet; but he was reluctant to leave his province (which he renamed Uttar Pradesh the same year). In 1954 he agreed to move to New Delhi and was given the important portfolio of home affairs. In 1957 he was awarded India's highest honour, the Bharat Ratna. As home minister Pant was a tower of strength to Nehru, especially in crises such as those created by the fierce controversies on the reorganization of the boundaries of the Indian provinces on a linguistic basis, which he handled with consummate skill. It was fortunate for him that in the formative stage of the Indian republic he was called on to fill the roles of a parliamentarian and administrator for which his talents, temperament, and experience had best equipped him. He died, while still in office, on 7 March 1961, in New Delhi, following a stroke. Several institutions were named after him, including the Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, the Govind Ballabh Pant Social Science Institute, Allahabad, and the Govind Ballabh Pant Hospital, New Delhi. 


@@@@@


doc= 94954


Kidwai, Rafi Ahmad (1894-1954), politician in India, was born on 18 February 1894 in the village of Masauli, in Bara Banki district, United Provinces, India, the eldest of four sons of Imtiaz Ali Kidwai, a middle-class 'zamindar' (or landowner) and government servant, and his wife, Rashid ul-Nisa, who died during his early childhood. He received his early education from a tutor at the home of his uncle, Wilayat Ali, a politically active lawyer, and in the village school. He attended the Government High School, Bara Banki, until 1913. He then attended the Mohammadan Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh, where he graduated BA in 1918. He began work towards the degree of LLB, but, swept up by the 'khilafat' and non-co-operation movements in 1920-21 (the first of Mahatma Gandhi's major all-India 'satyagraha', or non-violent civil resistance, movements) and jailed for his participation, he never completed it. He married Majid ul-Nisa in 1919. They had one child, a son, who died at seven years of age. 
After his release from jail in 1922 Kidwai moved to Allahabad, where he became attached to the Nehru family, as private secretary first to Motilal Nehru, then to Jawaharlal, to whom he remained devoted thereafter. Kidwai, a virtuoso politician, took the leading organizational role in numerous ventures: in the election campaign of the Swaraj Party (an electoral offshoot of the Congress) in 1926, during which he himself was elected to the central legislative assembly; as chief whip of the Congress in the central legislative assembly from 1926 to 1929; in the 'satyagraha' and agrarian no-tax movement in the United Provinces in 1930-31; as general secretary of the United Provinces Congress committee in 1931, then president, from which position he led the organization of the campaign for the provincial assembly elections of 1937; in his subsequent organization of the 1946 elections; and in many other roles. 
From 1930-31 until the independence of India in 1947 Kidwai was, alongside Govind Ballabh Pant, the leading figure in Congress politics in the United Provinces and in the governments formed in that province under the terms of the 'Government of India Act' of 1935 in 1937 and 1946. As revenue minister in the first government he was responsible for piloting the 'United Provinces Tenancy Act', which modified some of the burdens of the tenantry, presaging the post-independence abolition of the 'zamindari' land system. In the 1946 government he was second to Pant as home minister. Kidwai had been Pant's political manager, a situation of dependence that Pant could no longer tolerate, especially in the prevailing atmosphere of anti-Muslim communal hostility in the United Provinces. Nehru therefore called Kidwai to join him in the central government as minister for communications on 15 August 1947. 
In Delhi Kidwai, ever the political operative, soon became embroiled in the national struggle for power between Nehru and the supporters of Sardar Patel. He was one of the principal founders of the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party, which broke away from the Congress to contest the elections of 1952 on its own. However, Kidwai vacillated, resigned briefly from the Congress, then returned to it to contest and win a parliamentary seat, after which he rejoined Nehru in the central government on 13 May 1952 as minister for food and agriculture. In this role he was credited with implementing several measures that prevented a major food crisis. He also played a critical role in the Kashmir imbroglio in 1953, involving the displacement of Sheikh Abdullah from the prime ministership of the state. 
Kidwai was the only prominent Congress Muslim politician in the thoroughly communalized political atmosphere of his home province. All his followers were secular-minded Hindus from many different castes, whose political views ranged from conservative to socialist. Kidwai himself held to no ideology other than his devotion to the cause of Indian emancipation from British rule, though, like his mentor, Jawaharlal Nehru, he was loosely associated with those on the putative left of the Indian spectrum. While generous to all who sought his help, he was also a clever, manipulative, and conspiratorial political opponent in factional conflicts within the Congress organization, who at times engaged in legally dubious tactical moves against his rivals. A devoted band of followers in the United Provinces remained loyal to him throughout his life. In a humorous play on English, they proclaimed themselves 'Rafians', though after his departure to the central government they were reduced to a small minority in the provincial party organization and dispersed in factions within and parties outside the Congress. 
Kidwai suffered heart failure, precipitated by an attack of asthma, in the midst of a speech at a public meeting in Delhi and died shortly thereafter, on 24 October 1954. He was buried in his home village, Masauli, where a Mughal-style mausoleum was built over his grave. A formidable fund-raiser for Congress movements and elections, he distributed his largesse to all and sundry, but died in debt, leaving behind only a decaying house in his home village. 


@@@@@


doc= 94955


Lohia, Ram Manohar (1910-1967), politician in India, was born on 23 March 1910 in the small town of Akbarpur, in Faizabad district, United Provinces, India, the only child of Hiralal (died 1945), a teacher and trader, and his wife, Chanda, who died during his early childhood. Although born into the Marwari Bania caste, Lohia was an ardent opponent of the institution of caste throughout his life. Influenced as a youth by his father's nationalism and involvement in the Indian National Congress, he developed an early and life-long dedication to a united, independent Indian nation. He attended local schools in Akbarpur; secondary school at the Marwari School in Bombay; the Banaras Hindu University and then the Vidyasagar College at Calcutta University, where he received his degree in English in 1929; and finally Berlin University, where he received a PhD degree in 'Staatswissenschaften' in 1932. He left Germany and went home to India in 1933. He was witness, therefore, to the rise of Hitler, whose evil he condemned. He developed an antipathy for the communists as well. 
Lohia was a committed radical socialist politician throughout his adult life. He was one of the founders, in 1934, of the small Congress Socialist Party, an organized group within the Indian National Congress. As an admirer and disciple of Gandhi, Lohia was also a committed practitioner of non-violent resistance and civil disobedience against unjust authority and laws, which, as a universalist, he practised wherever he found injustice. He was arrested twenty-five times. He participated in and often organized and led resistance movements against British rule in India, Congress rule in post-independence India, and Portuguese rule in Goa. He agitated for democracy in Nepal, and, during a visit to America, in Jackson, Mississippi, he twice attempted to dine in a segregated, whites-only restaurant and was arrested and gaoled briefly on 28 May 1964. He was one of the principal leaders of the Quit India movement of 1942, during which he worked underground, attempting to establish radio transmitter systems to co-ordinate anti-British actions. During his longest internment, which began on 20 May 1944, he was lodged in the infamous Lahore Fort gaol, where he was subjected to four months of torture, including solitary confinement and intensive questioning during prolonged periods of sleep deprivation. He was not released from prison until 11 April 1946. 
In 1948, after independence, the Socialist Party separated from the Congress. A sequence of splits and mergers soon followed. Lohia was one of the principal leaders and general secretary of the Praja Socialist Party (PSP), founded in 1952 after a merger of the Socialist Party with the Kisan Mazdoor Praja (peasants and workers peoples' party). However, he ultimately differed with every other important leader in the socialist movement on both policies and tactics. When the PSP split in 1955-6, he became the first chairman of the new Socialist Party (later renamed, after further failed efforts to re-unite the socialist movement, the Samyukta -- United -- Socialist Party) and remained its unchallenged leader until his death. After two unsuccessful attempts to win election to parliament, he was elected for the first time in 1963, and again in 1967 during the first great upheaval against Congress rule in the country, of which he, through his doctrine of 'non-Congressism', calling for the alliance of all political parties against the ruling party, was the principal architect. 
Lohia articulated many original ideological and practical goals in numerous books, collections of essays and speeches, and articles for the socialist journal, 'Mankind', of which he was the founder and editor. He formulated the concept of the 'equal irrelevance' of the two contesting creeds of capitalism and communism to Indian and Asian needs. He was also justly credited with both the intellectual and practical foundation of the movement of the 'backward' castes and classes in Indian politics. The Socialist Party's platform called for displacement of the high castes from their dominance in Indian political life through reservation of 60 per cent of places in all government positions for the middle and lower castes, tribal peoples, backward Muslims, and other minorities, and women. This movement began to bear fruit by the time of his death. 
Although he never married, Lohia was, in life, a lover of women and, in politics, devoted to female equality and emancipation in every respect. His companion of many years until his death was Roma Mitra. He had an ebullient personality, combative but good-humoured in politics, full of life and political passion, an independent and principled free-thinker, a truth-teller and anti-hypocrite, indeed of the rare breed who are worthy of the name a 'free spirit'. He died, while still in the prime of life, in the night of 12-13 October 1967, of complications following a prostate operation, in the Willingdon Hospital (later renamed the Dr Ram Manohar Hospital), New Delhi. He had no surviving family, nor did he leave behind any wealth or property. 


@@@@@


doc= 94957


Hossain, Rokeya Sakhawat (c.1880-1932), educationist and social reformer in India, was born Rokeya Khatun in Pairaband, Rangpur district, Bengal, India, the second of three daughters and third of five children of Zahiruddin Abu Ali Haider Saber, landowner, and his wife, Rahatunnessa Sabera Chaudurani. Her date of birth is conventionally given as 9 December 1880, though her grandniece Majeda Saber has, as a result of a close reading of her writings, combined with family knowledge, suggested that she may have been born in 1877 (private information). Her father came from the conservative, Urdu-speaking, Muslim landed gentry, and her mother was given to strict purdah and observance of tradition. Rokeya's own childhood was spent in the family house's inner quarters ('andarmahal'), where purdah was observed. She studied under a tutor at home for a short while, when the family was staying in Calcutta, but this was stopped as female education was frowned upon. Indeed, she owed her early education largely to her brother Ibrahim, a student at St Xavier's College, Calcutta, who secretly taught her to read and write both English, the language of the new elite, and Bengali, the language of the non-aristocratic class. 
About 1898 Rokeya married Syed Sakhawat Hossain, a widower many years her senior, and a member of the enlightened section of the Muslim gentry that had begun to emerge in the late nineteenth century. At the time of their marriage he had just returned from studying in England to take up a post as deputy magistrate in Bhagalpur, Bihar. Theirs was a companionate marriage, in which Rokeya managed the house, nursed her diabetic husband, socialized modestly, and kept up her intellectual pursuits. They had two daughters, but both died in infancy. A liberal and progressive, Sakhawat encouraged his wife to study and write, and to set up a small school for girls. After his death on 3 May 1909 she founded a girls' school in Bhagalpur, but as a result of conflict with her step-daughter she decided to move to Calcutta. There, in March 1911, with money left her by her husband, she set up the Sakhawat Memorial Girls' School, initially with just eight pupils. With encouragement from Lady Chelmsford (the wife of the viceroy, who visited the school in 1917) and others she and her small team added further classes, so that by 1931 the school taught girls up to university entrance level. Despite the earlier efforts of Nawab Faizunnessa Choudhurani and Khujista Akhter Banu in Comilla (1873) and Calcutta (1905) respectively, Rokeya's was the first enduring institution for Muslim girls in Bengal; after her death it was taken over by the government, and at the beginning of the twenty-first century it continued to thrive. 
In March 1916 Rokeya founded the Anjuman-e-Khawatin-e-Islam (Muslim Women's Association) in Calcutta, following the example of several such welfare associations across India. The objective of the association was to enable needy women to become self-reliant. Various issues affecting women, such as child marriage, divorce, dowries, childrearing, education, and women's movements around the world, were discussed at the anjuman. Volunteers visited the slums of Calcutta and gave lessons on sewing, handicrafts, childrearing, hygiene, and other topics; and small exhibitions were hosted. A charitable fund was also set up, to provide shelter and education for orphans, help for impoverished widows, and encouragement to women to set up small businesses. 
Rokeya embarked on her writing career in Bhagalpur with the publication of an essay, 'Pipasha', in the journal 'Nabaprabha' in 1902. There followed a steady stream of essays (published in two collected volumes entitled 'Motichur' in 1905 and 1929), short stories, poems, novels, and satirical writings. Her two best-known works were 'Sultana's Dream', published in the 'Indian Ladies' Magazine', Madras, in 1905, and in book form in 1908, and 'Abarodhbasini' ('The secluded ones'), published in 1931. An anthology of her writings, 'Rokeya Rachanabali', was published by the Bangla Academy, Dhaka, in 1973. Generally she wrote in Bengali, though occasionally she wrote in English. Her literature followed in the main the tradition set by the late nineteenth-century 'Bengali renaissance' prose writers. She was more renowned as an essayist than as a novelist or poet; her style was characterized by 'manoswikata' -- intellect, logic, humour, irony, and a focus on the matter at hand. Her writings, like those of other Bengali reformers, were intended to put forth an argument and convince the reader of the goal in mind. 
Rokeya's writings centred on social issues, especially those pertaining to the subordination of women. In 'Streejatir abanati' ('The degradation of women'), published in 'Mahila' in 1903, she set out clearly her view that the subordination of women was the result of history, and not of any law of nature, and even used the term 'slavery' to describe the contemporary status of women: 'Readers! Have you ever reflected on your deplorable condition? What are we in this age of civilization of the twentieth century? Slaves! We hear that slavery has been abolished from the world but has our own slavery vanished? No!' ('Rokeya Rachanabali', 1973, 17). In other essays and allegories, and in her novel 'Padmarag' (1928), she elaborated on the ways in which women were subordinated to men and robbed of their basic dignity by the institutions of family, law, education, employment, politics, culture, and religion. It was not, however, enough for a reformer simply to let the matter rest there. Rokeya provided solutions: education, leading to waged work, consciousness raising (a perception that women needed to deconstruct patriarchal notions embedded in their psyches), and the growth of a feeling of solidarity or sisterhood. With regard to politics, like many of her contemporaries she dwelt on 'nari jagoron' ('women's awakening') rather than on a women's movement as such, and she had little to say about women and politics (in the conventional sense of the term). Nevertheless she provided alternative visions of a society in which women were allowed to flourish. In 'Padmarag', for instance, she depicted an ashram, Tarini Bhaban, as a refuge where women from all communities and classes could live and work in dignity and sisterhood. In 'Sultana's Dream', a fantasy which predated Charlotte Perkins Gilman's 'Herland' by ten years, she presented a satirical picture of a society in which gender relations are reversed, with men staying at home in seclusion and women occupying the public space encompassing the government, economy, science, culture, entertainment, and education. 
Having presided over a session of the Indian Women's Conference at Aligarh earlier in the year, Begum Rokeya (as she was known) died at her home, 162 Lower Circular Road, Calcutta, on 9 December 1932. On her desk was her last piece of writing, 'Narir adhikar' ('Rights of women'). She was buried the same day in the Muslim cemetery at Syedpur, near Calcutta. 


@@@@@


doc= 94958


Chaudhurani, Sarala Devi (1872-1945), political activist and campaigner for women's rights in India, was born on 9 September 1872 at Jorasanko, Calcutta, the younger daughter and youngest of the three children of Janakinath Ghosal (1840-1913), son of a local 'zamindar' of Krishnanagar, and a supporter of the Indian National Congress, and his wife, Swarnakumari Devi (1855-1932), daughter of Debendranath Tagore, sister of Rabindranath Tagore, and herself a noted author. Sarala's older sister, Hironmoyee, was an author and founder of a widows' home. Her brother, Jyotsna, joined the Indian Civil Service. The family was Brahmo (i.e. following the religion founded by Rammohun Roy and developed by Sarala's grandfather Debendranath Tagore). 
Owing to her father's absence abroad Sarala spent a few of her formative years in the progressive and unique cultural ambience of Jorasanko house (the ancestral home of the Tagore family). She received a BA degree with honours in English from Bethune College in 1890, securing the Padmavati medal for the best woman student. Her brief employment at Maharani School, Mysore, gave her an exposure to the wider world of India that she much valued. She entered politics through the power of her music. In 1901, at the Congress session in Calcutta, she mesmerized the audience, leading a chorus of fifty women from different parts of India with a stirring nationalist song she had composed and arranged. Later she composed and published a number of nationalist songs. Collecting folk-songs was her passion; she took some to her uncle Rabindranath Tagore for him to use, alter, or absorb. She claimed that 'O Amar Sonar Bangla' (later the national anthem of Bangladesh) was one such creation ('Jibaner Jharapata', 33). She also spoke and wrote extensively and edited the prestigious journal 'Bharati' jointly with her mother and sister for a few years, and on her own from 1899 to 1907. Her intention was both to propagate nationalism and a national spirit, and to elevate the literary standard of the journal. 
Sarala's signal contribution to nationalism was to encourage a martial, heroic culture among the youth of Bengal. She formed an 'akhra' (club) and a 'byayam samiti' (gymnasium) in her home, which subsequently inspired others to follow suit. Placing a map of India before the members, she tied a 'rakhi' (red thread, a symbol of brotherhood) to their wrists and made them promise to serve India with their entire body and mind. She appointed Murtaza, a Muslim, to teach the boys boxing, sword-fighting, and games with knives and rods. In 1902 she inaugurated the 'birashtami utsav' (festival of heroes) when she invited members of other clubs to pay homage along with the boys of her 'akhra' to the past heroes of India, and participate in competitive games. Later she introduced a 'pratapaditya utsav' and an 'udayaditya utsav' in memory of Bengali heroes who had bravely fought against the Mughals and Portuguese pirates. These attempts to develop youth power were part of her plan to help free the country through armed revolt. 
Sarala also helped to advance the interests of women. In 1904 she started the Lakshmir Bhandar (women's store) in Calcutta with a view to popularizing indigenous goods, especially those made by women. In 1910 she founded the Bharat Stree Mahamandal, the first all-India women's organization. With several branches in the country, it promoted education and vocational training for women irrespective of class, caste, or creed. 
In 1905, under tremendous family pressure, Sarala married Rambhuj Dutt Chaudhury (died 1923), a lawyer, journalist, and nationalist leader who belonged to the Arya Samaj (the Hindu reform movement founded by Swami Dayananda Saraswati in 1875). She had gone to visit Mayavati Ashram in the Himalayas when she was summoned back by her mother (who, she was told, was seriously ill). She arrived to find that preparations for a wedding had been made. Her mother clearly felt that it was high time for Sarala, as a Bengali woman, to be married (rather than lead a band of young men); the family honour was at stake. Significantly her autobiography, 'Jibaner Jharapata', ended with her marriage. In it she wrote that her 'hands and feet were tied' and that 'there was no space for movement' (p. 186). 
After her marriage Sarala moved to the Punjab, where she helped her husband edit the nationalist Urdu weekly 'Hindusthan'. When the colonial government threatened to cancel the licence of the paper if Rambhuj remained the proprietor, she registered her name as proprietor and editor, and brought out an English version of the paper. When Rambhuj was arrested for his part in the non-co-operation movement following the Jallianwalla Bagh massacre (1919), Gandhi came to Lahore as Sarala's house guest. A profound friendship developed between the two, and Sarala became a follower of Gandhi. She returned to Bengal after Rambhuj's death in 1923. Her only son, Dipak, married Gandhi's granddaughter Radha. On her return to Calcutta, Sarala devoted herself to the editorship of 'Bharati' from 1924 to 1926, and established a girls' school, Siksha Sadan, there in 1930. She retired from public life in 1935, and turned to religion, choosing the Vaishnavite Bijoykrishna Goswami as her guru. She died on 18 August 1945 in Calcutta. 
One of the first female political leaders in the Indian freedom movement, Sarala sympathized with revolutionary philosophy. She actively assisted secret revolutionary societies, made fiery speeches, and wrote fiercely nationalistic articles. In addition to working for the cause of women, she presided over assemblies of men, sang in public forums, and was much admired by her contemporaries. The revolutionary turned a Gandhian in later life; the reason for her voluntary retirement is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 94961


Gopal, Sarvepalli (1923-2002), historian, was born in Madras, India, on 23 April 1923, the only son (there were five daughters) of Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888-1975), philosopher and president of India, and his wife, Sivakamu (died 1956), daughter of Talpuru Chenchurammiah, railway stationmaster. He was educated at Mill Hill School, London, Madras Christian College, and Balliol College, Oxford, where he won the Curzon prize but took only a third-class degree in modern history, in 1947. He stayed on at Balliol to complete his DPhil, on the viceroyalty of Lord Ripon, in 1951. 
Gopal's academic career began as a lecturer, then reader in history at Andhra University, Waltair (1948-52). He then worked for the government of India, first as assistant director of the National Archives of India (1952-4) and later as director, historical division, ministry of external affairs (1954-66). In the latter capacity he came into close contact with Nehru. During the Indo-China War of 1962 he was Nehru's chief adviser on India's frontier with China. Having spent a year as Commonwealth Fellow at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1963-4, in 1966 he succeeded Kenneth Ballhatchet to the readership in modern South Asian history, Oxford University, and the professorial fellowship at St Antony's College that went with the appointment (St Antony's elected him an honorary fellow in 1995). He returned to India in 1971 to take up the chair in contemporary history in the newly founded Jawaharlal Nehru University. He and Romila Thapar were the main inspiration behind the university's Centre for Historical Studies. He was deeply involved in shaping the new university, but rejected three times the offer of its vice-chancellorship. He retired in 1983, becoming an emeritus professor. 
Gopal's career as a historian began with a series of works on British policies in India and political biographies of two viceroys, Ripon (1953) and Irwin (1957), whom he used to describe in private as the 'good viceroys'. The biographies were notable for their sympathetic treatment, unusual in a historian committed to nationalist and anti-colonial ideology. His study 'British Policy in India' (1965) broke new ground at two levels. First, the work was based on unpublished archival material as well as private papers, unlike most earlier works on the subject. Secondly, he was the first historian to focus on policy formation in Whitehall and not simply in India. His very first contribution to Indian history, 'The Permanent Settlement in Bengal' (1949), based on his Curzon prize essay at Oxford, had been socio-economic in its orientation. However, he spent the greater part of his creative life working on the life and work of Nehru, a three-volume study (1975-84) being followed by a one-volume summary of the same (1989), the latter a truly brilliant contribution to Indian historiography. Also remarkable for its frankness was his biography of his father (1989), which is often considered his best work. He was also the general editor of the volumes entitled 'Towards Freedom', the Indian counterpart of the multi-volume 'Transfer of Power in India' edited by Nicholas Mansergh: the different volumes in the series, bringing together the official and private papers on the Indian side, were edited by different editors under Gopal's general direction. He was awarded the degree of DLitt by the University of Oxford in recognition of his life's work. He also received honorary degrees from Andhra, Tirupati, Banaras, and Hyderabad universities. 
Gopal, though primarily an academic, had a deep interest in the political evolution of India. He cherished particularly the secular and multicultural values of the Nehruvian era, and twice stood forth at great risk to his personal welfare as a defender of the democratic and secular values of the Indian polity. He refused to co-operate with Indira Gandhi when she suppressed democratic practices and institutions by declaring an emergency in 1975, and suffered considerably as a result. Again, during the controversy over the Ramjanmabhumi temple in 1992, when Hindu fanatics destroyed a mosque that, they claimed, was built on the site of a temple, he was in the forefront of academics who courted considerable danger by confronting the politics of hatred and intolerance. He was a signatory at the height of the crisis to the document entitled 'Political abuse of history' and had already edited a book entitled 'The Anatomy of a Confrontation' (1991). In 1978 he served as president of the Indian History Congress, and in retirement he served as chairman of the Indian Institute of Advanced Study (1992-2002), the Madras Institute of Development Studies (1995-7), and the Indian Institute of Social Studies (1995-8). A leading academic and a prominent public figure, he was awarded the Padma Vibhushan, the second highest state honour in India. Deeply religious in his private life, he cherished the values of rationalism and liberal humanism, which he had absorbed from his family environment and his very fruitful association with Nehru. He lived latterly in Chennai (Madras), where he died on 20 April 2002 of kidney failure following a prolonged illness. He was survived by his wife, Indira, and cremated on 21 April at Besant Nagar crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 94963


Ferguson, George Ekem (1864-1897), surveyor and colonial agent, was born on 14 July 1864 at Anomabu, in the British west African colony of the Gold Coast, the surviving twin son of Robert Archibald Ferguson, a commercial agent for A. and F. Swanzy, and his wife, Amelia. His parents were Fante, and devout Methodists: his father was a Methodist lay preacher in retirement. Ferguson attended the local Wesleyan school and then from the age of eleven the Wesleyan boys' high school in Freetown, Sierra Leone. He returned to the Gold Coast in 1879, worked for two years as a schoolteacher, and then joined the civil service, where his shorthand writing skills were usefully employed. He served as a junior clerk in the governor's office, and was among several African officials who accompanied the new governor, Sir Samuel Rowe, to Prasu in 1881 at a time when the still powerful inland state of Asante threatened to invade the colony. 
Ferguson's interest in cartography attracted official attention when he produced in 1884 a map showing the ethnic divisions of the Gold Coast protectorate. That same year he was entrusted with a mission to arbitrate between the peoples of Krobo and Akwamu, which resulted in the latter state coming under British protection. Ferguson's surveying skills were further developed by his work with the British-German boundary commission of 1886, which defined the eastern frontier of the Gold Coast with the German colony of Togoland. In 1889 he was sent at government expense to London where he studied mining, metallurgy, assaying, and surveying at the Royal School of Mines, from which he graduated with a first-class certificate. 
On his return to the Gold Coast in 1890 Ferguson became increasingly trusted with political work at a time when the British were intent on safeguarding the trade of the northern interior. Ferguson's knowledge of languages (he spoke Fante and Ga, to which he added both Hausa and Mossi; he could also read French) meant that he could travel without an interpreter, while as a skilled surveyor and geologist he was one of the best scientifically qualified people in the colony. Employing him was more effective and considerably cheaper than using a European officer. As an African he could travel and collect information without exciting the same degree of suspicion that might attach to a European. The trust placed in Ferguson and several other well-qualified west Africans at this time indicates that in an age when race was becoming increasingly significant in British colonial affairs there were still senior officers who continued to recognize merit and ability in Africans. 
In October 1890 Sir Frederic Hodgson, the colonial secretary and acting governor, sent Ferguson to negotiate a treaty with the state of Atebubu, which was anxious to secure British protection. The following year he was sent on an expedition to Akyem Abuakwa, which also sought to be free of Asante control. During 1893-4 his activities were focused on the neutral zone, a rectangular block of territory astride the confluence of the rivers Volta and Daka over which, in 1888, the British and Germans had agreed not to exercise exclusive influence. However, by the early 1890s both powers, the Germans more than the British, had been trying to assert greater commercial control over the area, while the French had imperial ambitions to penetrate from the east. Ferguson again visited Atebubu in late 1893 in order to help establish a garrison and to sign treaties of friendship and free trade. At the same time he collected intelligence on the deployment of Asante military forces. Ferguson's view was that, if necessary, Asante should be prevented from interfering with British trade in the interior. This helped influence a change in official thinking and resulted in the British invasion of Asante in 1896. Ferguson's minor role in these operations involved helping to construct the fort and to survey the conquered Asante capital of Kumase. Ferguson's reports and precise maps of the north provided detailed information on topography, flora and fauna, peoples, languages, and cultures. This achievement was recognized by the Royal Geographical Society's award in 1894 of the Gill memorial grant, and a gold watch, for his services to exploration. 
In 1897 Ferguson was a member of a British military expedition sent to the north-west region in order to show the flag and to make treaties of protection with states threatened by the freebooting armies of Samori Toure. The expedition was attacked at Wa by Samori's army and during the retreat, on 7 April 1897, Ferguson was wounded and then killed. He was buried at Wa. His British companion, Lieutenant F. B. Henderson, wrote of the 'irreparable loss the Colony has sustained by the death of Mr. George Ferguson... I have lost a valued friend and the Colony an invaluable servant' (Arhin, x). Sir William Maxwell, governor of the Gold Coast, praised Ferguson's 'scrupulous fidelity' and wrote that his 'work both as an explorer and as a political agent proved to be of the highest value' (ibid., xi). 
Ferguson was one of a growing number of well-educated Africans who, in the late nineteenth century, served as British colonial agents. At the same time he was an African patriot who supported the extension of the British empire in Africa. Among officials in the Gold Coast, white and black, Ferguson was exceptional. He worked for most of the last six years of his life without any leave. His qualities persuaded the governor, Sir William Brandford Griffith, in 1893 to recommend, against the hesitations of the Colonial Office in London, that an annual four-year scholarship be provided for a gifted African. Ferguson was a devoted and loyal servant of the colonial state with whose interests he closely identified, and this was recognized by an official pension to his widow, Elizabeth, 'nee' Sey, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94965


Peregrino, Francis Zaccheus Santiago (c.1851-1919), pan-Africanist and newspaper editor in South Africa, was born in Accra, Gold Coast, the son of Zaqueu Francisco. Nothing is known of his mother. His father was the son of a Hausa woman who had been captured in Africa and taken to Brazil as a slave and who returned to Accra with her children in 1836, becoming part of the Afro-Brazilian community there. After Peregrino completed elementary school in Accra he was sent to Sierra Leone, then England, to study. He remained in England, working in the iron industry and as a clerk, and on 11 October 1876 he married Ellen Sophia Williams, an American, in Staffordshire. Within two years the couple had two children. 
Probably because of the economic recession Peregrino moved from the English midlands to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 1887, and his family joined him there the following year. By 1896 he was publishing a weekly newspaper, the 'Buffalo Spectator', for 'coloured people', in Buffalo, New York. Three years later, he was writing and publishing a similar paper, the 'Fortnightly Spectator', in Albany, the capital of New York state. Its masthead proclaimed that it was 'liberal in all things', and in it Peregrino sought to link African-Americans to their African heritage. In 1899 he went to London, where he attended the first pan-African conference in 1900. He then travelled on to Cape Town -- it seems in part in a vain search for his son Francis Joseph, who had gone to South Africa and there compiled 'A Short History of the Native Tribes of South Africa' (1900). Cape Town was to remain Peregrino's base for the rest of his life, and his wife and two of his children soon joined him there from the United States. 
Only two weeks after his arrival in Cape Town, Peregrino began publishing the 'South African Spectator', 'published exclusively in the interests of the Colored People', which for over a decade was what he was best known for. In it he promoted ideas of pan-Africanism and provided news of the activities of black people around the world. He claimed to be the representative of the Pan-African Association set up by the pan-African conference in London. He hoped to be made American consul in Cape Town, but that came to nothing. Among his numerous business activities there he represented the Cunard line, booking passages for African students to America, and for a time he ran a real estate agency. In 1903 he was a member of a delegation to meet the visiting colonial secretary, Joseph Chamberlain. He expected that with all South Africa under British rule the region would enter a new period of prosperity. He remained a strong Anglophile and continued to look to Britain as the potential saviour of the black people in South Africa. 
Peregrino soon became a prominent Capetonian, identifying primarily with the mixed-race coloured people of the city. He was active in moves to create a political movement, and helped in the founding of the leading coloured political organization, the African Political Organization (APO), but he soon fell out with its leaders and became a strong critic of the party. His conservatism offended many coloureds and the African Political Organization mocked his acceptance of racial segregation if facilities were equal. After being mugged by a group of whites, he set up the Coloured People's Vigilance Society, of which he remained secretary until his death. Active in petitioning government and serving on delegations on a variety of issues relating to coloureds, he failed to bring coloured and black Africans together, but developed close ties with some Africans. In 1904 he founded the short-lived South African Native Press Association with Sol Plaatje, a leading African intellectual, and he put much effort into developing ties with a number of African chiefs in the interior, including Chief Silas Molema of the BaRolong, though with little result. Always in financial difficulties -- he became bankrupt in 1904 -- he began to pass information about black politics to the government. 
By 1910 Peregrino was suffering from serious health problems, but in that year he published in Cape Town 'Life among the Natives and Coloured Miners in the Transvaal', and during the First World War he published a recruitment pamphlet for the South African Native Labour Corps. When he died of a heart attack in Cape Town on 19 November 1919 his only asset was a mining concession given to him by King Lewanika of Barotseland in 1906. Only one of his children, Thomas John, remained in Cape Town after his death; his widow and other children settled either in England or in the United States. A man of restless energy and sharp intelligence, whom Plaatje referred to as 'a master mind' (Plaatje to Silas Molema, 11 July 1920, Molema papers, University of the Witwatersrand), Peregrino was pompous, often dressed like a dandy, and was difficult to get on with. Not all the copies of his newspaper have survived, but from those that have it is apparent that he was a leading advocate of pan-African ideas in the early twentieth century, and that he helped shape early coloured politics at the Cape. 


@@@@@


doc= 94966


Johnson, James (c.1836-1917), assistant bishop of Western Equatorial Africa, was born at Kakanda Town, a freed slave settlement near Waterloo, Sierra Leone. His parents were both Yoruba from Nigeria. They met and married in Sierra Leone, where each had arrived separately after liberation at sea by the Royal Navy. James Johnson was their only son, born a twin with his sister Eliza. His parents, converts to Christianity, were illiterate and failed to register his birth. 
The family settled in Benguema. By 1843 James Johnson was enrolled in a nearby school of the West African Methodist church, which had seceded from the English Methodists in 1821. The ideal of an African-managed church was one that would remain with Johnson all his life. Some time before 1847 he entered the Anglican Church Missionary Society (CMS) school in St Matthew's parish of Waterloo. In 1851 he won a scholarship to the society's grammar school in Freetown. On 1 June 1854 he was admitted to the Fourah Bay Institution, which trained Anglican clergy. After graduating on 3 December 1858 he became a catechist in the village of Kent, where a spiritual experience occurred in which 'the Lord spoke to me' and 'I found salvation' (Johnson, 17). He resolved to dedicate his life to missionary work. His parents had taught him an abiding hatred of the slave trade and slavery, and a deep gratitude to their British rescuers. Now he committed himself to Anglican theology (regarding other protestants as 'dissenters' and Roman Catholics as 'idolaters') in a life of intense piety and dogmatism which would draw both admiration of his principles and condemnation of his inflexibility. 
After two years' teaching at the grammar school, in March 1863 Johnson was appointed deacon and curate of Christ Church, Pademba Road, Freetown. In December 1866 he was ordained to the priesthood. The development of his clerical career coincided with the ascendancy of the ideas of Henry Venn, secretary of the CMS from 1841 to 1872, whose vision was the creation of African missionary clergy to manage self-sufficient native churches, exemplified in 1864 by the appointment of Samuel Ajayi Crowther as bishop of the society's Niger mission. Johnson expanded these ideas into a 'nationalist' vision of an African church giving birth to an Africa which would 'take her place with the most Christian, civilized and intelligent Nations' (Ayandele, 'Holy Johnson', 45). This blend of 'nationalist' feelings and missionary impulse provoked opposition from the European missionaries on the spot, backed by some of the African pastors, but at CMS headquarters Johnson's ideals and integrity were admired. 
While making his first visit to England in January 1874 Johnson campaigned for the elevation of the Fourah Bay Institution to that of a university college and for African agency in missionary expansion. Meeting the colonial secretary, Lord Knutsford, he outlined his educational plans, and pressed for elected Africans to sit in the legislature. He impressed those whom he met, and the visit brought results: in 1876 Fourah Bay was affiliated with Durham University. By 1880 the Anglican Church of Sierra Leone had become a 'native pastorate' whose only European clergyman was the bishop. 
In 1874 the CMS moved Johnson to Lagos to take charge of St Paul's Breadfruit Church, patronized by the city's educated African elite. In 1876 he was appointed superintendent of the mission stations in Yorubaland, after discussion of his being made a 'native bishop'. Despite his missionary successes, especially in Abeokuta, his anti-slavery stance and opposition to polygyny provoked opposition from European missionaries and some of his converts, and he was removed in 1880, returning to the Breadfruit Church. From that time Johnson was increasingly seen by west African Anglicans as a 'bishop in waiting', second only to Bishop Crowther. In 1886 the governor of Lagos, Alfred Moloney, nominated him as one of the two African members of the legislative council. There he displayed independence, supporting the government on taxation of Africans, bitterly opposed by the educated class, while pressing government to increase opportunities for African civil servants and introduce the elective principle. Later Johnson became increasingly critical of Gilbert Carter, who replaced Moloney as governor of Lagos in 1891. His attacks on Carter's role in the war with Ijebu of 1892 led to Johnson's removal from the legislative council in 1894. 
In 1887 the CMS again invited Johnson to England, where he presented a scheme for four west African dioceses, each under an African suffragan bishop. In the same year young Europeans entered the Niger mission, unearthed a number of scandals among the African clergy, and by 1890 were 'purging' African clergy and shunting Bishop Crowther's authority aside. In response Johnson spearheaded the African opposition which in April 1892 resulted in the separation of the Niger delta churches. In September they requested the archbishop of Canterbury to consecrate Johnson as their bishop. The CMS responded by offering to make Johnson an assistant bishop, an offer he rejected as that of being a 'half-bishop'. 
A youthful romance having been cut short by his loved one's early death, Johnson remained single until April 1895, when he married Sabina A. Leigh (died 1901), the daughter of J. S. Leigh, a prosperous Sierra Leonean trader in Abeokuta, Nigeria. In the following years he wrote 'Yoruba Heathenism', published in London and Exeter in 1899, a work which displays a distinct mellowing of his views on 'paganism', hitherto generally condemned by both Christian and Muslim missionaries as akin to devil worship. Rather, he approached Yoruba religion as a system of theology, forged by a people groping towards religious truth without benefit of Christ's revelation. The work remains a useful source for students of Yoruba culture. 
The delta churches were reunited with the CMS in 1898. In a volte-face, Johnson in 1900 finally agreed to serve the delta pastorate as assistant bishop of Western Equatorial Africa, remaining for the rest of his life a loyal Anglican, a successful missionary, and an honest and effective administrator. He died in harness, of heart failure, on 18 May 1917, at Bonny CMS church, Nigeria, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 94968


Schon, Jacob Friederich (1803-1889), missionary and philologist, was born at Ober Weiler, Baden. He trained at the Basel missionary seminary and the Church Missionary Society (CMS) College, Islington. Ordained deacon in 1831 and priest in 1832, he went to Sierra Leone where he worked for the next fifteen years. In Sierra Leone he began linguistic research, encouraged by Gustav Nylander, whose daughter Elizabeth (died 1837), a CMS missionary of African descent, he married on 27 May 1835. Schon also learned Igbo and Hausa from recaptives (freed slaves), knowledge put to good use when he surveyed the languages of the lower Niger as the senior CMS representative on the British Niger expedition in 1841-2. An account of the expedition was written in 1843 by Schon and a young African catechist and future bishop, Samuel Ajayi Crowther, marking the beginning of a lifetime co-operation between the two men. Schon strongly believed in the value of native agency in missionary work, and of recaptive settlements as a means for the 'civilization' and 'christianizing' of Africa. Returning to Freetown, he concentrated on the study of Hausa, the language that was to be his life's work; his first publication on Hausa was in 1843, his last in 1888. 
Schon's first wife died in 1837. In 1839 he married Cordelia Irving (died 1840). Widowed a second time, he married, on 5 February 1841, Elizabeth White, 'nee' Drake (died 1892), the widow of James R. White. In 1847 ill health forced him to retire to Chatham, where he was appointed chaplain to the Melville Hospital for sailors. For the rest of his life Schon lived in Kent, and he was naturalized in 1854. He formally left the CMS in 1853 but he continued to study west African languages and to act as an unpaid adviser and editor for many CMS language publications in Temne, Mende, Nupe, Igbo, and Kanuri. However, Hausa was his major interest. In this he was aided by a young native speaker of Hausa, Dorugu, who spent much of his time between 1856 and 1864 living with the Schons, a relationship which led to acrimonious controversy with the German traveller and linguist Heinrich Barth, who had brought him to Britain. African and black visitors frequently stayed with Schon either to learn a language or to contribute to his studies. 
Schon's contribution to Hausa was a grammar (1862), followed by a dictionary (1876), various texts (1885-6), and 'Bible' translations (1857-81). Maurice Delafosse called Schon 'the great discoverer of the Hausa language, inasmuch as his writings revealed it to Europe' (M. Delafosse, 'Manuel de la langue haoussa', 1901, ix), and Charles Henry Robinson wrote of him as 'the pioneer of Hausa study' (C. H. Robinson, 'Dictionary of the Hausa Language', 2nd edn, 1906, x). He was elected a member of the German Oriental Society, given the Volney medal by the Institut de France (1877), made a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society (1879), and made an honorary DD by Oxford University (1884). He had no formal training in linguistics but his methods, criticized by a later generation of Hausa scholars, were slow and thorough. As an evangelical he regarded linguistic work as a means of promoting the spread of the Christian gospel. As he told the CMS in 1881, 'I am no linguist by profession' (Hair, 52), although his contribution to orthography influenced the future writing of west African languages, and his use of Roman script determined how modern Hausa would be written. Schon also demonstrated energy and thoroughness in the last decade of his life when, as P. E. H. Hair wrote, he 'published as much as in any previous decade, and cleared his shelves of almost all of his remaining manuscripts' (Hair, 53). 
Schon was gentle, kindly, and, as demonstrated by his first marriage and friendships, without any sense of racial superiority. As Robert Cust wrote in an appreciation, his life was like his name, 'beautiful' (Cust, March 1889, 36). Schon died at his home, Palm Cottage, New Brompton, Kent, on 30 March 1889. Following a funeral service at St Mark's, Gillingham, the family church, he was buried in Gillingham cemetery. He was survived by his third wife, Elizabeth, and at least nine children. At a Lambeth dinner David Livingstone had said to Archbishop Sumner of Schon: 'This man's name, your Grace, will live generations after mine has been forgotten' (Cust, March 1889, 36). However, Schon was ignored in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' and more than a century later his name is known only to specialists. 


@@@@@


doc= 94969


Taylor, John Eldred (c.1880-1924), journalist and pan-Africanist, was born in Sierra Leone, the son of John Eldred Taylor (died 1892), an assistant colonial chaplain. His grandfather had been active with the Church Missionary Society and Taylor was born into a respected Krio family. Such English-speaking Africans took leading roles in west African commerce and culture, forging links with the British and Britain, where many -- possibly including Taylor -- received some or all of their education. The 'Sierra Leone Weekly News' reported in 1905 that Taylor was the proprietor of a laundry and the author of a report into the possibilities for jute growing in the colony, and in 1908 that he was managing director of Sierra Leone Deep Sea Fishing and Industries Ltd, which brought a steam trawler to the colony in 1912. He ceased involvement in the fishing enterprise and (in the Gold Coast) the Volta River Coconut and Produce Co. Ltd in 1913, the year his wife, Adeline Rosamund, 'nee' Farmer ('b'. 'c'.1881), died. 
Taylor's income from his business dealings enabled him to settle in London, where in 1911 he protested to the Colonial Office over the authorities' attitude to the 'Nigerian Times'. The African-edited press of British west Africa informed resident and travelling Africans of local events and reported matters their editors believed to deserve action, and in their fight for colonial justice black residents and white radicals in Britain were useful contacts. But Taylor also saw the need for a London-based African publication. With the actor and author Duse Mohamed Ali he decided to revive the nineteenth-century London monthly the 'African Times', and in July 1912 the first issue of the 'African Times and Orient Review' was published. Taylor had been ousted by the time the August issue appeared, when more financially secure west Africans owned the venture. Nevertheless Taylor remained active in black affairs in London, for instance attending the funeral in September 1912 of the composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor (whose father was from Sierra Leone), along with the Trinidad-born John Alcindor and the South African educator Davidson Jabavu. 
In 1914 Taylor established the 'African Telegraph', again published in London. In December 1918 he published an article that brought a charge of libel. The 'African Telegraph' reported that in July 1914, in Northern Nigeria, Joseph Fitzpatrick, the district officer in charge of Bauchi, had ordered the public flogging of two naked women. The 'Gold Coast Leader' had published details but it was Taylor's London reprint which led Fitzpatrick (with official support) to sue. Taylor's defence was that he had reported the truth, and he mentioned other flogging incidents in Nigeria. However, the legal system in Northern Nigeria was officially dispensed through 'native courts' with men like Fitzpatrick acting as guides, theoretically advising independent Africans whose positions were within the structures of the traditional social system. The fact that he had chased and caught the two women and handed them to the local African court, and that (as the proconsul, Sir Frederick Lugard, testified in court) he had both the authority and duty to influence the African court did not prove that Fitzpatrick had 'ordered' the flogging. The London jury's decision led to Taylor being fined $400; but it added that the flogging of women should cease. 
Though Taylor had lost the case, he was seen as a hero by black people in Britain and Africa, and the case (and the publicity surrounding it) enabled Taylor and his fellow African journalists to spread information on the realities of British rule in west Africa. Through 'Crisis' (the monthly publication of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People) news of his actions reached thousands in America. His fame extended also to South Africa, for Taylor was with a South African 'native' delegation to the prime minister, Lloyd George, in November 1919. That year Taylor posed in the garden of his London home (23 Highbury Crescent) with eighteen other male Sierra Leoneans for a photograph that was published in the 'African Telegraph'; the group included teachers, businessmen, churchmen, doctors, an army officer, journalists, and a dentist. Taylor participated in other political and social events in Britain, including the pan-African congress of 1921, led by the editor of 'Crisis', W. E. B. Du Bois, and John Alcindor. He died on 7 December 1924 at his home in Highbury Crescent. His affairs were left with the merchant Samuel Adole Hughes, who also appeared in the photograph of 1919 and at Coleridge-Taylor's funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 94974


Fremantle, Henry Eardley Stephen (1874-1931), newspaper editor and politician in South Africa, was born at Bedwell Park, Hatfield, Hertfordshire, on 6 August 1874, the youngest of the five children of William Henry Fremantle (1831-1916), rector of St Mary's, Bryanston Square, and later dean of Ripon, and his wife, Isabella Maria Eardley (died 1901). He was educated at Eton College and Oriel College, Oxford, where he distinguished himself in the field of philosophy and obtained firsts in classical moderations (1895) and 'literae humaniores' (1897). He then held lectureships at University College, Aberystwyth, and Worcester College, Oxford. On 20 April 1899 he married Margaret Elizabeth (died 17 June 1909), daughter of Alexander Macdonald, Ruskin master of drawing at Oxford. They had one daughter. 
In 1899 Fremantle accepted the chair of English and philosophy at the South African College in Cape Town. He resigned his professorship in 1903 to concentrate on politics and journalism. His concern that the defeat of the Boer republics in the South African War and the alienation of Cape Afrikaners would damage the interests of the British empire had a profound influence on his political philosophy. He believed that the reconciliation of the Afrikaner could secure Britain's long-term interests in South Africa. Only by granting Afrikaners those rights which the English enjoyed themselves could British supremacy in South Africa be ensured peacefully. The Afrikaners and British had to move away from their old hatreds to become a strong, healthy, self-respecting South African nation, developing along its own lines within the empire. In pursuit of this ideal he joined John X. Merriman's South African Party in 1903 and became the co-editor of the 'South African News', the party's mouthpiece. In the jingoistic post-war climate of Cape Colony he had to endure much abuse as a lapsed Englishman. On 20 September 1910, following the death of his first wife, he married Helen le Roux, daughter of J. J. Eksteen of Piquetberg, an Afrikaner. The marriage was childless. 
In 1906 Fremantle was elected to represent Uitenhage in the Cape legislative assembly, where he distinguished himself as a talented speaker on public finances and education, and as a campaigner for the unification of South Africa. In aid of this ideal he published 'The New Nation: a Survey of the Conditions and Prospects of South Africa' (1909). In the Union of South Africa parliament, where he was MP for Uitenhage from 1910, he also made his mark as a person of ability. Unfortunately his fondness for controversy, his arrogance and tactlessness, and the fact that he made no attempt to conceal his sense of superiority, harmed his reputation. His unbridled personal ambition, which created unrealistic expectations, and public frustration that men of talents inferior to his own advanced ahead of him, also alienated many. The result was a lingering suspicion that he was an opportunistic careerist. 
In 1912 Fremantle's vision of South Africanism alienated him from the South African Party. Fluent in Dutch, he campaigned not only for language equality between Dutch and English as advocated by his party, but compulsory bilingualism. He became close to J. B. M. Hertzog, the champion of Afrikaner interests, and followed Hertzog into the newly founded National Party in 1914. According to Fremantle, Hertzog had to be supported in his desire to encourage a common South African nationalism as it would preserve the empire in South Africa. Critics, however, ascribed his motives to thwarted political ambitions in the South African Party. The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 initiated a period of turmoil for Fremantle. He decided to remain loyal to Hertzog's stance that the Union of South Africa should only act defensively and not invade German South-West Africa. Ambitious to become the party's Cape leader, he played a leading role in its founding in the province in 1915. While most English-speaking South Africans despised Fremantle as a renegade, many Afrikaners refused to be led by an English-speaking member of the Anglican church who advocated the franchise for Africans. D. F. Malan, the eventual Cape leader, viewed Fremantle as an unstable personality and an opportunist, and marginalized him in the party. 
Fremantle's position in the National Party was weakened when he lost his parliamentary seat in the 1915 election. Although he was one of the party's ablest parliamentarians, no effort was made, to his bitter disappointment, to secure him a safe seat. In 1916 he became the editor of 'The Interpreter', a weekly paper and an official organ of the National Party, which sought to conciliate English-speakers and Afrikaners. Fremantle sincerely believed that he was the only person who could understand and interpret the mind of the Afrikaners for his fellow English-speaking South Africans. The paper, however, made no impact and closed in May 1918. 
The growth of republicanism in the National Party made Fremantle's position untenable, and when it was obvious that his attempts to counter growing support for secessionism had failed, he resigned from the party in 1920. Hertzog dismissed his resignation as personal pique for not becoming the Cape leader of the party. Fremantle was involved in the flag controversy of 1926-8. He supported the notion of a South African flag, but opposed the National Party's stance of excluding the union jack from the new flag. He became a member of the central executive of the Flag (Vigilance) Committee Organisation to oppose such a flag, but eventually lost his position as he was seen as too tolerant of the nationalists. 
The years after 1920, marred by financial difficulties, were unhappy and frustrating. By then Fremantle was so discredited that other parties kept their distance, and he played no role in party politics. Activities such as political commentary and his membership of the board of trade and industries (1922-5), and of the Non-Racial Franchise Association to defend the rights of black voters in the Cape, did not compensate for his isolation and sense of failure. He became involved in local affairs in Cape Town and in August 1931 was elected to the city council, but did not live to take his seat. He died at his home, Essendon, Firdale Avenue, Gardens, Cape Town, on 6 September 1931, following an attack of influenza, and was buried at Muizenberg two days later. He possessed great intellectual gifts, but a curious combination of idealism, arrogance, and an unrealistic sense of his own importance meant that he never fulfilled his early promise. 


@@@@@


doc= 94975


Crowther, James Gerald (1899-1983), science journalist and administrator, was born at 6 Westfield, Hipperholme, Halifax, Yorkshire, on 26 September 1899, the second child and first son of James Crowther ('b'. 1866), principal of a technical school, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Ainscow ('b'. 1870), both of Manchester. At Bradford grammar school in 1917 he gained an exhibition to study mathematics and physics at Trinity College, Cambridge. The award was suspended for the duration of the war, and he worked instead on anti-aircraft guns under the physiologist A. V. Hill. He began his studies at Trinity in 1919, but after failing to change course from mathematics to history of science, he abandoned Cambridge after one term. 
Crowther made a bare living in temporary teaching posts, and became involved with a left-wing educational group, through which he became interested in the politics of the Soviet Union. He joined the Communist Party in 1923. He also became acquainted with scientific and educational publishing houses, and in 1924 he joined Oxford University Press as technical books representative, a post that required much travel, in the United Kingdom and overseas, to universities and scientific meetings. Despite being a shy man with a formal manner, he thus met and befriended many influential people in science. On 11 June 1924, at St Pancras register office, he married Dora Amy Royle de Bude ('b'. 1889/90), a school matron from London who was the daughter of Frederick de Bude, colonel in the Royal Artillery. Crowther became stepfather to her six-year-old daughter. 
Crowther lamented what he called the public's 'deep ignorance' of science, and looked for ways to disseminate science to non-scientists. He urged publishers to start a popular journal for science, but was rewarded only with a few small commissions for articles. In 1925 he devised a 'science page' for the BBC's magazine 'Radio Times', and offered himself to the BBC as the page's editor. The 'Radio Times' typeset a sample page, but decided not to publish it. Crowther also proposed a 'science bureau' for the BBC, which would gather up the science broadcasting that was scattered across the BBC and develop it into talks and series aimed at audiences of particular levels of education. He offered himself as its manager. The suggestion was not taken up by the BBC, though it did secure him attention, and he was invited to give some radio talks in 1928. The BBC had previously only used working scientists to give talks on their specialist subject, rather than professional popularizers like Crowther. Although his broadcasting style was considered rather dull by some, it was appreciated by many, and he gave talks -- over forty in all -- on BBC radio until the early 1970s. 
Crowther's search for opportunities to disseminate science was more immediately successful at the 'Manchester Guardian' newspaper, where he first published in 1926. He persuaded the editor, C. P. Scott, to hire him; his column, which began in 1928, was widely read and much respected among scientists. During his work for Oxford University Press, Crowther had established a close relationship with the physicists of the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge University, on which he now drew. By attending an internal seminar at the Cavendish, he scored an important journalistic scoop when in 1932 he broke the news of James Chadwick's discovery there of the neutron. He acted as unofficial press agent for the Cavendish for some time. 
Through these activities Crowther identified science journalism as a distinct specialism. Where before, general journalists reported science among many other topics, or scientists wrote articles about their research, now there existed a new specialist -- the science journalist -- who was recognized and hired by media institutions. 
Crowther also wrote a large number of books, the earliest of which were accessible accounts of the physical sciences. The scope of these books soon expanded to include the history of science and biographies of scientists and inventors, and his analysis of and prognosis for the social relations of science. He visited the Soviet Union many times between 1929 and 1936, building on contacts made during his teaching years, and also on his friendship with the Russian physicist Pyotr Kapitsa, who was working at the Cavendish Laboratory. Crowther was welcomed in Russia by state officials who wanted to encourage international support for Soviet science. When the Soviets sent a delegation to the Second International Congress of the History of Science and Technology, which took place in London in June 1931, Crowther acted as liaison for the visitors, among whom were the Soviet politician and Marxist theoretician Nikolay Bukharin and the physicist Boris Hessen. Hessen made a profound impact on the congress with his historical exposition of the social and political context from which Newton's 'Principia' had emerged, presaging a new era in historical studies of science. At the congress Crowther also introduced the Russians to leading left-wing thinkers among British scientists, including the crystallographer J. D. Bernal and the biochemist Joseph Needham, whom he knew well from the influential Tots and Quots, a dining club and science think-tank. Crowther became confirmed in the belief that a planned socialist society was necessary if science and scientists were to flourish; and also that scientists should contribute to the organization and planning of society. 
Although the exact nature of Crowther's involvement with the Soviet Union is not clear, he did have a number of friends there by the mid-1930s. However, many of them were to disappear during Stalin's purges. Kapitsa was prevented from returning to England after a visit to Russia in 1935, and Hessen was arrested and shot in 1936. While Crowther's commitment to the Soviet Union waned, his socialist convictions remained firm, and his writings on the social and political aspects of science continued to attract attention. Influential among these works were 'The Social Relations of Science' (1941) and 'Science in Modern Society' (1967). 
Crowther's first marriage having ended, he married Francisca Mendelssohn, a German who had come to Britain in 1933 with her brother, the physicist Kurt Mendelssohn. 
Crowther was active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science, in its division for the social and international relations of science, which was founded in 1938 and supported and pursued his aim to develop science journalism. With the outbreak of war in 1939 he was appointed to the British Council, as the first director of its new science department. He believed that the council should encourage co-operation between differing nations and political systems, and that science could serve as a common language in which this co-operation could be achieved. To this end he returned to his lobbying of the BBC; and while the BBC remained aloof from such political overtures, he had some success in increasing the science content of the BBC's Overseas Service. He was also responsible for the British Council's contribution to aid and resettlement for scientists displaced by the Nazi regime in Europe. One product of this activity was the Anglo-French Society of Sciences, through which he explored his ideas about science as a means for international relations. With Needham, in 1942, he also directed the council's establishment of a British cultural scientific office in China, a move that also supported Needham's classic historical work 'Science and Civilisation in China', published from 1954. 
Crowther can also be credited with the British Council's involvement in the establishment of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), which was founded in 1945. The inclusion of science in UNESCO's remit was due to a public campaign by Crowther, Needham, and the biologist Julian Huxley. Despite these successes, Crowther's pursuit of this political use of science distanced him from some parts of the British scientific and political establishment, and the influence of the council in national scientific affairs declined after the war. Crowther resigned from the council in 1946. 
Crowther's criticism of the deployment of the atomic bomb in 1945 also marginalized him in the scientific community, and soured his relationship with the 'Manchester Guardian'. He was still active in radical science politics, particularly in his work for the World Federation of Scientific Workers, for which he drafted the first constitution. He held the post of secretary-general of the federation from its founding in 1946 until 1954. In 1947 he was one of five founding members of the Association of British Science Writers. 
Crowther was critical of what he saw as the corruption of science under capitalism, and remained committed to the socialist ideal. During the 1960s he was highly respected by a younger generation of left-wing scientists who were exploring the social relations of science. His writings informed the emerging academic field in this area. He remained active as a journalist, for example in supporting 'New Scientist' magazine through a period of financial insecurity and editorial realignment in the late 1960s and early 1970s: he was particularly influential in the magazine's campaigns on the social and political issues in science. He also continued to advise scientific publishers, and maintained a close relationship with Oxford University Press throughout his life. He published a memoir, 'Fifty Years with Science', in 1970. 
In their later years Crowther and his wife lived frugally in Bloomsbury, London, and in a small cottage Crowther had inherited at Flamborough Head, Yorkshire. He died at the East Riding General Hospital, Driffield, Yorkshire, on 30 March 1983 from bronchial pneumonia and dementia. An investigation into Francisca Crowther's disappearance shortly after her husband's death concluded that she had thrown herself into the sea from cliffs near their home. 
When Crowther was awarded an honorary doctorate of the University of York in 1981, the citation read 'for creating the profession of scientific correspondent, for scholarly contributions to the history of science and to the social aspects of science, and for acting as a healthy irritant to the scientific establishment for 60 years'. This remains an appropriate summary of the achievements of J. G. Crowther, who made a pioneering and substantial contribution to creating a public sphere for science in the United Kingdom and more widely, and to fostering critical discussion of the social and political dimensions of science. 


@@@@@


doc= 94977


Sexey, Hugh (d. 1619), lawyer and benefactor, was a native of Bruton in east Somerset. The William Sexey recorded as buried there on 15 January 1567 may have been his father. A reliable tradition records his origins as humble, even though his family can be traced back to at least 1429. Hugh Sexey's first recorded dealings in property were conducted in 1566, so if it is assumed that he was then at least twenty-five years old, he may have been born about 1540, a date in keeping with a contemporary report that he was of an advanced age when he died in 1619. It is probable that he was educated at Bruton's free grammar school through the patronage of Sir Maurice Berkeley, who had acquired the site and much of the land of the Augustinian abbey of Bruton in 1544. 
The first firm evidence for Sexey's professional career dates from 1566, when he was living in Redcross Street, in London's Cripplegate suburb, and was described as an attorney. In October that year he received a twenty-one-year lease from the crown of the Devon borough of South Molton, then in a desolate condition, and undertook to rebuild and repair its ruined buildings. He subsequently became involved in negotiations over leases of crown properties in Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Somerset, and Devon, both on his own account and on behalf of gentry families in those counties, including those of Berkeley of Bruton and Fitzjames of Redlynch, and he also obtained a number of lucrative offices. He became a steward of former monastic lands in Somerset and Wiltshire, bailiff and deputy auditor for the bishopric of Bath and Wells, and a collector of rents from crown lands in Somerset and bailiff of the royal woodlands there. In 1582 he was appointed deputy in the exchequer to Thomas Hanbury, one of the auditors, and in 1599 himself obtained the reversion of an auditorship there, securing the position in 1603 and retaining it for the rest of his life. His social rank in 1578 was still that of yeoman, but a year later he was described as gentleman, and by 1588 as esquire. 
Sexey's legal practice, property dealings, and public offices enabled him to acquire great wealth, which he invested in land, principally in large estates round Bruton, but also in Gloucestershire and Middlesex. In 1583 he married Dorothy Fletcher (died 1597) from Otley in Yorkshire. They had no children, and husband and wife devoted themselves to charitable undertakings, Dorothy in Otley and Hugh in Bruton, where he made generous provision for the poor. Soon after his death it was recorded that he 'did in his lifetime convert divers little houses in Bruton aforesaid for habitations for divers poor people and then gave them certain small weekly maintenance' (Som. ARS, DD/SE 35, DD/SE 38). Dorothy Sexey died in 1597, and on 19 December 1611 her husband married Ursula, daughter of Gawen Champernowne of Dartington, Devon. Following the death of Ursula's father, her mother, Gabrielle, had married Thomas Horner of Cloford, 7 miles north-east of Bruton, and it was there that the marriage took place. Relations between Sexey and his much younger wife quickly deteriorated, however, and in 1616 he vested the income from much of his extensive property, both around Bruton and elsewhere, in the hands of ten prominent local gentlemen -- led by Sir Laurence Hyde of West Hatch and including three members of the Berkeley family -- as feoffees for a charity to be set up following his death. Ursula was left only a life interest in the manor of Blackford, near Wedmore, a few miles north-west of Glastonbury. 
Hugh Sexey died at his house in London on 19 August 1619, and was buried in the parish church of St Giles Cripplegate. Soon afterwards his widow married Sir Gerard Samms of Little Totham, Essex; she died in 1634. Sexey's death was followed by protracted litigation over his will. Brief, and signed only with the initials H. S. in a shaky hand, it was dated on the day of his death and proved just two days later. It left $140 to his clerk Thomas Bankes and his wife Anne (a cousin of Sexey), $400 to his cousin George Utley, $500 to be divided among the rest of his kindred, small sums to his servants, and 'All the rest to my deare wife Ursula Sexey whom I make my executrix' (Som. ARS, DD/SE 38; TNA: PRO, PROB 81 Parker). The will was contested by Thomas and Anne Bankes, who had lived with Sexey and served him for many years. They alleged that Sexey had left much of his property to Anne, who was his nearest relation, but that Ursula had destroyed the original will, instead producing a new one and persuading her husband to initial it on his deathbed, not half an hour before he died. They were joined in their objections by a number of others from Bruton, also claiming both kinship with Sexey and rights in parts of his estate. Although litigation continued until 1624, their pleas were unsuccessful. 
Sexey had left no precise instructions as to the form his charity should take, and the feoffees, having inquired 'among his most inward and familiar Friends concerning his intentions', decided to found a hospital or almshouse in Bruton for twelve aged and impotent persons (Som. ARS, DD/SE 38). A building was erected in the main street of Bruton, built around a quadrangle and containing rooms for the master and inmates, a hall, and an elegantly furnished chapel in which the master was to conduct divine service for the inmates twice each day. Building work was completed in 1632, whereupon a master was appointed and the first inmates, seven men and five women, were admitted. Rules for the hospital were prescribed by a deed of incorporation drawn up on 10 December 1638. Later in the seventeenth century a stone bust of Sexey, together with a coat of arms (that of the Saxey family of Bristol, with which he had no known connection), was placed over the entrance hall; they were carved by William Stanton of London. The income from Sexey's charitable endowment was such that the feoffees could also provide schooling and apprenticeships for poor boys in Bruton, and devote yet other funds 'to Godly and pious uses' (Som. ARS, DD/SE 38). Later they were able to extend the almshouse, establish other schools for both boys and girls in Bruton, and set up a school on the founder's estate at Blackford. The almshouse and schools serve their original purpose to the present day. 


@@@@@


doc= 94978


Tonge, Susan (b. before 1510, d. in or after 1564), courtier, was probably the youngest of the four children of Richard White of Hutton in south Essex and his wife, Maud Tyrell, daughter of Sir William Tyrell of Heron, also in south Essex. She had an elder brother, Richard, and two older sisters, Mary and Jane. The events of her later life suggest that she was born towards the end of the first decade of the sixteenth century. Some time before 1534 she married Thomas Tonge (died 1536), who must have been appreciably her senior, since he was already York herald by April 1513. He became Norroy king of arms at All Hallows 1522, and Clarenceux king of arms on 2 June 1534. He died in March 1536, leaving his widow as his executor and residuary legatee. Susan never married again, and it was from her husband's brief incumbency of his last position that she took the name by which she was known for the rest of her life. They appear to have had no children, or at least none who survived infancy. None is referred to in Thomas's will, and it was to her nephews that Susan disposed of her assets over twenty years later. 
At some point between 1533 and 1536 Susan Clarencius entered the service of Princess Mary, probably through her husband's court connections rather than through those of her family. She does not appear in Mary's household list of 1533, but by June 1536 the princess was referring to her as an established and trusted servant. This was a very difficult period for Mary, who was out of favour with her father and had no control over appointments to her own service. But although Susan was probably appointed by Henry VIII to keep an eye on his daughter, rather than being chosen by the princess herself, a relationship developed between the two women, who were about ten years apart in age, which was to last for the rest of Mary's life, and brought her as close to personal friendship and mutual trust as she ever came. One of Susan's first formal duties was to attend her young mistress when Mary was chief mourner for Queen Jane Seymour in November 1537, and glimpses of her can be caught thereafter in the princess's household accounts. She was trusted with money, and bought special items like gold wire and cinnamon, while in 1543 and 1544 she even purchased the new year gifts that Mary was to present to her father -- in 1544 these cost over $70. In 1543 her services brought her an annuity of $13. 6's'. 8died out of augmentations, which in the following year she surrendered in return for the Suffolk manor of Chepenhall. 
The services that Susan Clarencius rendered to Princess Mary continued during the difficult years of Edward VI's reign. Although there is no evidence that she did not fully support her mistress's stand against the 'new ways' in religion, she continued to receive grants of land for her 'services to the king's sister lady Mary' ('CPR', '1553', 28), notably the Essex manor of Thundersley, worth about $28 per annum. She also retained a place among the Essex gentry, being close both to her Tyrell cousins and to Sir William Petre, principal secretary successively to Edward VI and to Mary when the latter became queen. Although Susan held no title, her importance to Mary was generally recognized -- Jean Dubois, the imperial ambassador's secretary, described her as 'the chief lady in the princess's household' ('CSP Spain', '1550-52', 221) -- and when Mary succeeded to the throne in July 1553 this importance was given formal expression by her appointment as mistress of the robes, the female equivalent of chief gentleman of the privy chamber. Although Susan was now outranked by the wives and daughters of peers who surrounded the new queen, the closeness of their relationship continued. In autumn 1553, when the new imperial ambassador, Simon Renard, was struggling to arrange Mary's marriage to Prince Philip of Spain, and in particular to fend off the claims of the home-grown candidate for the queen's hand, Edward Courtenay, first earl of Devon, he was able to report with satisfaction that 'Mrs Clarencius... supports our cause to the utmost' ('CSP Spain', '1553', 344). When on 29 October 1553 Mary solemnly and secretly swore on the sacrament to marry Philip, only Renard and Clarencius were present in the oratory. 
Susan Clarencius continued to receive former church lands from the queen, although this should have been contrary to the principles of both women. The Essex manors of Runwell, Rivenhall, Chingford St Pauls, and Chingford Earls came her way in 1555, and by the end of Mary's reign she was probably receiving annual rents of about $200 from her various properties, in addition to fees for her services at court. Mary's death on 17 November 1558, at which Susan was present, meant the end of the latter's public career. She could have retired to the life of an Essex gentlewoman, despite the difficulties arising from her Catholicism, but instead she attached herself to the household of the young Jane Dormer, who became countess of Feria on her marriage to Philip's special envoy in December 1558. She left England with the countess in July 1559, having earlier enfeoffed her properties to the use of her nephews, the sons of her brother Richard. Despite the efforts of various sympathizers she never received formal licence to go abroad, but under the protection of the count that hardly mattered. Sympathetically described as 'a good old woman' in 1562 ('CSP foreign', '1561-2', 520), she is recorded at intervals in the context of the Feria household and its English connections until spring 1564, when she disappears from the records. Probably she died in Spain about this time. Early in the seventeenth century Henry Clifford, an English servant of the duchess of Feria (as Jane Dormer had become), described Susan Clarencius as a woman 'who from the childhood of Queen Mary had served her, and ever in principal place about her; a woman respected and beloved by the Queen, who the rest of her life remained with the Duchess' (Clifford, 110). He had probably never met her. 


@@@@@


doc= 94979


Wyggeston, William (c.1467-1536), merchant and benefactor, belonged to a family originating at Wigston, just outside Leicester, whose members were by the fifteenth century established as wealthy wool merchants in Coventry and in Leicester itself. The family name is variously spelt: in Leicester its standard form became Wyggeston, whereas at Coventry it was usually recorded as Wigston. Between 1448 and 1520 the family provided five mayors of Leicester, four of whom also represented the borough in parliament. There survives in Leicester, behind an eighteenth-century frontage, a late medieval timber-framed house believed to have been the home of Roger Wyggeston (died 1507), three times mayor. 
William Wyggeston, who was probably born in Leicester, was the eldest son of Roger's brother John (died 1513), who also became mayor, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1519/20). Admitted a freeman of the borough in 1493-4, William was elected mayor in 1499 and 1510, and MP in 1504. He controlled his family's business in his home town, sending wool to Calais, the principal town for the sale of English wool on the continent, and serving four times as mayor of the staple there, in that capacity overseeing the merchants who had the monopoly of dealing in wool for export. Bequests in his will suggest that he continued to trade to Calais until the end of his life. In Leicester he became by far the richest man of his time: the subsidy roll for 1524 shows that he owned 22 per cent of the taxable property in the town, while his assessment for taxation was $600, six times higher than that of the next richest resident, who was Wyggeston's own cousin, also named William and also a former mayor. He married twice. His first wife, Isabel, sister of Richard Gillott (another mayor of Leicester), died at an unknown date, and about 1509 he married Agnes, widow of William Ford and daughter of William Pysford -- both men were Coventry merchants. There were no children of either of his marriages. 
In 1511, with his brothers Thomas and Roger, William Wyggeston endowed a chantry in the collegiate church of St Mary in the Newarke, Leicester. Thomas had been a prebendary of the college since 1501 and resided there, although he was also rector of two Leicestershire parishes. A chantry chapel, with latten screens, was erected in the church nave; it was served by two priests, for whom Wyggeston built a house that survives as part of the Newarke Houses Museum, with his arms over the door. In due course William was buried in the church (which was destroyed in or soon after 1548), alongside his wives, his parents, and his brother Thomas. 
The career of 
Roger Wigston is not known to have resented the disappearance of the monasteries. His eldest brother, William Wyggeston, appears to have been a lifelong traditionalist in matters of religion. Soon after his chantry foundation William's thoughts turned towards charity, perhaps influenced by the fact that his second wife's first husband had founded an almshouse, Ford's Hospital, in Coventry; in 1529, with the authority of Ford's executors, William amended the statutes of that foundation. In 1513 he obtained statutes licensing him, along with Thomas and Roger and the priest William Fisher, to found an almshouse in Leicester for twelve poor men and twelve poor women. Wyggeston's Hospital, which had a chapel dedicated to Our Lady, St Katherine, and St Ursula, was built by the churchyard of St Martin's (Leicester Cathedral since 1926). William Fisher was its first master. Wyggeston endowed it with lands in Leicestershire and other counties, notably Lincolnshire and Staffordshire. The manor of Swannington, in a coal-mining area north-west of Leicester, was particularly important, since it came to be of considerable value. 
William Wyggeston died at Leicester on 8 July 1536. His will shows that he had remained a wealthy man. Following numerous individual bequests, he divided the residue of his estate into three portions, one of which was to be 'disposed in works of Mercy and Piety' at the discretion of his executors, who included his widow, Agnes, and his brother Thomas. But although he is commonly regarded as having founded not only Wyggeston's Hospital but also the Wyggeston Schools in Leicester, the credit for the latter may in fact belong to Agnes and Thomas, though they may well have been using money from William's residuary estate. A later deed indicates that they conveyed a sum to trustees to support a schoolmaster to teach grammar, and John Leland, who visited Leicester in 1539, only two or three years after Thomas's death, describes him as having 'made the fre Grammar Schole' (Leland, 1.16). A new school was built in 1573, a grant was made to it from the revenues of the duchy of Lancaster, and between 1572 and 1574 new statutes were issued for the hospital which linked it to the grammar school. 
Wyggeston's hospital and schools are still to be found in Leicester, having undergone many changes. The hospital was rebuilt on Hinckley Road in 1866-7, and the original building, with its chapel, was demolished in 1875. A boys' school, successor to the grammar school, was opened on the site of the hospital in 1877, funded from surplus endowments, Wyggeston's almshouse having become wealthy from the value of the lands he settled on it. A girls' school followed a year later. All these developments owed much to the efforts of Canon David James Vaughan, master of the hospital and a keen worker for education in Leicester. In the twentieth century both schools were moved to new premises, while the hospital was again entirely rebuilt, with a unit for the frail and elderly being added in 1992. It was named Agnes House, after Agnes Wyggeston, each of whose two husbands had founded a charitable institution still functioning after nearly 500 years. 


@@@@@


doc= 94980


Roger Wigston (1482/3-1542), the youngest brother of William, took a rather different course. He, too, was a wool merchant, but in Coventry (hence the spelling of his name). And though he both grew and exported wool, he achieved prominence less through trade than as a lawyer. In 1514, aged about thirty, he was admitted to the Inner Temple, and by 1524 had been appointed recorder of Coventry. As well as acting as counsel to a number of monastic houses, he was often employed by the crown. He served on numerous commissions in the west midlands, became receiver-general of the duchy of Lancaster honour of Tutbury in 1528, was named to the council in the marches of Wales in 1534, and in 1536 was appointed a commissioner for the survey of religious houses in Warwickshire. He sat in parliament for Leicester in 1523, but thereafter represented Coventry, which returned him in 1529, probably in 1536, in 1539, and in 1542. He was sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire in 1541-2. As well as acquiring estates in both those counties Roger Wigston became steward of Pinley Priory, a small Cistercian nunnery a few miles west of Warwick (where the last prioress, Margaret Wigston, was probably a kinswoman), which later came into the possession of his son. He also leased Wolston Priory, a former alien cell which had come into the possession of the Coventry Carthusians, as a residence, and then bought it after the Charterhouse's dissolution. Before 1509 he married Christian, daughter of Edward Langley and widow of William Pye, with whom he had two sons and five daughters. Roger Wigston died on 27 November 1542 and was buried at Wolston. 


@@@@@


doc= 94981


Cooke, John (d. 1528), mercer and benefactor, was born in Minsterworth, a few miles west of Gloucester, the son of Thomas and Alice Cooke. The loss of Gloucester's early civic records means that little can be said of his career there, except that he prospered greatly in the town. He served as sheriff -- the equivalent of bailiff -- in 1494 and 1498, and became an alderman in 1501, the year in which he was first chosen to be mayor; he was elected again in 1507, 1512, and 1519. In June of 1513 he was involved, as mayor, in a dispute over common rights with the abbot of Gloucester. In 1524 he was by far the richest man in Gloucester, with an assessment of $300 for that year's subsidy, more than double that of any other townsman. The source of his wealth was probably the generalized trading that went with his being a mercer, though since he bought a fulling mill at Ebley he may also have had a specialized interest in clothmaking. The provision he made in his will for the repair of the roads that ran out of Gloucester north-east to Evesham and east to Birdlip, on the way to Cirencester, may point to some of his preferred markets. He and his wife, Joan, lived in the parish of St Mary de Crypt, or Christ Church, one of two parishes in the town inhabited by a substantial proportion of Gloucester's elite. 
John Cooke fell ill in the spring of 1528. In his will, drawn up on 18 May, he requested burial in the chancel of St Mary's, at the north end of the high altar. Numerous bequests showed him to have been both charitable and conventionally concerned for the salvation of his soul. He left $5 to a priest to celebrate masses in the church of St Nicholas, and no less than $60 for distribution to the poor on the day of his burial, at his month's mind, and on the first anniversary of his death. Sixteen sets of vestments, at a cost of 26's'. 8died each, were left to various churches, mostly in Gloucester but also to Minsterworth church. Numerous individual bequests showed him mindful of his godchildren and kinsfolk, suggesting that he had two or three sisters. And he also made provision both for his wife and for a school he planned to found in Gloucester. In this he was repeating the terms of a deed he had drawn up a few days earlier, on 12 May, whereby estates in Gloucester itself, in Badgeworth to the east of it, and in the neighbourhoods of Stroud and of Westbury-on-Severn, were conveyed to a group of ten leading townsmen, many of them past or future office-holders, who were themselves to convey them to his widow for her lifetime, with reversion on her death to a free grammar school that was to be founded in Gloucester. 
John Cooke made it clear in his will that he had taken his wife into his confidence over his plans for a school, directing the trustees to act 'to such uses purpose and ententes as she shall declare thereof by hir lerned counsel to the performaunce of my wille as she do know my full mynde in these purpose', and ordering them to augment its endowment by buying lands worth $20 per annum, 'as I have at several tymes before my death declared published and shewed to my said wife' (Austin, 'Crypt School', 140-44). He died on 14 September 1528, and was buried as he had requested. 


Shortly afterwards, on 11 January 1540, Joan Cooke, the city of Worcester, and the mayor and burgesses of Gloucester executed a curious tripartite deed giving control of the school to the town of Gloucester, which for its part undertook to implement the provisions of John Cooke's will with regard to the school. This document makes it clear that the school had now been built, and provides a detailed plan for its functioning, including extensive stipulations concerning its funding. It also specifies the stipend the schoolmaster is to receive ($10 per annum for a priest, who will also offer masses for the souls of the donors and their family, $9 for a layman, who will not provide such services) and provides for his residence in rooms above the school; no space was to be provided for a wife or children. The mayor and burgesses of Worcester were to ensure that their opposite numbers of Gloucester fulfilled their obligations to the school under this deed; in this they were encouraged by the annuity of $6's'. 8died subsequently granted to them for this supervision by Joan Cooke. 
The school founded under John Cooke's will seems to have begun to function shortly afterwards, in a building which survives on the north side of the church. Dame Joan lived for another four years, during which she was troubled by pressure from the Gloucester authorities to hand over the title deeds for the school's endowment. Her health was beginning to fail, and she was said to have become 'soche an unwieldy womon for age and unweldynes that she could not ride', but she resolutely refused to surrender the documents, saying 'that for her tyme she was mystres of the rentes therof, and therefore wold have the kepinge of the evidences and at her death she said she wold delyver them', as indeed she did (Austin, 'John and Joan Cooke's gift', 204-5). She drew up her will on 1 May 1544, and it was proved on 25 February following. She requested burial 'in the same place where my husbande John Cooke was buried' (Austin, 'Crypt School', 162) and made very elaborate provision for the celebration of his obit, as well as leaving $40 for distribution to the poor and making numerous bequests to relatives and godchildren. Perhaps surprisingly, her will makes no reference to the school. 
John and Joan Cooke are commemorated by brasses in the north transept of St Mary de Crypt Church, and also by a joint portrait of uncertain authenticity painted after the couple's death and tentatively dated to the years immediately after 1598. But their most substantial monument is the Crypt School, which despite several changes of site continues to fulfil the intentions of its founders as a boys' grammar school, bearing out Joan Cooke's assertion, during her dispute with the Gloucester authorities, 'that her husband and she had lovyd the said towne' (Austin, 'John and Joan Cooke's gift', 219). 


@@@@@


doc= 94982


Joan Cooke (d. 1544/5) did all that her husband had required. Her own origins are unrecorded. Her husband's bequest of $10 to his brother-in-law Thomas Messenger, and her own generous bequest to Robert Messenger, suggest that she was born into that family, but certainty is impossible. John expressed the hope that she would not remarry, and she did not do so. Instead she devoted her energies to fulfilling her responsibilities as executor of his will, and in particular to bringing to fruition his plans for a school. This process began soon after John's death, on 6 October 1529, when a portion of the churchyard of St Mary de Crypt was acquired as the site for the proposed school. However, several years passed before further action was taken, until on 12 May 1538 Joan Cooke purchased a mortmain licence from the crown enabling the mayor and burgesses of Gloucester to acquire land worth up to $50 to support the new school. A few months later the dissolution of Llanthony Priory (which had hitherto claimed a monopoly on schooling in Gloucester) provided Joan Cooke and John's trustees with an opportunity to augment the endowment for the school provided by John's will. They made the most of it. On 5 September 1539, supported by a letter from Hugh Latimer, bishop of Worcester, to Thomas Cromwell, they completed the purchase from the crown of 'the manor or grange of Poddesmede' (Podsmead in Hemsted, just west of the city) and other associated lands previously held by the priory for the use of the school, at a cost of $266 6's'. 8died 


@@@@@


doc= 94983


Watson, George (1654-1723), accountant and benefactor, was born in Edinburgh on 23 November 1654, the elder son of John Watson, merchant, and his wife, Marion Ewing (died 1697), who were married on 26 September 1644. Following his father's early death and his mother's remarriage to a Mr Symmer, George and his brother James were brought up by their aunt Elizabeth, the wife of James Davidson of Curriehill, who was also a merchant. 
On 2 April 1669 Watson was apprenticed to another merchant, John Clelland. He received tuition in a range of Italian and Dutch bookkeeping techniques and terminated his five-year indenture to train further in Holland, where Mrs Davidson's brother-in-law was conservator of the Scottish staple. Watson specialized in arithmetic, accounting, and bookkeeping, and also acted as agent for Scottish merchants. He returned to Edinburgh in 1676 and apparently never left the city again, probably due to a 'tender constitution'. He was employed as accountant and secretary, and in due course trading partner, by James Dick of Priestfield, lord provost of Edinburgh from 1679 to 1681, and a Catholic supporter of James, duke of York (the future James VII and II), when the latter was effectively viceroy in Scotland. Dick's house was burned down by anti-Catholic rioters at Christmas 1680, and in compensation James appointed him a collector of customs; probably as a consequence of this, in 1682 Watson was appointed 'conjoint collector of customs'. Dick's political fortunes declined but Watson remained his accountant until November 1696, while simultaneously trading and lending money on his own account. 
Mrs Davidson died in 1688 and left Watson an annuity; he paid for her funeral. Watson's mother had outlived her second husband and from 1683 he supported his half-brother John Symmer, engaging in business with him. From 1695 until 1697 Watson lived in Greyfriars in a house with no servants, despite his wealth. However on the death of their mother in July 1697 Watson moved into Symmer's household, where he lived, unmarried, for the rest of his life, paying an annual rent of $28. 
In 1688 Watson received his burgess and guild ticket. His business interests were already distinctive. He chose not to become involved with the Darien scheme that attracted so much Scottish capital in the late 1690s. On 24 March 1696 Watson became the first accountant and bookkeeper of the Bank of Scotland, founded by act of parliament the previous July. At a general meeting held on 25 March 1697 the bank was forced to consider retrenchment in the context of the Darien Company's proposal to issue banknotes. Watson argued against such cuts, which included a reduction in both his staff and salary, and was dismissed. He did however retain the $3000 Scots of bank shares which he had purchased the previous December and remained a member of the auditing committee which reported to the adventurers annually. 
Watson's reputation for accounting was built on his highly cohesive systems, which could allow accessibility in the form of random checking and the speedy recall of loans. It could also facilitate knowledge of the vital ratio of banknotes to recallable assets, coin, bullion, and goods. Management of this ratio required a merchant's experience of seasonal patterns and also awareness of both domestic and international political circumstances. In 1689, for example, Watson's London trading contacts wrote to him making reference to the unsettling effects of political events on the exchange market. These skills were well developed through Watson's background and career, and his methods clearly improved with experience. 
Watson was already trading to countries such as Italy. In November 1695 he joined with a London Scottish firm for a slave and ivory trading venture to Africa and the West Indies. They built a ship disguised as a frigate and 'fit to carry Negro's and elephants teeth' (Saville, 66). Since these plans were illegal under English law they were kept secret. Watson also illegally exported unclipped Scottish coin with which to buy up clipped English coin in anticipation of the silver recoinage of 1696. In 1713 he was still dispensing advice regarding the collection of Scots coins after the recoinage of 1708, in which the Bank of Scotland played a key role. He also made money from industrial investment, for instance in linen and wool. The New Mills woollen manufacture in East Lothian did not survive the union with England and closed in 1713. From 1702 to 1711 Watson was also treasurer of the committee that managed the Edinburgh ale tax. 
However most of Watson's fortune came from banking. He owed much of his financial success to his ability to establish networks which survived the vicissitudes of internal and international political change. He was able to judge successfully when to avoid risk and when to take it, and indeed when to risk illegal activity. He negotiated bills of exchange with London, benefiting from the high margins in the remittance of funds, a high-risk trade about which the Bank of Scotland was cautious, as it required reliable political antennae. Watson also lent capital to many of the old Scottish aristocracy at a time when it was in short supply following the collapse of the Darien Company in 1700. Many of his creditors had lost money in the scheme, yet he 'recovered his debts with pertinacity' (Nish, 14). 
Watson's religious allegiance was firmly presbyterian; he was a supporter of the revolution of 1688 and the Hanoverian succession in 1714. From February 1698 he and his half-brother were allocated seats in the Greyfriars Old Kirk, and he was described as 'for many years a constant hearer of the ministers of the Old Church' ('Statutes and Rules', xiii). His booksellers' accounts suggest he read widely in theological subjects. In 1711 he was appointed treasurer of the Society in Scotland for Propagating Christian Knowledge (SSPCK), established in 1709 to set up a system of presbyterian elementary schools in the highlands and islands. He received donations twice weekly and managed investments. He held the position until his death, a period that included the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1719. 
Watson fell ill in the autumn of 1721 and was cared for in the house of his half-brother where he still lived. From February 1723 he was heavily medicated and attended by a nurse and a maid. He drew up his will on 9 February 1723. Watson had been one of the earliest benefactors of the Merchant Maidens' Hospital, established in 1706 by the Merchant Company of Edinburgh with funds gifted by Mary Erskine. Though never a member of the Merchant Company, he was treasurer of the hospital between 1702 and 1704, and a governor from 1700 to at least 1713. The relationship between the institutional support of the Merchant Company and the autonomy of the governors of the hospital provided a model that appealed to Watson. Consequently he followed Erskine's example in vesting his legacy in the Merchant Company, which, as a perpetual company established by royal grant in 1681, would ensure the continuation of a foundation of his own. He wrote to the Merchant Company on 16 February 1723 asking that his half-brother should become accountant for the 'hospital which is to bear my name' (Nish, 13). 
On 21 March 1723 Watson wrote to the SSPCK resigning as treasurer on grounds of illness. He died in Edinburgh on 3 April 1723 and was buried on 8 April in the Old Greyfriars churchyard, where the site of his grave is marked by a plaque. His estate was reckoned at $189,239 Scots ($15,769 sterling), consisting largely of loans due for repayment by Scottish merchants and landowners. He also owned houses in Parliament Close and Fish Mercat Close and shops in the Exchange, valued at $705 sterling. This amounted to a considerable fortune. 
The motives behind the establishment of 'George Watson's Hospital', and for its administration being placed in the hands of the Merchant Company, derived from its founder's family background, possibly from his personal experience, and certainly from his trust that the Merchant Company would look after its own. The chief trustee of his will, John Osborn, was master of the Merchant Company for 1723-4 and helped to ensure that his wishes were executed. The will provided 500 merks to the SSPCK and Trades Maiden Hospital, 3000 merks to Trinity Hospital, 5000 merks to Heriot's Hospital, and 830 merks to the Merchant Maiden Hospital. From the residue, $100,000 Scots, increased in a codicil of 15 February 1723 to $144,000 Scots, was left to build a new hospital 'for entertaining and educating of the male children and grandchildren of decayed merchants in Edinburgh' (Thomson, 17). 
George Watson's will was ratified on 10 April by his niece Elizabeth Watson. Two of his relatives, descendants of his father's sister Margaret, challenged it on the grounds of Elizabeth Watson's mental condition, and subsequently on the grounds of conflict of interest by members of the Merchant Company, including those who had testified to Elizabeth's sanity. These challenges were finally rejected by Lord Cullen on 13 November 1723. The first text of the statutes of the new hospital was drawn up on 1 May 1724, followed by the declaration of the fundamental articles of the hospital. A seven-acre site for the hospital was purchased in 1738, and George Watson's Hospital received its first foundationers in 1741. In 1870 the hospital became a day school under the name of George Watson's College, and in 1974 it amalgamated with George Watson's Ladies College to become the co-educational school it is today. 


@@@@@


doc= 94985


Marriott, (George Thomas) Moore (1885-1949), film actor, was born at Alpha Place, Yiewsley, Middlesex, on 14 September 1885, the son of George Matthew Marriott (1859-1940), who was then a commercial traveller, and his wife, Edith Rousby, 'nee' Coleman (1864-1946). His parents were actors, and his father became a theatrical manager. Marriott was appearing on stage by the age of five. He entered films possibly as early as 1906, working in a number of one-reelers at Cecil Hepworth's studios at Walton-on-Thames, where he became known for being a master of disguise, able to take on multiple roles. He married, at Barrow-in-Furness on 2 January 1908, Annie Rose Elizabeth Stone (1886-1931), daughter of George Stone. They had three daughters and a son. In November 1915 he enlisted in the Army Service Corps and served during the First World War as a motorcycle dispatch rider. 
After the war Marriott's career continued with a series of films for the director Bert Haldane at Famous Pictures, followed by some adaptations of works by W. W. Jacobs, including the lead in a 1923 version of Jacobs's 'The Monkey's Paw'. Marriott's facility with make-up ensured that many of these parts were as older men, this versatility aided by five sets of false teeth which he could use as required. He appeared in three films based on stories by P. G. Wodehouse in 1924, but perhaps his most important silent film came in 1928 when he took on the title role in a version of 'Sweeney Todd' which, like the opening reels of 'The Monkey's Paw', has survived. 
The coming of sound did not interrupt Marriott's progress, and though fewer starring roles came his way he developed as a character actor. While he remained prolific -- Marriott once claimed to have completed over 300 films in his career -- he felt that his career was in decline. In 1936 he put out a self-promoting publicity brochure to agents and producers. One of the pictures he included was from his performance as the elderly Tom Cobley in 'Widecombe Fair' (1928). This caught the eye of the team at Gainsborough Studios, who were seeking to cast an old man as a stooge for the comedian Will Hay. He was given a role in 'Windbag the Sailor' (1936), a part which secured him a contract with the studio. 
In 'Windbag the Sailor' Marriott was cast as the old, wily Jeremiah Harbottle alongside Graham Moffatt as contrasting stooges to Will Hay. Over the next three years the trio went on to make six films together, all but one directed by Marcel Varnel. Will Hay starred as the duplicitous schemer inveigling his way into a position of authority; Marriott's Jerry, sporting a one-tooth plate, was the irascible, garrulous but dim reprobate; and Moffatt's Albert was the insolent but resourceful sidekick. They were lucky to be served by top-class scriptwriters, notably Marriott Edgar and Val Guest, who, with the help of J. O. C. Orton, provided them with their best film, the classic 'Oh, Mr Porter!' (1937), in which they played the staff at a sleepy railway station in Ireland who unwittingly get involved in a gun-running intrigue. In it Marriott gruffly delivered one of the best-remembered lines in British comedy -- 'Next train's gone!' Nevertheless, Marriott's finest overall performance came in another Will Hay vehicle, 'Convict 99', where he played Jerry the Mole, a gaolbird forever trying to tunnel his way to freedom. 
In the end Will Hay felt the need to assert his authority as a star comedian and detached himself from his stooges -- but the value of Marriott and Moffatt to Gainsborough Studios as a duo was apparent. They were cast as support to a number of other comedians including Arthur Askey, Bebe Daniels, and the Crazy Gang. Their most memorable scene as a duo outside the Hay films was as comic relief in a 1938 Will Fyffe melodrama, 'Owd Bob'. In 1939 they were loaned out to Ealing Studios for 'Cheer Boys Cheer', a notable precursor to the classic Ealing comedy in which they play workmates at a cosy brewery. They also worked together on stage, touring Harry Tate's celebrated motoring sketch with Tate's son in 1941, and the following year they starred in a travelling revue, 'Now Then Boys'. On radio they completed a six-part series in 1942, 'A Slight Delay', scripted by their regular film writers Val Guest and Marriott Edgar. Their last joint appearance was in the 1944 Tommy Handley vehicle 'Time Flies', which featured Marriott as an unfortunate Elizabethan soothsayer clamped in the stocks, with Moffatt as his nephew. 
Marriott's versatility had meant there was always a demand for his services on radio, stage, and film with or without Moffatt. He was superb in a straight role as the father whose family is pulled apart by the war in 'Millions Like Us' (1943). At the end of the war poor health caused him to cut down his work schedule, though he did enjoy a short stint as a regular in the 'Jack Buchanan Radio Programme' in 1945. His post-war film roles may have been less prominent, but he still received some excellent parts. He made his mark as the first murder victim in the 1946 whodunnit 'Green for Danger' and the avenging farmer in the 1947 melodrama 'The Root of All Evil'. His final film appearance was in the 1949 Ben Wrigley farce 'High Jinks in Society'. 
Marriott's marriage had broken down by 1919, and he settled down with Grace Lillian Williamson. He died at their home, 82 Rose Green Road, Bognor Regis, Sussex, of a heart attack, on 11 December 1949 and his ashes were interred at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 94995


Taylor, Alma Louise (1895-1974), film actress, was born in Peckham, London, on 3 January 1895, the eldest of three children of John Harry Taylor ('b'. 1853), a metal broker, and Kate Caroline, 'nee' Harvey ('b'. 1870). She grew up in Sunbury-on-Thames, Surrey, and in 1907, aged twelve, started appearing as an extra in films made at the studios of the Hepworth Manufacturing Company Ltd in neighbouring Walton-on-Thames. Thus began an association with the film-maker Cecil Hepworth that would last for nearly twenty years. 
In 1910 Hepworth cast Taylor in one of the lead roles in his popular long-running (1910-15) 'Tilly the Tomboy' series of short films, in which Taylor and her co-star Chrissie White (1895-1989) played a pair of rebellious teenage girls who created inappropriate and often violent mayhem in a variety of genteel social situations. Taylor starred in forty feature-length films for Hepworth between 1912 and 1924, of which her most famous was undoubtedly a 1916 adaptation of Helen Mathers's pastoral melodrama 'Comin' Thro' the Rye'. 
Hepworth's was the first studio in Britain to imitate the burgeoning American practice of promoting film actors as recognisable celebrities. Taylor was not the first of Hepworth's employees to receive this treatment, but, after he started publicizing her name in advertisements for his films from 1912 onwards, she quickly became established as the studio's leading performer. Various polls conducted by fan magazines and newspapers confirm that Taylor was the best-known and most popular film star in silent British cinema over a formative ten-year period, from 1914 to 1924. In July 1915 the weekly publication 'Pictures and the Picturegoer' published the results of a poll designed to assess which British-born film actors were most popular among its readers, and Taylor was placed first, ahead of Charlie Chaplin (then in the second year of his screen career). In April 1916 another fan magazine, 'Picture Palace News', conducted a poll which asked readers to vote for their favourite female film star, European or American. Taylor came third in this popularity contest with 142,571 votes, behind the Hollywood stars Mary Fuller (142,635 votes) and Mary Pickford (185,910). 
At the height of her career Taylor was occasionally described as the 'English Mary Pickford', but the publicity campaigns contrived by Hepworth's press agents sought to create a star image which was markedly distinct from that of her transatlantic rivals. The first generation of American film actresses regularly endorsed fashion and beauty products, and public fascination centred on their avowed preferences in clothes and men. By contrast publicity features on Alma Taylor portrayed her as a woman without earthly desires and certainly no interest in clothes or shopping. Her image as a uniquely homely and chaste star clearly struck a chord with many British filmgoers. One female fan wrote in to 'Pictures and the Picturegoer' in September 1918 to describe a chance personal encounter with her idol in Sunbury, and noted with approval that Taylor was as unostentatiously dressed off-screen as she was wont to appear in front of the cameras, wearing a 'simple cotton costume' and appearing every inch 'the embodiment of charming, unspoilt, British girlhood' (Tremayne, 301). British film fans of the time occasionally complained that Taylor lacked glamour in her appearance and vigour in her performances. Her popularity was certainly culturally specific: she enjoyed little fame overseas, and, unlike several of her British contemporaries, made no attempt to launch a career in Hollywood. 

'Comin' Thro' the Rye' had been so successful that Hepworth remade it, with Taylor once again in the starring role, in 1923. In April 1924 the 'Daily News' published the results of a new readers' poll measuring the relative popularity of British film stars, and Taylor was still placed in first position, which she jointly shared with a relative newcomer, Betty Balfour (1903-1977). However, 1923/4 marked a negative turning point in her career. The 'Comin' Thro' the Rye' remake was not the box office success that Hepworth had anticipated and desperately needed, and, following a disastrous public flotation which was supposed to provide the funding for a major expansion of the studios, his company entered voluntary liquidation in 1924. Between 1924 and 1928 Taylor was cast as the star in four more feature films, all made at different studios for different directors, and also made her debut as an actress on the legitimate stage. But her appeal proved to be intimately wedded to the Hepworth film-making style and publicity machine, and before the silent era ended she was demoted to the status of a supporting player. She appeared in minor roles in five early sound films before officially retiring from film acting following her marriage, on 2 June 1936, to Major Leonard Avery (1869-1953). Her husband, the Australian-born son of James Watts Grimes, pastoralist, had changed his name by deed poll, and was the divorced husband of Helen May, 'nee' Reeves. He had qualified in medicine, and served as an army medical officer in the South African War, when he devised a horse-drawn ambulance, and in the First World War in the Middle East. In 1928 he was a member of the British Colonial Film Company's expedition to Kenya and Tanganyika. 
After her husband's death, Taylor returned to the film industry, accepting uncredited work as an extra on several films and television productions. Poignantly one of these films, 'Stock Car' (1955), was made at Nettlefold, which was formerly Hepworth's old studio at Walton. Taylor's last-known screen appearance was in 'A Night to Remember' in 1958. She died at her home, 38 Carlton Drive, Putney, London, on 23 January 1974. Sixteen films from her silent era heyday are known to have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 95005


Tennyson, (Frederick) Penrose (1912-1941), film director, was born at 22 Carlyle Square, London, on 26 August 1912, the eldest of three sons of Sir Charles Bruce Locker Tennyson (1879-1977), barrister and legal adviser to the Colonial Office, and his wife, Ivy Gladys, 'nee' Pretious (1880-1958). On his father's side he was a great-grandson of two poets: the poet laureate Alfred Tennyson, and Frederick Locker-Lampson. His father, who became secretary to the recently formed Federation of British Industries and then from 1928 to 1948 company secretary of the Dunlop Rubber Company, was knighted in 1945 for his efforts to improve industrial design as chairman of the Board of Trade utility furniture committee. His mother, who had been brought up by the positivists Frederic and Ethel Harrison, became secretary to Emily Hobhouse during her campaigning against the Boer War. She succeeded Emily's brother Leonard Hobhouse as salaried secretary to the Free Trade Union until her marriage in 1909, and as an active member of the Women's Anti-Suffrage League helped to edit the 'Anti-Suffrage Review'. In 1918 she was awarded the OBE for her war work in charge of women workers employed by the Ministry of Munitions. 
Penrose Tennyson, usually known as Pen, was educated at Scaitcliffe preparatory school and then Eton College, from where he won an exhibition at Balliol College, Oxford. He spent six months in Switzerland improving his French and widening his reading before taking up residence at the university in October 1931. He read history but, distracted by a love affair and having failed his first examination, he decided -- in spite of the support he had from the college dean, the renowned 'Sligger' Urquhart -- to leave and find employment. He was aided by his mother, who persuaded C. M. Woolf, manager of the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation, to take him on. In May 1932 he began work at the Lime Grove Studios. There he quickly impressed the producer Michael Balcon, who did much to advance his career. 
Tennyson made two short travelogues, on Sandwich and York, and was assistant director to Alfred Hitchcock on five films, including 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1934) and 'The 39 Steps' (1935), in the latter of which he was the 'double' for Madeleine Carroll 'in a blonde wig and a dress' (Balcon, 'Sub-Lieutenant F. Penrose Tennyson', 194). Loaned out to another company, as the assistant director on 'Farewell Again' (1937), he sailed to Aden and Egypt with a camera crew to take 'atmosphere' shots. When financial difficulties beset Gaumont-British he moved with Balcon to join MGM's project to make films in Britain. This enabled him to widen his experience as assistant director of 'The Citadel' (1938) and 'A Yank at Oxford' (1938). When Balcon took the position of studio head at Ealing Studios, Tennyson again went with him. Both were to have the opportunity to make what they regarded as indigenously British films. 
Slightly built and tousle-haired, Tennyson found time for the traditional upper-class recreations of fox-hunting, shooting, and sailing. He combined this with a nonconformity that led him to become supportive of the Soviet Union and sympathetic to the unprivileged sections of society. He was one of the earliest members of the Association of Cine-Technicians after its formation in 1933 and acted as the secretary of the Gaumont-British Studio branch. 
In the autumn of 1938 Tennyson began directing his first film, a boxing drama, 'There Ain't No Justice', based on a recently published novel by James Curtis (the pseudonym of Geoffrey Maiden). Modestly financed and set in London's East End, it was part-scripted by Tennyson (as were his two later films). On its release in the summer of 1939 it was not given a West End showing, nor was it much discussed by film critics. On 19 October 1939 he married, at Caxton Hall, London. His wife was the actress (Margery) Nova Pilbeam (1919-205), the daughter of Arnold William Pilbeam, theatre manager. There were no children of the marriage. 
To achieve a naturalistic effect in 'There Ain't No Justice', Tennyson had avoided better-known actors and recruited extras from the Cockney neighbourhoods he sought to evoke. In his next film, 'The Proud Valley', the leading man was the American actor and singer Paul Robeson. Tennyson had to place him in the context of a Welsh village affected by the closure of its coalmine. The storyline of the film, devised by the socialist theatre director Herbert P. J. Marshall and the latter's wife, Fredda Brilliant, had proposed an epic of working-class life, showing the hardships and solidarities of miners who reopen their mine to operate it as a workers' co-operative. Four authors contributed to the final script. As well as Tennyson, the film's associate producer, Sergei Nolbandov, was credited as an author along with two novelists, Louis Golding and Jack Jones; the latter was also drafted in to play the part of one of the miners, Ned Thomas. 
Filming began in August 1939. Within a couple of weeks the war broke out and several of the production team were called up. Tennyson had to find replacements and modify the script. The reopening of the mine became a joint effort of the workers and the owners. Symbolically both Robeson's character, David Goliath, and the mining engineer sent by the owners to survey the pit sacrifice their lives to save others. As old divisions are superseded by the national interest Ned Thomas declares 'to hell with Hitler!' and in the final scene the villagers cheer as wagons of coal, now vital in helping to win the war, are brought to the surface. On its release in March 1940 critical opinion was divided, but in a longer perspective 'The Proud Valley' has been termed 'the first in the Ealing cycle of war-effort films' (Barr, 20). Its combination of documentary realism, propaganda, humour, and ordinary people dealing with extraordinary situations anticipated, for example, 'The Foreman Went to France' (1942), 'The Bells Go Down' (1943), and 'San Demetrio London' (1943). 
Similar characteristics mark Tennyson's third film, 'Convoy'. As well as a morale-raising story of a British cruiser escorting merchant ships across the Atlantic, Tennyson's script included a romantic triangle about two officers, played by Clive Brook and John Clements, involved with the same woman (Judy Campbell). Clements's caddish character redeems himself by giving his life for his ship and country. After its opening in July 1940 'Convoy' became one of the most successful British films of that year (Barr, 22). As well as making a good profit it was generally well received by the critics. A naval adviser assisted with the technical details, and facilities were provided for Tennyson to be on board HMS 'Valorous' as it sailed in convoy from Scotland down the east coast. His script gave those below decks 'a raw vitality which contrasts favourably with the stiff formalities of the upper deck' (Murphy, 24). 
For several years Tennyson had been a member of the Royal Naval Supplementary Reserve. He could, to make another film, have sought exemption from war service, but decided not to do so, and in June 1940 he began six weeks of training before he was posted, as third officer, to an anti-submarine trawler. Later that year the Admiralty appointed him to head its instructional film unit based at Portsmouth. His first film was a short piece of propaganda intended for American armament workers. By the summer of 1941 he was making a film that required location work at Scapa Flow. On 7 July 1941 he began a journey back to London, the first leg of which involved a flight to Rosyth. The small Fleet Air Arm plane in which he was travelling crashed into a mountainside, killing all passengers and crew. His remains were buried in the naval plot of Dunfermline (Douglas Bank) cemetery. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the Fields on 24 July. In 1950 his widow married a BBC journalist, Alexander Whyte. 
Pen's brother (Charles) Julian Tennyson (1915-1945), author of 'Suffolk Scene: a Book of Description and Adventure' (1939), which was widely praised for its evocation of that county, was commissioned in the Oxford and Bucks Light Infantry and was killed during the Burma campaign. The youngest brother, (Beryl) Hallam Augustine Tennyson (1920-2005), refused to take a combatant role in the Second World War, but joined the Friends' Ambulance Unit. Hallam's homosexuality placed him outside the conventional attitudes of the time. He wrote about it with great frankness in his autobiography, 'The Haunted Mind' (1984), in which he also expressed the admiration he had for his father and the dislike of his mother. From 1955 to 1979 he worked at the BBC, becoming assistant head of radio drama. His death from knife wounds at his flat in Highgate remained an unsolved crime. 


@@@@@


doc= 95006


Cutts, (John Henry) Graham (1884-1958), film director, was born at 47 Park Crescent, Brighton, Sussex, on 19 February 1884, the elder of two children of Henry Whitmore Cutts (1851-1935), wood engraver and later dentist, and his wife, Mary Maud Colclough, 'nee' Jackson ('b'. 1862). His grandfather was the Revd Edward Lewes Cutts, author of books on ecclesiastical history. He was a boarder in Eastbourne, at what was advertised as an 'educational home for delicate boys requiring sea air', and from 1898 to 1901 at Hurstpierpoint College, Sussex. On 9 August 1909, in Hartlepool, he married Lizzie (1884-1988), daughter of Thomas Hart, licensed victualler. Their only child died in infancy. 
Trained as a marine and electrical engineer, after his marriage Cutts ran a cinema in Sevenoaks, Kent, his wife working as the cinema pianist. He went on to manage the Empire Electric Theatre, Exeter, and subsequently to run cinemas and stage screenings for Solomon Levy and George Black. 
After moving into film-making Jack Cutts, as he was sometimes known, courted controversy with 'Cocaine' (1922), made for H. B. Parkinson's Master Films: banned by the British Board of Film Censors, though screened at some cinemas outside London, it was re-issued later in 1922 as 'While London Sleeps', minus the cocaine references. Cutts and his then film-making partner Herbert Wilcox received more applause for 'The Wonderful Story' (1922), which 'Variety' went as far as to call 'probably the best ever made by a British producer in a British studio with British players' (Gore, 'Wonderful year'). From this early stage he was remarkably successful in reaching an international audience and in bringing Hollywood stars to Britain. Mae Marsh appeared in 'Flames of Passion' (1922) and 'Paddy the Next Best Thing' (1923), and Betty Compson in 'Woman to Woman' (1923), a critical and box-office triumph, as well as in the less successful 'The White Shadow' (1924). The Compson films were made for Balcon-Saville-Freedman at the Famous-Players Lasky Studios in Islington, where Michael Balcon and Cutts went on to establish Gainsborough Pictures. 
In 1924 Cutts went to UFA's Babelsberg studios in Berlin to direct Jane Novak in Gainsborough's 'The Blackguard' (1925). Alfred Hitchcock accompanied him as art director and assistant director. Hitchcock had first worked with Cutts on 'Flames of Passion' but their initially amicable relationship became strained as the younger man's ambitions and ability became increasingly evident. After 'The Prude's Fall' (1925) they continued to work at Gainsborough but on separate projects. However, while biographers of Hitchcock (Taylor, McGilligan) have reported that Cutts's extra-marital affairs increasingly led him to leave the film-making to his assistant, Cutts's subsequent work confirmed that he was an important film-maker in his own right. His new enthusiasm for the mobile camera enlivened 'The Rat' (1925) and 'The Triumph of the Rat' (1926) and helped establish Ivor Novello as a film star. Cutts had further critical and commercial successes with the Betty Balfour comedy 'The Sea Urchin' (1926). 
After returning to Berlin to film Lili Damita in 'The Queen was in the Parlour' (1927) Cutts left Gainsborough for First National Pictures, though the move to Hollywood reported in the American press never happened. Instead he made 'Chance the Idol' (1927) and 'Confetti' (1928) in Germany and the Riviera, then returned to Britain to work with Anny Ondra. An attempt to establish a new company, Allied British Film Producers Ltd, came to nothing. Cutts returned to Gainsborough to direct 'The Return of the Rat' (1929), then with the coming of sound he abandoned cinema for the hotel business. After the failure of that venture he returned to the film industry, initially working with Basil Dean on, among other films, the Gracie Fields musical 'Looking on the Bright Side' (1932). He went on to direct, co-direct, or work as production manager on a series of pleasing but less substantial works, from 'Three Men in a Boat' (1934) to 'Just William' (1940). His final films were short documentaries, made for World Wide during and at the end of the Second World War. 
Cutts had a daughter, Patricia Cutts (1925-1974), with the actress Robin Coles, formerly Gladys Rose Allen (1903/4-1954), with whom he was living in Paddington Street, London, before the Second World War. Patricia Cutts went on to have a career in film and television. Latterly Cutts's home was at 50 Pepys Road, Wimbledon. He died of bronchopneumonia and lung cancer at St Bartholomew's Hospital, Smithfield, on 7 September 1958, and was cremated. 
In 1926 Iris Barry described Cutts as 'far and away the best known of our English directors', noting that his achievements included directing 'Woman to Woman', 'The first English post-war film to earn universal acclaim', and 'The Rat', 'the first English film to use the new photographic methods of the Germans' ('Daily Mail', 18 Aug 1926). It was not a minority view at the time. Since then Cutts has been overshadowed by Hitchcock. While clearly less successful than his one-time assistant in making the transition to sound, in the 1920s Cutts was the major figure. He was important not only as a showman, helping to raise the profile of British cinema at a particularly low point, but also for the visual style of his films. He was fond of scenes of night-life and masked balls; they resurface even in minor works such as 'Car of Dreams' (1935) and were most vividly realized in the films featuring Novello as 'The Rat'. Even the 1930s films include striking moments, from the climax of 'The Sign of Four' (1932) to the 360 degree pan used in the 'Side-by-Side' number in 'Over She Goes' (1938). The disappearance of major films such as 'Woman to Woman' makes it difficult to give a full assessment of his work, but the silent films that do survive confirm him as a key British film-maker. 


@@@@@


doc= 95007


Barker, William George (1868-1951), film producer, was born at Prospect House, Waltham Lane, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 18 January 1868, the son of William Emmanuel Barker (1843/4-1884), office clerk and tea merchant, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Theobald ('b'. 1845). Little is known of his early life, but he spent many years as a travelling salesman for a German company selling gold paint. His occupation was given as commercial traveller when he married, at Stoke Newington on 7 July 1897, Mary Alice ('b'. 1866/7), a milliner, daughter of George Edwards. They had at least two sons and one daughter. 
An enthusiastic amateur photographer, Barker was able in 1896 to buy, for $40, a motion picture camera from the pioneering Lumiere brothers, using it for amateur displays of 'films' he had shot, directed, and produced. His first professional work was on early newsreels, or 'topicals' as they were called, and he had some success as the cameraman on one of these devoted to celebrating Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee, foreshadowing the patriotic themes he would later embrace. 
The dates of Barker's early professional activities are sometimes hard to pin down but he did found the Autoscope Company, based at 50 Gray's Inn Road, London, on 1 January 1901 and built a primitive outdoor stage at Stamford Hill in north London. 'Most of his pictures were, however, topicals, that is newsreels and documentaries, on which he built his reputation' (Ball, 77). In 1902 he bought two houses facing Ealing Green, West Lodge and The Lodge, the former of which was set in nearly four acres. When Autoscope merged with the Warwick Trading Company (founded by the American Charles Urban in 1898) Barker was appointed managing director and made it a real force in early British cinema, still specializing in news films, including the short-lived daily newsreel 'London Day by Day' in July 1906. However, in 1907 he built the first of his three enclosed greenhouse-like glass stages at Ealing, thus making the shooting of films less dependent on the vagaries of English weather. 
Barker's aspirations were not to be satisfied for long with news films. He sought to realize his ambitions in films more noted for their extravagance than for their artistry or subtlety. In 1909 he left Warwick to form his own company, Barker Motion Photography Ltd, and established offices in Soho Square in March 1910, making some very lavish films at Ealing, which some claimed set a new standard for British film-making. There is some dispute about where and exactly when his film of 'Hamlet', the first British film of the play, was made, but it is listed in 1912 by the Globe Film Co. Ltd as 'Barker's 'Hamlet'' (Ball, 318) and Gifford's 'British Film Catalogue' lists its release as March 1912, though it may have been made two years earlier. Whatever the disputes about dates, and whether or not he made 'Hamlet' for his own company, there can be no question that Barker was, along with Cecil Hepworth, one of the two most influential figures in British film in the period up to and during the First World War. 
Barker's period of greatest productivity was from 1910 to 1916, and two main strands can be discerned in his output. As if emulating the American pioneer D. W. Griffith, he produced some grandiose spectacular films, often literary adaptations, and it is for these that he is chiefly remembered. There were also crime melodramas, which, drawing perhaps on his background in 'topicals', were noted for the realism with which they depicted the streets and docks of London. It is the former strand that seems to have captured his imagination and to have given most scope to his patriotic urges, though such films as 'Henry VIII' (1911), 'Sixty Years a Queen' (1913), which combined his taste for actualities with vast spectacle, a very lavish, nearly two-hour production of 'East Lynne' (1913), 'Jane Shore' (1915), and 'She' (1916) were less popular in 'industrial halls' than in metropolitan picture houses. The crime-genre titles included 'Beckwith's Gun' (1910), 'The Fighting Parson' (1912; crime with uplift), and 'The Great Bullion Robbery' (1913), blending melodrama and location work. 
It is worth singling out 'Henry VIII' as an example of Barker's showmanship and business instincts. With the lavish offer of $1000 he enticed the stage actor Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree to repeat his famous theatrical interpretation of Cardinal Wolsey on screen, along with such other stage luminaries as Violet Vanbrugh and Henry Ainley, and used sets designed for the production at His Majesty's Theatre. 'Henry VIII' is described by the film historian Rachael Low as 'the first really important British film' (Low, 2.95). Frustratingly it seems unlikely that it survives. Part of Barker's publicity campaign for the film was to make it hard to see: he announced that, after six weeks, all twenty prints struck would be destroyed and in fact on 13 April 1911 all copies of the film, released in February, were burnt at Ealing in a ceremony attended by the press. Barker's argument for this act of seeming artistic vandalism was to demonstrate against the practice of hiring out for exhibition films whose physical quality had deteriorated beyond their use-by date. Barker did very well out of 'Henry VIII', while hundreds of people were reputedly turned away from cinemas bursting at the seams with enthusiastic crowds. 'He claimed that his film had been so expensive to produce that no dealer or showman could afford to buy it; consequently he hired it for limited runs at very high prices' (ibid., 2.45). He may well have raised standards; he certainly raised rentals. 
The showman in him led to the patriotic cavalcade of Victoria's reign, 'Sixty Years a Queen', directed by Bert Haldane and starring one of Barker's discoveries, Blanche Forsythe, who also starred in 'East Lynne' and 'She', and to the extravagances of 'Jane Shore', again directed by Haldane (with F. Martin Thornton) and again starring Forsythe as Edward IV's mistress. 'Jane Shore' had a huge cast, with several thousand extras, and very lavish-looking production design, as the surviving stills attest. Oakley records how 'Barker transported 5000 people to Devil's Dyke in Sussex for three days while he shot episodes in the Battle of Marston Moor' (Oakley, 65). He even dressed actors up as policemen to help maintain order when the local constabulary refused. Sadly the resulting film failed to justify its reckless expenditure and, after one more ambitious project, the filming of H. Rider Haggard's 'She' (1916), which he co-directed with H. Lisle Locoque, he wound down his operations. 
In a typically flamboyant gesture Barker retired from film-making on armistice day 1918, though three further films he had produced were released in 1919. In 1920 he accompanied the prince of Wales on a world tour as official cameraman, leading to individual news items in the 'Topical Budget' newsreels and the feature '50,000 Miles with the Prince of Wales' (1920). He was a past president of the Cinema Veterans and remained active in it until just before his death. In February 1936 he addressed the British Kinematographic Society on his pre-1910 experiences, but until the resurgence of interest in British silent cinema in the late twentieth century Barker was almost forgotten. Latterly resident at 1 Drax Avenue, Wimbledon, he died at the premises of the Roll Film Company, Nursery Road, Wimbledon, on 6 November 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 95008


Leitch, Archibald (1865-1939), engineer and architect, was born on 27 April 1865 at 1 Comleypark Street, Glasgow, the fourth of six children of Archibald Leitch (1830-1907), a blacksmith, and Agnes, 'nee' Kent (1833-1911). In 1876 he won a place at Hutchesons' Boys' Grammar School, an institution noted for its severity but also for promoting the interests of talented working-class boys. From there he graduated in 1880 or 1881 to Anderson's College, before joining Duncan Stewart engineers in 1882, where he qualified as a draughtsman. In 1887 Leitch followed the path of many young Glaswegians by going to sea, during which time he trained as a marine engineer and visited India and South Africa. He then returned to Glasgow where -- on 10 June 1890 at St John's Church in the Gorbals -- he married Jessie Black (1866-1950), daughter of James Black, dairyman. Late in that year he secured a senior position in the drawing office of another engineering firm, Mirlees, Watson & Co. 
Over the ensuing years Leitch built up the contacts and experience that would eventually enable him to set up on his own account as a consulting engineer and factory architect in 1896, with an office at 40 St Enoch's Square, Glasgow, and a staff that soon rose to over thirty hands. He joined the freemasons, taught evening classes to raise money, and in 1897 gained associate membership of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers. Among his proposers and seconders were some of the leading names in Scottish engineering, including Sir William Renny Watson and Sir William Arrol. Also during this period Leitch became involved with Rangers, the football club he would support all his life, and whose Ibrox Park stadium, opened in Govan in 1887, lay within walking distance of McLellan Street, where Archibald and Jessie set up their first home and started a family in 1891. At a time when Glasgow's football was unrivalled in Britain, and therefore the world, in its intensity, stadiums, and attendance figures, Rangers was one of three dominant clubs, along with Queen's Park, a resolutely amateur club with strong establishment ties, and Celtic, formed by the Roman Catholic community in 1888. 
As Rangers' lease on Ibrox Park came to an end in 1899, Leitch presented to members ambitious plans for a vast new stadium to be built on an adjoining site. Newspaper reports depicted Leitch as a persuasive speaker, using the latest form of magic lantern to project his drawings onto a screen. By such means Leitch won the contract. At its completion in April 1900 the new Ibrox Park had a capacity of just under 80,000, making it the largest purpose-built football ground in the world. Leitch took no fee for his work, but did take on paid commissions for two other football clubs, building grandstands for Kilmarnock and Sheffield United, in conjunction with the Clyde Structural Iron Company, with whom he worked closely for several years, mainly on industrial buildings for the home market and for export to the colonies. 
As Rangers had hoped, the new Ibrox was selected to host the lucrative biennial Scotland v. England international, scheduled for 5 April 1902. But a day that started promisingly, with Leitch's portrait being published in the local press alongside widespread praise of the stadium, ended in disaster when a section of elevated wooden terracing gave way shortly after kick off, resulting in the deaths of twenty-six spectators. Leitch, who attended the match and assisted in the bloody aftermath of the collapse, was naturally devastated. During the subsequent trial of the timber merchant who had supplied the suspect terracing he was to suffer further when various engineers, Sir William Arrol included, publicly questioned his competence. Humiliatingly, also read out in court was a letter written by Leitch to Rangers begging them not to hire another architect lest this be seen as confirmation of his culpability. 'I need hardly say', he admitted in the letter, 'what unutterable anguish the accident caused me, surely the most unhappy eyewitness of all' (Inglis, 25). 
As it transpired, no legal blame for the disaster was ascribed to any party. Indeed Leitch not only retained his position as adviser to Rangers but, remarkably, went on to establish himself as the world's first ever specialist designer of football grounds. Between 1899 and 1939 Leitch's company is known to have completed significant works for at least thirty British and Irish football clubs, as well as the English Rugby Union at Twickenham and at least two greyhound and speedway stadiums. It is thought that he also worked on lesser contracts for at least twelve further football clubs. No other architect or engineer of his generation came close to establishing a stadium portfolio of this magnitude. That Leitch managed to rebuild his reputation after the Ibrox disaster may be attributed to three main factors. First, according to what little evidence there is -- including his oral testimony at the disaster trial -- Leitch appears to have been confident, resilient, and also highly personable. One grandchild recalled that there always seemed to be laughter when he was around. In football club boardrooms this geniality won him many clients. Second, thanks to his experience in factory construction he was able to satisfy the two main demands of football clubs, that is to build speedily and cheaply. But third, and most important, instead of retreating after the Ibrox disaster and confining his efforts to factory work, Leitch went back to the drawing board and designed a new form of terracing that would ultimately become the standard at British football grounds. 
Patented in 1906, but first erected in the summer of 1905 at two grounds in west London (Craven Cottage and Stamford Bridge), Leitch's tubular steel crush barriers would remain ubiquitous until at least the 1970s. His designs for the layout of terracing equally stood the test of time, so that when the British government first drew up its 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' in 1973 Leitch's calculations on terracing essentially formed the basis of the recommendations (even though, ironically, the guide's publication had been prompted by a second disaster at Ibrox Park, in 1971, on one of the exit stairs). Leitch also made a speciality of grandstand design. In particular his double-decker stands, where the upper tier overhung the lower, were characterized by a succession of distinctive criss-cross steel ties along the front of the main balcony truss. Seventeen Leitch stands of this design were built between 1907 and 1938, the best-known being at Goodison Park (for Everton Football Club), Ibrox Park, Roker Park (Sunderland), and Fratton Park (Portsmouth). Another Leitch trademark was to place a gable on the centre of the stand roof, with the club's name or emblem displayed on the front, facing the pitch. 
Having established his credentials in Glasgow, the prospect of greater rewards south of the border prompted Leitch to move to Liverpool in 1908, and from there to London in 1915, where he set up offices in Victoria Street, Westminster (in the heartland of London's engineering world). But whereas each of his offices were modest, the scale and grandeur of Leitch's family homes, in Nicholas Road, Blundellsands (1908-15), followed by Etruria House, on Lonsdale Road, Barnes (1915-22), and during the mid-1920s on The Bourne, Southgate, in north London, suggest that his business both in football and industry thrived. 
Despite designing some of the best-known football stadiums in the world, including Manchester United's Old Trafford (1910) and Arsenal's Highbury in 1913, Leitch remained virtually unknown to the sporting public during his lifetime, and received no recognition from the architectural or engineering establishments (by whom his work would have been dismissed as merely functional and utilitarian). Indeed after his death on 25 April 1939, in the semi-detached house he and Jessie had retired to four years earlier, at 113 Belmont Avenue, Cockfosters, London, only one brief obituary appeared. Published in the journal of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers, this made no mention at all of his football-related work. 
Archibald Leitch was buried in the family plot in East Sheen cemetery, alongside two of his four daughters, who predeceased him aged twenty-two and twenty-nine respectively; a third daughter had died in infancy. His only son, Archibald Kent Leitch (1891-1972), had become his business partner in the 1920s but, lacking his father's acumen, wound up the firm about 1955. 
Following the 1989 Hillsborough disaster, which heralded the era of all-seater stadiums, most Leitch stands and terraces were demolished. However, his contribution to the staging and development of British football has since been acknowledged, and three surviving Leitch structures at two grounds have been listed. These are the Stevenage Road stand and Craven Cottage pavilion at Fulham Football Club (grade 2), dating from 1905, and the south stand at Ibrox Park (grade B), completed in 1928. One of his finest designs, the Trinity Road stand at Villa Park, Birmingham, completed in 1924, was controversially demolished in 2000. 
Archibald Leitch has also gained posthumous recognition as an early exponent of reinforced concrete. Apart from two pioneering grandstands, at Liverpool Football Club's Anfield (1906) and Sheffield Wednesday's Hillsborough (1914) -- both extant in 2009 but covered by larger structures -- a Leitch factory built in 1903 in Polmadie, Glasgow, was granted grade A listed status in 1991. Known as the Sentinel Works and derelict since the 1980s, this has been identified as the first reinforced concrete building in Glasgow, and is the third oldest to survive in the United Kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 95011


Collier, Richard (1480x85?-1533), mercer and benefactor, was born at Horsham, Sussex. The identity of his parents is unknown. He was closely related to the Caryll family of the neighbouring parish of Warnham, but the precise nature of that kinship remains unclear. 
Collier is first recorded as a member of the Mercers' Company in 1511, but his precedence suggests that he is to be identified with William Bromwell's apprentice recorded as William Colier, who became free in 1506 and was therefore probably born early in the 1480s; certainly Bromwell, who traded in English saffron as well as operating at the Antwerp marts, is later to be found associated with Richard Collier. Between 1508 and 1510 Collier was the company's tenant of the most valuable portion of the Crown Seld on the south side of Cheapside, and in 1518 he purchased The Sun, a tenement west of St Mary-le-Bow churchyard. Shortly after 1510 he married Helen, the daughter of the mercer William Usher, and received her portion of about $100; on the death of Helen's sister Cecily the couple became entitled to a further $50. Helen herself died before the sum could be claimed, and Collier's reaction was to sue Usher's executors in the mayor's court for his late wife's share. Perhaps by 1520 he married again, to Katherine (died 1563), daughter of Thomas Dallam, who had served as warden of the Skinners' Company in 1497. 
Collier made conventional if unspectacular progress in the Mercers' Company. In 1513, for instance, he was among the eight master bachelors chosen to assist in presenting the newly elected lord mayor at the Tower, and in 1528 he was nominated third warden. The tasks allotted to him suggest a practical turn of mind. In 1525, with William Bromwell, he was chosen to assess the repairs required at one of the company's properties, and in the same year served on a committee appointed to regulate the use of the beam, scales, and weights employed by the mercers for weighing silks in their hall at St Thomas of Acon. Although he could be strict with his apprentices, there is evidence for his trustworthiness and generosity. In 1523, for instance, he stepped in to secure the inheritance of his former apprentice John Ashley. 
Of Collier's business little can be established. When in 1521 Wolsey required provisions and men for a royal voyage to Newfoundland, Collier was one of ninety-three mercers who subscribed. Perhaps more significantly, he signed alongside Robert Pakington, who was to play a part in the transmission of his educational legacy. In May 1520 Collier supplied crimson velvet worth $62 for the queen's use at the Field of Cloth of Gold, but his name is not to be found in the customs accounts; possibly his trade was largely an inland one. He may also have diversified into moneylending: shortly before his death he was suing for the recovery of a loan of $100. 
Although Collier continued to live in St Mary-le-Bow, where in 1523 he was assessed for the subsidy at $413 6's'. 8died, in 1520 he made a major purchase, paying $100 for The Key, an extensive holding on the south side of Cheapside, almost opposite Mercers' Hall, in the parish of St Pancras, Soper Lane. He improved the property, buying out two quitrents in 1521 and in 1524 acquiring an element owned by Richard Lacon of Bruges. He also acquired the Brook Shed, which lay between The Key and Soper Lane. Robert Pakington's son later claimed that his father had been a major shareholder in these developments, and in 1523 both Robert and his brother John Pakington, solicitor to the Mercers, were living in St Pancras. 
By 1532 Collier was a merchant of great substance, owning two houses in Cheapside, as well as property in Hoxton, Kent, Surrey, and Sussex. He had rebuilt a considerable frontage of Cheapside including The Key, and was living there with his wife and two young children, George and Dorothy. A decade later the site contained a great shop 'garnished about with warebenches and covered with canvas', a warehouse, a counting-house over a hall, a 'fyshehouse', a summer parlour, a great parlour and chamber next to the street, both with carved wainscot portals (Mercers' Company archives, register of leases 1, fols. 245-7). It was here that Collier, having been absent from Mercers' Hall for over two years, made his will on 23 January 1533. After bequeathing his soul to God, the Virgin, and 'all the holy company of heaven', and bestowing $15 on obits for himself at St Pancras and at Horsham for his parents, he left $100 for mending the roads between Horsham, Crawley, and Reigate, $30 to provide herring for the poor of Horsham in Lent, and money to buy coal for the poor of St Pancras and St Mary-le-Bow. With perhaps characteristic realism, he ensured that the herring would be fairly distributed by allowing the churchwardens to take 40died for their labours from the annual sum of $3. He left his real property, conventionally enough, to his wife and then in trust for his children. But if both George and Dorothy died under age, then the Cheapside houses were to pass to the Mercers' Company for the establishment of a free school in Horsham. The overseers of the will were Collier's cousin John Caryll, the future attorney of the duchy of Lancaster, and Robert Pakington's brother Humphrey, another mercer. Collier probably died in February, at The Key, and the will was proved on 12 March 1533. His place of burial is not recorded. 
Contingent as the provisions of Richard Collier's will were, they led eventually to the foundation that perpetuates his name. Before November 1535 his widow married Robert Pakington, whose business affairs were closely entwined with those of her late husband. An interest in The Key was vested in Pakington in trust for George and Dorothy, 'only to keep the children of the said Richard Collier in a stay that they should not know in their youth what they had in a certain lest they would haply take over-great courage in the same' (TNA: PRO, C 1/1050/2-5). Pakington was presumably living at The Key on 13 November 1536 when, on leaving home for mass at St Thomas of Acon at 4 a.m., he was shot dead near the end of Soper Lane. A committed evangelical who acted as Cromwell's agent in the Low Countries, he was probably assassinated by religious conservatives. 
On 21 August 1539 Katherine Pakington married Michael Dormer, a mercer and alderman whose wealth greatly exceeded that of her two former husbands. They chose to live at The Key, and the death of both Collier children about the time of the marriage must have been as unwelcome to Dormer as it was distressing to his wife. The Mercers began to take an interest in the building, and put Katherine under pressure to honour the reversionary clause in Collier's will. She was also besieged by her stepson Thomas Pakington, whose chancery suit claimed that his father had put up the purchase money. The company laid the whole affair before the lord mayor and the court of aldermen, which seems to have brought the Dormers to terms. It was agreed that they should at once carry out the provisions of the will, but that they might retain their London house as the company's tenants. In August 1540 Dormer paid $8 6's'. 8died for a house and garden near Horsham church for Collier's projected school; it was to remain its home until 1893. Dormer died in 1546 and Katherine in 1563. 
Collier's foundation provided for sixty scholars, to be selected by a local committee headed by the vicar of Horsham. Education was to be free, but the scholars were to pray for the souls of the founder and his wife, 'with De Profundis every day at the departing of the said school' -- a clause demonstrating that although he associated with evangelicals, Collier himself remained conservative in religion (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/24). Poor Horsham boys and those from surrounding parishes were to be preferred, since 'gentlemen and other men be in better ability than poor men be'. But no one from the parish of Horsham was to be refused who was likely to learn. A master and an usher, to be paid respectively $10 and 10 marks ($6 13's'. 4died) a year, would be chosen by the Horsham committee and presented to the Mercers for appointment. The company was also to have the management of the endowment. 
Initially the school prospered, and its constitution exempted it from the attentions of the chantry commissioners in 1546, although the Mercers refused their request to produce Collier's will. But a rebuilding of the school in 1660 was partly intended to provide boarding accommodation for fee-paying boys, since Collier's insistence on a free school, combined with the Mercers' refusal to use surplus income for the benefit of Horsham -- in 1802 the company spent $100 on the school out of a rental of $438 -- made his conception increasingly unrealistic. The result, confirmed by a chancery decree of 1813, was that Collier's foundation effectively became an elementary school. For the rest of the nineteenth century the school's fortunes fluctuated. A new building was erected in 1841, but controversy was always apt to resurface, especially over the founder's intentions. In 1889, however, a compromise was effected, and a scheme under the 'Endowed Schools Acts' was ratified by order in council on 15 October. Renamed Horsham grammar school, the school came gradually under the control of public authorities, and became a voluntary maintained grammar school in 1944. In 1976 it became a sixth-form college with the title Collyer's, and admitted its first girls; the first female principal was appointed in 2004. 
In planning an educational foundation Richard Collier was following the example of other great London merchants who had similarly benefited the towns of their birth. Where his foundation differed most from those of his contemporaries was in the emphasis he placed on ability to learn irrespective of social position, something that bolsters the impression given by his other bequests, and indeed by all his recorded activities, that his was a down-to-earth approach to salvation. He could not have foreseen that his insistence on a free education would lead his foundation into the doldrums for well over a century; but then he had no doubt hoped that the educational component of his will, depending as it did on the failure of his line, would never come to pass. 


@@@@@


doc= 95012


Little, Clement (c.1527-1580), lawyer and benefactor, was the elder son of Clement Little (died 1551), a prosperous Edinburgh merchant who also owned property in upper Liberton to the south of the town, and his wife, Elizabeth Fisher. The couple ran their shop, filled with cloth, articles of apparel, and similar merchandise, which lay close to the family home on the south side of Edinburgh's high street; their younger son, William (died 1601), who later became an elder in the kirk, a councillor, and in 1586 and 1591 provost of the burgh, soon entered the family business, whose valued customers in the mid-sixteenth century included the successive rulers of Scotland in the name of the young Mary, queen of Scots, namely John Hamilton, second earl of Arran and duke of Chatelherault, and the queen mother, Mary of Guise. The Little daughters married comfortably: Katherine to a local laird, Alexander Napier of Ingliston, and Helen to Hew Brown, a master mason who was also a town councillor. The younger Clement's family was well placed to provide him with a university education. After he had presumably attended the burgh's grammar school he went first to St Andrews, where he attended St Leonard's College in the early 1540s, and then to Louvain in Flanders, where he matriculated in July 1546, five months after George Wishart had been convicted and executed for heresy at St Andrews. If St Leonard's had gained a reputation for protestant sympathies, Louvain remained staunchly orthodox, though favourable towards biblical humanism. No doubt his father's familiarity with the Brabant cloth industry and his links with Flemish weavers in Edinburgh afforded Clement introductions when he arrived in Louvain, in all probability to study law. As well as the university's faculty of law, the city contained the Collegium Trilingue, founded by Jerome de Busleyden in 1517, which provided aspiring lawyers with free public lectures on jurisprudence. 
By 28 April 1550, when he witnessed a legal document, the younger Clement Little had returned to Scotland, preparing to serve his apprenticeship in the ecclesiastical and secular courts. Promotion came rapidly, and by 1557 he was practising as an advocate in Edinburgh, entitled to plead before the court of session, the highest civil court. He acted in a variety of capacities for influential clients among the aristocracy, and associated with such prelates as Robert Reid, abbot of Kinloss and bishop of Orkney, and Henry Sinclair, dean of Glasgow, both of whom were prominent judges on the court of session. Following Sinclair's death in 1565 Little was one of his executors and acquired a number of his books. 
The arrival of the Reformation in Scotland raised particular problems for lawyers like Little, taking as it did the form of a rebellion, effected against the wishes of the crown, that swept away the existing ecclesiastical structure, displaced canon law, and overthrew the whole system of church courts. Then an irregular parliament, summoned in the summer of 1560, proceeded to abrogate papal authority in Scotland, prohibit the celebration of the mass, and sanction a protestant confession of faith. Clement Little, who when a student would have been well aware of Wishart's mission to St Andrews in the 1540s, now found Wishart's old bodyguard, John Knox, appointed minister to St Giles's Kirk in Edinburgh. However, the young lawyer readily threw in his lot with the reformers, in the process taking a divergent path from that followed by Henry Sinclair and the more conservative element on the bench. His religious commitment clearly extended beyond the merely conventional. Little seems to have arrived at protestantism though Erasmian humanism and reformist Catholicism, and his devotion to protestant theology and to the reformed kirk is well illustrated by his extensive collection of theological books, over 270 in all, among which the writings of the leading protestant theologians -- Luther, Melanchthon, Zwingli, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Viret, Pietro Martire Vermigli (Peter Martyr), Musculus, Calvin, and Beza -- are strongly represented. 
Little quickly won recognition from both town and kirk for the 'luiffing affection and grit zeale borne be him to the kirk of God and to the advancement of his word' (Marwick, 4.182). As early as 1561 he was serving as an elder on Edinburgh kirk session, in the following year he contributed to that session's appeal for funds for a new hospital (to whose poor he left 300 merks at the end of his life), and he was regularly selected as a commissioner from the burgh to attend meetings of the kirk's general assembly. The latter valued his legal expertise, and in 1567 appointed him one of the kirk's advocates. In the secular courts, too, his career prospered. On 18 February 1564 he was made one of the four members of Edinburgh's commissary court, which succeeded to the jurisdiction in matrimonial and testamentary cases that had been exercised by bishops before the Reformation. For this he received an annual salary of 300 merks. Though he was rarely directly involved in politics, it was a sign of his standing that in 1572 he accompanied Sir William Murray of Tullibardine on a mission to Edinburgh Castle, in an attempt to negotiate peace with the Marians holding out there. In 1577 he was appointed an advocate depute, licensed as such to stand in for the king's advocate in the civil courts. 
Ten years earlier, in 1567, Little had also displayed a surprising radicalism, when he approved the enforced abdication of Mary, queen of Scots, in favour of her infant son, who became James VI, and later that year subscribed the general assembly's claim that there existed a mutual contract between God, prince, and people, with the others pledging himself to root out all idolatry and to reform schools, colleges, and universities. Little's concern for education was long-standing. In 1561, at the request of the Edinburgh town council, he had taken part in examining the qualifications of William Robertoun, a committed Catholic, to remain master of the grammar school, a process that resulted in the master's dismissal. And quite apart from his interest in the grammar school, Little was also keen to see a university established in the burgh. Before his death in 1558 Robert Reid had left money to found a college there, and the first 'Book of Discipline' had argued the case for colleges in the main towns in 1560. By 1579 Clement's brother William Little was one of the town councillors who wanted to make Trinity College (where Waverley Station now stands) the site for the burgh's university, and Clement and his brother together discussed its creation with James Lawson, Knox's successor as minister in Edinburgh. The town council also toyed with the idea of a college of theology. Then, amid these discussions, on 1 April 1580 Clement Little died, and was buried in the churchyard of the Edinburgh Greyfriars. He left an estate valued at $3997. In 1563 he had married Elizabeth, the daughter of John Fawside, a prosperous baker, and his wife, Margaret Tod. She survived him, and in 1583 married John Preston of Penicuik, dying later that year after giving birth to a son. There were no children of her marriage to Little. 
In his will Clement Little left to the kirk and town of Edinburgh his collection of 268 theological works, valued at 1000 merks (his books on law and other subjects, worth $140 17's'. 7died, were otherwise disposed of). He made his bequest 'with ane luiffing heart and mynd... to the effect and purpose that sik personis knowin of honest conversation and guid lyfe (and na utheris) sall haif free access and ingress for reading and collecting the fruitful knowledge of the saidis buikis. (Cuthbertson, 2)' Inscriptions record the provenance of many of the books. Apart from thirty-nine volumes from Henry Sinclair's collection, and writings once owned by other contemporary bishops and abbots, there were books from the libraries of the Edinburgh Franciscans and Dominicans, as well as volumes previously owned by two of James V's illegitimate children; one of these, a copy of John Jewel's 'Apologia pro Ecclesia Anglicana', had been given to the earl of Moray by the English ambassador to Scotland, Thomas Randolph. Clearly intended to serve the needs of theology students, Little's collection became the nucleus of the university library when the 'town's college' finally got under way at Kirk o' Field late in 1583. Each book was stamped on its title page with a circular seal bearing Little's initials and arms, and also with the inscription 'I am gevin to Edinburgh & Kirk of God be Maister Clement Litil thair to reman. 1580' -- a successful precaution, since all but thirty-four volumes have remained in the university's possession. Nearly all were handsomely rebound in the nineteenth century. The collection is now kept in the main university library building in Edinburgh's George Square. 


@@@@@


doc= 95013


Pelham, Dorothy, Lady Pelham (d. 1613), benefactor, was the daughter of Anthony Catesby (died 1554) of Whiston, Northamptonshire, where he built the existing parish church, and his wife, Isabel. She had at least one brother, John. About 1550 Dorothy married 
Priests and others fleeing religious persecution are said to have been sheltered at Eythrope during Edward VI's reign, and Sir William Dormer was visited there by the Spanish ambassador, Diego Guzman de Silva, in 1566. Dormer had been made a knight of the Bath on 29 September 1553, two days before Queen Mary's coronation. His daughter Jane, following her marriage in 1558 to Philip II's representative in England, settled in Spain, where she became the recognized leader of the English Catholic exiles at King Philip's court. A year later, in 1559, Sir William's mother exiled herself to Louvain, where her home became a base for English Catholics until her death in 1571. Her son continued to send her money, and their correspondence was reportedly watched. In 1564 he was himself listed as a 'hinderer' of religion. Even so, he (and later his son) must have conformed outwardly to the Church of England both before 1547 and after 1558, for at no time did his Catholicism prevent his playing an active part in county administration and politics. Sir William was MP for Wycombe in 1542, a knight of the shire for Buckinghamshire in 1553, 1558, and 1571, and sheriff of Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire in 1553-4 and 1568-9. He seems to have owed his relative immunity to his close friendship with the local magnate Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, who was a committed protestant. He is credited with having commissioned the superb Renaissance-style monument to his father in Wing parish church, described as 'one of the finest of its period in England' ('Buckinghamshire', 751), and was himself buried there on 30 May 1575 following his death on the 17th. With Dorothy he had one son, Robert (1550/51-1616), who succeeded to his father's estates, and six daughters, three of whom, Mary, Katherine, and Margaret, survived into adulthood and were still living in 1613. In his will Sir William left a life interest in various lands and manors in Buckinghamshire to his 'entirely beloved wife' Dorothy, in addition to her jointure, and also the use of his lodgings in the Savoy Hospital for visits to London. 
After her husband's death Lady Dorothy resided on her jointure estate at Eythrope. Her second marriage, to the soldier and military engineer Sir William Pelham, whose first wife had died in 1574, may have occurred as early as 1576. Pelham, whose religious sympathies seem to have been puritanical, had extensive interests in former monastic properties in Lincolnshire (some of them purchased jointly with his second wife) and served in Ireland from 1579 to 1580, acting briefly as lord justice during this period. In 1586 he went to the Netherlands, and died of wounds at Flushing on 24 November 1587. There were no children of his marriage to Dorothy. In his will, dated June 1586, Pelham (who styled himself as of Eythrope), left her an income estimated at 800 marks ($533 6's'. 8died) per annum for life, to be paid from his estates in recompense for her portion and dower. But as he died heavily in debt, there must be some doubt as to how much of this bequest she actually received. 
It was presumably during her second widowhood that Lady Dorothy founded and endowed the almshouses, consisting of a range of four stone cottages, that are now known as the Dormer Hospital in Wing. She seems to have intended to honour the memory of her first husband, since a plaque over the entrance identified the foundress as 'some time wife of Sir William Dormer, Knight, Lord of this Manor of Winge' (Lipscomb, 3.525), albeit with the clearly erroneous date 1569. In 1862 the number of inmates was given as eight. She also erected an elaborate family monument (an inscription records its completion on 20 October 1590) in the chancel of Wing parish church, commemorating her first husband, both his wives and their issue, and incorporating conventional effigies of herself, Sir William Dormer, and their seven children, but ignoring Sir William Pelham. She is said to have made additions about 1610 to the mansion at Eythrope (demolished 200 years later). In her will, drawn up on 24 June 1611, Lady Dorothy requested burial next to her first husband, and in a codicil dated 19 September 1613 she left $100 to be spent in varying proportions on the relief of the needy and the repair of the highways in the three neighbouring market towns of Aylesbury, High Wycombe, and Leighton Buzzard, and in nearly all the parishes in which she held land. The bequest resulted in the establishment of permanent charities in Aylesbury and High Wycombe, which were augmented in their turn under the will of her son Robert, who had been created first Baron Dormer of Wing in 1615, the year before he died. The preamble to her will shows that Dorothy Pelham shared the protestantism of her second husband, rather than the Catholicism of her first. She died on 30 September 1613, and was recorded in the Wing burial register as 'The Good Lady Dame Dorothe Pelham'. 


@@@@@


doc= 95014


Sir William Dormer (1512?-1575) of Eythrope and Wing in Buckinghamshire, as his second wife. William was the only son of Sir Robert Dormer (1485/6-1552), a wealthy wool merchant and grazier who settled at Wing about 1520, and his wife, Jane Newdigate. His parents were conservative in religion, and Lady Dormer's brother, Sebastian Newdigate, was one of the London Carthusians executed in 1535 for refusing the oath of supremacy. William, who certainly retained strongly Catholic sympathies throughout his life, had at least four children from his first marriage, two sons who died in infancy, and two daughters, Ann, who married Sir William Hungerford, and Jane, who became duchess of Feria ['see 'Suarez de Figueroa, Jane]. Jane was born in 1538 at Eythrope, where the family had a private chapel; William himself lived there from 1535 until 1559, when he moved to Wing. 


@@@@@


doc= 95016


Ryder, (John) Gordon (1919-2000), architect, was born on 5 December 1919 at 37 Lanehouse Road, Thornaby-on-Tees, Yorkshire, near Middlesbrough, the eldest of the two children of John (Jack) Ryder, brass moulder and foundry manager, and his wife, Bertha, 'nee' Sheard. He studied at the local grammar school and in 1936 entered articles to a Middlesbrough firm of architects, William Edwin Haslock. In 1930 Ryder had suffered a serious accident while rock climbing; subsequently excluded from war service, he enrolled in 1940 at King's College school of architecture, Newcastle upon Tyne, then part of Durham University, as an RIBA probationer. After qualifying in 1944, he undertook study at Newcastle in town planning under Thomas Wilfred Sharp, and in the following year was appointed a studio demonstrator at the school of architecture. Ryder left his teaching post in 1948 to join Berthold Lubetkin, chief architect for the new town of Peterlee in co. Durham. 
It was here that Ryder met Peter Yates (1920-1982), architect and artist, who was born on 19 July 1920 at 118 Wallwood Road, Leytonstone, Essex, the son of Frank Yates, builders' merchants manager, and his wife, Frances Marguerite, 'nee' Clarke. Yates attended Wanstead School until 1936 and then worked as a commercial artist in London before studying architecture at Regent Street Polytechnic (1938-41). On 19 July 1941 he enlisted in the RAF and -- after postings in Wales and Ireland -- in 1944 served with Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Forces at Versailles. In February 1945 Yates met Le Corbusier and began an association that lasted until the French architect's death; others whom he met in this period included Gertrude Stein and Alice Toklas. Discharged from the RAF in December 1945, Yates worked in the offices of Ove Arup before joining Lubetkin -- and his future business partner, Gordon Ryder -- at Peterlee. 
The three years Ryder and Yates spent with Lubetkin proved to be their most formative period. Though nothing was built at Peterlee before Lubetkin's resignation in 1950, the experience reinforced the young architects' commitment to modernist values. In the Peterlee office they worked together on master planning and on social housing projects, particularly that at Thorntree Gill, for which the intended design of linked cubic blocks forming terraces would appear in their own housing development at North Kenton, Newcastle (1963). The legacy of Peterlee may also be seen in their competition entry for Carlisle civic centre (1956) and from 1965 in their various projects for Northern Gas at Killingworth, near Newcastle. After Lubetkin's resignation Yates returned to Paris as chief designer for a commercial art firm, Unite d'Informations Visuelles, while Ryder opened an office in Newcastle. 
The buildings from Ryder's first years in practice were sporadic, unpredictable, and limited -- until late 1954 -- by the licensing of all building materials. Consequently more time was spent on competition work, including that held by the City of London for the new Golden Lane estate (1952, won by Geoffrey Powell), which saw Ryder again draw on his experience of Peterlee. Ryder's first executed project was a new clubhouse for the Tynemouth Sailing Club (1952-3), of which he was an enthusiastic member. Here he met two of his most important early clients, James Liddell and Derek Damerell, who shared his love of sailing. Liddell, as commodore of the sailing club, had financed the building of several Firefly sailing dinghies for an Olympic trials team of which Ryder had been a member. In 1953 Ryder began work at Olympia, London, on an exhibition stand for the Carlisle Plaster Company (of which Damerell was managing director), and during a visit to the capital he had a chance encounter with Peter Yates at an underground station. Having recently suffered a period of ill health, and with no post to return to in Paris, Yates now agreed to join Ryder as an equal partner in his Newcastle practice. 
From the outset the office of Ryder and Yates displayed a strong commitment to modernism, which resulted in a number of rejections by shocked planning committees. Some commissions for private houses did arise, but it was a second premium in the Carlisle civic centre competition that helped to raise the practice's profile and give it greater respectability. They came to national attention with a house on Grand Parade, Tynemouth, for James Liddell and his family (Liddell House, 1958), which was featured in the 'Daily Express' and caught the eye of the northern district manager of Martin's Bank, who identified them as the architects to revitalize the bank's image. The refurbishment of branches in Newcastle and Hexham in 1962, while showing a respect for the classically inspired facades, remodelled the interiors in a highly modernist manner. 
Liddell House was one of fourteen private houses designed by Ryder and Yates across the north of England, of which twelve were built between 1952 and 1980. The designs demonstrated recurring themes in plan, form, and use of materials that came to characterize much of Ryder and Yates's domestic, commercial, and industry-related work. While specific to client and site, and lacking an obvious generic approach, the partnership's house designs were shaped by the importance attached to their ground plans, with an emphasis on major living spaces to which secondary areas were linked. In their division of open spaces by staircases and columns (used structurally to allow uninterrupted glass facades), and in their use of dramatic sculptural effects, Ryder and Yates also drew on Le Corbusier and Lubetkin respectively. Among the twelve completed houses was Trees (1967), at Woolsington, the first of two homes designed by Ryder for his own family. On 5 April 1958 at Tynemouth register office, he had married Mary Irene McLean, a 21-year-old schoolteacher, and daughter of Neil McLean, medical practitioner; they had two sons and two daughters. On 4 October of the same year, at St Andrew's, Greensted, Essex, Peter Yates married Helen Maude Southgate (1933-1973), with whom he lived at Hamsterley Mill, Rowlands Gill, Northumberland, with their three sons and two daughters. After the death of his first wife Yates married, on 30 October 1976, at Brighton register office, Gillian (Gilly) Jessica Eden ('b'. 1931), daughter of Lincoln Eden, civil engineer. 
Ryder and Yates's first major commercial project (1962-4) was for a Newcastle car dealer, for whom they designed a showroom whose entire frontage was carried on three columns, allowing an uninterrupted glass wall. This was a remarkable use of space, structure, materials, and colour arrangements, which demonstrated the architects' characteristic control, the result being a beautiful yet simple building. Ryder and Yates was also notable in this period as one of the country's first multi-disciplinary practices in which architects worked alongside structural, mechanical, and electrical engineers. The success of this approach was further demonstrated in their design for the Northern Gas Board headquarters, Norgas House (1963-5), the first major building in Killingworth New Town, on the outskirts of Newcastle, and the partnership's first large project. The client's requirements for maximum flexibility led to a design that simplified the main accommodation and internal arrangements, allowing them to change layouts according to business requirements. The use of colour, water, reflections in glass, and Minoan imagery was performed with great assurance and deceptive simplicity. Norgas House was followed with a second commission at Killingworth, to build an engineering research station for British Gas (1965-8). The final design comprised two distinct internal sections: a fixed element, which included an entrance, library, and administration area over an underground car park, and a flexible section for offices, laboratories, and workshops. The structure was encased in a regular box of painted concrete panels and ribbon windows, lending a formality to the exterior that was in contrast to the variable uses of the interior. The building's fixed element, with its symbolic entrance bridge and decorative pylon, proclaimed itself with six striking roof-top concrete trumpets. Together the Killingworth commissions represent the high point of Ryder and Yates's work, gaining them national recognition, two RIBA awards (1966 and 1969), and for the research station the 'Financial Times' award for industrial architecture (1969). Owing much to Le Corbusier, the engineering research station is arguably Ryder and Yates's best-known building; described as 'pure architecture' by the 'Architects' Journal', it received grade 2 star listed status in 1997. Further Killingworth projects included high-rise offices (1967, dem.), a training centre for Northern Gas (1970), and a school of engineering for the British Gas Council in 1974. Later industrial commissions were for factories for Vickers Armaments in Newcastle (1981) and Leeds (1982). 
Alongside a move into commercial and industrial designs, the partnership maintained their interest in social housing. A small-scale project at Fenham (1963), followed by the North Kenton estate (1962-6) for Newcastle city council, provided Ryder and Yates with an opportunity to develop their ideas on multi-occupancy living, first explored with Lubetkin at Peterlee. With the Fenham pilot deemed a success, 600 dwellings, with 8 different house types, were planned for Kenton. All of the initial themes -- such as segregation of vehicles and pedestrians, and house types with terraced, courtyard, and linked pavilions, all with flat roofs, strip windows, and white render -- were repeated at North Kenton. Like Le Corbusier and Lubetkin before them, Ryder and Yates also produced a series of buildings for health care and welfare. Two Newcastle clinics (both 1960) established the practice's reputation for buildings of social purpose and were followed by commissions for the Salvation Army, including Hopedene maternity home (1969) and two social services centres in Newcastle (1974) and Sunderland (1982). MEA House (1974) was Ryder and Yates's first substantial building in Newcastle city centre. One of the first buildings designed specifically to house a range of voluntary organizations, it remains one of Newcastle's finest modern designs and one of the city centre's best pieces of townscape. 
Throughout his career Peter Yates continued to work as a painter and many of his pieces appeared as murals integrated into the partnership's domestic and commercial designs. He exhibited in mixed shows from 1942, and solo displays of his work were held in the north-east from 1975 and in London in 1982; this was followed by a retrospective exhibition later that year at the Hatton Gallery, Newcastle, and by a posthumous exhibition at the RIBA gallery, London, in 1985. Peter Yates died from cancer on 16 November 1982 at his home, 20 Brandling Park, Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne; he was survived by his second wife, Gillian, and by four of his children, one son having predeceased him. After Yates's death Ryder remained at what became the Ryder Nicklin Partnership on the appointment as partner of Ted Nicklin (died 1994) until his retirement in 1989. From 1980 he lived at Triangles, Riding Mill, near Newcastle, the second home he designed for his family. It was here that Ryder, who was appointed OBE for services to architecture, died from pneumonia on 1 December 2000; he was cremated in Gateshead and survived by his wife and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95021


Mary Box (d. 1679), educational benefactor, the daughter of Ralph Allen ('b'. 1556) and his wife, Alice Long. Her father was the second son of Sir William Allen, lord mayor of London in 1572; her mother was the daughter of Henry Long (died 1611) of Whaddon, Wiltshire, and aunt of the politician Walter Long. Henry and Mary had four sons (the eldest was baptized in June 1623) and three daughters, of whom one son, Ralph, and one daughter, Alice, who married the exchequer auditor William Hill, survived their father. From 1616 until his death Box leased a large house, with shop and warehouse attached, on Cheapside, in the parish of St Mary Colechurch. He lived there until he moved to Hammersmith, Middlesex, probably in the 1650s. 


@@@@@


doc= 95162


Arnost (d. 1076), a monk of Bec, was made bishop by Lanfranc. He had probably been at Bec since about 1060, and also developed a connection with St Etienne, Caen, where he became involved in arrangements for the copying of texts, and where in 1070 Lanfranc recommended him for the office of prior. But there is no evidence that he was promoted, and perhaps he came instead to England, as Lanfranc's assistant -- he is recorded as being present at the famous lawsuit over archiepiscopal lands conducted on Penenden Heath, Kent, probably in 1072, and may well have been there in attendance on the archbishop, though his being styled bishop of Rochester is anachronistic. Following Siward's death Rochester's dependence on Canterbury justified Lanfranc in appointing Arnost as bishop in the Canterbury chapter house, probably in January 1076. In his profession of obedience to the archbishop Arnost described himself as having been 'chosen by you'. Lanfranc clearly had a high regard for his nominee, who, however, had little opportunity to demonstrate his abilities. Having been consecrated at London, Arnost seems to have applied himself energetically to bringing order to his diocese, judging by a letter to him from Anselm, commiserating over the many and heavy troubles then afflicting him. The prognosticon, the gospel reading taken at random during a bishop's consecration and interpreted as foretelling the character of his episcopate, had been understood by Lanfranc as predicting that Arnost would not live long, and perhaps his labours shortened his life, for he died after a six-month episcopate, probably on 15 July, when his obit was commemorated. It is not known where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 95338


Manto, Saadat Hasan (1912-1955), author in Pakistan, was born on 11 May 1912 in Sumaira, in the Ludhiana district of the Punjab, British India, the son of Ghulam Hasan Manto (1855-1930), judge, and his second (concurrent) wife, Sardar. He had a sister, Nasira Iqbal, and three stepbrothers from his father's first marriage, to Jan Ali. He was of Kashmiri descent, his ancestral home being in Koocha Wukeelan, Amritsar. He had a difficult childhood. The hostile attitude of his stepbrothers (who resented his father's second marriage), his father's strict nature, and later the exploitation he felt at the hands of his relatives following his father's death, all left permanent scars. He received a scanty education at home until the age of ten; he then attended first the local Muslim school, then Government Muslim High School, Amritsar, and finally Aligarh Muslim University, which he left without taking a degree. 
A seminal influence on Manto was his friend Abdul Bari Alig, a successful journalist and scriptwriter. Manto's formal education had proven something of a failure, and had left him with an aversion for books, but Bari encouraged him to read, both in English and in Urdu, and to write, first translations into Urdu of Victor Hugo and Oscar Wilde, then his own compositions. His short story 'Tumasha' was published in the first number of the journal 'Khulq' in 1934. Further stories followed in 'Saqi', the 'Aligarh Magazine', and other literary journals. The first collection of his short stories, 'Atishparay', was published in 1936. By then Manto had moved to Bombay, where he first edited 'Musawwir', a monthly film magazine, then worked in the film industry as a scriptwriter. Among the companies he worked for were the Toon Film Company, Filmistan Limited, and Bombay Talkies. He also worked for All India Radio as a feature and drama writer from 1941 to 1942 (leaving after a quarrel with the director, N. M. Rashid), and as a journalist for papers such as the 'Daily Masawat', 'Humayoun', and 'Alamgir'. His short stories from this period were collected in successful volumes including 'Manto kay afsanay' (1940), 'Dhowan' (1941), 'Afsanay aur durramay' (1943), and 'Luzut-e-sung' (1947). He married in April 1938, though his wife, Safia, did not formally move to his house until 26 April 1939; they had three daughters. 
In January 1948, following the horrors of the partition of India, but despite the entreaties of his colleagues in the Bombay film industry, Manto moved to Lahore, in the newly created state of Pakistan, to which he had earlier sent his wife and children. It was by then clear that writers in Urdu faced more limited prospects in independent India than in Pakistan; indeed, in the United Provinces, the heartland of Urdu before partition, the use of Urdu was already under concerted attack from the protagonists of Hindi. A collection of short stories based on the events of the partition, 'Siyah hashiyay', was published in 1948; and the partition inspired perhaps his best-known story, 'Toba Tek Singh', about the exchange of psychiatric patients between India and Pakistan following partition. After his move to Pakistan, Manto wrote a stream of short stories, essays, personality sketches, occasional journalism, and a novel, 'Bughair unwaan kay' (1954) -- during his lifetime he published twenty-two collections of stories, seven collections of radio plays, and three collections of essays -- but on a personal level his move to Lahore turned out to be disastrous. He descended into alcoholism, writing often only to buy the next bottle of liquor, was twice admitted to psychiatric hospital, was frequently in debt, and was on numerous occasions tried (and on six occasions convicted) for obscenity, for such stories as 'Thanda gosht', 'Khol do', and 'Oppar, neechey aur darmiaan'. 
Manto was one of the leading Urdu writers of the twentieth century. Frequently compared to D. H. Lawrence, he set new trends in Urdu fiction and introduced radical themes. He had a knack of pointing out the contradictions in society, and his leading protagonists were often prostitutes and others from the underclass, who through their humanistic values highlighted the dark side and the hypocrisy of Indian and Pakistani society. He could be a difficult colleague, and was frequently angry at perceived slights. He was also acutely self-critical. Even in February 1939, at the height of his success in the Bombay film industry, and at perhaps the best time of his life, he wrote to his friend Ahmed Nadeem Qasmee, 'My life is like a wall whose cement I scratch with my own nails to make all of its bricks pristine. At times I feel like erecting a new building from its rubble' (A. N. Qasmee, 'Manto Kay Khutoot', 1962). He died at his home in Dayal Singh Mansions, The Mall, in central Lahore, Pakistan, on 18 January 1955, of liver failure, and was buried in Miani Saheb graveyard, Lahore. His work was frequently reprinted, and a new collection, 'Manto kay behtreen kahanian' ('Manto's best stories') was published in 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 95339


Husain, Sir Mian Fazl-i- (1877-1936), politician in India, was born on 14 June 1877 in Peshawar, North-West Frontier Province, India, where his father, Mian Husain Imam Bakhsh, was posted as 'extra assistant commissioner'. He came from a family of Bhatti Rajputs from Batala, in the Gurdaspur district of the Punjab. He started his education at the municipal board school in Abbottabad, North-West Frontier Province, where his father had been transferred. He was a very ordinary student, his delicate health hampering his studies. After matriculating from the Government High School, Gurdaspur, Punjab, he went to Government College, Lahore, where he impressed as a student of more than average merit, philosophy being his favourite subject. He graduated BA from the University of the Punjab in 1898. He then went to England, to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he took the Oriental languages tripos. He was called to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1901. He also tried his luck at entering the Indian Civil Service, but was unsuccessful. 
On his return to India Fazl-i-Husain practised law for four years in Sialkot, where he became involved in educational activities. He organized an Anjuman-i-Islam (Muslim Association), with the intention of running a small school for local Muslims. He placed the local 'idgah' (or open-air prayer area) on a proper financial footing with the support of local Muslims. While in Sialkot he also became an active member of Anjuman-i-Himayat-i-Islam, a Muslim educational organization. He moved to Lahore in 1905, and started legal practice at the chief court. For two years he divided his time between his profession and educational work as honorary principal of the Islamia College and subsequently as secretary of the college committee of the Anjuman-i-Himayat-i-Islam. He was nominated a fellow of the University of the Punjab in 1908 and elected secretary of the Oriental faculty in 1913 and of the law faculty in 1915. In the same year he was elected president of the bar association, succeeding Mian Muhammad Shafi. 
Under the inspiration of the swadeshi (or economic self-sufficiency) movement, Fazl-i-Husain entered politics. He at first identified with the Indian National Congress, but as it had no substantial presence in the Punjab he was more active among the ranks of the Muslim League, in which he represented the pro-Congress faction. Initially he was more preoccupied with his legal and educational activities, but from 1915, when he was elected to the Punjab legislative council to represent the Punjab University constituency, 'politics claimed Mian Fazl-i-Husain more and more' (Nur Ahmad, 12). He secured victory by a narrow margin largely because the Muslim votes were cast solidly in his favour. Thereafter he became a staunch believer in separate electorates, so that minorities in the multi-communal polity could have representation in the legislature. He also advocated the allocation of jobs in the government service by communal group, in the belief that an increased share for Muslims would help develop common national political ideals. That realization culminated in the 'national pact' in 1916 between Congress and the Muslim League at Lucknow, which endorsed the idea of separate, communal electorates; Fazl-i-Husain was one of its authors. Nevertheless his subsequent political career in the Punjab depended on a degree of inter-communal collaboration unmatched in any other province of British India, and he was never an advocate of a separate Muslim state. 
Fazl-i-Husain parted ways with Congress when the non-co-operation movement swept India immediately after the First World War. The passage of the 'Rowlatt Act', authorizing the government to imprison people without trial, had galvanized the normally politically lethargic Punjab into activity. That popular upsurge, in his view, had taken an unconstitutional twist. His criticism of the non-co-operation movement turned his former comrades and followers against him. In defiance of Congress's boycott of the Montagu-Chelmsford constitutional reforms of 1919 he contested the Punjab election in 1920 and not only entered the Punjab legislature but also assumed office as government minister in charge of the transferred departments of education, health, and local government, on 3 January 1921. Thereafter his political vision came to encompass not so much the politically conscious urban Punjabis as rural Punjabis. His former colleagues from Congress accused him of having changed from a leader of political intellectuals into an ally of the 'zamindars', or landowners, especially after, with the help of the rural representatives in the legislative council, he formally organized a parliamentary party in 1923, the Unionist Party. Though this party drew the bulk of its support from Muslims it sought to represent the interests of Muslim, Hindu, and Sikh landowners and farmers on an inter-communal basis, and largely prevented the Muslim League from dominating Muslim politics in the province until after the Second World War. He secured recognition for the principle of party government in relation to those departments transferred in 1919 to the control of elected parliamentarians, and he, Lal Chand, and later on Chaudhury Chhotu Ram (a Hindu), held ministries as members of the Unionist Party. 
As a minister Fazl-i-Husain placed an emphasis on rural development that had virtually no precedent. A network of primary and secondary schools was spread out in the rural areas; a programme of opening up colleges in rural towns was instituted; the training of teachers was attended to; and primary education was made free throughout the Punjab. Fazl-i-Husain made it possible for 'untouchables' to climb the social ladder by issuing a circular exhorting schools whether public or private not to refuse admission to them. In the sphere of medicine, relief against epidemics and particularly malaria was extended to the countryside through the public health department. The annual expenditure on the public health department specializing in rural work more than doubled between 1921 and 1926. 
In 1926 Fazl-i-Husain accepted the portfolio of revenue in the 'reserved' part of the government, thereby forfeiting the opportunity to contest the next elections. His appointment was ostensibly a promotion but his influence over the 'transferred' departments was substantially curtailed. At the end of his four-year tenure in 1930 he was appointed a member of the viceroy's executive council in Delhi for a five-year term. During these years far-reaching constitutional developments -- the Round Table conferences of 1930-32, the grant of full political status to the North-West Frontier Province, the communal award of 1932 (granting separate electorates to minority communities), the separation of Sind from Bombay, and the 'Government of India Act' of 1935 -- took place. Fazl-i-Husain's role with respect to the constitution of the Muslim delegation to the Round Table conferences was particularly important, the Aga Khan, Choudhri Zafrullah Khan, and Sir Shafaat Ahmad Khan being chosen as part of the Muslim delegation largely at his behest. A champion of minority rights, he pulled strings very effectively by means of regular correspondence from Delhi to ensure that the Muslim delegates to the Round Table conferences stood firm on communal electorates, and emphasized the need for provincial autonomy under any new constitutional arrangements. Having been knighted in 1925, he was appointed KCIE in 1929 and KCSI in 1932. In 1935, when his term as a member of the viceroy's executive council came to an end, he returned to the Punjab, setting himself the task of reorganizing the Unionist Party at an all-India level. However, his failing health did not spare him enough time to realize that ambition. He died in Lahore on 9 July 1936. He was married, with two sons and four daughters. He was predeceased by his elder son, Naim (1908-1931), a student at Cambridge. His younger son, Azim Husain (1913-2007), became a prominent Indian civil servant and diplomat. 


@@@@@


doc= 95340


Khan, Sir Sikander Hyat- (1892-1942), politician in India, was born on 5 June 1892 at Multan, Punjab, India, the son of Nawab Muhammad Hyat-Khan, a well-known scion of the Khattar tribe from Attock district, and his second wife, who was the daughter of Ghulam Gilani, the premier of Kapurthala. His father was the divisional judge at Multan at the time of his birth, and a friend and supporter of Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan. His mother died when he was only three years old, and his father died six years later. Thus his eldest sister-in-law brought him up. He received his early education from the Muhammadan Anglo Oriental Collegiate High School at Aligarh, where he captained both the hockey and the cricket team. He developed a love of literature at an early age, and translated two of Shakespeare's plays into Urdu when he was barely in his eighth grade. Soon after matriculation he was sent to England, where he continued his studies at University College, London. However, he was called back following the death of his elder brother Ghairat. His keen interest in politics during his stay in England and his deteriorating eyesight also contributed to his recall: as his biographer Iftikhar H. Malik revealed, 'Sikander Hayat had started playing an active role in the Ghadr Party, much to the annoyance of the British Indian Government. Two of his brothers held Government posts and were subject to official pressures to recall him' (Malik, 11). Thus he returned to India in July 1910 without a degree. 
Back in India, Hyat-Khan started his military career as a 'jamadar' in the army. During the First World War he was posted to the North-West Frontier Province, where he not only rose to the rank of a captain (and was the first Indian to command a company on active service) but was appointed MBE. In 1924 he entered politics by securing a seat in the Punjab legislative council, meanwhile developing an interest in commerce and industry. He was at various points a director of the Punjab Portland Cement Company, the Wah Tea Estate, the People's Bank of Northern India, the Wah Stone and Lime Company, Messrs Owen Roberts, and the Taj Company. He also remained engaged in local politics. Besides acting as an honorary magistrate of his native area he was vice-chairman of the Attock district board and chairman of the Hasan Abdal small-town committee. On 12 May 1912 he married Zobaida Khatoon (died 1918), eldest daughter of Mir Ibad Ullah. Following her death he married, in April 1920, her sister Amina. He eventually had five sons and five daughters. 
Although elected to the provincial legislature in 1921, Hyat-Khan's election was set aside, and he therefore had to wait until 1924 to take his place in the legislative council. His first important assignment came in 1928 when he headed the Punjab reforms committee set up by the legislative council following the announcement of the Simon commission. After that his political career took off. He was appointed the revenue member of the government of the Punjab in 1929. When in July 1932 the lieutenant-governor of the province, Sir Geoffrey de Montmorency, fell seriously ill and took two months' leave, Hyat-Khan filled the position, the first Indian to hold such responsibility. He was knighted KBE in 1933 and the following year, in the absence of the lieutenant-governor, Herbert Emerson, again acted as lieutenant-governor. In February 1935 he was appointed deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of India. 
During the 1920s and early 1930s the Unionist Party had been riddled with factionalism, Mian Fazl-i-Hussain and Hyat-Khan being the two main adversaries vying for political supremacy in the Punjab. Fazl-i-Hussain gained the upper hand but died in 1936. Hyat-Khan then succeeded him as leader of the Unionist Party (the dominant, and initially non-sectarian, party in the Punjab). In the elections to the Punjab legislative assembly held in 1937 (with a widened franchise and greater powers, under the terms of the 'Government of India Act' of 1935) the Unionist Party secured a comfortable majority by winning 96 out of 175 seats. Nevertheless Hyat-Khan opted for a coalition cabinet, with three Muslims, two Hindus, and one Sikh. His commitment to political accommodation was also evident in the Jinnah-Sikander pact in 1937, in which he reached an agreement with Mohamed Ali Jinnah whereby the Unionist Party would support the All-India Muslim League at the centre with Jinnah as 'sole spokesman' of Indian Muslims, while the Muslim League would be subsumed into the Unionist Party at the Punjab level. The pact provided an entree to the Muslim League in the Punjab in the 1940s. He also played an important role in making the Lahore resolution (23-4 March 1940), an historic event that laid the foundation for Pakistan. During the Second World War he actively supported the British cause, recruiting soldiers, opposing the Quit India movement, and visiting Indian troops in north Africa. His premiership was also notable for improvements in irrigation facilities, roads, and other elements of the rural infrastructure. Despite his privileged background, he was known as a friend of the peasantry, and inspired great loyalty among Punjabi Muslims. 
Hyat-Khan died in Lahore on 27 December 1942 of heart failure, following the marriage ceremonies of two sons and a daughter; he was buried near the Badshahi mosque in Lahore. In a message to the viceroy on his death, Churchill observed: 'Please convey to the Government and people of the Punjab my sincere sympathy with the great loss they have sustained by the premature death of their wise and valiant leader... I had the pleasure of meeting him in the Middle East and recognizing in him both a gallant soldier and a statesman with a broad and valiant outlook, loyal to his own province, loyal to India, to the British Commonwealth and to the common sense of freedom' (Malik, 105). 


@@@@@


doc= 95341


Hahn, Emily (1905-1997), author and traveller, was born at 4858 Fountain Avenue, St Louis, Missouri, on 14 January 1905, the fifth of the six children of Isaac Newton Hahn (1856-1934), hardware salesman, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Schoen (1866-1957). Her parents, who were of German-Jewish heritage and liberal inclinations, encouraged their children to think for themselves; young Mickey (as she was known to family and friends) took their advice to heart. A precocious child, she taught herself to read at the age of three and soon thereafter began charting her own course in life. Having received a bachelor of science degree at the University of Wisconsin (1922-6), where she was the first woman to graduate from the school's mining engineering programme, Hahn took a job as a petroleum geologist. However, inspired by the derring-do of the pioneer aviator Charles Lindberg, she abruptly left her job in May 1927, vowing never again to lead a 'conventional' life. Following a six-month stint as a horseback trail guide in the New Mexico wilderness, she enrolled in graduate studies in geology at Columbia University in New York City and began writing freelance articles for various publications, one of which was the 'New Yorker' magazine. 
Despite her early journalistic successes in America, in December 1929 Hahn moved to London, where she developed a wide and varied circle of friends that included the choreographer Frederick Ashton and writer Rebecca West. Boosted by the publication in New York of her first book, 'Seductio ad Absurdum: the Principles and Practices of Seduction' (1930), and by West's mentorship, Hahn's literary career began to blossom. None the less, on Christmas day 1930 she went off in search of adventure in the Belgian Congo, spending the next twenty months living and working at a remote Croix Rouge du Congo medical aid mission. By the time she had hiked solo across east Africa and returned to London in January 1933 she was 'broke and practically without any wardrobe' (Cuthbertson, 118). During the next two years she wrote two books about her African adventures, endured an ill-fated love affair with a married Hollywood screenwriter, and did graduate-level studies in anthropology at Oxford University. 
Ever restless, in March 1935 Hahn and an older sister sailed for Japan and China on a three-month sightseeing trip that would grow into an eight-year adventure. Seduced by the romance and mystery of Shanghai, she found work as a teacher and journalist and lived the high life as the girlfriend of Sir Victor Sassoon, a British businessman of Jewish background who was reputed to be one of the wealthiest men in the British empire at the time. Hahn further scandalized the European and American communities by smoking opium, keeping a mischievous pet gibbon that she took to social engagements, and socializing with the locals. Her flat became a gathering spot for an eclectic group of Chinese political activists, bon vivants, intellectuals, students, and artists, including the future premier of communist China Zhou Enlai, and a dashing and well-to-do poet and publisher named Sinmay Zau, who took Hahn as his concubine. After Zau had introduced her to the Soong sisters, the most influential women in China, Hahn wrote 'The Soong Sisters' (1941), the book that became her first international bestseller. 
In the autumn of 1940, with China in turmoil and battling against an invading Japanese army as the world slid inexorably toward global war, Hahn departed for America. 'En route' she stopped in Hong Kong, and there fell into a torrid love affair with Charles Ralph Boxer (1904-2000), the married chief of British army intelligence. A frustrated historian and author, he was bored with life and had adopted a live-for-the-moment attitude. On 17 October 1941 Hahn gave birth to Boxer's daughter, Carola. Hahn was still in Hong Kong when on 25 December 1941 the Japanese occupied the crown colony. Hahn managed to avoid detention and for the next twenty months she helped to feed and care for Boxer, who was a prisoner of war after being seriously wounded in action. However, by September 1943 conditions were growing increasingly dangerous in Hong Kong, and so Hahn returned to the United States in a Red Cross prisoner exchange. She spent the rest of the war in New York, winning success with her writing -- particularly 'China to Me' (1944), a sensational bestseller that recounted her recent adventures in the Far East -- but distraught by rumours that the Japanese had executed Boxer. 
Liberated on VJ-day, Boxer travelled to New York. After his divorce was finalized he and Hahn were married there on 28 November 1945 and took up residence on the Boxer family's estate near Weymouth, Dorset. Having retired from the army in 1947, Boxer accepted a teaching position at King's College, London. Meanwhile his wife was busy caring for the couple's second child, Amanda, working as a freelance broadcaster at the BBC, and writing under her maiden name. Among the books she wrote during this period was 'England to Me' (1949), a provocatively irreverent account of English family life in the difficult post-war years. 
Predictably, however, Hahn proved ill suited for English country life or for conventional domesticity. Thus in early 1950 the Boxers agreed to make theirs an 'open marriage' -- not in the sexual sense, but rather in terms of domicile and lifestyle. Boxer and his younger daughter Amanda (later a well-known stage and screen actress in the UK) kept the home fires burning, while Hahn returned (with Carola) to New York and a job as a staff writer at the 'New Yorker'. For the next forty-seven years, she and Carola spent much of the year in New York, regularly sojourning in the UK for stays of no longer than ninety-one days, the number that established residence for income-tax purposes. Professionally these arrangements proved productive for both partners. Boxer's academic career flourished, while Hahn achieved considerable literary success and in the 1970s was lionized as an early champion of feminism (a label she rejected). 
Hahn died on 18 February 1997 at St Vincent's Hospital, New York, of heart failure following a fall and was cremated the same day. By the time of her death she had written hundreds of articles (including a whimsical 'New Yorker' essay of 1966 entitled 'Aisle K', in which she chronicled her lifelong love affair with the British Museum reading room), short stories, poems, and fifty-two books on a wide range of topics. Among her best-known later works were 'Meet the British' (1953), which she co-wrote with Charles Roetter and Harford Thomas, 'Chiang Kai-shek: an Unauthorized Biography' (1955), 'Animal Gardens' (1967), 'Times and Places' (1970), a collection of autobiographical articles, and 'Eve and the Apes' (1988). News of Hahn's death was prominently reported in the London 'Times', the 'New York Times', and other publications, and even in China, where she was officially 'persona non grata' because of her association with Madame Chiang Kai-shek. An Emily Hahn obituary in the 'New Yorker' magazine, which hailed her as 'Ms Ulysses', noted that a 'lifetime of reporting and vivid adventure kept her happily out of touch with convention' ('New Yorker', 10 March 1997). The summation was indeed an apt one. 


@@@@@


doc= 95343


McDavid, Sir Herbert Gladstone (1898-1966), shipowner, was born on 19 May 1898 at 4 Upper Stanhope Street, Liverpool, the eldest child of Denis McDavid, a tailor's cutter, and his wife, Octavia, 'nee' Christian. His grandfather was Jacob Christian, a ship's steward born of African descent in Antigua, West Indies. Octavia's brothers George William Christian and Arthur Christian worked for the Liverpool merchant and shipowner John Holt. 
McDavid was educated at the Liverpool Institute and joined Alfred Holt & Co., owners and managers of the Ocean Steamship Co. Ltd (the Blue Funnel Line), in 1915. At the beginning of 1917 he enlisted in the Liverpool Scottish, was captured, and made a prisoner of war. Quickly mastering German, he acted as an interpreter, failed in an escape attempt, and by late 1918 was virtually running the prisoner-of-war camp. For his outstanding services he was awarded the meritorious service medal. 
After returning to Blue Funnel after the war McDavid developed his leadership qualities and learned much during the difficult years between 1928 and 1935. Technical efficiency was not enough: there had to be full understanding between the carrier and its customers, a principle adopted throughout Holts. McDavid made a particular mark as leader of a team of outward cargo canvassers reporting to Leonard Cripps. Throughout his career he travelled widely to ensure he was aware of the needs of his customers. 
Holts acquired the Glen Line in 1935 and McDavid was transferred to their London office in 1936 to strengthen the management team. Like Blue Funnel, Glen ran cargo liner services to the Far East, but from London and east coast ports rather than Liverpool and the west coast. McDavid was appointed a director in May 1938, serving under C. E. Wurtzburg, who had been appointed managing director in 1937. A priority of the new owners was renewal of the fleet, achieved partly by transfer from Blue Funnel, and Glen's ten ships were earning increased profits by 1938, thanks to the new management and general improvement in trade. Eight ships were ordered in 1936-7 for the twice-monthly fast service to Malaya, Hong Kong, China, and Japan. The Glenearn class were among the largest and fastest cargo liners of their day, with a capacity of about 19,000 cubic metres and a speed of 18 knots. Four were ordered from overseas yards. Delivery began in 1938, but war intervened before all could be delivered. 'Glengarry' was nearing completion in a Copenhagen yard when the Germans invaded; characteristically McDavid enlisted the help of the Admiralty in an unsuccessful attempt to seize the ship. 
Many of the Glen ships were requisitioned at the outbreak of the Second World War, and the remaining Far East service ceased at the end of 1941. McDavid was seconded to the Ministry of War Transport in 1941 as deputy director of sea transport and led a small team dealing with the shipping of cargoes for the fighting services. He devised new methods of loading and unloading ships and landing craft so that material was ready for use as soon as possible, and took a leading role in the planning of the landings in north Africa, Sicily, Italy, and Normandy. He was appointed CBE in 1944 for services rendered during the Normandy invasion. His capacity for hard work and his dependability endeared him to military and civil service colleagues alike. After the end of the war he was appointed director of sea transport to oversee the return to peacetime conditions, a task almost completed when he returned to Glen in 1946. In 1947 he was made an officer of the order of Orange Nassau (Netherlands) and received the American medal of freedom with silver palm. 
Six of the Glen Line's eight new ships survived hostilities, including to everybody's surprise the 'Glengarry', and by September 1948 Glen had fifteen ships and was providing the twice-monthly fast service and a slower secondary service. On Wurtzburg's death in 1952 McDavid was appointed managing director, and he became chairman in June 1954. He was also chairman and managing director of McGregor, Gow and Holland Ltd, and chairman of McGregor, Gow and Robinson Ltd. In 1956 Holts began planning a new fleet to serve both Glen and Blue Funnel, but McDavid pressed for Glen to have priority, often to the annoyance of the Liverpool-based Ocean Steamship Co. managers, and insisted on larger and faster ships to meet the greater competition at east coast ports. His views prevailed, and four Glenlyon class ships were ordered in 1960 and delivered in 1962-3. With a service speed of 20 knots and sufficient in reserve, they maintained Glen's position. Four Glenalmond class ships, similar to the Blue Funnel Priams, were ordered shortly before McDavid retired at the end of 1963. Under McDavid's leadership Glen made healthy profits, but within a decade of his retirement the company's trade had disappeared and the Glen Line quietly faded away. 
McDavid continued as a part-time non-executive director of Glen Line until late 1965, and was also appointed to the board of the Ocean Steamship Co. Ltd and made a partner in Alfred Holt & Co. He represented Ocean on the Far Eastern Conference and was its chairman from 1963 to 1965. His status in London shipping circles was reflected in his membership of such organizations as the Baltic Exchange, the General Council of British Shipping, the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights, and the Port of London Authority, on which he served from 1958 to 1964. He continued to advise the government on shipping matters and was recalled to organize shipping during the Suez crisis in 1956, for which he was knighted. 
From the early 1950s McDavid was dogged by illness, often needing assistance, and he was unable, during his short retirement, to pursue his hobby of fly-fishing. Mac, as he was universally known, never married, but he enjoyed the company of a wide circle of friends, who remembered his high spirits and his affection for his colleagues. Patience and enthusiasm made him a natural teacher. He died at his London flat, 35 Dorset House, Gloucester Place, on 14 October 1966, of bronchopneumonia and heart failure. He was cremated on 20 October at Golders Green crematorium, and a memorial service was held on 24 November at All Hallows Barking by the Tower, London. His brothers Arthur and Gordon had also worked for Holts, Arthur (died 2002) rising to be a captain and Gordon (died 1942) an engineering officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 95349


Valentine, Lewis Edward (1893-1986), Baptist minister and Welsh nationalist, was born at Hillside, Llanddulas, Denbighshire, on 1 June 1893, the second of seven children of Samuel Valentine (1854-1940), a quarryman and lay preacher, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Roberts (1865-1928). Samuel Valentine had converted to the Baptists as a young man and his wife followed him after marriage, although both had been raised as Wesleyan Methodists, and Valentine was brought up in his parents' adopted denomination at Bethesda, or the Capel Bach ('little chapel'), as it was known, in the village. He claimed later that belonging to a denominational minority, with its spirit of community and pacifism, was something he rediscovered in the Welsh Nationalist Party, or Plaid Bach ('little party') of which he became a co-founder in 1925. 
After attending Llanddulas elementary school and Eirias High School in Colwyn Bay, and a period as a pupil teacher, Valentine entered the University College of North Wales, Bangor, in the autumn of 1913, to study Welsh and Semitic languages. His intention to complete his degree and enter the ministry was upset within a year by the outbreak of the First World War. He carried out non-combatant duties with the Welsh student company of the Royal Army Medical Corps in England, France, and Ireland, returning to Bangor in 1919. 
Valentine's war memoirs, 'Dyddiadur milwr' ('A soldier's diary'), originally published in instalments in the Baptist periodical 'Seren Gomer' between 1969 and 1972, and in an edited collection of his work in 1988, leave unanswered the question of to what extent the nationalist convictions he expresses there are later interpolations. There is no doubt, however, that the war was crucial to his political development. His upbringing had been typical of turn-of-the-century Welsh nonconformism. Lloyd George's portrait hung over the hearth at Hillside and his parents espoused the Liberal agenda of church disestablishment and were cautiously supportive of home rule. The war would lead their son in a different direction. The conflict itself was traumatic: a shell blast in 1917 left him deaf, dumb, and blind for three months. Moreover, his first direct experience of the English class system, petty military regulations and duties, and what he considered (perhaps again with hindsight) to be the hijacking of the gospel in the interests of national prestige and political and economic advantage, created space for a more lasting influence. In common with other leading figures in the first generation of Welsh nationalists (Saunders Lewis, Ambrose Bebb, and D. J. Williams), he was exposed to the work of the polemicist, critic, and late Victorian Calvinistic Methodist minister Robert Ambrose Jones (Emrys ap Iwan). 
Valentine's pieces on Emrys ap Iwan, for the Welsh Nationalist Party's monthly 'Y Ddraig Goch' in 1933, republished in the literary quarterly 'Heddiw' in 1936, are curiously bloodless. It is, however, possible to discern in them the political and cultural ideas that would shape Valentine's response to post-war Wales. Emrys ap Iwan's Europeanism (he claimed French ancestry and had spent time in Lausanne and Bonn), along with his call in 1892 for the establishment of a nationalist party 'to preserve the Welsh as a nation in feeling and thought', constituted an overt challenge to the Britishness of which Wales felt itself to be an integral part. Valentine returned from the war a convinced nationalist and pacifist. 
His political ideas in the period immediately after the war ran in tandem with the development of his career. He resumed his studies in Bangor, graduating BD (1919) and MA (1921, for a study of Welsh Renaissance translations of 'Job'), and was ordained in January of the same year as minister of the Tabernacl Baptist Church in Llandudno. 
Valentine's earliest mature work appeared in the periodical 'Y Deyrnas' ('The kingdom'), which he launched and edited in November 1923, its name consciously borrowed from a pacifist non-denominational monthly that had been one of the few organs of dissent during the war. Although not overtly political, it embraced a brand of cultural nationalism, eager to promote Emrys ap Iwan's view that languages and nations are divinely ordained as separate and equal. 
The first series of 'Y Deyrnas' ran until 1930, by which time Valentine was immersed in party politics. His initial contact with organized nationalism had been through meetings of like-minded individuals at a cafe in Caernarfon in 1924. With the support of a similar group from south Wales, these led in August 1925 to the launch of the Welsh Nationalist Party (later Plaid Cymru). Valentine was among the six who managed to attend the initial gathering in Pwllheli, and was elected president. He held the post for the next year. Three months later he married Margaret, 'nee' Jones, from Llandudno, becoming father to a son, Hedd ('Peace'), in August 1926 and a daughter, Gweirrul, in 1932. 
Valentine also became the party's first ever parliamentary candidate, contesting the Caernarvonshire constituency in the general election of 1929. He polled 609 votes, or about 1 per cent of the total. The 'glorious 600' became part of nationalist folklore. He did not contest another election, but continued to serve as the party's vice-president. 
The first half of the 1930s passed without incident, as Valentine established himself in his ministry and raised a family. The defining incident in his life came almost without warning. In late 1935 the Air Ministry announced plans to build a training base for pilots at Penrhos on the Llyn peninsula. Initially Plaid Cymru saw no political capital in the decision, until Valentine, cited as 'Mr X' and described as 'one prominent member of the Welsh Nationalist Party', expressed his opposition, urging members: 'to go to Porth Neigwl and lay themselves across the road in front of the lorries taking building materials to the Air Station... The time has come to do something, and if our bodies are broken and lives forfeit, what will it matter if the end is achieved? ('Western Mail', 31 Dec 1935)' Valentine, unwittingly, had precipitated arguably the most dramatic incident in the history of Welsh nationalism. Unsure who was responsible for the statement, Saunders Lewis, the party president, faced a dilemma. Dismissing it risked showing lack of leadership; supporting it meant a campaign for which he was unprepared. He chose the latter. By the middle of January 1936 all Plaid Cymru's (still meagre) resources were concentrated on this remote corner of north-west Wales. Letters and petitions followed, culminating in a rally in Pwllheli in May 1936. Valentine, who attended, described it as the party's 'baptism of fire'. Speakers were shouted down and scuffles erupted. 'It would not be inappropriate', he wrote immediately after the event, 'to liken the insane mob... who continued to scream the worst blasphemy and filth that ears ever heard, to that madding crowd in the Praetorium who cried 'Crucify Him, Crucify Him!'' ('Bedydd tan y Blaid Genedlaethol' ['The National Party's baptism of fire'], 'Y Ddraig Goch', June 1936, 5). 
The broader protest was more successful, however, attracting support from religious denominations and sections of the Labour and Liberal parties. But faced with official indifference and continuing preparations in the summer of 1936, the party's leadership took direct action. In the early hours of 8 September 1936, Valentine, Saunders Lewis, and another senior party figure, D. J. Williams, set fire to the workmen's huts at Penrhos and surrendered themselves to the police. The 'tan yn Llyn' ('fire in Llyn'), or 'Penyberth' (named after the house that stood on the site) became a 'cause celebre'. At the first trial, at Caernarfon assizes in October 1936, the jury failed to reach a verdict. Lewis and Williams were carried through the town on the shoulders of their jubilant supporters; Valentine, well over 6 foot tall, was too heavy to receive the same acclaim. 
A retrial was ordered, and amid fears that a fair hearing would be impossible in Wales, the lord chief justice insisted on transferring it to the Old Bailey. The second trial, in January 1937, lasted less than an hour, and the jury did not leave the court before reaching their verdict. The three were sentenced to nine months each 'in the second division', a concession that would spare them hard labour and allow them to hold a passport and retain the right to vote on their release. 
'My heart did not leap, my knees did not shake, I did not think that the world had come to an end, and I did not experience a single minute of insane panic', Valentine wrote later ('Y Ddraig Goch', Nov 1937, 7). His account of his time at Wormwood Scrubs, 'Beddau'r byw' ('The graves of the living'), published in instalments in 'Y Ddraig Goch' between November 1937 and February 1939, echoes his account of the war twenty years before. Again the focus is the visceral response to indignity and discomforts (sparrows roosted in the rafters above the hall where the prisoners congregated, showering them with droppings), set against unexpected lighter moments. He learned elementary French and took advantage of the classes to meet Lewis and Williams. 
On his release in August 1937 Valentine resumed his church duties in Llandudno. After the trauma of the previous year he kept a lower profile. The arson did little to increase support for nationalism, and in the event the training base was never developed. The terrain and climate proved unsuitable. The fire, a symbolic protest to mark 400 years since the 'Act of Union' in 1536, was never intended to create a precedent and the party, publicly at least, did not refer to it again. When war was declared in September 1939 Plaid Cymru announced that Wales was neutral, a stance with which Valentine concurred for both pacifist and political reasons. His most public acts during the Second World War were to sign open letters in support of Saunders Lewis's unsuccessful campaign in the University of Wales parliamentary by-election in 1943 and defend the candidate in the same year against charges of seeking to create a Catholic Wales. 'Is it rash of me to thank God for Thomas a Kempis?' he wrote in an open debate with a fellow Baptist on the pages of the denomination's monthly, 'Seren Gomer'. Personal loyalties ran deep. 
In 1947, over a quarter of a century on from his appointment at Tabernacl, aged fifty-two, Valentine moved to Penuel Chapel in Rhosllannerchrugog, Denbighshire. In retrospect he regarded it as not altogether a wise decision, not least because of his wife's close connections with Llandudno. The change, however, prompted a return to writing. He edited 'Seren Gomer' from 1951 to 1975, completing reviews of over 900 books, and offering a commentary on current affairs. His editorials revisited the ideas first aired in 'Y Deyrnas' in the 1920s that Welshness was shaped by the Welsh language and Christianity. It is one measure of political and cultural change in Wales that what were considered revolutionary ideas at the beginning of the century were commonplace, even cliches, as it drew to a close. In 1962 he was made president of his denomination and, six years later, in July 1968, was reunited with Lewis and Williams: the first and last time the three were together since their days in prison. 
Valentine retired in 1970, moving first to Llanddulas and then to Old Colwyn. He lived to witness and comment on events in a changing Wales: the investiture of Prince Charles as prince of Wales in 1969, the unsuccessful referendum for a national assembly in 1979 and Gwynfor Evans's threatened fast to death for a Welsh-language television channel a year later. In a letter to Evans he spoke of his mixed feelings on hearing the news of his 'sad, magnificent resolution': 'Elation that one like you has arisen from among us, and guilt that I and my like did not exert ourselves more, and discipline ourselves more severely in attempting to serve our nation in our own generation' (Valentine to Evans, (9 Sept 1980), quoted in Emyr, 254). 
Lewis Valentine died, on 5 March 1986 at Como Nursing Home, Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire, and was buried in the town six days later. The service concluded with the singing of his own hymn, set to Sibelius's 'Finlandia': 'Dros Gymru'n gwlad' ('For Wales our country'), regarded by some as a second Welsh national anthem. He did not live to receive the honorary doctorate of divinity due to be awarded to him by the University of Wales that summer, but an annual memorial lecture in his name was established by the Welsh Baptist Union's Peace Society in 1989. 
Valentine's life is inevitably overshadowed by the events of 1936-7. None the less it offers both a representative portrait of a generation shaped by higher education, war, and political and religious upheaval, and an individual story of unaffected principle. 


@@@@@


doc= 95354


Godolphin, Elizabeth (bap. 1663, d. 1726), benefactor, was baptized on 5 November 1663 at Coulston church, Wiltshire, the third of the five children of Francis Godolphin (1629-1670) of Spargor and Coulston, and his wife, Elizabeth (1633-1667), one of the four surviving daughters of Sir John Gayer (bap. 1584, d. 1649), a London merchant who was lord mayor in 1646, and his wife, Katharine, daughter of Sampson Hopkins of Coventry. 
Elizabeth's mother died soon after giving birth to her youngest son, Charles, in 1667, and her two-year-old daughter, Anne, died in the same year. Her husband was married again in 1669, to Dame Elizabeth Mordaunt, widow of Sir Charles Mordaunt of Massingham Parva, but died only a year later. The bulk of Francis Godolphin's estate passed to his eldest son, William (1659-1682). Elizabeth was provided with an annuity, and she and her brother Francis (1661-1702) were placed in the guardianship of their uncle Sir William Godolphin (bap. 1635, d. 1696). But with Sir William having taken up residence in Spain in 1669 as Charles II's ambassador there, the children were looked after by their elderly great-uncle Francis Bluet (died 1678) and his wife, Elizabeth, and after their deaths by their eldest son. Elizabeth's brother William died following a duel in 1682. Francis succeeded to the estate but committed suicide in 1702, possibly under the strain of legal proceedings against his relatives. The Coulston house, built by Elizabeth's father with his own mother's dowry, was put in the hands of trustees made responsible for Elizabeth's dowry. 
In 1687 Elizabeth married her cousin Charles Godolphin (1651-1720), the fifth of the fourteen children of Sir Francis Godolphin (1605-1667) and his wife, Dorothy (died 1668), daughter of Sir Henry Berkeley. The younger brother of Sidney Godolphin, first Earl Godophin (1645-1712) and of Henry Godolphin (1648-1733), dean of St Paul's, Charles was MP for Helston and became a senior commissioner for customs in London. He and Elizabeth bought a house in St James's Street, Piccadilly, in addition to the Coulston residence. Their marriage was happy but marred by the death of both their children, Anne ('bap'. 12 August 1688, died 1690) and William ('bap'. 25 March 1694, died May 1694). However, Charles's great-niece Frances (Fanny) Quicke, the granddaughter of his sister Elizabeth, Lady Northcote ('b'. 1635), became a surrogate daughter, living in London with Elizabeth and Charles until her marriage to Francis Hall, a commissioner for customs. 
Elizabeth and Francis Godolphin were beneficiaries under the will of their uncle Sir William. The bulk of the latter's estate, valued at $80,000, consisted of lands in Cornwall, chattels in Madrid (where he died), and money in Madrid, Rome, Amsterdam, and Venice. In his first will, of 1669, Sir William bequeathed his estate to charitable causes, in the second (1696) to the Jesuits, and in the third, after Francis visited him on his deathbed in Spain, to Francis and Elizabeth. When Francis and Elizabeth sought to claim the estate, the Jesuits petitioned parliament on 30 December 1697 to rescind the letters of administration granted to Francis and Elizabeth in November 1696; but a bill of 2 April 1698 recognized the claim of the charities endowed by Sir William and required Francis and Elizabeth to pay $1520 each towards charitable purposes. Elizabeth was assigned $4000 and her husband Charles $1000. 
Of the $1520 to be devoted to good causes by Elizabeth under Sir William's will, Charles, acting on her behalf, gave $500 to charities at Helston, Cornwall. He also bought land to the west of St James's Street on which houses were subsequently built, and in 1703 this was assigned to trustees for the education, maintenance, and apprenticing of poor scholars, for the relief of decayed gentlefolk, and for other charitable purposes. It continued to be used to these ends until the death of Elizabeth's nephew William in 1781, when the management of the trust was settled by proceedings in chancery. The charity commissioners appointed in 1819 were unable to obtain satisfactory accounts or information from the sole surviving trustee, Robert Long, and recommended that the case should be laid before the attorney-general. The result was a decree by the court of chancery in April 1852, establishing the Godolphin School at Hammersmith. It opened in 1856 in Great Church Lane, Hammersmith, under the Revd Henry Twells, but although initially successful it closed in 1900 in the face of competition from St Paul's (from 1884) and Latymer Upper School. However, a new scheme, drawn up in 1903 and supported by a grant from the Latymer Foundation, created the Godolphin and Latymer School for Girls, which is now an independent day school. 
The portion of $1520 that was to be devoted to charitable causes by Francis Godolphin was assigned after his death to the Godolphin School for Girls, founded at Salisbury by his sister Elizabeth. This separate charity, endowed from lands that she had bought in Somerset, was established to maintain and educate eight young orphan gentlewomen, whose parents were required to have been communicants of the Church of England. A prudent mistress was to be appointed to teach the girls to dance, work, read, write, cast accounts, and become proficient in housewifery. The foundation of the school occupied the six years that remained to Elizabeth after Charles's death on 10 July 1720. Neither the dean and chapter of Salisbury nor Samuel Clark, the rector of St James's, Westminster, in whose names Elizabeth wished the lands to be held and whom she wanted to direct the charity, was prepared to act as trustee, and so on 4 July 1721 the matter was placed before the court of chancery. William Godolphin's moneys vested in Venice had depreciated considerably and realized only $3359 7's'. 10died To this sum Elizabeth (who had met the costs of proceedings in chancery and other expenses out of her own pocket) added money left to her by Charles as well as some of her own, altogether realizing $3890 0's'. 9died, which she directed should be invested in government securities. But this sum still fell short of what was necessary to found the school. In her will, however, Elizabeth left still more money to bring the charitable funds up to $5000, and entrusted the foundation of the school to her nephew William Godolphin (1694-1781) and his heirs. The school opened on 9 August 1784 in Rosemary Lane, adjoining Salisbury Cathedral close. Elizabeth's heirs continued to approve the appointment of the mistress and nominate the pupils, until a new scheme for the Godolphin School in 1886 renegotiated the relationship between the trustees and Elizabeth's heirs to the former's satisfaction. 
Elizabeth Godolphin died on 29 July 1726 and was buried in Westminster Abbey, alongside her husband and their children. A formidable, tough, and autocratic woman, renowned for her wit, she acted as arbitrator in family disputes but did not suffer fools gladly and could be a difficult neighbour, as her next-door neighbour Thomas Coke discovered when building his own house in St James's Street. Her tendency to sharpness is epitomized in her bequest to Fanny Hall, whom she made both her executor and her residuary legatee 'to her own particular separate and peculiar use and exclusive of her said Husband', with the specific condition that 'her said Husband is not to intermedle' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/610, fol. 202'v'). Her will, drawn up in 1724, and with a codicil dated 22 July 1725, was proved on 18 August 1726. 


@@@@@


doc= 95357


Evans, Evan (1795-1855), Welsh-language poet, was born at Tan-y-celyn in Trefriw, Caernarvonshire, on 20 April 1795. His father, Robert Evans, a farmer, and his mother, Elizabeth Evans, were people of some culture and literate in both Welsh and English; they were among the founders of Calvinistic Methodism in Trefriw, a village about seven miles north of Betws-y-coed in the Conwy valley. The boy was sent to the free grammar school at Llanrwst, a place he was later to celebrate in a famous poem, 'Ysgoldy rhad Llanrwst' ('The free schoolhouse at Llanrwst'). On leaving school he went to work on his father's farm but the family was impoverished after the Gwydir estate, which owned the land, put up the rent. At the age of twenty-one, with only a grammar school education, he went to Tal-y-bont, in his native county, as master of a day school. 
Evans came to public attention at the eisteddfod held in Wrexham in 1820 after winning a prize with his ode 'Hiraeth Cymro am ei wlad mewn bro estronawl' ('A Welshman's longing for his country in a foreign place'). On the same occasion he made the acquaintance of a number of gentlemen and clerics such as Ifor Ceri (John Jenkins), who recognized his gifts and encouraged him to seek holy orders. He studied first at Aberriw in Montgomeryshire and then at St Bees Theological College, Cumberland, and in 1826 was duly ordained by the bishop of Chester and licensed to conduct the Welsh services at St Martin's Church, Chester. In the same year he became curate of Christleton, near Chester, where he stayed until 1843, when he was moved to a curacy at nearby Ince. 
Ieuan Glan Geirionydd (the name by which Evans was widely known in bardic and antiquarian circles) was a prolific and gifted writer in Welsh. He was for long associated with a group of Anglican clergymen known as 'yr' hen bersoniaid llengar ('the old literary clerics') who strove to promote Welsh antiquities, learning, and literature within an Anglican church that was unsympathetic, and often hostile, to such activity. His journalistic talents were put, for the most part, into editing the periodical 'Y Gwladgarwr' ('The patriot') between 1833 and 1836, and his erudition into writing or translating books on theological subjects, none of which is still highly regarded. 
Ieuan Glan Geirionydd's reputation rests on his literary work, especially his verse which was written in both the strict and free metres. He won the chair at three eisteddfodau: at St Asaph in 1818 with his 'Awdl ar farwolaeth y Dywysoges Charlotte' ('Ode on the death of Princess Charlotte'); at Denbigh in 1828 with his 'Awdl ar wledd Belsassar' ('Ode on Belshazzar's feast'); and again at Denbigh in 1850 with his 'pryddest' 'Yr adgyfodiad' ('The resurrection'). The archaic language and orthography of these poems were adversely affected by the outlandish theories of William Owen Pughe and are little read nowadays. His poem 'Y bedd' ('The grave'; 1821), however, is among the greatest poems written in the strict metres during the first half of the nineteenth century. 
Even so, it is as a poet in the free metres that Ieuan is chiefly remembered. Much influenced by the English 'churchyard school' of Thomas Gray, Robert Blair, and Edward Young, his lyrics display his musical gifts in their smooth melodic metre and clear, dignified language. In such poems as 'Caniad y gog i Arfon' ('The cuckoo's song to Caernarvonshire') he imitated the old harp-stanzas to brilliant effect, while 'Glan Geirionydd' ('On the bank of Geirionydd') delighted in childhood memories and the poet's communion with nature. Saunders Lewis, who made a selection of Ieuan's work in 1931, thought it was in such poems that he belonged most truly to the tradition of Goronwy Owen and that his work in the free metres showed the paramount spirit of the classical tradition in Welsh, namely stoicism; no later critic has challenged this view. Ieuan's achievement was crowned by his hymns, such as 'Ar lan Iorddonen ddofn' ('On the bank of the deep Jordan') and 'Mor dedwydd yw y rhai trwy ffydd' ('So happy are those who by faith'), which are among the finest ever written in Welsh and are still sung by congregations in Wales. 
Ieuan was married, though further details are unknown. Towards the end of 1852, his wife having died and being in indifferent health himself, he left Ince and returned to Trefriw and, shortly afterwards, obtained a curacy at Rhyl. He died there on 21 January 1855 and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's at Trefriw. 


@@@@@


doc= 95358


Jenkins, John (1770-1829), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born on 8 April 1770 at Cilbronnau, a farmhouse in Llangoedmor, Cardiganshire; exact details of his parents are unknown, though (according to Foster) he may have been the son of one Griffith Jenkins. He was educated at the village school, then went to the Carmarthen Academy, from there to Jesus College, Oxford, and then to Merton College, where he graduated BA in 1793. In the same year he was ordained deacon and went as curate to his uncle, rector of Whippingham on the Isle of Wight. In 1799 Jenkins became chaplain in the 'Agincourt' in the West Indies, later transferring to the 'Theseus'. Returning home to recover his health, he was appointed rector of Manordeifi, Pembrokeshire, and in 1807 he became vicar of Ceri in Montgomeryshire, the living being in the gift of Thomas Burgess, bishop of St David's. 
Jenkins took the name by which he was known in antiquarian circles, Ifor Ceri, from the parish where he was vicar; the parsonage he had built for himself became known as Llys Ifor Hael ('The court of Ifor the generous'), a reference to Ifor ap Llywelyn, patron of Dafydd ap Gwilym, whom the poet had called Ifor Hael. He kept open house during the first week of every year for 'all comers provided only that they could compose an 'englyn', sing a song, or play the harp' ('DWB', 434), and the place became a mecca for poets, musicians, and antiquaries from all parts of Wales. 
One of the most distinguished visitors to enjoy the hospitality at Ceri was Bishop Burgess. In August 1818 he and Ifor Ceri hatched a plan 'to rekindle the bardic skill and ingenuity of the principality... by holding eisteddfodau in different places in the four provinces' ('DWB', 434). The first of these eisteddfodau was held at the Ivy Bush inn in Carmarthen on 8 and 9 July 1819, an occasion at which the Gorsedd of Bards invented by Iolo Morganwg (Edward Williams) became an essential part of the proceedings. They were directed by Ifor Ceri, as were all their successors until 1829 when, at Denbigh, he came to the conclusion that English influence was more and more apparent and that the eisteddfod, in its emphasis on grand concerts, was becoming an 'Anglo-Italian farce' (ibid.). Even so, the provincial eisteddfodau were the forerunners of the national eisteddfod inaugurated towards the end of the nineteenth century. 
Ifor Ceri had begun collecting folk-songs as a young man, especially ballads and carols, for which he had a penchant. Some of his manuscripts were used by Maria Jane Williams (1795-1873) of Aberpergwm in her 'Ancient Welsh Music'; other tunes appeared in the 'Cambrian Journal' between 1854 and 1857 or were included by John Parry (Bardd Alaw) in 'The Welsh Harper' (vol.2, 1848), while some remain unpublished and are kept in the National Library of Wales. Ifor Ceri also collected psalm tunes and hymn tunes sung during the early years of the Methodist revival. In addition he was a local historian of some repute. He wrote the parish histories of Ceri and Mochdre included anonymously in 'A Topographical History of Wales' (1811) by Nicholas Carlisle and again in William Cathrall's 'The History of North Wales' (1828). His only writings in Welsh were the articles he contributed to the periodical 'Y Gwyliedydd' under the pseudonym Hooker. 
As one of the leading members of the group now known as 'yr' hen bersoniaid llengar ('the old literary clerics') Ifor Ceri played a crucial role in keeping alive a remembrance of early Welsh literature on which later scholars were able to build. Given the neglected state of Welsh scholarship in his day, his achievement in helping to reform the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion and in organizing the provincial eisteddfodau was all the more remarkable. That he was able to do so much against the prevailing attitudes of the established church -- Bishop Burgess was a shining exception to the widespread Anglican prejudice against all things Welsh -- says much for his patriotic zeal and tenacity. Ifor Ceri remained in Ceri from 1807 until his death, unmarried, on 20 November 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 95378


Williams, Egbert Austin (1874-1922), dancer and entertainer, was born on 12 November 1874 in St Matthew's parish, Nassau, Bahamas, the son of Frederick Williams (1850-1912), then working as a waiter at the Royal Victoria Hotel, Nassau, and his Antigua-born wife, Julia, 'nee' Monceur. He had one sister. The family migrated to Florida about 1885, and soon moved to San Pedro, California, and finally to Riverside, California, where Bert attended school. He planned to study civil engineering at Stanford University, but instead worked as an entertainer in San Francisco, where in 1893 he met George Walker (1873-1911), with whom he formed a double act, Walker and Williams, the Two Real Coons, appearing in minstrel and medicine shows and then vaudeville. By 1896 the pair were in New York, formed a short-lived all-black theatrical company, and then with better management took leading roles in several shows including 'The Policy Players' (1899) and 'Sons of Ham' (1900). In 1900 Williams married Charlotte Louise Johnson; they had no children. 
Williams and Walker had first visited England in April 1897, but they were not well received and their run at the Empire Theatre lasted only a week (which Williams put down to their appearance straight after the ballet 'The Count of Monte Cristo'). Nevertheless, the success of their all-black musical comedy 'In Dahomey', which was premiered on Broadway in February 1903, persuaded them to return to England, sailing with their forty-strong cast at the end of April. 'In Dahomey' was premiered in London at the Shaftesbury Theatre on 16 May 1903, and was an instant sensation. British press reports acknowledged that 'In Dahomey' was unlike any previous musical show to play in London. The 'Daily Mail' noted that the audience 'literally screamed with merriment over the whimsicalities of a tall low comedian named Williams. He upset the gravity of everybody, and the preservation of a rigid and decorous countenance became absolutely impossible' ('Daily Mail', 18 May 1903). It also ventured that the show's 'natural dash and swing and the humours of the ineffable Williams will, no doubt, endorse the favourable verdict emphatically pronounced on Saturday night' (ibid.). Its only criticism, if it was one, was that even the programme notes did not clarify what the show was about. The abrupt ending was reported by the 'St James's Gazette' (18 May 1903) as 'wildly inconsequential' and 'The Times' (18 May 1903) said the show was an example of plotless drama perhaps without rival. The 'Sunday Sun''s report (17 May 1903) noted that the success of the show depended on Williams and Walker, who 'are both excellent comedians, than whom it would be difficult to find any better on the London stage'. Of Williams 'The Times' observed that 'he possesses the gift of stringing together tunes of a decidedly taking kind'. The 'Pall Mall Gazette' reviewer, also baffled by the absence of a plot and noting that the audience remained seated for some time after the finale, praised Williams's 'extraordinarily amusing impersonation of the part of Shylock Homestead. For this alone the work deserves to score a great popular success. He is, from every point of view, admirable; his art is so personal and so elusive that it is difficult to analyze it; but his methods are absolutely alive with the possibilities of laughter. (18 May 1903)' The British expected these black Americans to dance the cakewalk, and by late May that dance was in the show. By late June a cake over 6 feet high, lit by 100 electric light bulbs, was central to the dance. This was such a success that it was frequently thereafter asserted, erroneously, that 'In Dahomey' introduced that dance to Britain. A royal command performance was given on 23 June 1903 at Buckingham Palace for the ninth birthday of Edward VII's favourite grandson, David (the future Edward VIII), and the cakewalk was taught to society grandees by Williams and Walker. The show added extra performances for the Christmas period (the 250th performance was on 26 December), but as the Shaftesbury Theatre was to be redecorated in the new year the show moved off to other British cities, including Manchester, Newcastle, and Glasgow. In Edinburgh Williams and other male entertainers joined the Freemasons. 
Williams and the 'In Dahomey' troupe made a lasting impression on many British residents of African birth or descent, including the composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor. Until the 'Blackbirds' shows set a new standard in the 1920s, many black entertainers claimed to have been in the show, for it was a benchmark in British theatre. Other Britons remained enamoured of Williams, whose comic style led George Bernard Shaw to express the wish that he should take the role of Ftatateeta, the queen's nurse in his 'Caesar and Cleopatra' (first performed in 1906). 
Williams and most of the 'In Dahomey' troupe sailed from Liverpool for New York on 14 June 1904, and new recruits arrived to take their places. Stella Hart, who had worked with Williams in 'The Policy Players', joined the 'In Dahomey' players in July 1904 and when interviewed by 'The Magnet' of Leeds (12 November 1904) said they intended to continue touring Britain for two years. But without Williams and Walker the show could not survive. 
Back in America Williams worked with Walker until the latter's retirement in 1909, and then became the leading black figure in American entertainment. Among his fans was the educationist Booker T. Washington, who described him as 'a tremendous asset of the Negro race. He is an asset because he has succeeded in actually doing something, and because he has succeeded, the fact of his success helps the Negro many times more than he could help the Negro by merely contenting himself to whine and complain about racial difficulties and racial discriminations. ('The greatest comedian the negro race has', 'American Magazine', 70, Sept 1910, 601)' Williams wrote over seventy songs, made gramophone recordings from 1901, and directed and starred in the film 'Natural Born Gambler' (1916), thus becoming the first known black American film director. Florenz Ziegfeld employed him in his 'Follies', a Broadway attraction, from 1910 to 1919. He was a great success, but by moving into white musical comedy he deprived black theatre of a major figure. He collapsed in Detroit on 28 February 1922 and died in New York on 4 March. One of those at his Harlem funeral was the South African nationalist Solomon Plaatje; both Edward 'Duke' Ellington and Ferdinand 'Jelly Roll' Morton later composed works named for him. 


@@@@@


doc= 95379


Bambatha ka Mancinza (1865/6-1906), chief and rebel in Natal, was born in 1865 or 1866 in the Umvoti division of the British colony of Natal. He was the son of the chief Mancinza (also called Sobhuza) ka Jangeni (died 1883) and a daughter of the Chunu chief Phakade who was hence called Maphakade. He succeeded to the chieftaincy of the Ngome branch of the Zondi tribe under the regency of his uncle Magwababa in 1890 and in his own right in 1896. He was unhappily married and appeared repeatedly in court, mainly for debt, but occasionally for crimes. Because of his assault on several men in a faction fight in August 1905 the Natal government decided to remove him as chief in February 1906. Later in February some of his men took up arms to oppose collection of the colony's poll tax. Although Bambatha dissuaded them he failed to report the incident to the authorities. 
In March 1906 Bambatha was summoned to appear before the minister for native affairs. Instead he fled to Zululand. Arriving at the Osuthu kraal with a pregnant wife and three children, he went to Dinizulu, chief of the Suthu and son and heir of the later Zulu king Cetshwayo. Although the British government refused to recognize Dinizulu, most Zulu regarded him as their king. Later, when on trial for high treason, Dinizulu claimed that Bambatha was not expected, and that Bambatha had complained of harassment for debt at home, and asked to live in the king's district. Dinizulu also stated that he had sent Bambatha home. According to Bambatha's wife and children, Bambatha was brought by one of Dinizulu's men to the Osuthu, where Dinizulu gave him a rifle and told him to go back to Natal and start a rebellion. It is impossible to reconcile the two accounts. 
Natal was agitated by the government's imposition of a $1 tax on adult males (with a few categorical exemptions), which became payable in January 1906. Dinizulu denied rumours that he was behind a movement to overthrow European rule, and he had his own people pay the tax promptly. Bambatha, on the other hand, brandishing the rifle which he said Dinizulu had given him, launched his rebellion on 2 April 1906, seizing Magwababa, whom the government had again appointed regent. The magistrate who went to investigate was driven off on 3 April and police who went to the magistrate's rescue were ambushed on 4 April. Initially the rebellion appeared to be a success, for the police lost four killed and left the battlefield. No rebel was killed, seeming proof of Bambatha's claims to be able to doctor men against bullets. Yet Bambatha was disappointed when other chiefs did not join him as expected. Nor did he have the full support of his own people. At most he attracted (or commandeered) 300 armed supporters. Little was said about the poll tax; most who were liable had already paid. Bambatha was motivated largely by revenge. He wanted to kill Magwababa, but one of Dinizulu's men prevented him. 
On 7 April 1906, when colonial forces closed in, Bambatha fled to Zululand with about a hundred men. He was received by the aged Chube chief Sigananda, who also had personal reasons for rebelling. Together they conjured with Dinizulu's name and drew recruits from neighbouring tribes until, by the third week of April, the rebel army numbered about a thousand men. They waited for Dinizulu to join them, but he disavowed them, sending a trusted adviser to deliver the message. The rebels' explanation for this rejection was that because of government pressure Dinizulu could only support them secretly. 
The rebels lacked overall command. They had no commissary. They trusted in a defensive strategy in the rugged Nkandhla division. On 5 May they were worsted in an encounter with the police at Bobe ridge. Bambatha's men stayed in the bush and did not attack, while Sigananda's attacked in the open and were mowed down by rifle fire. Morale fell. Bambatha now appeared to be a coward and a quack. For a fortnight he was hardly seen, and it was said that he was sick. He again sought out Dinizulu in an attempt to get support, but Dinizulu declined. Rebel reinforcements from the Nqutu division arrived under an important Zulu chief, Mehlokazulu. Early in June the rebels threatened to invade Natal, but were diverted by a call for help from Sigananda, whose people were suffering greatly from militia actions. The relieving force was intercepted by militia at the mouth of the Mome gorge on the morning of 10 June and was destroyed. Mehlokazulu was primarily to blame, not heeding forewarnings of the ambush. Sigananda surrendered on 16 June and the rebellion in Zululand collapsed. A flare-up in the Mapumulo division of Natal was suppressed early in July. 
There are two different contemporary accounts of Bambatha's death. A few days after the battle at Mome a body in the gorge was identified as his, its head cut off and brought up to the militia camp, closely guarded, and shown to persons who knew what Bambatha looked like and would identify it as his. Then it was taken back and buried with the body. Officially it was proclaimed that Bambatha was dead. Yet stories began to circulate almost immediately that Bambatha had escaped, and during the next eighteen months, while Zululand was in an unsettled state, he was often reported at various places, preparing to renew the fight. Dinizulu's loyalty came into question when Bambatha's wife and children fled from the Osuthu and alleged his complicity in the rebellion. In December 1907 Dinizulu was arrested, then charged, and finally put on trial for high treason in November 1908. After Dinizulu's arrest reports about Bambatha ceased. Indeed they had no substance, for those who made them had never actually seen or spoken to Bambatha. The last eyewitness report of him dates from the day of the battle. Nor is there any circumstantial evidence that he exerted a direct influence on events after that time. It is most likely that Bambatha died in the Mome gorge, on 10 June 1906, though in recent years stories have circulated again that Bambatha escaped and, after the rebellion, lived incognito in Zululand or Mozambique. 
Bambatha's significance consists in his being a symbol of resistance, and his rebellion has been called the first act in the twentieth-century struggle for liberation from colonialism and apartheid in South Africa. Bambatha seems to have had no agenda in rebelling except a personal one, and he was not a charismatic leader. In Natal he was manipulated by one of Dinizulu's men, and in Zululand he became a cipher among the rebel leaders. His rebellion brought hardship and death first to his own people, and then to others elsewhere. Today's icon is the product of the romanticization of a lost cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 95382


Harrison, (Barbara) Jane (1945-1968), air steward, was born on 24 May 1945 at 2 Kingsdale Crescent, Bradford, Yorkshire, the younger daughter of Alan Frederic Harrison (1911-1996), then a policeman and later a driving examiner, and Lena Veronica, 'nee' Adlard (1914-1955). Jane, as she was known to her family, was educated at Greystones School, Bradford, and, after her family's move to the east coast, at Newby county primary school and Scarborough Girls' High School. After a term at the high school, Doncaster, to where her father had moved, Jane took her first job as a clerk at Martin's Bank, Doncaster, in spring 1962. After several years she left to work as a children's nanny, first in Switzerland and then in San Francisco. Her decision to work in Switzerland had been prompted in part by her growing interest in becoming an air steward, a post that at the time required proficiency in a foreign language. While in California she applied for a position with the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) and was accepted in May 1966; she moved to a flat she shared with fellow BOAC employees at 36 Emperor's Gate, Kensington, London. 
On 8 April 1968 Harrison was assigned to flight 712 from Heathrow to Sydney, Australia, via Zurich, Tel Aviv, Tehran, Bombay, Singapore, and Perth. The plane, a four-engine Boeing 707, carried 115 passengers and 11 crew. About one minute after take-off an explosion occurred in the number 2 engine on the port side. A fire broke out in the engine which then spread along the wing as the plane continued to climb to 3000 feet. The flight's captain, Charles Taylor, was given clearance to make an emergency landing on a short runway that ran across the airport. As the plane turned over Egham, Surrey, the number 2 engine fell from the wing, landing in a gravel pit in the village of Thorpe. Three and a half minutes after take-off the plane landed and the evacuation began on the starboard side as the fire spread underneath the fuselage, causing further explosions. Jane Harrison was one of two stewards at the rear of the plane. Here the fire was at its most intense and the cabin rapidly filled with smoke. Evacuation from this section of the plane was made more difficult when the escape chute became twisted. This required Harrison's fellow steward to go out of the aircraft to correct the problem, leaving Harrison to direct passengers alone. After five passengers had escaped, the chute caught fire and was destroyed. Harrison continued to urge passengers to jump from the rear starboard exit and on several occasions pushed individuals from the plane. Having cleared their respective sections, and under the impression that the evacuation had been completed, the BOAC crew members now made their exits. However, survivors on the ground report seeing Harrison return into the fuselage in what was clearly an attempt to rescue four remaining passengers, including an eight-year-old girl and an elderly disabled woman. All five died in the fire. Jane Harrison's funeral service took place at St George's Roman Catholic Church, York (the home of her sister), and she was buried in the city's Fulford cemetery. 
On 23 April 1968 John Boyd-Carpenter, MP for Kingston upon Thames and a former minister of transport and civil aviation, wrote to Tony Crosland, president of the Board of Trade, to press for Harrison's actions to be recognized. Boyd-Carpenter spoke of her 'very great courage and self-sacrifice' and reiterated reports (confirmed by fire officers who later entered the fuselage) that Harrison's last action had been an attempt to rescue the four passengers who remained trapped in the plane (Ottaway, 131). With the completion of the Board of Trade's investigation into the accident in April 1969, Crosland approved the recommendation that Harrison be awarded a posthumous George Cross, referring to her conduct as a 'lonely and courageous action' that was evidence of a 'devotion to duty' worthy of the highest civilian award for gallantry (ibid., 139). The award of the George Cross was made public on 8 August 1969 and is, to date, the fourth to a female recipient, and the only award to a woman in peacetime. Jane Harrison's actions are commemorated in memorial windows at St George's Chapel, Heathrow (1970), and Bradford city hall (2000), a plaque at St Laurence's Church, Scalby, Yorkshire, and an eponymous prize in the field of aviation medicine. In 2005 she was one of several recipients of the Victoria and George crosses featured in a poster series commissioned and displayed by London Underground under the heading 'Ordinary people, extraordinary deeds'. Harrison's George Cross is now at the British Airways Museum, Hounslow, as part of an exhibition dedicated to her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 95415


Smith, Sir James (c.1621-1681), politician and benefactor, was the sixth son and youngest child of Sir Nicholas Smith (died 1622) of Larkbeare, Devon, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Sir Ralph Horsey of Clifton Maybank, Dorset ['see under 'Horsey family]. He was born into a prosperous west-country merchant family. His grandfather, Sir George Smith, was mayor of Exeter on three occasions, while his father sat as MP for St Mawes in the Addled Parliament of 1614. 
Nothing is known of James Smith's life before September 1643, when, aged about twenty-one, he took up arms for Charles I following the royalist capture of Exeter in the civil war. Knighted on 30 July 1644, he continued to serve as a colonel of cavalry until the king's army disbanded at Truro on 13 March 1646. For the next fourteen years he seems to have remained in Devon, an object of intermittent suspicion to the parliamentary regime. On 27 April 1648 he married a Cornish heiress, Bridget, daughter of Sir Reynold Mohun of Boconnoc and widow of John Nicholls of Trewarne. She was dead by 16 September 1663, when Smith was licensed to marry Anne, daughter of John Lucy, a merchant of London and Antwerp, and widow of William Boevey (died 1661), of Little Chelsea, Middlesex. There were no children of either marriage. Boevey had left Anne an estate consisting of a house with a 3 acre garden in Little Chelsea, which was then a small and remote Thames-side settlement. Its hearth tax return for 1666 recorded only seven houses, of which by far the largest was Smith's, with eighteen hearths. By 1682, however, he had sold the mansion and estate to Charles Morgan. 
Smith's political fortunes revived with the restoration of Charles II, when he had the additional advantage of being first cousin to the man who had done most to bring it about, namely General George Monck, created duke of Albemarle in July 1660 immediately after the king's return; Smith bore the great banner at his kinsman's funeral in 1670. In 1661 he was returned to parliament for Exeter, and during the eighteen years of the so-called Cavalier Parliament was appointed to no less than 125 committees. He was conscientious in representing the interests of his constituents, and was one of six MPs sent to the king on 8 April 1662 to request the suspension of the monopoly of the export of cloth enjoyed by the Merchant Adventurers of London, so that the trade could be opened up to (among others) the merchants of Exeter. The petition was granted, and in the following year Smith was appointed to a committee set up to determine what benefits had accrued to the kingdom as a result. 
In October 1667 Smith bought an estate at Trehannick in Cornwall, about 3 miles from Camelford, from William Carmynowe, a Cornish gentleman who had also fought for the king during the civil war. But in March 1675 he mortgaged this property for $2900, and thereafter resided at Warmington House, in the centre of Camelford, when he came to Cornwall. In 1679 and 1681 he was elected MP for Camelford. The earl of Shaftesbury regarded him as an opponent of the policy of excluding the Catholic James, duke of York, from the succession, but in fact Smith played little part in either parliament, and missed the crucial division in May 1679 because he was in Cornwall. He was engaged in making provision for the endowment of a school in Camelford. In 1671 he had bought from Hugh Carew of Trevye a messuage and tenement called Great Tregarth, an estate situated to the north-west of the town. Now, on 24 May 1679, he conveyed half of this property in trust to the mayor and burgesses, 'in consideration of the goodwill and respect which Sir James Smyth has towards the borough of Camelford', directing that the rents and revenues be used 'for the better erecting of a schoolhouse and the maintenance of a school there' (Cornwall RO, MS X345/3). 
Smith died between 21 and 25 October 1681, of unknown causes, and was buried in Chelsea parish church on 18 November. He had already arranged for the conveyance of his inherited estates to the descendants of his surviving brother, George, who later sold them for $5000. The rest of his property was bequeathed to trustees, who were to sell them in order to pay his debts, legacies, and funeral expenses, and transfer the residue to his widow. In the event, however, Anne, who lived until 1698, inherited only debts amounting to more than $6000, and these gave rise to a series of lawsuits. One such was brought in 1684 by Francis Blight of Bodmin, who claimed $200 which he had allegedly lent to Smith in 1653. Blight won his case, and in 1689 Anne Smith was ordered to repay the money. 
The fortunes of Smith's school were no less troubled. Soon after he had set up the trust at Camelford, a grammar school and writing school were established in the town, and educated and respectable clergymen of the Church of England were appointed as salaried masters by the mayor and burgesses. But contrary to Smith's intentions, no schoolhouse was built; pupils received their lessons in the town hall, and after that was demolished, in the homes of the masters. The grammar school was discontinued from around the middle of the eighteenth century because a salary of $10 per annum was insufficient to attract adequate teachers, but the writing school lasted into the early nineteenth century. Smith's endowment funded the writing schoolmaster's annual salary of $5, but the remainder was used to defray the mayor's expenses and to meet other civic costs, for instance the land tax and poor rates. In 1813, however, the corporation's failure to build a schoolhouse led to an information being filed in chancery against the mayor and burgesses of Camelford, alleging wilful misappropriation of the money from Sir James Smith's endowment. The defendants were adamant that no trust money had ever been misapplied or diverted for personal use, and they argued that children had continued to be educated, on the grounds that the writing school had been maintained and suitable masters appointed. Furthermore, they had been unaware both of the real purposes of the charity and of the contents of the deed of 1679, which had been 'locked up in the Chest of the Town Clerk and never inspected for a great number of years until April last' (Cornwall RO, MS X345/8). 
In fact even before the information had been laid, a plan of a schoolhouse had been drawn up for the corporation's approval, while a vacant plot of ground had been cleared and approved for its building. The schoolhouse was finally erected in the following year, fulfilling the terms of Smith's endowment some 135 years after he had made it. As more space has been needed for greater numbers of children, so new buildings have been constructed. The school (with over 600 pupils on its roll in 2006) now bears the name Sir James Smith's Community College in memory of the man who first supported education in Camelford. 


@@@@@


doc= 95416


Ali, Abdullah Yusuf (1872-1953), Indian civil servant and Islamic scholar, was born on 4 April 1872 in Surat, Gujarat, India. His father, Yusuf Ali Allahbuksh, otherwise Khan Bahadur Yusuf Ali, a Shi'i in the Dawoodi Bohra tradition, had abandoned the traditional occupation of his community, business, and entered instead the police force, being presented on retirement with the title of Khan Bahadur for public service. 
Abdullah Yusuf Ali was first educated at the Anjuman Himayat-ul-Islam school in Bombay, and subsequently at a missionary school there, Wilson College. Having graduated with a first-class mark, he won a scholarship to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1891. After graduation, he passed the Indian Civil Service examination in 1894 with flying colours, and was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn two years later. His service in various districts of the United Provinces was interspersed with two short stints as acting under-secretary (1907) and then deputy secretary (1911-12) in the finance department of the government of India. On 18 September 1900, while on leave in England, he married, at St Peter's Church, Bournemouth, Teresa Mary Shalders ('b'. 1873), daughter of Isaac Noah Shalders, accountant. They had three sons and a daughter. 
A man of very considerable intellect and wide interests, Yusuf Ali found bureaucratic routine frustrating and unfulfilling. He was allowed to retire with a comfortable pension in 1914 on grounds partly of health and partly of family anxieties. Retirement enabled him to devote time to writing and other pursuits close to his heart, dividing his time and travelling frequently between India and Britain. 
Yusuf Ali belonged to the group of Indian Muslims from professional families who were concerned with rank and status. In pursuit of his aspiration for influence, deference, if not outright obsequiousness, became a central feature of his relationship with the British. During the formative phase of his life he mingled mainly in upper-class circles, assiduously cultivating relations with members of the English elite. He was particularly impressed by the apparently genteel behaviour and cordiality of those with whom he associated, and, as a result, became an incorrigible Anglophile. His marriage to Teresa Shalders according to the rites of the Church of England, his hosting of receptions for the good and the great, his taste for Hellenic artefacts and culture and fascination for its heroes, his admiration for freemasonry in India as a way of bridging the racial and social divide, and his advocacy of the dissemination of rationalist and modernist thought through secular education were all genuine attempts to assimilate into British society. 
Yusuf Ali prized his membership of the British empire and was a loyal supporter of its sovereign. When the First World War broke out, in contrast to many Muslims in Britain who felt a great deal of unease in supporting the war effort against the Ottoman empire, he declared his unequivocal backing for Britain's cause in jingoistic articles, public speeches, and a lecture tour of Scandinavia. Likewise, during the Second World War, he reassured Britain of Indian Muslims' loyalty and wrote propaganda pieces in favour of the war effort. 
In his personal conduct Yusuf Ali scrupulously adhered to the religious ritual of his faith, attending prayers and festivals as required. He maintained close ties with the small but growing British Muslim community in London, helping to give it organizational shape. A trustee of the Shah Jehan Mosque in Woking, he occasionally led congregational prayers there. He was elected a trustee of the London Mosque Fund in 1921, which later financed the purchase of the premises for the East London Mosque. In India he focused much of his energy on the educational challenges facing Muslims. He was twice principal of Islamia College, Lahore, from 1925 to 1927 and from 1935 to 1937. He was also a fellow and syndic of Punjab University (1925-8 and 1935-9) and a member of the Punjab University enquiry committee (1932-3). Among his publications were 'Muslim Educational Ideals' (1923) and 'Moral Education: Aims and Methods' (1930). 
Yusuf Ali's scholarship of Islam, to which he brought his intimate knowledge of Arabic and a lifetime study of the principles and history of the religion, was widely recognized. Through both word and deed he attempted to change the widespread negative perceptions of Islam in the West. In a series of pamphlets entitled 'Progressive Islam' he attempted to demonstrate that Islam could make a useful contribution to Western civilization. Driven by his loyalty to the empire, he argued against pan-Islamism and in favour of the depoliticization of Islam. He sought to show that religion was essentially a personal and spiritual matter. That in 1936 he preached a sermon at the Unitarian Church in Cheltenham to a packed congregation is a testimony to his belief in the basic unity underlying all religions. Having been closely associated with interfaith dialogue, he was one of the key speakers at many of the World Congress of Faiths conferences. His books included 'Fundamentals of Islam' (1929), 'Personality of Man in Islam' (1931), and 'The Message of Islam' (1940), but he was best known as a translator of the 'Qu'ran', his translation and commentary (1934-8; rev. edn, 1939-40) remaining, fifty and more years after his death, one of the two most widely used English versions (the other being the translation by Marmaduke Pickthall). 
The British government much appreciated Yusuf Ali's services, especially as a publicist, and he was duly rewarded. Even before the First World War he received flattering notices in the press. 'The Times' described him as 'a very talented member of the Indian Civil Service and a representative of the great Mahomedan community' ('The Times', 24 Jan 1907). In 1917 he was appointed CBE for his services to the empire. He was appointed as an adviser to the Indian delegation at the Paris peace conference in 1919, while in 1928 he represented India at the assembly of the League of Nations in Geneva. In 1929, he was elected fellow of the Royal Empire Society. He was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Yusuf Ali's pursuit of a harmonious union of East and West at a personal and intellectual level, however, proved unsuccessful. His first marriage ended in a difficult divorce. In 1920 he married Gertrude Annie (Masuma) Mawbey (1895-1984), daughter of Thomas Mawbey, a nonconformist Derbyshire printer, and they had one son, Rashid (who served with the Indian Army during the Second World War), but he and his second wife had drifted apart well before his death. For all the services he had rendered, he died estranged from both his family and a British establishment that, following Indian independence, no longer had any use for him. In his old age, with his mental faculties deteriorating and desperately in need of proper care, he lived in isolation. Of no fixed abode (his address was given as the Royal Empire Society, Northumberland Avenue), he spent most of the last decade of his life wandering about. Eventually, in December 1953, found on the streets in a bewildered condition by the police, he was taken to a home for the destitute, and he died, unnoticed, the following day (10 December) at St Stephen's Hospital, Fulham, of heart failure. His funeral and burial at the Brookwood cemetery close to the Woking mosque was arranged by the Pakistan high commission. He left an estate valued at $20,578 which, after various small legacies, he bequeathed to the University of London for the benefit of Indian students. 


@@@@@


doc= 95419


Battye, Aubyn Bernard Rochfort Trevor- (1855-1922), traveller and naturalist, was born at Hever, Kent, on 17 July 1855, the second son in the family of two sons and three daughters of William Wilberforce Battye (1822-1890), rector of Hever, and his wife, Harriet Dorothea (1827-1904), daughter of Edmund Wakefield Meade-Waldo of Stonewall Park and Hever Castle. His father was a descendant of Sir John Trevor ('bap'. 1624, died 1672), and in 1883 succeeded to Trevor estates at Tingrith (Bedfordshire) and Little Hampden (Buckinghamshire); on his death in 1890 his widow and children assumed the name of Trevor-Battye. 
Trevor-Battye was educated at St Edward's School, Oxford (1871-3), and then engaged in stints as a private tutor while maintaining a busy sporting and social life. He returned to St Edward's in 1881 as assistant master in order to prepare for entry to Oxford University and matriculated there as a non-collegiate student in 1882. Migrating to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1884, he graduated with a BA pass degree in 1887, having studied under the naturalist H. N. Moseley. During the next six years he travelled widely, pursuing his amateur interests in ornithology, fishing, and hunting big game. He also wrote short stories, republished as 'Pictures in Prose of Nature, Wild Sport, and Humble Life' (1894). He was a member of the British Ornithologists' Union, and a fellow of the Linnean and Zoological societies. 
Encouraged by the naturalist and polar explorer Henry Wemyss Feilden (1838-1921), Trevor-Battye undertook a private expedition to Kolguyev Island in northern Russia. He travelled to Archangel to make preliminary enquiries in 1893, and returned in the following year on the steam yacht 'Saxon', chartered by his friend Mervyn Powys for a hunting expedition in the islands of the Barents Sea. They reached Kolguyev in June 1894. Along with his assistant Thomas Hyland (whose duties included preserving the bird specimens collected by the expedition) and his spaniel, Trevor-Battye was left with supplies and an agreement to be collected by the vessel after one month. An extensive study of the flora and fauna of the island was made, with special attention to its breeding birds, and the island was partly mapped. Unfortunately the 'Saxon' suffered a breakdown and it was impossible to keep the return appointment. When Powys eventually reached Kolguyev, ice prevented a landing. Believing that Trevor-Battye's party had already left by other means, the vessel continued to Scotland. The explorers were therefore marooned on the island. Friendly contact with Samoyed (Nenets) reindeer herders enabled them to leave in September. They then had a 1000 mile journey across northern Russia to Archangel in the season of 'rasputnya', when travel was normally deemed impossible. Their arduous and sometimes dangerous journey took them almost five weeks. 
In the meantime friends had become anxious that Trevor-Battye had not returned. The Foreign Office and the Royal Geographical Society became involved, and a rescue expedition was planned by his brother, Charles Edmund Augustine Trevor Trevor-Battye (1853-1931) (at that time known as Trevor Battye-Trevor). In November 1894 telegrams arrived from Archangel announcing their arrival, followed by summaries of their adventures. Trevor-Battye wrote 'Ice-Bound on Kolguev' (1895), describing the investigations on the island, and 'A Northern Highway of the Tsar' (1898), recounting their difficult return. These remain among the few English-language sources for Kolguyev. 
Trevor-Battye was invited to join Sir Martin Conway's expedition to Spitsbergen in 1896, as zoologist. Although he made contributions, and took part in a partial ascent of the Hornsundtind, relations between him and Conway became strained. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in November 1896. He joined the 'Victoria county history' project in 1899 as honorary secretary to the council and editor for natural history, but had little involvement after 1902. On 1 May 1901 he married Margaret Amy, daughter of C. North Graham. They made their home at Chilbolton, Hampshire, and had two daughters. He now travelled less, devoting time to writing and to editing some memoirs of his friend the ornithologist Lord Lilford (1903). His wife developed tuberculosis in 1905 and died in Switzerland in 1906. 
Trevor-Battye attended the British Association meeting in South Africa in 1905 as a committee member of the geographical section, and went on to the Victoria Falls with a view to studying the natural history of the upper Zambezi, but returned to England on receiving news of his wife's illness. In 1906 he visited zoos in Europe and gave a paper to the Zoological Society that resulted in improvements to the zoological gardens in Regent's Park, London. He explored Crete in 1908 and 1909, describing his travels in 'Camping in Crete' (1913), including ornithological and topographical data. He visited South Africa again in 1910, and in 1914 he travelled to India with his friend Henry John Elwes. Trevor-Battye had known the viceroy of India, Lord Hardinge, when they were young and this helped him to get permission to visit Sikkim. Elwes had been invited to visit Nepal, so the two of them were able to watch and photograph a 'keddah' (capture of wild elephants) and travel to Katmandu at a time when Europeans were seldom admitted. After the First World War Trevor-Battye continued to write and to attend meetings of the Royal Geographical Society, but his health was deteriorating. Resident for the last decade of his life at Ashford Chace, Hampshire, he was advised to go abroad, and died at the Queen Victoria Hospital, Las Palmas, in the Canary Islands, on 19 or 20 December 1922. 
Though never wealthy, Trevor-Battye had sufficient means to travel widely in pursuit of a range of interests. He made friends readily, but was firm when faced with difficulties. His writings included five books, a contribution to another, and over twenty papers in ornithological or geographical journals. 


@@@@@


doc= 95427


John Waugh (bap. 1701, d. 1765), dean of Worcester, who was baptized on 19 February 1701 at St Bride's, London. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 26 February 1722, and graduated BA in 1724 and MA in 1727, proceeding DCL on 8 February 1735. In 1727 he was appointed by his father to the posts of vicar of Stanwix, rector of Caldbeck, prebendary of Carlisle Cathedral, and chancellor of the diocese of Carlisle. On 20 August 1728, at St Mary, Carlisle, the younger John Waugh married Isabella (died in or after 1765), second daughter of Thomas Tullie, dean of Carlisle. They had a son, John (1730-1777), and six daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 95438


Haldane, Sir (James) Aylmer Lowthorpe (1862-1950), army officer and author, was born on 17 November 1862 at 14 Stafford Street, Edinburgh, the only son and sixth of seven children of Daniel Rutherford Haldane (1824-1887), physician, and his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth Lowthorpe (died 1908). He came from the family of Haldane of Gleneagles, of which he later wrote a history. Educated at Edinburgh Academy, he attended John Brackenbury and Charles Wynne's Wimbledon School to prepare for entrance to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he was admitted in 1881. 
Commissioned into the 2nd Gordon Highlanders in 1882, Haldane spent the years 1888-92 as adjutant of his battalion, being promoted captain in 1892, while attending the Staff College, which he left at the end of 1893. Haldane first saw active service in the Waziristan expedition of 1894-5, and then with the Chitral relief force (1895) and the Tirah expedition (1897). In the latter campaign he served as deputy assistant adjutant-general on the staff, and in consequence of his valuable services in this capacity was appointed DSO in 1898. During the period 1896-9 he was aide-de-camp to General Sir William Lockhart, who at the start of the period was in command of the Tirah field force and in 1898 became commander-in-chief, India. Haldane returned to his battalion in September 1899, just as it left India for South Africa. 
Wounded at the battle of Elandslaagte on 21 October 1899, Haldane was captured by the Boers a month later (15 November) while in command of an armoured train. Also taken prisoner was the young Winston Churchill. The latter escaped by using a plan confided to him by Haldane and another officer, preventing them from using it, much to their chagrin. Haldane later insisted that he never again spoke to Churchill without the latter referring to the incident. However, he was later able to get away and return to his battalion, though he was invalided home late in 1900, and while on sick leave wrote 'How we Escaped from Pretoria', his first book. 
In June 1901 Haldane took up duties in the intelligence section at the War Office. Rapid promotion followed: he attained his majority in July 1902 and a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy the following day. From 1903 to 1906 Haldane was deputy assistant quartermaster-general in the intelligence section and on the outbreak of the Russo-Japanese war in 1904 he became a military observer with the Japanese army (the fighting qualities of which he admired) in Manchuria, returning the next year. In early 1906 he was promoted to a brevet colonelcy and gained the substantive rank at the end of the same year, in which he became assistant director of military operations, a post he held until 1909. 
Haldane's staff career continued (as brigadier-general, general staff, eastern command) until 1912, when he took command of the 10th brigade in the 4th division. It was this formation he took to war in 1914. His brigade acted as the 4th division's rearguard for much of the retreat from Mons, placing a considerable strain on all ranks, and by the time it was over he had lost three of his four original battalion commanders (the fourth died in action on the Aisne in September 1914), but nevertheless his brigade had performed well at Le Cateau. It was not involved in the main fighting during the first battle of Ypres, holding the line to the south of that sector after capturing Armentieres. 
On the death in action of Sir Hubert Hamilton on 14 October 1914 Haldane succeeded to the command of the 3rd division, as a temporary major-general. For the whole of 1915 the 3rd division remained in the Ypres sector, for much of the time in the 5th corps, under Lieutenant-General Sir Edmund Allenby. Haldane developed a detestation of Allenby, partly (he later alleged) because Allenby pressed him to launch attacks without proper preparation. Suffering heavy losses in fighting around Hooge and Bellewaarde, the 3rd division could equally have blamed the inadequacies of the British artillery and its lack of ammunition in this period of the war for its misfortunes. It moved to the Fourth Army, on the Somme, in July 1916 and took part in the dawn attack of 14 July, gaining all its objectives; on finding no opposition to the division's front Haldane wished to use his reserve brigade to exploit the advance, but was overruled. His division was then involved in heavy fighting around Longueval and Delville Wood, before the conclusion of which he had left it. 
On 8 August 1916 Haldane took command of the 6th corps, near Arras, becoming a temporary lieutenant-general in the process. To his displeasure he again fell under Allenby's command. On the first day of the battle of Arras (9 April 1917) his corps advanced on average more than two miles -- no mean feat by the standards of the time. In addition he presided over the capture of the important feature of Monchy-le-Preux two days later, before the Arras offensive degenerated into a slogging match. The 6th corps was also involved in the Cambrai offensive in November of the same year, and took an important part in repelling the subsequent German counter-attack. 
During the German offensive of March 1918 Haldane skilfully handled the retreat of his right flank to conform with that of neighbouring units. His corps took part in the heaviest of the fighting in the German Arras offensive of 28 March 1918 and beat off all attacks, which, had they succeeded, would have changed the course of the war. He regarded this as his most testing period of command on the western front. In the hundred days the 6th corps was in action from 21 August to the armistice, advancing 60 miles in eighty-three days and fighting in eight major battles, including those on the Somme, at Arras, the Hindenburg line, and the rivers Selle (the latter a notable victory) and Sambre. Haldane's diary reveals him as constantly active and always planning not only the next attack but the one after that. 
Unsurprisingly the 6th corps was selected as one of those to constitute the army of occupation in the Rhineland. Having been created KCB in January 1918 Haldane was promoted substantive lieutenant-general on 1 January 1919, giving up his corps command in November of the same year. His time on half-pay was brief, however, and on 21 December 1919 he took the appointment of general officer commanding, Mesopotamia (later Iraq), a former territory of the Ottoman empire placed under direct British rule by a League of Nations mandate. Briefed by the secretary for war, Winston Churchill, on the need to reduce the garrison there, which was a drain on British public finances, he arrived in Mesopotamia in March 1920. 
Haldane's period in Mesopotamia was dominated by an Arab uprising that united Sunni and Shi'a and led to the breakdown of civil administration during the summer of 1920 as the insurgents cut railway lines and telegraph communications. Early reverses included the rout of a column of the Manchester regiment on the Kifli road near Hillah on 24 July 1920. He regarded the following twelve days, when the rebels threatened to overwhelm the governing forces, as 'the most tense cycle of activity' in his military career, even including his four years on the western front (Haldane, 'Insurrection', 139). His principal problem was lack of manpower, and for much of the period he was compelled to husband his resources and undertake only fire-fighting operations, putting down one uprising only for another to break out elsewhere. 'We are living on bluff and have been doing so for weeks', he confided to his diary (4 Aug 1920, Jeffery, 151). Only when twenty battalions of reinforcements arrived from India could he take more active steps to suppress the revolt, while restoring the damaged infrastructure. Following the relief of Kufa (17 October 1920) he was able to send out columns, supported by the RAF, to disarm the tribes involved. After a display of force at Suq al-Suyukh by a column under Brigadier-General Frank Coningham (1870-1934) on 3 February 1921 he reported to the War Office that operations were at an end. He was present at the enthronement of King Feisal as the head of the new kingdom of Iraq in October 1921, and spent the remaining period of his command winding down the British military presence, which was replaced with a substantial force of local levies, before leaving Baghdad in March 1922. 
On his return to Britain Haldane wrote 'The Insurrection in Mesopotamia, 1920' (1922), a detailed account of how the insurgency was put down. He was regarded as somewhat tardy in his recognition of the role of air power in policing so large an area. His account included some frank criticisms of the British administration, whose methods he considered partly responsible for provoking the uprising, but described the military operations as a successful reconquest of the territory and insisted that 'The Arabs of Iraq respect nothing but force, and to force only will they bend' (p. 312). 
Haldane was created GCMG in May 1922 and promoted full general in 1925; he retired in May 1926. Unmarried, he lived in London with his sister, who predeceased him. His autobiography was published in 1948. He died at his home at 107 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 19 April 1950 and was buried at Brookwood cemetery. He was a highly competent soldier; his career as a divisional commander, and even more as a corps commander, showed him as an excellent example of the type of technocratic general through whose efforts the First World War on the western front was won. 


@@@@@


doc= 95459


Davies, Sir (Robert) Rees (1938-2005), historian, was born on 6 August 1938 at Glanddwynant, Llanfor, near Llandderfel, a village in the upper Dee valley, Merioneth, the youngest of four sons of (William) Edward Davies (1904-1967), tenant farmer, and his wife, Sarah Margaret (Maggie), 'nee' Williams (1906-1984). His parents shortly afterwards moved a few miles eastwards and upwards, to the hill farm of Blaengwnodl Uchaf, where Rees (as he always wished to be known) was brought up. The family home, with its superb vista of the Berwyn range on the opposite side of the valley, and its region, the historic commote of Edeyrnion, left a profound and lifelong impression on him. It was the country of Owain Glyn Dwr, still at that time almost wholly Welsh in speech, ever in creative tension with the English influences from just across the mountains or downstream. Questions of identity and borderlands became central to his interests as a historian. 
Davies attended school at the village of Cynwyd, then as a weekly boarder at the boys' grammar school in Bala. There he proved a brilliant pupil, and also learned the English that he subsequently employed with such elegance and precision. In 1956 he went to University College, London, where he studied history with Geoffrey Barrow, Alfred Cobban, and May MacKisack. Anxious for a pupil described as 'the ablest undergraduate we've had in the department since the war', they were advised that it would be a 'great mistake for a medieval historian, even if Welsh, to 'start' his postgraduate work by tackling Welsh history' (Morgan and Davidson, 6). Wisely Davies opted for a halfway house: study of the lords of the Anglo-Welsh marches. This would in many ways determine his life's work. For the present -- the year was 1959 -- it took him to Merton College, Oxford, as a student of the redoubtable K. B. McFarlane at Magdalen. 
After one or two monosyllabic initial encounters McFarlane clearly hit it off with Davies, who later recalled McFarlane's friendship as 'utterly direct and totally equal', his 'intellectual honesty and integrity' as sometimes 'terrifying'. McFarlane appreciated 'some Welsh sharpness' in his pupil, 'not wholly blunted by good nature'. The fruit of their collaboration was Davies's DPhil dissertation of 1965 on the Lancaster marcher lordships in the fourteenth century, carefully matured, for, as McFarlane observed, 'he can't bear a slovenly sentence, a misplaced comma, or a reckless generalisation' (McFarlane, 210-13, 215-17, 226-7, 251-2). Another reason for delay was Davies's burgeoning academic career in both his countries. Appointed as an assistant Welsh-medium lecturer at Swansea in 1961, he was then recalled to University College as a lecturer two years later. 
In London Davies had joined Welsh circles, just as he later took an active role in the Cymdeithas Dafydd ap Gwilym at Oxford. Through the Welsh Presbyterian Church he met Carys Lloyd Wynne, and they married at Zion Chapel, Wrexham, on 29 July 1966. A schoolteacher, aged twenty-eight at the time of her marriage, Carys was the daughter of Ifor Lloyd Wynne, bank manager. They had one son and one daughter. Meanwhile the subject-matter of Davies's thesis broadened into a stream of highly suggestive articles over a further decade, before being reconfigured as his first book, 'Lordship and Society in the March of Wales, 1278-1400' (1978). Critical acclaim was immediate for this momentous 'these', which interwove political, administrative, legal, and social approaches. Opening up a vast, rich, and intricate world, the work nevertheless rested on a single basic juxtaposition, within and between the myriad petty jurisdictions it examines: that of native Welsh and immigrant English. 
Two years before the book's publication Davies had taken a chair at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, partly from his and Carys's desire for their children to grow up in a Welsh-language environment. At Aberystwyth he was the prime mover in a complete redesigning of the history syllabus, and served between 1988 and 1991 as vice-principal. He assumed a far wider pedagogical brief too when in 1989-91 he chaired the National Curriculum History Committee for Wales. This body achieved truly pioneering work, and laid out for the first time a vision (and a fully bilingual one) for the study of history in Wales. In the meantime Davies had delivered, for a new and authoritative 'History of Wales' series published by Oxford University Press, one of the finest treatments of any period in the country's past. His 'Conquest, Co-Existence and Change: Wales, 1063-1415' (1987), brilliantly conceived and pellucidly executed, won him the Wolfson prize and constituted a high point in the renaissance of Welsh historiography that coincided so exactly with his career. Davies, however, having become a historian of his homeland largely in England, was now in the process of retooling himself as a British historian while in Wales. His Wiles lectures of 1988 at the Queen's University of Belfast, which were published as 'Domination and Conquest: the Experience of Ireland, Scotland and Wales' (1990), disclosed a whole new research territory. It was a logical consequence of this trajectory for him to be appointed to the Chichele chair of medieval history at Oxford in 1995. 
Davies's move back to Oxford followed a hard decision. He was always quizzical about Oxford, and felt something of an outsider. Yet he brought an immensely fertile blend of shrewdness, dedication, and imaginative creativity to his university duties. As a devoted supervisor or mentor to nearly a hundred graduate students at any one time he turned doctoral research on medieval topics into a more coherent academic enterprise, with an enhanced 'esprit de corps'. At the same time, though setting no store by such things in themselves, he initiated major and overdue reforms in the structure and conduct of faculty business. Above all he supplied intellectual leadership, beginning with a memorable inaugural, which told a disturbingly Oxford-centred story of the replacement of the British heritage by the 'Matter of England', as the main strand in the grand historiographical narrative of the British Isles, first in the twelfth century, then confirmed with full professional gravitas in the later nineteenth, by the likes of Stubbs and Freeman. The theme was soon elaborated in his Ford lectures at Oxford, published as 'The First English Empire' (2000). These analysed an Anglicization of the British Isles, from 1093 to 1343, and of course beyond, which confirmed the exclusion, and the passive or active resistance, of the 'Celtic' lands. He described a deep divide within Britain, with 'two political culture zones', and a border between (as they came to be perceived from the centre) 'sweet civility' and 'barbaric rudeness' ('First English Empire', 110 ff). 
The Anglo-Welsh border was the frontier that Davies had known since his youth in Edeyrnion, though he and Carys could also build on long-standing Welsh traditions at Oxford, within the university and beyond. The chronicler of the identity of others had by now constructed his own, which straddled that notional border he wrote of. This was reflected in the multiplying accolades and commitments of his latter years. He became a fellow of the British Academy in 1987 -- and typically knuckled down to some very hard work for it. Alongside a CBE in 1995 and a fistful of honorary fellowships and degrees in both countries, he was awarded the Medlicott medal for his services to the Historical Association in 1994, even as he presided over its sister organization in London, the Royal Historical Society (1992-6). On the Welsh side of the fence his longest involvement was with the Ancient Monuments Board for Wales, of which he had been the youngest member ever in 1977, and became chairman in 1995. In the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion too, the oldest and broadest-based of Welsh learned societies, Davies played a leading role, being elected president in 2002. 
During this time political debates about Welsh nationhood, within or beyond Britishness, were intensifying. Davies had long experienced a 'crise de conscience' before he articulated it in historical terms through his most deeply felt and popular work, 'The Revolt of Owain Glyn Dwr', in 1995. This was, above all, a gripping and definitive narrative of the independence struggle of late medieval Wales. The phenomenon of Glyn Dwr helped inspire Davies to his maturest reflections on the identity of nations in general and of the Welsh in particular. In an eisteddfod talk in 1998 he spoke from the heart about the British dimension of his Welshness and vice versa: how England's unique achievement of a '1000-year Reich' had undermined the pristine equilibria of the 'Matter of Britain'. Now in its decline there was a need to rebuild the crumbling edifice of Britishness, as the best carapace for the survival of Welsh culture too. For all his emphasis on identity, mythology, and other cultural markers Davies always saw material authority as very real, enduring, and irreducible. Thence his feeling for those looser-limbed traditions of marcher lordship, with which he began his career, and to which he returned, in the widest European context of 'seigneurie' and 'Herrschaft', in some of his last, uncompleted work. 
Rees Davies was a deeply unassuming man, dutiful, utterly professional, who bore huge burdens with never a complaint, and whose daunting organizational skills were always deployed to achieve results through a gentle, even diffident, but infinitely patient manner, through painstaking and selfless application, and through a radiant generosity of spirit. He was a brilliant teacher; a colleague whose sometimes slightly reserved exterior soon dissolved into quick wit and good humour; a correspondent whose letters and memoranda, in what has been called a 'hand as meticulous as that of a medieval Chancery scribe' ('The Independent', 23 May 2005), apparently never needed correction; a walker and lover of the natural world, with the eye of a countryman (though more of an urban turn of speed) and a sharp sense of place and landscape; an active devotee of music and literature; above all a man of firm, humble, quiet spirituality, and of unswerving devotion to his family and friends. He was knighted in the new year's honours of 2005, by which time he was suffering from cancer. He died at his home, 9 Dale Close, Oxford, on 16 May 2005, and was survived by his wife, Carys, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95460


Barker, Ronald William George (1929-2005), actor and comedian, was born on 25 September 1929 at 70 Garfield Street, Bedford, the only son and second of the three children of Leonard William Barker, a clerk for Shell, and his wife, Edith Eleanor, 'nee' Carter. His father's work took the family to Ilford and eventually to Oxford, where Barker attended Donnington junior school and the City of Oxford High School. On leaving school he began to train as an architect but after a few months abandoned his studies and took a job at the local Westminster Bank. A childhood bout of nephritis and surgery for a tubercular gland ensured his rejection for national service. 
While working at the bank Barker joined a local amateur dramatics group, where he caught the attention of the director, Margarethe Bayliss, who suggested that he might become a professional actor. His audition for the Young Vic school in London in 1947 was unsuccessful; but in 1948 he auditioned for the Manchester Repertory Company, at that time located in Aylesbury, and was taken on as assistant stage manager. After serving a week's notice at the bank, on 8 November 1948 he entered the hectic world of weekly repertory, and a week later made his professional stage debut as Lieutenant Spicer in J. M. Barrie's 'Quality Street'. He recalled playing mostly 'upper-class idiots' but, intoxicated by the sound of an audience's laughter, he realized that his natural instinct was for comic roles: 'This is what I want to do, I thought. I want to make people laugh. Never mind Hamlet. Forget Richard the Second. Give me Charley's Aunt' ('Dancing in the Moonlight', 38). He would later commemorate his early stage career, together with his offstage sexual conquests, in a lively memoir. 
In time the company left Aylesbury for Rhyl, and Barker went with it; but the company's days were numbered, and Barker soon found himself back home in Oxford. He worked as a hospital porter until, in January 1950, he joined Clifford Williams's touring mime company. After a few weeks of 'misery and despair' ('Dancing in the Moonlight', 72) the tour collapsed in Cornwall without even enough money for everyone's train fare, and Barker was left to walk home to Oxford. He then joined Frank H. Fortescue's Famous Players in Bramhall, Cheshire, where he was influenced by Glenn Melvyn, 'who was to teach me everything I ever learned about comedy' (ibid., 80) -- including how to stutter. While still in Bramhall, Barker applied to the Oxford Playhouse and was taken on, albeit initially in the publicity department. His young contemporaries included Maggie Smith, whom Barker advised to give up acting. Fortunately she took no notice. 
The first major turning point in Barker's career came with the arrival of Peter Hall as the new director of the Oxford Playhouse. He recognized Barker's talent, and when he left Oxford for London to become director of the Arts Theatre he invited Barker to join him for a production of Eugene O'Neill's 'Mourning Becomes Electra' (1955). This marked the beginning of Barker's career on the West End stage, which would include a role in Peter Brook's production of 'Irma La Douce' (1958) -- an unhappy experience that left Barker with an aversion to long runs -- and perhaps reached its high point when he played two characters in two plays in different theatres on the same evening. On 8 July 1957, at All Saints, Harrow Weald, Barker married Beryl Joyce (Joy) Tubb, a 24-year-old actress, and daughter of George Tubb, painter and decorator. They had two sons, Laurence 
(Larry; 'b'. 1960)
and Adam ('b'. 1967), and a daughter, Charlotte ('b'. 1963). 
Barker also began to find work in radio and television. The long-running series 'The Navy Lark', in which he played the malcontent Able Seaman Johnson, made him a distinctive radio personality; he stayed with the show for seven years (1959-67). His television career took a decisive turn in 1966 when the BBC producer Jimmy Gilbert proposed that he should join Ronnie Corbett and John Cleese in 'The Frost Report', David Frost's new series of themed satirical shows on various aspects of contemporary British society. The series, which would make television stars of all three men, was memorable mainly for its comic visual representation of the British class structure, with Barker standing between the tall Cleese and the diminutive Corbett to speak for the middle class. The show later moved to ITV as 'Frost on Sunday' (1968-70). 'The Frost Report' also saw the emergence of Barker as a prolific comedy writer. He began to submit material under assumed names, ostensibly so that his colleagues would judge the material on its own merits. His favourite 'nom de plume' was Gerald Wiley. 
In 1968 Barker was given his own show, 'The Ronnie Barker Playhouse', a series of six individual comedies. He had gained his first experience of the 'playhouse' format, presenting different characters and situations in each episode, when he had appeared with the comedian Jimmy Edwards in 'The Seven Faces of Jim' (1961) and its two sequels, and such series would prove particularly fruitful in Barker's career: 'Hark at Barker' (1969, 1970), 'Six Dates with Barker' (1971), and 'Seven of One' (1973) would yield characters and ideas that Barker was later able to develop. 
Barker enjoyed only a modest film career, making little impact, and came to realize that his future lay in television; but with 'Futtock's End' (1970), which he wrote himself, he discovered the genre of the 'almost silent' film. He made two others, also starring Ronnie Corbett: 'The Picnic' (1976) and 'By the Sea' (1982), which reflected Barker's love of seaside postcards. He had become an avid collector of printed ephemera, and in 1974 he published his 'Book of Bathing Beauties', the first of several such volumes derived entirely from his own collection. 
The next major development in the career of Ronnie Barker -- and of Ronnie Corbett -- came about by accident. When a live broadcast of an awards ceremony from the London Palladium was interrupted by a technical problem, the two Ronnies gave an impromptu performance to entertain the audience. The BBC's head of light entertainment, Bill Cotton, was so impressed that he suggested that the two men be brought together for their own series. 'The Two Ronnies' ran from 1971 to 1986. The format never changed. Opening and closing with spoof announcements and news items, each show contained sketches, monologues, a comedy drama serial, and a musical finale, with the sign-off line, 'It's goodnight from me -- and it's goodnight from him'. The stand-up comedian Corbett delivered his monologues directly to the audience, but Barker the actor was invariably in character, usually a spokesman for some fictitious organization or government department. The serials, all written by Barker, included 'The Worm that Turned', portraying a future Britain ruled by women and with the men wearing women's clothes; 'The Phantom Raspberry Blower of Old London Town', elaborating an episode contributed by Spike Milligan to 'Six Dates with Barker'; and 'Death can be Fatal', featuring the two clueless detectives Piggy Malone (Barker) and Charley Farley (Corbett). The sketches frequently displayed Barker's love of wordplay, most notably in 'Four Candles/Fork Handles', which became an established favourite and which the two Ronnies later performed live (with a new ending) during their season at the Palladium in 1978. In the same year Barker and Corbett were appointed OBE. 
Two situation comedies in the 1970s, 'Porridge' and 'Open All Hours', confirmed Barker as the country's foremost comedy actor. 'Porridge' (1974-7), written by Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais, retrieved Norman Stanley Fletcher, a convicted criminal, from 'Seven of One', and captured the tedium of daily prison life and the sweetness of little victories over authority. A feature film with the same title followed in 1979; but 'Going Straight' (1978), a series tracing Fletcher's life after his release, was less successful. 'Open All Hours' (1976 and 1981-5) saw the revival of another character from 'Seven of One': the stuttering, miserly grocer Arkwright, who exploited the good nature of his downtrodden nephew Granville and lusted after the buxom nurse Gladys Emmanuel. 'Open All Hours' was written by Roy Clarke, whose next series, 'The Magnificent Evans' (1984), about a flamboyant Welsh photographer, gave Barker his first real taste of failure. A similar fate would befall 'Clarence' (1988), his last series, written by Barker himself. Revived from 'Six Dates with Barker', Clarence the short-sighted removal man also failed to impress. 
In late 1985 Barker decided to retire. He had begun to find writing difficult but had also developed heart disease (he underwent surgery in 1996). He planned his retirement carefully and finally stopped working at the end of 1987, walking away from show business to open an antique shop in Chipping Norton. 'I lose money every week, but it's a hobby', he said ('Daily Express', 23 Dec 2003). Fortunately his retirement was not absolute. In 1988 his daughter, Charlotte, opened at London's King's Head Theatre in 'Mum', a play he had written for her. It received a cool reception from the critics. He returned to film acting in 'The Gathering Storm' (2002), playing Churchill's butler, David Inches, and in 'My House in Umbria' (2003), in which he was reunited with Maggie Smith. In 2004 he suggested that some 'Two Ronnies' material might be shown again; and the popularity of 'The Two Ronnies Sketchbook' (2005), in which Corbett and Barker presented a personal selection, demonstrated that the shows had retained their appeal. Barker was visibly frail, and the Christmas special, recorded in July 2005, marked his final television appearance. 
Secure in his own talent -- he knew what he could do and knew that he was good at it -- Barker was spared the anxieties that haunted the careers of many of his comedy contemporaries. Peter Hall, whose early admiration for Barker had only grown over the years, identified Barker's 'gift of total relaxation', and praised his 'immaculate comic timing' and the way in which he 'completely inhabited what it was he was being, even if it was a north country charlady' (McCabe, 36). In the late 1980s Hall invited Barker to play Falstaff at the National Theatre. (In the mid-1960s Barker had appeared on Caedmon recordings of 'The Merchant of Venice' as Launcelot Gobbo and 'Measure for Measure' as Barnardine. These performances suggest that he could have justified Hall's belief in him.) Barker cited Hall's remarkable offer, or more particularly the summary fashion in which he rejected it, as the immediate cause of his decision to retire; but the truth is that Hall's invitation had simply come too late -- failing health and loss of motivation had already made Barker's decision for him. He died of heart disease at Katharine House Hospice, Adderbury, Oxfordshire, on 3 October 2005. He was cremated after a humanist funeral service at Banbury crematorium on 13 October. A service of thanksgiving for his life and work was held at Westminster Abbey on 3 March 2006. He was survived by his wife, Joy, and their children Laurence, Charlotte, and Adam. In a late interview with Terry Wogan, Ronnie Barker had composed his own epitaph: 'I suppose I would like to be remembered as one of the funniest men people have seen on TV. 'He did make us laugh. God bless him'' ('The Independent', 4 March 2006). It was an assessment with which few would have disagreed. 


@@@@@


doc= 95487


Colenso, Francis Ernest (1852-1910), campaigner for the rights of the Zulu people, was born at Forncett St Mary, Norfolk, on 9 April 1852, the fourth child and second son of John William Colenso, who was then rector of Forncett St Mary, and his wife, (Sarah) Frances Bunyon (1816-1893). Harriette Emily Colenso and Frances Ellen Colenso ['see under 'Colenso, Harriette Emily] were his elder sisters. Most of Frank's childhood and early youth were spent at the family residence, Bishopstowe, adjacent to the mission station near Pietermaritzburg, Natal, known as Ekukanyeni (meaning in Zulu 'place of light'), founded by his father, who became the first bishop of the newly created diocese of Natal and took his family to the colony in 1855. With his brother and three sisters Frank learned the Zulu language and was given the Zulu name Gebhuza, meaning 'to paw the ground and toss the head, as a bull'. 
Frank Colenso attended Kensington grammar school between 1862 and 1865. In 1870 he matriculated from his father's college, St John's, Cambridge, whence he graduated in 1874 having been ranked second senior optime in the mathematical tripos. In 1874 he was admitted to the Inner Temple, and gained experience of insurance work at the London office of the Norwich Union insurance company, of which his uncle Charles John Bunyon (1821-1892) was actuary. In 1877 he was called to the bar and returned to Natal, where he practised as a barrister in Pietermaritzburg and Durban. 
In December 1877 Colenso and his associate Dr Walter Smith notified the colonial and imperial authorities of their appointment as diplomatic agents to Cetshwayo, the Zulu king, in regard to the boundary dispute between Zululand and the Transvaal. The validity of the appointment was denied by both the Colonial Office in Britain and the governor of Natal. But it was most bitterly opposed by the colonial officials, not least members of the Shepstone family, who then occupied key positions in both the Transvaal and the Natal administrations and who objected to what they deemed to be the unwarranted interference of the Colenso family in 'native affairs'. In both the Natal and the British press in 1878 and 1879 the arrangement was denounced as irresponsible, and even disloyal, Colenso being accused of turning the Zulu king against the missionaries in Zululand. His defenders in the controversy included F. W. Chesson, secretary of the Aborigines Protection Society. Some suggested that if Colenso and his colleague had been allowed a free hand to act, the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879 might have been averted. 
In 1879 Colenso returned to England, where he was appointed assistant secretary and assistant actuary to the Norwich Union at their head office in Norwich. On 13 November 1880 he married Sophie Frankland ('b'. 1855), daughter of the chemist Edward Frankland, a member of T. H. Huxley's famous X Club, with whom Bishop Colenso had been closely associated. In 1886 he became actuary and secretary to the English and Scottish Law Life Assurance Association in their London office where he remained until 1894, when he moved to the Eagle Insurance Company in London. 
Colenso visited South Africa for a few months in 1900, but otherwise remained in England, where he campaigned for the rights of the African populations of Natal and Zululand. He channelled information from members of his family in Natal to radical and Liberal MPs and humanitarian organizations, wrote letters to the press, made representations to members of the government, and produced pamphlets and drew up petitions to publicize, and seek to remedy, the injustices suffered by the Zulu people. He was also involved with organizations that had the broader aim of promoting the interests of Africans and other colonized peoples, including the Pan-African Association, which organized the Pan-African Conference of 1900, and he acted as a point of contact and advice for deputations of Africans visiting London to make representations to the British government, Queen Victoria, and, subsequently, Edward VII. 
Colenso supported his father's campaign to secure the release and return from exile of Langalibalele, the Natal Zulu chief, and Cetshwayo, and his sister Harriette's work in arranging the defence of Cetshwayo's son Dinizulu in his two trials for treason. In the decade after the Anglo-Zulu War Colenso sought to expose how the British government had been systematically misinformed by the Natal and Zululand administrations, and how the civil war and the disturbances there had been provoked and exacerbated by local officials. Following the Bambatha rebellion in 1906 Colenso published several pamphlets attacking the injustice of the court proceedings against those accused of taking part. In one case he attempted to prevent the execution of twelve Africans in Natal by enlisting the support of back-bench MPs, including Ramsay MacDonald. Colenso ensured that information was available to the public, the press, and parliament in Britain, so that pressure could be brought to bear on ministers and officials at the Colonial Office in London, who in turn would seek to curb the often aggressive designs of the local officials in Africa towards the Zulu royal family. 
Colenso died at his home, Elangeni, in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, on 30 June 1910, and was survived by his wife, a son, and three daughters. Messages of sympathy, including those from J. R. Archer (later president of the African Progress Union) and the Zulu historian Magema Fuze, revealed the esteem in which he was held within the movement campaigning for the rights of African people. 


@@@@@


doc= 95491


Miller, Charles William (1874-1953), footballer and administrator, was born in Bras, an industrial neighbourhood in Sao Paulo, Brazil, on 24 November 1874, the second son of John Miller (1844-1886), a Scottish merchant and commission agent, and his wife, Charlotte (Carlota), 'nee' Fox (died 1892), a Brazilian woman of English heritage. His parents had married in the British consulate in Sao Paulo on 2 March 1872, his father having arrived in South America from Scotland in the early 1860s. His paternal grandfather was a shipowner, operating between Greenock and Rio de Janeiro. In early 1884, aged nine, Miller was sent to England to be educated at Banister Court School, Millbrook, near Southampton. He embraced the new cult of physical education and team sports, and excelled at both association football and cricket, playing football for St Mary's (later known as Southampton Football Club), Hampshire, and also making an appearance for the Corinthians. 
In 1894, aged twenty, Miller returned to Sao Paulo, bringing the football rules established by the Football Association in 1863 as adopted by the Hampshire FA, two footballs, and great enthusiasm for the game. Three decades later he recalled his return: 'On the quay in Santos, solemn, as if he were at a funeral, my father was waiting for me to disembark holding my degree certificate. But in fact I appeared in front of him with two footballs, one in each hand... the old man, surprised, enquired:'What is this Charles?' 

'My degree', I replied. 

'What?' 

'Yes! Your son has graduated in football...'. 

The old man, in good spirits, laughed. I was off the hook.... 
(interview with Charles Miller, 'O Imparcial', 21 Oct 1927, reproduced in Hamilton, 9)' This exchange has long been celebrated as the original moment when the sport of football arrived in Brazil. Miller, in retelling it, was part of this foundational moment, relishing the role he had been assigned in a complicated story of transnational, imperial, transatlantic, and cultural transfer from Europe to Brazil which was much easier to understand as the work of one prescient 'great' man. There are many doubts about the facts of the legend: his father, John Miller, had in fact died in Glasgow in 1886, and the man who received him in Santos was probably an uncle; other footballs had arrived before Miller's (though admittedly they had not been promoted or received with such enthusiasm); and many football games had already been played on Brazilian soil by visiting Royal Navy crews in the preceding decades. 
There is no doubt, however, that on his return from England, Miller evangelized for football in Brazil. On 15 April 1895 he organized what has been remembered as the first game played in Brazil 'officially' under the rules of the English FA, recruiting players from the British community. The match pitted the Gas Company versus the Sao Paulo Railway, who won 4-2. Inspired, Miller was the driving force behind the organization of more and more matches, including the first 'international' match on Brazilian soil, against a South African touring party in 1902. He was instrumental in the setting up of a Sao Paulo football league, the Liga Paulista, which his team, SPAC, won in its first three years: 1902, 1903, and 1904. As a footballer he was a skilful technical player as well as a strong runner. His name survived in the ''chaleira'', defined in the Sao Paulo football dictionary as 'Charles -- skill in which the player bends his leg back and kicks the ball with his heel' (Hamilton, 126). 
Miller worked as a clerk for the Sao Paulo Railway Company, and then (from 1904) he was the agent for the Royal Mail, and acting British vice-consul. He became a central figure in the British and commercial communities in Sao Paulo, as much for his amateur sporting activities as for his professional duties. In January 1906 he married the pianist Antonietta Rudge (1885-1974), ten years younger than him, who was from a far wealthier and established British family in Sao Paulo. They were distant cousins. They had two children, Carlos Rudge Miller, born in February 1907, and Helena Rudge Miller, born in 1909. Miller accompanied his wife on her concert tours of Europe. The couple later separated, and from 1922 Antonietta had a relationship with the Brazilian futurist poet and journalist Menotti del Picchia. 
In 1910 the Corinthians, symbol and pride of British amateur football, toured Brazil, which was in the grip of a crisis around the consequences of footballers being paid to play, many of these shaped by prejudices and fears of class and race. Miller remained a strident advocate of amateur sport throughout his life, believing that 'professionalism, for me, is not sport' (Miller, 1928, interview in 'O Estado', reproduced in Hamilton, 148). It is often repeated, and is possible, that Miller had a hand in suggesting the name Corinthians for the new, working-class team founded in 1910 which became one of Brazil's most important clubs. 
Miller made frequent visits to Britain, a benefit of his position as a Royal Mail agent. He was a founder member of the British Chamber of Commerce in Sao Paulo, instituted during the First World War. He profited from investing in the construction of garden suburbs in Sao Paulo, built according to the designs of the British architects Barry Parker and Raymond Unwin, and built and lived in a large villa in the Jardins America. In the later years of his life he largely eschewed professional sports, continuing to play cricket and golf, and was cared for by the family of his son, Carlos Miller. In 1948, aged seventy-three, he was honoured by making the ceremonial kick-off for the match in Sao Paulo between the visiting Southampton side and a Sao Paulo eleven. The local press described him as 'one of the first English footballers out here and a well-known character' ('Southampton Echo', reproduced in Hamilton, 166). He died on 30 June 1953 in Sao Paulo and was buried in the city's protestant cemetery. 
The legend of Miller as the father of football in Brazil persists, in the face of much historical evidence uncovered after his death, and has been entrenched by urban design, football history, and media representations of the historical footballing links between Britain and Brazil. What made Miller's return to the country in 1894 notable and worthy of commemoration was that he was identifiably Brazilian rather than foreign. His Scottish-born father and his elite education abroad were counteracted by his Brazilian-born mother, his own Brazilian birth, and his wholehearted commitment to Brazil during his life. His legend encapsulated Brazil's story: the land of immigrants caught between new and old worlds, seeking and finding a new identity somewhere in between. In football Brazil found a space where it could take on and outperform all other nations: it is for this reason that its myth of origin became so important, and why Miller's story has endured. 


@@@@@


doc= 95492


Laing, James (1803-1872), missionary in Cape Colony, was born at Thirstane Hill, Durrisdeer, south-east of Sanquhar in Dumfriesshire, on 6 September 1803, the third of four sons of Robert Laing, a shepherd, and his wife, Catherine Johnstone. When he was five the family moved to Knockconey Dod near Thirstane Hill. Having been schooled at home and at the Sanquhar parish school he entered Edinburgh University in 1822, where he studied classics, philosophy, theology, and a range of medical subjects. At Edinburgh he was strongly influenced by the theologian and social reformer Thomas Chalmers, who held the chair of divinity, and he attended Chalmers's theological class during the 1829-30 session. He was received by the Glasgow Missionary Society as a candidate and was designated in the Tron Church, Glasgow, to the office and work of a missionary within the society on 31 August 1830, when he was ordained as a minister of the Church of Scotland. 
Under the auspices of the Glasgow Missionary Society, Laing was assigned to Burnshill mission on the eastern Cape frontier in South Africa. On 13 August 1830, two months before his appointed date of departure for the Cape, Laing married Margaret S. G. Drummond in St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh. They sailed from Liverpool Bay in the brig 'Aquila' on 11 October 1830. On 1 January 1831 the 'Aquila' docked in Cape Town, where they spent several months before embarking for Algoa Bay and the eastern frontier. After a brief stay in Grahamstown they spent a further few months at Tyhume, where Laing was introduced to the customs and language of the amaXhosa among whom he was to work. 
Burnshill lay on the Keiskamma River, beyond the 'ceded territory' expropriated by the Cape governor, Lord Charles Somerset, from Ngqika, chief of the amaRharhabe, in 1819, ostensibly to create a buffer zone between the colony and the territory of the amaXhosa. The fourth Glasgow Missionary Society station, Burnshill was established on 13 June 1830 by William Chalmers and Alexander McDiarmid. Laing ministered at Burnshill for just under thirty of his forty-one years as a missionary (1831-72). 
By 1834 there were whispers of war, and life on the mission stations became increasingly tense. Burnshill enjoyed the protection of Suthu, great wife of the late Ngqika, and his sons Maqoma and Tyhali, and so was less threatened by either the colonial forces or the amaNgqika than other mission stations. Laing and his wife gave asylum to fleeing traders and their families, to fellow missionaries, and even to relatives of Maqoma himself. However, in February 1835 the Laing family and the mission adherents were taken under military escort to Grahamstown where they spent more than nine months. Their first son, Robert, born at Burnshill on 9 October 1832, was hydrocephalic and died on 17 March 1835. A second son, John Drummond Laing, was born two weeks later, on 31 March. 
After returning to Burnshill at the end of November 1835 Laing resumed his ministry among the amaNgqika. His wife had suffered chronic ill health from the time of her departure from Scotland, and she died on 24 June 1837. Five years later, on 27 July 1842, Laing married Isabella Mirrlees, niece of his longtime friend Patrick Falconer, in St Stephen's Church, Cape Town. 
An incident connected with James and Isabella Laing's journey back to Burnshill in September 1842 proved to have far-reaching implications both for them personally and for the future of the Scottish missionary effort on the frontier. In hiring two oxen for their wagon, the Revd John Bennie, who was stationed at the newly instituted seminary at Lovedale, betrayed a trust with their owners. As a result Lovedale, which later trained many of South Africa's leaders, was in severe danger of having to close down. To resolve the issue, in 1843 the presbytery of Kaffraria instructed Laing to replace Bennie at Lovedale. 
Laing remained at Lovedale for nearly twelve years, interrupted only when he and his family took refuge in the Kat River valley during the Cape Frontier War of 1846-7 (the 'war of the axe'). They finally left Lovedale for Burnshill on 1 March 1855 and set about rebuilding their home and mission which had been destroyed during the Cape Frontier War of 1850-51. Laing's ministry from then on became far more itinerant. He travelled by wagon deep into the Transkei, and Isabella accompanied him on many of these extended journeys. In August 1843, along with other members of the presbytery of Kaffraria, he had seceded from the Church of Scotland to join the Free Church of Scotland, and in 1860 he was appointed to represent the presbytery at the general assembly of the Free Church in Edinburgh. He took advantage of his first (and only) return to Scotland to raise money to set up printing and bookbinding as a new branch in the industrial department of the Lovedale seminary. He also engaged a teacher in the English department in the seminary and tried, unsuccessfully, to raise money for erecting schools at the outstations. 
Laing played a part in seeing through the translation of the entire 'Bible' into isiXhosa in 1865, despite having initially struggled to master the Xhosa language. During the jubilee of the Glasgow mission held at Burnshill on 15 November 1871 he presented a paper entitled 'The history of the mission, with special reference to those who have whither been removed by death, or returned to Europe'. He paid particular tribute to women missionaries, pointing out that they were rarely noticed in public reports. In January 1872 he contracted pneumonia, and within a week of doing so he fell into a delirium in which he imagined he saw his friends gathered around him and chattered volubly to them in isiXhosa. On his deathbed the extent of his acculturation into the societal microcosm which he shared with the amaXhosa had become apparent. When he died, at Burnshill, on 28 January 1872, he did so, at least linguistically, as an umXhosa. 
Laing was known for his diligence, simplicity, geniality, and constancy. In a tribute signed by J. Masingata and published in the Lovedale newspaper 'Isigidimi samaXosa' (1 March 1872) Laing was described as 'Indoda ebisitanda' ('the man who loved us'). 


@@@@@


doc= 95495


Simpson, James (1799-1869), waterworks engineer, was born in London on 25 July 1799, the fourth son of Thomas Simpson, engineer of the Chelsea, and later Lambeth, water companies. Born in the engineer's residence at the waterworks on the north bank of the Thames, James Simpson learned engineering at his father's hand, worked under his father's direction, and inherited the position of chief engineer to both companies upon his father's death in 1823. 
A few years after Simpson assumed his father's place the Chelsea company requested that the young engineer investigate the possibilities of filtering drinking water on a large scale. The company was responding to mounting complaints about the quality of their, and other companies', Thames-drawn water supply. Some feared, even in the absence of an established theory of waterborne disease, that the Chelsea water was 'destructive of health' (J. Wright, 'The Dolphin', 1827, 61). 
There were existing methods of small-scale filtration from which Simpson could work. First, there were well-known examples of Renaissance filter cisterns in which water passed through sand before collecting in a well. Then, there were small charcoal and sand filters for domestic use or for use at sea. Towards the end of the eighteenth century textile enterprises in Lancashire began filtering water in small beds, about 6 feet deep, lined with clay and layered with large stones, small stones, and gravelly sand. Water seeped from the sand to the stone layer, in the centre of which sat a perforated iron cylinder; the water trickling into this well was clear and ready to be used in dyeworks. 
Paisley in Scotland enjoyed what some characterize as the first filtered municipal water supply. Distributed by carts bearing huge casks, however, it was provided on a limited, commercial basis. In 1804 a bleachworks owner, frustrated with the muddy, polluted local water sources available to the textile centre, constructed filter beds that worked on the same basic principle as the Lancashire filters. He took the added step of drawing off some of the purified water, casking it, and selling it door to door. Only a few years later Thomas Telford executed a filtration system, not particularly effective, for the Glasgow Water Works Company. There, water pumped from the Clyde passed down a series of small ponds and sand-filled cells before being piped to consumers. In mid-1827 Simpson toured the water filtration operations at Glasgow and at industrial sites near Manchester and elsewhere in Lancashire. 
After undertaking over a year of experiments with prototype filter beds Simpson finally completed in January 1829 the filter beds for which he is renowned. Located at the site of the Chelsea works, the filter bed was 1 acre in area. Like some of the filters he had seen in the north, it was layered with a number of straining media. Water pumped into the bed first passed downward through a layer of fine sand, then coarse sand, then pebbles and shells, then fine gravel, then loose gravel. The water then entered perforated earthenware drainpipes that delivered it to a well from which it was finally pumped into the company's network of pipes. The filtered water was clear and free of odour. The occasional scraping of an inch or so from the top layer of sand kept the filter from clogging. 
The water was mechanically strained, but the biological processes taking place in the uppermost strata truly accounted for the system's success. At the very surface of the sand a layer of bacteria, protozoa, and other organisms metabolized the organic matter before passing downward. Simpson did not understand the biological process going on, but knew that more than mere straining accounted for the clarity of the filtered water. 'Something more is evidently effected,' Simpson wrote, 'an appearance of fermentation being discernible when water is in contact with the sand' (Baker, 111). 
Working independently from Simpson, the Scottish engineer Robert Thom constructed a series of three smaller filter beds at Greenock over a year earlier that worked on the same principle as Simpson's large bed. Thom's featured the ability of cleaning the sand layer by reversing the flow of water and backwashing the filter media. The essence of Simpson's and Thom's scheme remains the basis of municipal water supply systems dependent on surface water throughout the world. Today waterworks often first chemically precipitate impurities from the water before it enters the separate sand filter bed. Chlorine and fluoride are regularly added after filtration. 
In the ensuing decades Simpson maintained an extremely active career, his authority established by his early success and respect for him heightened by his renowned tact and courtesy. He provided a water supply for Windsor Castle and other royal palaces early in his career. He was at the forefront of a national movement for replacing inadequate and polluted town water supplies with purer sources drawn from long distances. Simpson completed a gravitation water scheme -- a scheme for delivering water from an elevated source under pressure -- for Bristol in 1851, piping water over 10 miles through great iron tubes. As the section of the Thames, near Hungerford Bridge, from where the Lambeth Water Company drew its water became heavily polluted by sewage, he was responsible for moving its operations to a site above Teddington Lock, at Seething Wells, Kingston upon Thames. Completed in March 1852, the Seething Wells waterworks used four 600 horse-power steam engines to pump ten million gallons from its filter beds to London consumers. He described his projects and methods in evidence to select committees on the London water supply in 1851 and 1852. 
Simpson also designed or contributed to gravitation schemes at Aberdeen, Liverpool, Newport, and Stockport. He executed or was consulted on waterworks for Cambridge, Cardiff, Carlisle, Exeter, London, York, and elsewhere from the 1840s through the 1860s. Amsterdam and Copenhagen sought out his expertise and he was consulted on waterworks there in 1851 and 1856. He introduced innovations to steam pumping engines that, among other things, increased their efficiency of coal consumption. He trained his younger brother William (1809-1864) in engineering and aided him in the operation of a steam engine company in Pimlico, London. 
Elected in 1825, Simpson was among the earliest members of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and was a vice-president from 1844 to 1853 and president in 1854 and 1855. With his wife, Sarah ('b'. 1799/1800), he had three sons, James, John, and Arthur, each of whom was connected with engineering or engine manufacturing. At least four of his grandsons were engineers involved with waterworks. He died at his home, Westfield Lodge, Portsmouth Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 4 March 1869. A large gathering of members of the Institution of Civil Engineers, employees of his family's engine manufactory, associates from the waterworks companies with which he was connected, and other colleagues, along with his family, attended his funeral at Brompton cemetery. 
Simpson heralded a new age of public health technology through his adaptation, refinement, and expansion of the sand filter in 1829. His accomplishment sustained the urbanization of Britain and was readily exported to colonial towns and throughout the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 95496


Thom, Robert, of Ascog (1774-1847), civil engineer and industrialist, was born in the parish of Tarbolton, Ayrshire, in January 1774, the elder son of John Thom, tenant farmer. His mother's identity remains elusive because her name was not recorded in Thom's baptismal entry in the Tarbolton parish register for 26 January 1774. An agricultural community that specialized in dairy farming, late eighteenth-century Tarbolton became celebrated for its clubbable culture of enquiry and debate, and included two masonic lodges. Robert Thom was educated locally, almost certainly at the parish school, and was subsequently trained by an older brother as a wright and joiner. These craft skills proved to be useful assets for employment in Scotland's rapidly developing textile industry. 
During the early 1790s Thom settled in Glasgow and was eventually appointed manager of John Monteith's cotton mills at Pollokshaws, then a textile village outside the city boundary. He also took time to attend evening classes at Anderson's Institution, founded in 1796 as a pioneer of technical and scientific education. Thom's abilities were recognized by Robert Lothian, professor of mathematics and geography, who bequeathed his papers to his protege before leaving Scotland to live in the United States. Thom himself did not remain in Glasgow; some time after 1800 he became manager of the Blackburn cotton mill, near Bathgate, West Lothian. There he formed a close working partnership with William Kelly, who had managed the New Lanark mills during the 1790s. Thom and Kelly had much in common, as both were mechanically inventive; indeed, Kelly's skills had been prominently on display at New Lanark with his showpiece, five-dialled clock, which was intended to represent the precise regulation of the working day. 
Thom also met his future wife in West Lothian. Catherine Prentice (1796-1869) was the daughter of David Prentice, a tenant farmer in the parish of Livingston, and his wife, Elizabeth. The couple married on 31 October 1814 in Canongate, Midlothian, where Thom was living. They subsequently had three daughters and three sons, four of whom survived into adulthood. Around 1817 the family settled permanently in Bute, an island in the Firth of Clyde where since 1779 the Rothesay Spinning Company had been operating one of Scotland's first cotton mills. Bute was thought to be particularly suitable for cotton spinning because of its abundant water supplies and proximity by sea to the transatlantic port of Greenock in Renfrewshire. Thom arrived in Rothesay to become resident manager of the company, which had been acquired by the Kelly-Thom partnership in 1813. 
The Rothesay mill had not been cost-effective for its previous owners, and Thom identified inadequacies in the main energy supply as the key problem. From 1800 steam engines had augmented the original water power in a bid to boost production, but coal had proved prohibitively expensive to import to the island. In West Lothian Thom had already given thought to developing a purely hydraulic scheme for the Blackburn mill, a project that was ultimately not implemented but nevertheless influenced his ideas for improving the Rothesay mill's output. After intricately surveying the island, Thom used Loch Fad, the largest water catchment area, as his main reservoir. He then channelled water into the loch from other sources through an extensive system of aqueducts. These followed the natural contours of the landscape, thus doubling the amount of water available in Loch Fad without necessitating the expense of constructing bridges or tunnels. The flow of water was regulated by a system of self-activating sluices, designed to ensure an even supply during wet and dry seasons. 
The success of the Loch Fad scheme established Thom's reputation as a hydraulic civil engineer and he was recommended to Sir Michael Shaw Stewart of Blackhall, fifth baronet, a prominent Renfrewshire landowner, as the most likely person to resolve Greenock's water deficiencies. In 1824 Thom responded positively to Stewart's request to prepare a plan for the town, selling his ambitious idea of creating an artificial reservoir in the hills above Greenock on the basis of economic efficiency and commercial opportunity. Thom was evangelical about the environmental advantages of water: 'Here you would have no steam-engines, vomiting forth smoke, but, on the contrary, the pure 'stream of the mountains', flowing past in ceaseless profusion, carrying along with it freshness, health and vigour' (Thom, 48). The irony of this statement, which was probably quite deliberate, was that James Watt, the pioneer of steam power, had been Greenock-born. 
In 1825 a joint-stock enterprise, the Shaws Water Company, was set up to develop Thom's Greenock scheme and two years later the first phase was completed at a cost of $90,000. The water supply centred on a 'great reservoir', which after Thom's death in 1847 was renamed Loch Thom in tribute to his memory. The main aqueduct, popularly known as the Greenock Cut, stretched over 4 miles and ended at a dam where the water descended into the town. To ensure that the supply was drinkable Thom devised an innovative system of self-cleansing sand filters. His gravitational scheme was immediately projected as one of the technical wonders of the west of Scotland, and attracted the attention of industrialists and civic activists intrigued by Thom's claims to achieve low-cost yet effective results. In later years he oversaw smaller-scale schemes in Ayr and Paisley and acted as a consultant on water supplies for several towns across the British Isles. He gave evidence to the health of towns commission in June 1843, when he explained his methods of purifying water and of engineering aqueducts and pipes so that towns received a supply at high pressure. Critical of private water companies, which he alleged put vested interests before the public good, he urged the assistance of government and legislation to ensure that the community was not denied 'the first necessity of life -- a copious supply of pure water' ('First report of the commission for inquiring into the state of large towns and populous districts', C 572, 1844, 2.22). 
Thom was evidently committed to hard work and relatively little is known about his life beyond his professional interests. In addition to his civil engineering career he continued to play a managerial role in the Rothesay cotton mill. After William Kelly's retirement in 1826 he entered into partnership with Thomas Struthers, and the factory commissioners subsequently described their workforce as 'very happy and healthy looking' ('First report... employment of children in factories', 1833, 1.119). In 1831 Thom purchased the estate of Ascog in western Bute and lived there for the rest of his life. He died at Ascog House on 14 December 1847 and was buried in the graveyard of Rothesay parish church. Highly regarded by civil engineers for his technical ingenuity, Thom stood out in an era that was characterized by the ubiquitous power of steam because he highlighted the potential of water as a 'green' yet viable energy source. 


@@@@@


doc= 95497


Hargreaves, William Mason Creer (1919-2000), campaigner for disabled people's rights, was born on 12 December 1919 at Mosman, near Sydney, Australia, the only son of George Moorfield Hargreaves (1890-1978), soap manufacturer, and his first wife, Gwendoline May, 'nee' Needham ('c'.1887-1922/3). His mother was a member of the seafaring Creer family; her cousin Lieutenant Henty Henty-Creer died while commanding a Royal Navy X-craft midget submarine during an attack on the German battleship 'Tirpitz' in Norway on 22 September 1943. 
A 21/2 pound baby born two months prematurely, Hargreaves was fed with an eye-dropper, bathed in olive oil, and wrapped in cotton wool for the first six weeks of his life. When he was three his mother died. The doctor's advice to his father was that, because Hargreaves had cerebral palsy, he would 'never walk, work or wed' (private information). Hargreaves was looked after by a nurse in Hobart, Tasmania, for two years until his father returned with his second wife. At the age of seven, and after several painful operations, he began proving the doctor wrong. He started walking to Coogee public school -- barefoot, because his uncoordinated walking style meant he was wearing out a pair of shoes every week. In 1930 he, his adopted brother John, and his father set sail for England to join their stepmother and her two sons, David and Peter. He spent five years at University School, Southport, and Marlborough College, Liverpool, before leaving school at the age of sixteen. 
Hargreaves began work at El-Dor, his father's soap factory in Shrewsbury, in 1935. Starting as a soap packer, he adapted machinery to enable himself to become a qualified soap maker, despite his limited dexterity. On his twenty-first birthday he was put in charge of the works, owing to his father's ill health. The following day the factory was requisitioned to build Spitfire wings. Hargreaves went on to work in the Vickers Armstrong Lancaster bomber factory in Birmingham. During the Second World War, as part of a YMCA travelling theatre, he also entertained troops with his ventriloquism act, Vocis. Trained by George H. Bate, he achieved some success and was a member of the Magic Circle and the British Magical Society. While looking for an assistant for the act he met Mary Bowles ('b'. 1922), a dressmaker and the daughter of Herbert Vincent Bowles, a chef. They married on 30 June 1945 and became wardens of the YMCA hostel at Kettering. After the birth of their son Brian (1949-2006) they moved to Corby, where their daughter Margaret ('b'. 1953) was born. 
Hargreaves spent three years working for Stewarts and Lloyds steelworks from 1949 until 1952, when his life took an unexpected turn. A friend from YMCA days, Laurie Green, whose own son had cerebral palsy, gave him a leaflet: 'Please help Spastics. What is a Spastic? It might have been your child.' Hargreaves recalled his reaction: 'I went straight around within the hour to Laurie Green's house, and I saw before me a child who was me... It was a terrible, emotional feeling. Laurie told me that I was the first person with cerebral palsy they had heard of who had made it in life, and please, please could I help? There weren't any people with cerebral palsy in the streets at all... Why? Because their parents were ashamed of having their children seen -- which was appalling. (Hargreaves, 59)' As chairman of the newly formed Corby Spastics Group Hargreaves was the first person with cerebral palsy to serve on the executive committee of the National Spastics Society. He also served on the employment committee that created the Sherrards work centre. In 1957 he was asked by the chairman, Ian Dawson-Shepherd, to become industrial liaison officer on a salary of $900 a year, touring the country spreading the message: 'Given the right chance, many disabled people could do a good job of work'. In five years he placed over 1500 people with cerebral palsy into their first jobs, and the Ministry of Labour published 10,000 copies of one of his speeches to distribute to disablement advisory committees. His life story was broadcast on BBC radio as 'Can You Manage Stairs?' in 1959. 
In 1962 Hargreaves turned his attention to the limited social opportunities afforded to people with cerebral palsy. He founded the 62 Clubs, self-help groups run by people with cerebral palsy themselves. The range of activities grew from holidays at Woodlarks campsite to a catamaran crossing of the English Channel, from talks about climbing Everest to a hike up Snowdon. Within two years there were thirty-nine clubs in the UK as well as others in Canada, Germany, and Italy. Hargreaves's work gained international recognition and his powerful and entertaining public speaking took him to fourteen countries. He was awarded the queen's silver jubilee medal in 1977 and appointed MBE in 1978. 
Hargreaves retired in 1982 but returned to the executive council of the Spastics Society in 1984. He continued to be very involved in the organization, which changed its name, with his blessing, to Scope in 1994. He was also involved in setting up the Handicapped Aid Trust, which made grants of many thousands of pounds to pay for carers for disabled people on holiday. He died at Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, of cancer of the bladder on 3 October 2000 and was cremated at Lytham St Anne's, where he had lived since 1989. He was survived by his wife, Mary, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95498


Hazlitt, William (1737-1820), Unitarian minister and author, was born in Shronell, co. Tipperary, on 18 April 1737, the eldest son of John Hazlitt ('b'. 1710?), a flax factor from Antrim, and his wife, Margaret. His parents were Presbyterians inclining towards rational dissent, and his mother was keen for him to be educated for the ministry. After leaving his local grammar school Hazlitt matriculated at the University of Glasgow in 1756, where he was taught by Adam Smith, then delivering the lectures on which his 'Theory of Moral Sentiments' would be based. Hazlitt was also taught by Joseph Black and James Watt, and may have been involved in experiments that led to the discovery of latent heat, which had begun by 1757. 
By the time he graduated MA in 1761 Hazlitt had formed the views to which he remained true for the rest of his life. He was essentially a Socinian, and in later years would associate himself with the doctrines of Priestleyan Unitarians; though Priestley was an Arian until influenced by Nathaniel Lardner, and did not adopt Socinian opinions until about 1769. He was thus anticipated by Hazlitt. 
Hazlitt's first post was that of chaplain to Sir Conyers Joscelyn and his family at Hyde Hall, Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, from where as a frequent visitor to the London theatres he became an admirer of Kitty Clive and Hannah Pritchard. In 1764 he became the minister of the Presbyterian meeting house in Wisbech, a post held until 1758 by John Godwin, father of the philosopher and novelist William Godwin. Towards the end of his two years there he met Grace Loftus (1746-1837), daughter of Thomas Loftus, ironmonger, and married her in Peterborough on 19 January 1766. Shortly after they moved to Marshfield in Gloucestershire where Hazlitt became the minister of the Presbyterian meeting house. Later that year he published his 'Sermon on Human Mortality' (1766), beginning his association with Joseph Johnson, the bookseller who would publish his British writings until the end of his authorial career in 1808. In 1767 Grace gave birth to a son, John Hazlitt, who became a portrait painter. 
In June 1770 the Hazlitts, now with two sons, John and Loftus, moved to Maidstone in Kent. By this time Priestley was editing the 'Theological Repository' and Hazlitt contributed to it under the pen-names Philalethes and Rationalis. Thanks partly to his contact with Priestley, Hazlitt became absorbed into Unitarian circles. He may have associated with the Club of Honest Whigs (many of whom he knew), who during the 1770s met regularly at the London Coffee House on Ludgate Hill, as well as with such wealthy Unitarians as the wheelwright Thomas Viny, at whose house in Tenterden he encountered Benjamin Franklin during the latter's second English agency. Other prominent dissenters who befriended him at this period included Richard Price, Caleb Fleming, Andrew Kippis, Theophilus Lindsey, John Palmer, Thomas Amory, Abraham Rees, and the businessman Samuel Vaughan. Also during the Maidstone years Grace gave birth to a daughter, Margaret (1770-1841), and a son, William Hazlitt (1778-1830), the future essayist. 
A schism within the Maidstone congregation prompted Hazlitt to move his family to Bandon on the south-west coast of Ireland in March 1780. There he wrote newspaper articles attacking British officers who were running their swords into the hammocks of injured or ailing American prisoners of war, thereby killing or maiming them. Threats of 'assassination' led him to appeal (through Richard Price) in 1782 to the prime minister, William Petty, second earl of Shelburne, who replaced the regiment concerned with another, which for the remainder of Hazlitt's time in Bandon took better care of its captives. 
When the war with America ended, the Hazlitts were on the first boat to New York, the 'Henry', which sailed from Cork on 3 April 1783. Hazlitt hoped to find a post as a Unitarian minister in Philadelphia, but was unable to overcome the bigotry of hardline Presbyterians in the city. Efforts were made to establish him first as a schoolmaster in the nearby village of Germantown and then as principal of the newly founded Dickinson College, but without success. In Philadelphia he probably attended meetings of the American Philosophical Society, founded by Franklin in 1743. In 1784 he published, as editor, Priestley's 'Appeal to the Serious and Candid Professor of Christianity' (first printed in Leeds in 1770) with a local bookseller, Robert Bell. 
In May 1784 he moved his family to Boston on the promise of a job as minister replacing Samuel Cooper, the recently deceased pastor of the Brattle Street church, but enemies from Philadelphia thwarted the appointment. However, he quickly made friends with the liberal clergymen who formed the Boston Association of Ministers, which included Charles Chauncy, John Eliot, John Lathrop, and James Freeman. Freeman, minister to King's Chapel in Boston, was urged by Hazlitt to revise his liturgy so as to delete references to the Trinity -- which he did in June 1785. And it was thanks to Hazlitt's encouragement that King's Chapel detached itself from the Episcopalian church to become America's first Unitarian church in November 1787. In the meantime Hazlitt sought postings in New England and Maine, while attacking the Episcopalian establishment, which was still waging a political vendetta against him, first in the 'Boston Magazine' and then in the 'American Herald'. 
Despite making many friends (including the future president of the United States of America John Adams) Hazlitt was ahead of his time in his religious views and failed to find sufficient support to establish himself in a salaried position. In late 1786 he returned to England, his wife and children following in August 1787. None the less, his work in America did bear fruit. The founding of the first Unitarian church in America, King's Chapel, would have taken much longer (and might not have happened at all) had it not been for his support, both in word and action -- nor would William Bentley, pastor of the East Church, Salem, have adopted Priestley's catechism as a substitute for the Westminster catechism, or made a spirited attack on the doctrine of the Trinity in a course of sermons delivered in 1787. Moreover, it may be more than pure coincidence that Charles Chauncy decided to publish his treatise on universal salvation, 'The Mystery Hid from Ages, or the Salvation of All Men', shortly after his first encounter with Hazlitt in 1784. When Priestley landed in America in 1794 he found less resistance to his views than he would otherwise have done, thanks to Hazlitt's labours -- which included publication of one of Priestley's own works. 
In November 1787 Hazlitt settled his family in Wem, a small market town in Shropshire, where he ministered to the dissenting meeting house. He also took charge of the local school and devoted his energies to the education of his son William. One of the highlights of his intellectual life was his meeting with Samuel Taylor Coleridge, brought home by William after a sermon at Shrewsbury in January 1798 -- an encounter described in his son's 'My first acquaintance with poets'. 
Hazlitt was an indefatigable writer. In addition to the eight articles he published in the 'Theological Repository' between 1770 and 1788, and the eleven so far attributed to him in the 'Boston Magazine' and the 'American Herald' between September 1784 and April 1785, he contributed twenty-one articles to the 'Monthly Repository' from June 1806 to September 1818, usually over his own initials, though on one occasion as Philalethes, and on another as 'An Old Unitarian'. In June 1806 the 'Repository' advertised for subscriptions to Hazlitt's 'Fifty-Two Sermons' in two volumes, which in 1808 was issued by Joseph Johnson as 'Sermons for the Use of Families'. 
Upon retirement in 1813 he lived in Addlestone, Surrey, before moving to Bath in 1817. Shortly afterwards he and his wife took into their household Catherine Emmet (died 1824), daughter of Christopher Temple Emmet ('c'.1761-1788), eldest brother of the United Irishman Robert Emmet, executed in 1803 for his part in the Dublin uprising in July of that year. He spent the last two years of his life at Crediton in Devon, dependent on a grant from the Presbyterian Fund and donations from members of his congregation at Wem. The Hazlitts lived first at an old house called Winswood, and later moved to one closer to the church that was traditionally thought to have been part of the old episcopal palace. There are stories of him in his last years being nearly dragged into the water by a swan, of his love of snuff and barley sugar, and of his keeping both in the same leather-lined waistcoat pocket. He died at Crediton on 16 July 1820 at the age of eighty-three, and was buried in the parish churchyard there. His wife survived him. When on 6 August his death was reported in Leigh Hunt's 'Examiner', for which his son frequently wrote, he was described as 'through his whole life a friend to truth and liberty' ('The Examiner', 12/659, 6 Aug 1820, 512). 


@@@@@


doc= 95499


Cavendish, William, second duke of Devonshire (1670/71-1729), politician and art collector, was the second but first surviving son of William Cavendish, first duke of Devonshire (1641-1707), and Mary (1646-1710), second daughter of James Butler, first duke of Ormond. Following his father's accession to the earldom of Devonshire in 1684 he was known by courtesy as Lord Cavendish, and after his father's elevation to the dukedom in 1694 he was called marquess of Hartington. 
Lord Cavendish was educated privately, but was noted as being present at a court entertainment in November 1686. After protracted negotiations, including for a reputed portion of $25,000, on 21 June 1688, at Southampton House, St Giles-in-the-fields, London, he was married by John Sharp, the future archbishop of York, to Lady Rachel Russell (1674-1725), the eldest daughter of William Russell, Lord Russell, a political associate of his father, who had been executed for complicity in the Rye House plot, and Lady Rachel Russell. At least six sons and six daughters were born of the marriage, three children of each sex surviving their parents. 
His father's intrigues with William of Orange may have dictated that, rather than settle down with his young wife, Lord Cavendish should spend some time out of the country. By October 1688 he was writing from Brussels to his mother-in-law, and his movements during the revolution of that year are unclear. At the beginning of 1689 he was commissioned as the colonel of the regiment (10th horse) raised by his father, and he retained the colonelcy until April 1690. However, by that date he was travelling on the continent, visiting Vienna, Brussels, Lubeck and (in June 1691) Padua. 
Lord Cavendish returned to England later in 1691, ready to be launched on a public career. Plans were made to secure him the vacant parliamentary seat at Westminster, but fierce competition for the constituency made his father unwilling to risk a defeat and he did not contest the election. He served as a volunteer in Flanders in the campaign of 1692. He may have begun to collect art during this period, possibly being the purchaser of drawings sold from the collections of Sir Peter Lely and P. H. Lankrink between 1688 and 1694, later recorded as part of the Devonshire collection at the family seat of Chatsworth House in Derbyshire. 
Hartington entered parliament as MP for Derbyshire at the election of 1695. In his first session in the Commons he supported the court in several important divisions and signed the association. In the following session he missed the vote on the Sir John Fenwick attainder bill in November 1696. His absence may have indicated a growing willingness to oppose the court, which was confirmed by his votes in the session of 1697-8 against the standing army. He also played a leading role in the pursuit of the perpetrators of a fraud concerning exchequer bills, which led him to defend the rights of the Commons against the pretensions of the House of Lords. 
Hartington was returned unopposed for Derbyshire at the 1698 election, proposing the court-backed whig, Sir Thomas Littleton, for speaker. However, he remained a prominent spokesman against the standing army. On 4 January 1699 he spoke against a court-inspired attempt to increase the number of men above the 7000 previously agreed. So effective was Hartington that William III reproached his father about his conduct, only to be told that Hartington and his brother 'had advanced nothing but what was reasonable, nothing but what he would have said himself if he had been in their place' (Grimblot, 2.321). 
Hartington's stature had now risen sufficiently for his wife's uncle, the earl of Orford, to propose him, unsuccessfully, for the post of treasurer of the navy. The following session saw Hartington heavily involved in the controversy surrounding the resumption of Irish forfeited estates. In particular he was keen to add a place clause, excluding excise commissioners from the Commons, to the 'Irish Forfeitures Bill', which itself was tacked to the land tax and again prompted a clash with the Lords over their rights and privileges. He was similarly active in the defence of the remaining whig ministers in the government, being prominent in the debate on 10 April 1700 when a motion to remove Lord Chancellor Somers from office was defeated. Following the end of the session Hartington allegedly refused a court post because he was 'so much a friend of my Lord Somers, that he would not be obliged' (James, 3.94). Following his re-election for Derbyshire in January 1701 he was again prominent in debates, particularly on the succession and the need for an accord with the Dutch, and in defence of Somers, Orford, and other former ministers from charges of impeachment. 
Hartington was defeated in the Derbyshire election of November 1701, and lodged a petition against the result. Meanwhile he was made captain of the yeomen of the guard, at a salary of $1000 p.a., and rumours circulated that he would be made a secretary of state. Hartington withdrew his petition upon his election at Castle Rising on 2 February 1702, where his partner was his long-term friend Robert Walpole. Hartington was soon back in the fray, moving in the Commons on 24 February that the committee instructed to consider the rights and liberties of the House of Commons should also consider the rights and liberties of the commons of England, and on 26 February proposing that it was the undoubted right of the commons of England to petition for the calling, sitting, and dissolving of parliaments and for the redressing of grievances. 
At the election of 1702 Hartington was returned for Yorkshire. His pre-eminence among the whigs in the Commons was again demonstrated on 26 October 1702, when he moved an amendment to the address emphasizing that the duke of Marlborough had been instrumental in 'maintaining' rather than 'retrieving' England's honour. In the session of 1703-4 he played a full part in defeating the bill against occasional conformity, and on the whig side in the controversial 'Ashby v. White' case. In the following session he spoke against leave for the introduction of a third 'Occasional Conformity Bill', and duly voted against the controversial motion to tack it to a supply bill. 
When Queen Anne visited Cambridge University in April 1705 both Hartington and his father were awarded honorary doctorates of law. He was re-elected for Yorkshire in 1705. In December, he moved the committal of the 'Regency Bill'. In May 1706 he was named a commissioner to negotiate the union with Scotland. 
By the time of his father's death, on 18 August 1707, Hartington had acquired a considerable reputation. In James Brydges' view, 'we lose by his removal to the House of Peers a very considerable Member in the House of Commons, and whose loss will not easily be repaired' (Hunt. L., Stowe MS 57(1), 255). A few years earlier John Macky had portrayed him as a man who 'hath for many years made a considerable figure in the House of Commons. A gentleman of very good sense, a bold orator, and zealous abettor of the liberty of the people... He is one of the best beloved gentlemen, by the Country Party, in England. ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 47)' John Vanbrugh reported in September 1707 that 'his father left but a small estate after all, not above $10,000, as Sir James Forbes tells me', but that given his other assets, 'he is left in a very good condition' (duke of Manchester, 2.251). This relatively healthy state of affairs may well have come about due to the reorganization of the family finances made in an estate act passed in 1705. 
Devonshire succeeded his father in most of his offices, including the lord stewardship and the lord lieutenancy of Derbyshire, and, after a short delay, membership of the cabinet. He took his seat in the Lords on 23 October 1707. There, he became an important point of pressure on both Marlborough and Godolphin, and Queen Anne. Between March and June 1708 he was one of those pressing for the admission of Somers to the cabinet, and, likewise, in 1709, he supported the appointment of Orford to head the Admiralty. His activities outside politics that year included involvement in a consortium, whose other members included Somers, Charles Montagu, Lord Halifax, and Thomas Herbert, eighth earl of Pembroke, which employed the antiquary John Talman to live in Italy and buy works of art on behalf of individual participants. 
In January 1710 Devonshire was employed in trying to ensure that Marlborough did not resign over the queen's decision to award a regiment to Jack Hill, the brother of Abigail Masham. On 20 March he voted for the impeachment of Henry Sacheverell. Robert Harley entertained hopes that Devonshire could be detached from the whigs and used the duke of Newcastle as a means of enticing him into the new ministry. However, Devonshire remained part of the whig leadership, being consulted on its response to the earl of Sunderland's dismissal. He signed a letter on 14 June 1710 exhorting Marlborough to continue in his post and was also involved in discussion with whig financiers on how to put pressure on the queen to retain her whig ministers. 
After the decision to dissolve parliament in September 1710 Devonshire was dismissed (or resigned) from the lord stewardship. However, having been nominated KG in March 1710, he was installed on 22 December. He lost the lord lieutenancy of Derbyshire in September 1711. Devonshire, who was by this time a member of the Kit-Cat Club, was often prominent in the opposition in the Lords. He signed five protests in January and February 1711 against resolutions criticizing the previous ministry's conduct of the war in Spain. He also spoke in the debate on the address on 7 December 1711, in favour of the 'no peace without Spain' resolution, and later that month he moved for a bill to give the electoral prince of Hanover, duke of Cambridge (the future George II) precedence over all other peers. He supported the motion on 28 May 1712 for an address opposing the 'restraining orders' given to the duke of Ormond, and signed another protest on 7 June against an address allowing the ministry a free hand in completing the peace negotiations. 
Following the House of Lords committal of the 'Schism Bill' on 4 June 1714 Devonshire presented a petition on behalf of some dissenting protestants and on 15 June he signed a protest against the bill. On 8 July he signed another protest concerning the implementation of the 'asiento' contract for the supply of slaves to South America. 
The Hanoverian succession saw Devonshire named as a lord justice to rule the country until the arrival of George I. He was then restored to the lord stewardship (September 1714) and the lord lieutenancy of Derbyshire (October 1714). As a person of influence on 18 August 1715 he presented a petition on behalf of the duchess of Ormond, whose husband (his mother's nephew) was facing a bill of attainder. On 10 April 1716 Devonshire brought in the bill to repeal the 'Triennial Act'. In July 1716 he exchanged his office of lord steward for that of lord president of the council. The king remarked at this time that he was a 'very honest disinterested man' ('Diary of Mary, Countess Cowper', 110). 
In the emerging whig split at the beginning of 1717 Devonshire was part of the Walpole-Townshend group. He supported those bishops who wished to defend the Church of England, George Smalridge, bishop of Bristol, noting on 25 March 1717 that Devonshire had 'declared that he would as soon consent to a bill for divesting him of Chatsworth, as for depriving the universities of their privileges' ('London Diaries of William Nicolson', 640). Devonshire left the government in the wake of Walpole and Townshend on 16 April. 
On 19 December 1717 Devonshire and his heir successfully petitioned the House of Lords for leave to bring in a bill to settle his estates, an essential measure preparatory to the marriage of the marquess of Hartington with Catherine Hoskins, the heir of a London businessman. During the session of 1717-18 Devonshire took a major role in support of the prince of Wales in the quarrel with his father, and in persuading him to submit to his father in January 1718. On 20 February 1718 he signed two protests in the Lords against the 'Mutiny Bill'. 
In January 1719 Devonshire supported Archbishop Wake 'and others of the staunch old Whigs [who] have appeared so gloriously on behalf of the Church' (Wake MS 21/84) in defence of the 'Occasional Conformity Act'. He was involved in the negotiations in April 1720 that brought about the reconciliation between the king and the prince of Wales and also ended the whig schism. With the readmittance of Walpole and Townshend to office in June 1720 Devonshire was again in favour and named as a lord justice in 1720, as he was again in 1723 and 1725. 
Beyond politics, Devonshire maintained his interest in art. Having bought part of Lord Somers's collection at its dispersal in 1717, in 1723 he bought 225 drawings that had belonged to Nicolaes Anthoni Flinck, whose father Govaert Flinck had been a pupil of Rembrandt. In addition to Rembrandt, artists represented in the purchase included Rubens, Raphael, Mantegna, Barocci, and Annibale Carracci, contributing to the Devonshire collection's reputation as 'unequalled at the time in England' (Blunt, 39) 
Devonshire succeeded Baron Carleton as lord president in March 1725. He was placed in a difficult position during the attack on Lord Chancellor Macclesfield, a long-term whig ally, surprising some observers by voting him guilty on 25 May, although on the following day he was one of those who exerted himself to mitigate his punishment. However, he had no scruple in opposing the bill allowing Viscount Bolingbroke to reclaim his estates. 
Devonshire played a key role in securing Walpole in power after the death of George I, many of the relevant meetings taking place at his London residence, Devonshire House. In November 1727 George II chose Devonshire as his own replacement as a governor of Charterhouse. By this date Devonshire was increasingly afflicted with gout, a condition that had plagued him since 1704. In November 1728 the earl of Godolphin reported that Devonshire 'is free from pain, but he has such a weakness in his knees as leaves him no sort of use of his legs' (BL, Add. MS 61437, fol. 123). 
In March and May 1729 Devonshire was still active in national affairs, but he was reported to be dangerously ill at the end of May 1729, and Newcastle blamed the gout for his absence from cabinet. He died on 4 June 1729 at Devonshire House, Piccadilly, London, and was buried in All Saints' Church, Derby. 
Sir Robert Walpole was reported to be inconsolable upon hearing the news of his death, possibly because Devonshire was 'always steady to his party and constant to his friends' (Sedgwick, 1.24). Lord Hervey claimed that: 'Devonshire was a man who had no uncommon portion of understanding; and as his chief skill lay in painting, medals, and horses, he was more able as a virtuoso than a statesman, and a much better jockey than he was a politician. (ibid.)' Devonshire was without question one of the principal art collectors of the period, but the record of his collection is incomplete, as much of it was kept not at Chatsworth but at Devonshire House, where the earliest account of the collection was not made until 1761. He is known to have assembled 'a magnificent collection of engravings' (Blunt, 21) which was continued by his son the third duke. He also owned collections of gems and coins, each housed in a specially built Boulle cabinet, one of which appeared with him in the portrait by Charles Jervas. As Hervey indicated, Devonshire also owned racehorses, including the pre-eminent stallion on the turf in the 1720s, Flying Childers, sired by Richard Darley's Arabian, and kept a stud. Hervey underestimated Devonshire's value as a politician: perhaps, as a duke, Devonshire found his abilities were taken for granted. As his taste as a virtuoso contributed to the eminence of the Cavendish family within the whig aristocracy, his powers as a speaker and a negotiator played an influential if largely unsung role in establishing whig political dominance in eighteenth-century Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 95611


Ramsey, Mary, Lady Ramsey (d. 1601), philanthropist, was the eldest daughter of the Bristol merchant William Dale. Nothing is known of her early years though they may have been made difficult by her father's alienation from the Bristol civic elite after he brought a Star Chamber suit at the end of his year as sheriff in 1518-19 complaining that the income from the office was no longer sufficient to bear its charges because the mayor and aldermen were detaining the profit of the city's lands. He progressed no further in the civic 'cursus honorum'. The identity of his daughter's first husband is unknown, but by 1554 she was married to Thomas Avery (died 1576), a gentleman of Berden in Essex. Avery had made his career in the service of Thomas Cromwell, and later became a gentleman pensioner, and an associate of Sir Ralph Sadler, who secured him the nomination of the parliamentary representation of Liverpool in 1571, and to whom he left 'my table of gold with the Lord Cromwell's visage' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/58, fol. 287'r'). The marriage was childless, and Avery instructed that the manor of Colne Engaine was to pass on Mary's death to 'a boy', presumably a bastard, John Avery, to whom Mary herself left just $20 when she died. Thomas Avery had strong London connections (he had been trained by Cromwell's commercial agent Stephen Vaughan, and one of the overseers of his will was the former lord mayor Sir Thomas Lodge) and it is possibly these that explain his widow's speedy remarriage in 1578 to Sir Thomas Ramsey (1510/11-1590). 
'Rich Ramsey' was a fine catch, for he was lord mayor of London in the year of their marriage. The second son of John Ramsey of Eaton Bridge near Westerham in Kent, he had been apprenticed in London, and became free of the Grocers' Company between 1537 and 1539, and in 1540 married his first wife, Alice (1492/3-1578), daughter of Bevis Lea of Enfield in Staffordshire. Ramsey was elected alderman in 1566, and served for Cheap ward before translating to Cornhill ward in 1588. He served as sheriff in 1567-8 and lord mayor in 1577-8. He was among the most assiduous of aldermen, with an attendance record of 100 per cent in his shrieval year, and 80 per cent thereafter until his death. 
To judge from his subsidy assessments, reaching $400 in 1582, Ramsey was among the wealthiest men in Elizabethan London. Mary moved into the house 'with a very fair forefront' (Stow, 1.203) built by Sir Martin Bowes, which Ramsey had purchased in 1566 in Lombard Street. When the house and the two adjoining tenements were sold in 1608 they fetched $1500. Mary certainly did not want for the comforts of life: by the time of her death she owned a coach, and there were bequests of numerous items of silver and jewellery, including a 'gold ring with a ruby... a jewel of diamonds with three pearls hanging thereon... my gold bracelets which Sir Thomas Ramsey gave me... my silver bason and ewer with mine arms thereon' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/98, fols. 190'v'-193'v'). 
Mary Ramsey's interest in charity was focused by her husband's involvement with the London hospitals, for he was president of Christ's Hospital from 1582 until his death. Although their charities were to tick several of the godly boxes, they do not seem particularly to have been associated with the godly wing of the church. They supported their local clergy, including Thomas Buckminster, a noted 'obedient protestant' and Lady Ramsey intervened in 1594 to secure a pension from Christ's Hospital for Robert Crowley's widow. It was also important that there were no children from either of Sir Thomas's marriages. The beneficiaries of his will included a number of nephews and nieces, particularly Elizabeth Holmden ('nee' Tailor) married to Edward Holmden, a Levant merchant who received a life interest in Ramsey's former house in St Mary Woolchurch, and her brothers, Thomas, William, and Giles Tailor. Thomas was to receive the house in St Mary Woolnoth after Mary's death, and William and Giles the house in St Mary Woolchurch after their sister's death. William Tailor received $500 in cash, and his daughter who was married to the grocer John Wanton another $200. But half the moveable goods were destined for Mary Ramsey, and although the overall size of the estate is not known, the fact that the specified cash bequests of the testator's reserved half amounted to over $3500 is indicative of the minimum size of Mary's inheritance. 
For a man of this wealth Ramsey's charitable bequests might appear somewhat token. Conventional bequests were made to the hospitals, prisons, and to the poor of his parish; eighty poor men were to receive gowns at his burial; $200 was to be spent on a loan stock for four young retailers of the Grocers' Company; twenty sermons were to be preached within two years of his death in St Mary Woolnoth at a cost of 6's'. 8died per sermon. The total was just over $500. But the will gives only a partial impression, for the couple had begun building up a charitable portfolio centred on Christ's Hospital some years before his death. In 1583 they had conveyed the manor of Berden and the rectory of Clavering to Christ's, with the intention of providing $10 per annum for the poor in London prisons, $10 per annum for St Bartholomew's Hospital, and $40 per annum to support scholarships and fellowships at Peterhouse, Cambridge; the surplus income (by the beginning of the seventeenth century $168 per annum) was destined for Christ's Hospital. 
On her husband's death in 1590 Mary Ramsey sustained the momentum of charitable endeavour. Almost immediately she conveyed the manor of Colne Engaine in Essex to Christ's to perform a variety of charitable trusts, including the support of a writing school in the hospital, a grammar school at Halstead (originally intended for Clavering) in Essex, and the support of twenty poor widows. Another trust was created in 1597 to support the poor of three London parishes. The charitable tide continued to flow strongly in her will of 1601. She left $1000 to her native Bristol to be used in general charitable purposes, loan stocks of $200 apiece to five city companies (the interest being used to support the poor of those companies), a stock of $500 to relieve debtors, and an endowment of $2000 yielding $100 per annum, of which $40 was destined for university exhibitions, $20 for wounded soldiers, $2 for sermons, and the residue for the clothing and support of the poor. The total capital value of the charities established by the Ramseys between 1583 and 1601 was $14,318. 
Mary Ramsey died in November 1601, in London, and was buried at Christ Church on the 13th. It was unfortunate that the distribution of a dole (interestingly not specified in her will) in Leadenhall at the time of her funeral resulted in a stampede in which seventeen poor people were killed. But this did not hold back the encomiasts. In 1602 Nicholas Bourne published 'An Epitaph upon the Decease of the Worshipful Lady Ramsey', 'sweet Ramsey' as she was repeatedly called in the text. In 1606 the playwright Thomas Heywood dramatized the life of the Ramseys, or a fictionalized version of it, in part 2 of 'If You Know Not Me You Know Nobody'. Lady Ramsey is here presented as the model of virtuous civic womanhood. She persuades Alexander Nowell, the dean of St Paul's, to arbitrate in a property dispute between Sir Thomas Gresham and her husband, and on their reconciliation she repeatedly celebrates Gresham's charity in founding the Royal Exchange, 'an honour to all English merchants'. She is also present when Dean Nowell takes Gresham and the Ramseys into his picture gallery, where the portraits of virtuous citizens are displayed, moving Lady Ramsey to exclaim, 'Why should I not live so, that being dead/My name might have a register with theirs?'. She later appears 'dealing of our charity... to poor soldiers such as want'. The exemplary portraits also move her husband, who becomes 'addicted/Unto the poor's relief' in his dying days. Lady Ramsey's memory was assured by the repeated celebration of her charities in the works of John Stow and their derivatives, and in the annual civic celebration of charity at the Easter Spital sermons where her pensioners marched each year in their red caps and blue coats sewn with the initials MR. Appropriately, both Ramseys were celebrated in civic portraiture; Mary's portrait survives at Christ's Hospital, her husband's was among those painted on canvas banners rolled out on red-letter days in the Grocers' Company hall in the early seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 95614


Carrington, Samuel (bap. 1798, d. 1870), geologist and archaeologist, was born at Wetton, Staffordshire, where he was baptized on 25 November 1798, the son of Samuel Carrington (1772/3-1840), leader of a team of miners ('copers') in the duke of Devonshire's copper mines at Ecton, and his wife, Ann (died 1829). He attended the village school at Wetton, and at the age of twenty-one emigrated with his father to America but 'was dissatisfied with that country and gladly returned home with the intention of never quitting again his native parish' (Briggs). He became master of Wetton School, and was parish clerk, positions he held until his death, while also keeping a small farm in the village. On 29 December 1823 he married Olive (1802-1884), eldest child of Thomas Chadwick of Grindon, Staffordshire, with whom he had nine children. 
As village schoolmaster in Wetton, Carrington gained a reputation as the local 'wise man' ('Memoir', repr. in Zoeteweij, 282). He had remarkable physical and mental energy, and was a keen observer of natural phenomena, whether rock forms, fauna, or insect life, interpreting their characteristics in the light of natural theology as 'proofs of design' (ibid.) by a divine creator. He was also a skilled draughtsman, carefully recording his observations. His archaeological enthusiasms might well have lain dormant but for a meeting in 1845 with Thomas Bateman, the Derbyshire archaeologist and collector. On Bateman's behalf he excavated, between that date and 1852, over 100 burial mounds, mainly in the area around his native village. The contents of the tumuli were passed on to the Bateman Museum at Middleton by Youlgrave, Derbyshire, together with accounts of the openings which were sent to his patron in a series of letters. Carrington's excavations form a complete section in Bateman's 'Ten Years' Diggings in Celtic and Saxon Grave Hills' (1861). 
After Bateman's death in 1861 Carrington continued his investigation of local archaeological sites with John Lucas of Fenny Bentley, Derbyshire. In 1864-5, under the auspices of the Midland Scientific Association, he directed the clearing out of Thor's Cave, Wetton, where evidence was found of Celtic, Romano-British, and Anglo-Saxon occupation. He also dug over, in a somewhat desultory fashion, the site of a Romano-British farmstead at Borough Holes adjacent to his smallholding in Wetton, which reinforced his claim that his native village had been a 'North Staffordshire Pompeii' (Roberts, 14). 
Carrington's interest in geology led him to range over the Carboniferous limestone country around his home, often in the company of his daughter Ann (died 1874), who helped him to gather specimens. He amassed thousands of fossils, some of which were sold during his lifetime and are preserved in a number of repositories, including the British Geological Survey at Keyworth, the Natural History Museum, London, the Passmore Edwards Museum, London, and Sheffield City Museum. His remaining assemblage, which he displayed in the pantry of his home in Wetton, was purchased in 1870 by the Nottingham Natural History Museum, and is now preserved at Wollaton Hall, Nottingham. Among his many geological finds were six species that he was the first to identify in the local limestone; four were named either after him or his native village. Notable examples of brachiopods that he collected were cited in the writings of the palaeontologist Thomas Davidson. 
Carrington contributed geological and archaeological papers to the 'Reliquary', edited by Llewellynn Jewitt, the 'Transactions of the Midland Scientific Association', and the 'Transactions of the North Staffordshire Field Club'. He also wrote a curious play called 'The Barrow-Digger's Restitution of the Lost Archives of Ancient Britain', which survives in manuscript, embellished with numerous pen-and-ink sketches of barrows, burials, artefacts, and cartoons relating to the action of the work, which takes place in and around Wetton. The main characters are clearly Thomas Bateman and Carrington himself. He is also depicted as one of the characters in Eliza Meteyard's story for children 'Dora and Her Papa' (1869). 
Carrington died on 8 October 1870 in Wetton, where he was buried in St Margaret's churchyard. In 1874, following a public subscription organized by Thomas Wardle, president of the North Staffordshire Naturalists' Field Club, and headed by the duke of Devonshire, an elaborate tombstone, designed by George Gilbert Scott, was erected over his grave. The memorial stone was decorated with characteristic fossils native to the district, including the six types that he was the first to discover on the north Staffordshire limestone. Carrington was recalled by the antiquary Charles Roach Smith as 'a very intelligent man; a good geologist; and an enthusiastic excavator of tumuli. Seldom are such men appreciated; and I fear he was not an exception from the common fate of the worthy, unselfish poor' ('Retrospections, Social and Archaeological', vol. 1, 1883, 19). 


@@@@@


doc= 95615


Peers, Donald Rhys Hubert (1909-1973), singer, was born at 106 College Street, Ammanford, Carmarthenshire, on 10 July 1908, the youngest son of five children born to Frank Peers and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Rees. The family moved to the neighbouring village of Betws when Donald was five, and it was there that he lived until he left home somewhat abruptly on the eve of his sixteenth birthday. 
Peers's parents met and married in America in 1894. His father, who was born and brought up in the village of Ash near Canterbury, Kent, was employed in a Chicago stockyard after an adventurous perambulation that had taken him first to Africa and then America. His mother, a native of Ystalyfera in the Swansea valley, had travelled to Hot Springs, Missouri, in the hope of finding a cure for the rheumatoid arthritis that plagued her. After the birth of their second son they returned to Wales, first to Mary's home town, where Frank found employment in the printing works of her father, Ebenezer Rees (printers of the radical Welsh newspaper 'Llais Llafur', 'Voice of labour'). His father had various jobs in his life but Donald Peers was most often referred to as the son of a colliery worker. 
Peers's parents had joined the Plymouth Brethren during their stay in America and remained devoutly faithful to it throughout their lives; Frank Peers became an elder and lay preacher. Any domestic severity that came from the religious proclivities of Donald's parents was tempered by his ready access to the popular entertainment made available to him by two of his uncles -- Elwyn, who ran the local cinema, the Coliseum Theatre in Ystalyfera, and David, who owned both a piano and a gramophone: two items prohibited from the Peers household, but which decisively influenced the path that he was to follow. 
At Amman Valley grammar school in Ammanford Peers was neither distinguished nor dull, but his aptitude for theatrical performance was noted and mildly encouraged by one of his English teachers. At sixteen he absconded from home in company with two itinerant house painters whom he befriended when they were painting Ammanford railway station. He was briefly at sea as a mess steward, but it was while he was working as a painter in Richmond, Yorkshire, that he met Gertrude Mary (Marie) Thomson (1907-2000), whom he married in Knaresborough, Yorkshire, on 7 June 1930; their daughter Sheila was born in 1931. The marriage lasted until 1953 when they separated. 
Peers was already gaining engagements as a music hall singer in the late 1920s, having won a Fred Karno talent contest during a period when he was painting the barracks at Aldershot: he appeared in partnership with Miriam Ferris on BBC radio in January 1928. This followed an audition in which he sang 'In a Shady Nook by a Babbling Brook', the song that was to project him to stardom two decades later (words and music written in 1927 by the American vaudeville artistes Harry Pease and E. G. Nelson respectively). In the 1930s, by which time he had acquired the ability to accompany himself on the ukulele, he enjoyed success as an itinerant music hall entertainer, sometimes billed as Smiling Donald Peers. 
During the Second World War Peers was a clerk in the Royal Army Service Corps. Discharged in 1944, he returned to show business as a variety headliner in Moss Empires' variety tours. It was after the war that his recording of 'In a Shady Nook by a Babbling Brook' made him the first post-war singing sensation in the UK. His performance of the song had an effect on the female population that was unprecedented for a British recording artist and was followed by other hit recordings. On the strength of this celebrity he was contracted for a weekly radio series as the Cavalier of Song, and was soon the first popular music singer to give a solo concert at the Royal Albert Hall; in 1950 he starred at the royal variety performance. 
Peers's popularity was challenged in the mid-1950s by the introduction of new modes of popular musical entertainment and he spent four years in Australia. On his return he found that the fame he once enjoyed was entirely eclipsed, so he once again relentlessly toured the clubs and seaside resorts of the north of England; but in February 1969, to the surprise of many, he re-entered the charts with 'Please Don't Go', an adaptation of the 'Barcarolle' from Offenbach's 'Tales of Hoffmann'. This was followed by other minor hits before he released the prophetic 'Give Me One More Chance', his last song to enter the UK top forty. By this time he had also appeared in several films, but none made sufficient impact for him to be regarded as anything other than a singer. 
A few years before the end of his life Peers, who had long had bouts of ill health, sustained a serious spinal injury when he fell through an opening on a stage in Australia. This required him to wear a steel brace and he was soon wheelchair-bound and forced to move from his house in St John's Road, Hove, Sussex, to a nearby nursing home, at 24 Harrington Road, Brighton, where he died of multiple myelomatosis on 9 August 1973. His body was cremated at the Down crematorium, Brighton, where his ashes remained. 
The level of Peers's success in the years after the Second World War is difficult to overstate. While his most flourishing period was between 1935 and 1955, he surprised many by reviving his popularity after rock and roll had transformed and captured British popular music culture. When he returned to the hit parade in 1969 he co-existed with Frank Sinatra's 'My Way', but more incredibly with the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, often to the chagrin of the popular music press: a respected music critic castigated Peers as a 'kindly dinosaur' who wandered 'among the debris of showbiz's mythological golden era' ('Comeback for Peers', 'The Observer', 16 March 1969). This missed the point. Two features operated persistently in Peers's favour. First, in the idiom to which he subscribed, he was a singer of real competence. His voice carried strength, authority, and a sensitivity to the nuance of lyrics that placed him above most other British balladeers. He claimed that his mentors were the crooner Al Jolson and Randolph Sutton, the last and one of the most elegant of the British music hall 'swell' artists. It is possible to identify traces of these influences, but he was more often compared to Bing Crosby. However, the truth is that Peers was distinctive: his relaxed mode of delivery obscured the accuracy of his musicianship -- untutored but clearly present. And he believed in the potency of the type of music he sang, and this integrity was transmitted simply but powerfully to his audiences. Theirs was not a trivial and unqualified adoration for a sexual idol: Peers had the rare ability to touch audiences not as a mass group but as a collection of individuals, and many, of more than one generation, gave testimony to this phenomenon. 
Peers was suave, always elegantly dressed, good-looking, and good-natured. As evidenced by commentary about him and by his 1951 autobiography 'Pathway', he was a pragmatic individual who was never consumed or disfigured by the celebrity that was periodically conferred upon him. He endured financial and physical hardships, but took the rough with the smooth and sang lines like 'Powder your face with sunshine' with total and genuine conviction. 


@@@@@


doc= 95618


Watson, David Christopher Knight (1933-1984), Church of England clergyman, was born at 12 Harley Hill, Catterick Camp, Scotton, Yorkshire, on 7 March 1933, the son of Godfrey Charles Knight Watson, a captain in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Margaret Sara Winifred, 'nee' Simpson (1900-1989). His earliest memories were of the north-west frontier of India, where his father was for a time stationed. The family returned to England in 1937, but his father, a Christian Scientist, went back to India and died in 1943 having refused medical treatment for a lung infection. His mother remarried in 1949. He was educated at Bedford School (1940-46) and then Wellington College (1946-51), where he was head boy and won the prestigious Queen's Medal in 1952. He served in the 3rd regiment of the Royal Horse Artillery in Germany, before going in 1954 to St John's College, Cambridge, where he read for part one of the moral sciences tripos (1956), before graduating in 1957. He was intrigued by 'alternative' spiritualities in his teenage years, in particular theosophy and Buddhism, but was not impressed by 'army religion' and became an atheist while in the forces. 
Watson was converted to Christianity in 1954 through a talk at the Cambridge Inter-Collegiate Christian Union by the Revd John Collins, and subsequently through reading John Stott's 'Becoming a Christian' (1950). He was nurtured in his new evangelical faith by David Sheppard, who was then preparing for Anglican ordination at Ridley Hall, Cambridge. Another early formative influence was the holidays for public schoolboys organized by the Revd E. J. H. Nash. He served on about thirty-five of these 'Bash camps' and, like other young Christian leaders of his generation, was instilled with patterns of ministry and conservative evangelical emphases. Sheppard later encouraged him to train for Anglican ministry, and he attended Ridley Hall for two years. He was frustrated by liberal academic theology and in contrast was attracted to the evangelistic style of Billy Graham, who spoke at a university mission in 1955. 
In 1959 Watson was ordained as curate at St Mark's, Gillingham, where he was reunited with John Collins and thrived in a Medway dockland parish known for its activism and evangelism. In 1962 he took a second curacy at the Round Church, Cambridge, but found the university town unexciting, and began to explore privately the themes of revival and spiritual renewal. He later described having an experience of being filled with the Holy Spirit ('You are my God', 54). At this stage he was unaware of the 'charismatic renewal' already under way in the United States and making initial stirrings in the Church of England following an outbreak of 'manifestations' of the spirit at St Paul's, Beckenham. Soon afterwards he had a personal experience of 'speaking in tongues' and subsequently questioned the 'cessationist' orthodoxy (that the miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit were only for the early church) of many conservative evangelicals. During his curacy in Cambridge he met Elizabeth Anne MacEwan Smith, a nurse, the daughter of Cecil William Smith, office controller. They married in Cambridge on 19 September 1964. 
In July 1965 Watson became curate-in-charge at St Cuthbert's, York. The Church Redundancy Commission was already making plans for the future of the building, where the average total Sunday offering amounted to only $2. He introduced a programme of monthly and then weekly Sunday morning family services, including music, dance, and drama. Services were soon regularly full, and within four years of Watson's arrival, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a Sunday service from St Cuthbert's. He believed this growth was the result of committed prayer. Prayer and 'Bible' meetings had been established at St Cuthbert's and in such gatherings (as was the case in other English parishes experiencing 'renewal' in the 1960s) charismatic emphases appeared. From 1966 the 'charisms', such as tongues, prophecy, healing, and 'words of knowledge', were also encouraged in Sunday worship. Importantly, however, Watson believed that unity was found in Christ rather than in a form of churchmanship. Throughout his ministry the church was never exclusively charismatic, and when he appointed his first curate in 1973 he deliberately chose a non-charismatic evangelical. 
In January 1973, having long outgrown St Cuthbert's, the congregation was given permission to move to St Michael le Belfrey, opposite York Minster. Watson was made vicar later that year. In this prime location the congregation experienced further growth and innovation, becoming influential as a centre for Anglican renewal. From 1973 he led evangelistic guest services at York Minster, which were often full to capacity. During the early 1970s he and his wife were impressed by various expressions of charismatic renewal in the episcopalian congregations in North America, and they played an important role in bringing these influences to England. Following the example of the Church of the Redeemer, Houston, Texas, 'extended households' were set up in order to deepen the sense of community in the church and share resources to further lay ministry. Watson placed emphasis on simple living and community-orientated church life. His family led one such household, which shared a common purse. Another influence was the guitar-led worship of the Fisherfolk group, also originally from Houston. St Michael's soon became known for contemporary praise music set in the context of the flexible Series Three service. Similarly, drama, dance, and banners were used more extensively in services, which were noted by the Archbishops' Council on Evangelism when it studied Watson's church in 1977. 
These expressions of church life and ministry opened up wide opportunities for lay involvement. Such participation of the laity was encouraged in the renewal movement generally, and Watson was committed to ministry of the 'Body of Christ'. Midweek 'area groups', of which there were about forty by 1979, saw lay members meet for prayer and ministry in homes. Patterns of leadership also relied on the laity; and from the early 1970s the church appointed elders, commissioned by the bishop of Selby, Maurice Maddocks. 
Sharing the Christian faith was Watson's primary concern, and he became widely in demand as an evangelist. In 1966 he began to lead university missions, speaking at over sixty during his career. His evangelistic talks were given wider appeal in 'My God is Real' (1970) and 'In Search of God' (1974). His approach was not 'intellectual'; he believed in the 'immense power of the simple Gospel of Christ in any company' ('Renewal', Dec/Jan 1968, 5) and invited his listeners to a personal relationship with Christ. However, he was an apologist for the rationality of Christianity and often quoted C. S. Lewis. A gifted communicator, Watson often used references from popular culture and frequently incorporated visual illustrations into his talks. 
Watson's theology of evangelism remained strongly conservative evangelical in its core emphases. He discussed sin, judgement, and hell; he preached a substitutionary model of the atonement; and he argued for the historicity of the resurrection. Additionally, he urged non-Christians to consider the cost of committed discipleship. He argued that 'The only right and worthy response to God's mercy is 'practical', involving our bodies and minds; it is 'total', as we hold nothing back and offer ourselves as a 'living sacrifice'; and it is 'purposeful': instead of being passively squeezed into the shapes and standards of the world, we deliberately give our bodies to God, and so let him work within our minds by his Spirit and his Word. ('Live a New Life', 1975)' From the mid-1970s he was encouraged by other evangelical leaders to undertake city and area-wide missions, which soon became known as 'festivals'. There was special emphasis on worship and he spoke at over sixty such events, taking his team of musicians, dancers, and actors to five continents. His approach contrasted with the typical evangelical 'crusade'.A commitment to healing relations in the church became a central aspect of Watson's ministry. In his earlier years he held strongly anti-Catholic views, but became committed to restoring relationships between protestants and Catholics. After sharing a platform with Roman Catholic renewal leaders at the Fountain Trust international conference at Guildford in 1971 he became convinced of the commonalities between Christians. He had a special concern for Northern Ireland and was a high-profile participant in peace marches, working alongside activists such as Monsignor Michael Buckley and Mairead Corrigan. At a mission in St Anne's Cathedral, Belfast, in 1977 he declared 'There are no Roman Catholics in heaven, there are no Anglicans in heaven. There are no Baptists or Presbyterians. Only sinners saved by Jesus Christ on the Cross' (Saunders and Sansom, 239). His openess to Catholics could provoke angry responses from some protestants. When he suggested at the National Anglican Evangelical Conference of 1977 that the 'Reformation was one of the greatest tragedies that ever happened to the Church' because it broke the unity of the body of Christ, he was criticized by some evangelicals. 
Watson was particularly committed to the renewal of the Anglican church and the other mainstream denominations. This, he suggested, was the main purpose of the contemporary 'move' of the spirit, often citing the prophet Ezekiel's vision of the valley of the dry bones to ground this view biblically. He enjoyed strong relations with the local Anglican hierarchy and in contrast to some evangelicals of the period he was convinced that the only justifiable reason for leaving a denomination was either outright apostasy or persecution. At St Michael le Belfrey, he emphasized renewal as lay involvement in ministry; the practice of the gifts of the spirit; intimate and joyful praise and worship; and the use of the arts. From 1977 he began to run successful pan-denominational 'renewal weeks' twice a year at the church, where at each up to 130 church leaders from Britain and abroad experienced the congregation first hand and received teaching and training. 
In 1978, in order to accommodate a growing international ministry, Watson was appointed rector of St Michael le Belfrey, which he had made a symbol of charismatic renewal in the Church of England. A painful period followed, as the church experienced internal disunity following a decision to appoint women elders, one of whom was Watson's wife. He developed a strong friendship and rapport with John Wimber, the Californian renewal leader and founder of the Vineyard movement. Watson was decidedly influenced by Wimber's confidence in the power of God to heal and invited him to take meetings at St Michael's. The Californian then had a significant impact on British charismatic Christianity. In 1981 Watson published 'Discipleship', one of his best-known books, and was in the same year appointed canon provincial of York Minster. The following year he and his family took the decision to move to London, where he intended to further develop both his national and global ministry under the auspices of the Belfrey Trust. He meanwhile published his autobiography, 'You are my God' (1983). 
In April 1983 Watson was diagnosed with an inoperable cancer of the colon which shortly after spread to the liver. For a long period he was convinced that God would heal him, as were John Wimber and other Vineyard pastors who visited him at Guy's Hospital, London. For a time the pain subsided and he was able to return to some public engagements. He spoke publicly about his experience of cancer, broadcasting a BBC Radio 4 interview, 'A case for healing?', in April 1983 and writing about his experiences in 'Fear No Evil' (1984). He died at his home, 15 Eaton Row, Westminster, on 18 February 1984, and was survived by his wife and their two children, Fiona and Guy. The response from the Christian community to his death was considerable, with the largest memorial services held at York Minster and St Paul's Cathedral. 
Watson was a prominent public figure and powerful, effective speaker; yet he was also shy, known for his humility and sometimes sensitive to the criticism of others. As a leader of the charismatic renewal he laid emphasis on the immediacy of the power of God; yet he struggled with chronic asthma and serious bouts of depression throughout his ministry, and was later open about the strains which leadership could put on Christian marriage. He moved comfortably in 'establishment' circles; yet for much of his career he lived a simple lifestyle, being known for wearing second-hand Oxfam shoes. Paradoxes were also evident in his ministry and leadership. He was widely respected among charismatics, yet his rejection of the controversial term of a 'baptism of the Spirit' and his doctrinal emphases allowed conservative evangelicals to identify with him. Regarded as a gifted and balanced renewal leader, he also avoided alienating senior Anglican leaders. His ministry was celebrated as a synthesis of evangelism, reconciliation, and renewal. 


@@@@@


doc= 95620


Weir, James (1842/3-1920), engineer and inventor, was born near Airdrie, Lanarkshire, the fourth of the five children of James Weir, a farmer, and Jean Bishop, who was the child of Bess, the eldest and illegitimate daughter of the poet Robert Burns. No record of his exact date of birth has been found, though he was said to be thirty-two at his marriage on 3 June 1875. Following the early death of Weir senior, the family moved to Glasgow, where James attended school. Aged fifteen, he was sent to work in the offices of Hamilton and Grandison, consulting engineers in Glasgow. Following this, in 1860 he was formally apprenticed as an engineer to Randolph, Elder & Co. in Govan. To raise the requisite 5's'. a week for three years for the apprenticeship, his mother turned to needlework and dressmaking but she may also have received financial help from her eldest son, George, who was a ship's engineer. Randolph, Elder & Co. was at the leading edge of marine engineering in the 1850s and 1860s, and Weir served his apprenticeship under both the original partners. He immediately showed inventiveness and skill as an engineer, and the firm gave him every encouragement, allowing him to patent a new marine governor and to supervise its construction at Smith Bros & Co. This was the first of many inventions by Weir; it was fitted to the SS 'Garland', and the original model was exhibited by the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland. 
When his apprenticeship ended in 1865 Weir went to sea as an engineer, serving first on the Sligo steamer 'Liverpool', then on the Bibby Line steamer 'Arabian' that plied between Liverpool and the eastern Mediterranean. Promoted to first engineer, he left the 'Arabian' in August 1870 to join the 'Oporto' and subsequently the 'Princess Royal', on which George Weir, his elder brother, also served as an engineer. This was Weir's last posting and after he signed off in June 1871 he made only one more working sea voyage, as first engineer of the 'Queen Anne', owned by R. and J. Craig of Glasgow, in May 1874. From this ship he deserted after only six days, presumably following some quarrel with the ship's master. 
While on the 'Princess Royal' Weir had taken out patents for various improvements to steam machinery, and in 1871 or 1872 he went into partnership with his brother, George, as the consulting engineers G. and J. Weir and Co. The firm was based first in Liverpool but moved in 1873 to Glasgow, probably partly due to family financial reasons. At Kilmaurs on 3 June 1875 Weir married Mary Douglas Richmond (1848-1931), the daughter of William Douglas, blacksmith; she had been left well off by the death of her former husband, a bonnet maker from Kilmarnock under contract with the War Office for soldiers' headgear. Her financial contribution to the young company, and desire to stay near her family, may have clinched the decision to move to Glasgow. She brought James Weir a stepson, John Ritchie Richmond, and with him had two sons and two daughters. 
Glasgow at that time was well on its way to being the major British and world centre of shipbuilding. Weir's genius lay in inventing and designing auxiliary devices that addressed particular marine power plant problems, and marketing them adroitly to the shipbuilders. His 1874 hydrokineter used nozzle injectors to promote circulation in ship engine boilers, reducing the time taken to raise steam. It continued in use for about sixty years. Between 1880 and 1886 he produced three more major inventions that laid the foundation of both the new company's success and Weir's fortune. The first was a device to use excess steam to heat the feed water before it entered a steam boiler, so removing the air and limescale that caused boiler corrosion and scaling. The concept of 'regenerative feed heating' is still applied in steam plants of the twenty-first century to improve the thermal economy of the system. 
Feed heating was indispensable at a time in Glasgow when, with the greater use of steel in construction and the adoption of triple-expansion engines, the shipbuilding industry was growing fast. While other inventors had proposed components of the feed system, Weir was the first to combine his own inventions into a unified solution to the feed water problem. His pump for the hot feed water was produced with few design changes into the 1960s, and his evaporator for distilling sea water into the fresh water needed for the boiler helped make the great passenger liners possible by increasing the range that ships could travel before taking on extra water. 
As the Weir company had no plant of its own, all manufacturing was subcontracted. However, by 1886 the Weir brothers had accumulated enough capital to set up the Holm foundry at Cathcart, which was at that time a village on the outskirts of Glasgow. The foundry was among the first factories to use electricity in running its machines, and the company adopted an enlightened employment approach for its time, awarding performance bonuses to its workers. 
Weir brought his stepson, John Richmond, into the business in 1889 as office manager, and his elder son, William Douglas Weir, later first Viscount Weir of Eastwood, was apprenticed in 1893 with a view to his eventually joining the management too. For more effective business practice, in 1895 the partnership was replaced by a private limited company, G. and J. Weir Ltd. James Weir remained as chairman and largest shareholder, but George Weir, whose formerly cordial relations with James had cooled, took this opportunity to sell his shareholding to his brother and retire to Australia. 
The Royal Navy had great demand for the kind of auxiliary equipment that Weir could provide, so he was careful to cultivate a close relationship with the Admiralty's engineer-in-chief, Sir John Durston, and his subordinates. The architect of this relationship was William Weir, who joined the board of the company in 1898 at the age of twenty-one. James Weir was requested by the engineer-in-chief himself to design a high-pressure feed pump to compete with a new French model. He also took out four further patents for various aspects of water-tube boiler design at this time. 
In 1903, contemplating retirement, Weir bought the estate of Over Courance in Dumfriesshire, where he built a house to his own design. He started making lengthy and leisurely tours abroad and developed an interest in agricultural improvement, to which he brought the originality of mind that he had formerly applied to marine engineering problems. He sold his shares to his sons and retired as chairman in 1910, but continued to offer technical consultancy to the firm. He left his company in a healthy condition: the Holm foundry had grown from a single building employing forty men, to a works covering 13 acres and employing 1450. 
Throughout his career James Weir was active in various professional bodies promoting engineering: he was vice-president of the Institute of Marine Engineers, a member of the Institute of Naval Architects, and on the council of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland. He wrote two small treatises, 'Terrestrial Energy' and 'Steam Engine Efficiency' (1891), and in his retirement he published 'The Energy System of Matter: a Deduction from Terrestrial Energy Phenomena' (1912). 
Inventive genius, good design, specialization, and an appreciation of the need to balance business risk in a buoyant but fickle market had made James Weir's success. He died at Over Courance on 10 July 1920, leaving an estate valued at over $500,000. 
Weir's name lives on in the international Weir Group of companies (which still maintains a business in Cathcart) and the Weir chair of thermodynamics and fluid mechanics, established since 1968 at the University of Strathclyde in Glasgow. This university also houses a major part of its engineering faculty in the James Weir building. 


@@@@@


doc= 95621


(Augustus Frederic) Rudolf Hoernle (1841-1918), Indologist and philologist, was born in Secundra, Agra, India, on 19 October 1841, the son of Christian Theophilus Hoernle (1804-1882), one of the early missionaries sent to India under the auspices of the Church Missionary Society. He was educated in Europe at schools in Esslingen and Stuttgart, and the universities of Basel, Tubingen (DPh, 1872), and London. He went to India in 1865 as a Church Missionary Society missionary at Meerut and in 1869 was appointed professor of philosophy and Sanskrit at Jai Narayan's College in Benares. While on leave in England (1874-7) he completed a seminal work on vernacular languages of north India. In 1877 he married Sophie Fredericke Louise, daughter of R. Romig of Bonn; R. F. A. Hoernle was their only son. A. F. R. Hoernle returned to Calcutta, where he was principal of the Cathedral Mission College. In 1881 he joined the Indian educational service and became principal of the Calcutta Madrasa, a position he held until his retirement to England in 1899. He worked on editions and translations of newly discovered texts, most notably the Bower manuscript, a fifth-century birch-bark text in Sanskrit. He also produced a number of important studies of central Asian texts and was a primary decipherer of Khotanese. He served as secretary (1889-92) and president (1897) of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. In 1912 he was made an MA by decree by Oxford University. He died at his home, 8 Northmoor Road, Oxford, on 12 November 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 95622


Attenborough, Frederick Levi (1887-1973), historian and college administrator, was born on 4 April 1887 at Stapleford, Nottinghamshire, the son of Frederick Augustus Attenborough, a baker and grocer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Saxton. His parents were devout Methodists. He was educated at the county school at Long Eaton, Nottinghamshire, under whose enlightened headmaster, Samuel Clegg, he became a pupil teacher. Intelligent and ambitious, he entered the Normal College at Bangor, where he soon discovered that he knew more of English literature than his preceptors. He taught briefly in Liverpool before returning to Long Eaton (where the future botanist Harry Godwin was among his pupils). He was a promising footballer, playing for the Corinthian Casuals, but a badly set broken leg left him with a permanent limp, and unfit for military service in 1914. He was a successful and popular teacher, but he wished to take a degree, and with Clegg's encouragement he matriculated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, graduating in 1918 with first-class honours in modern and medieval languages. H. M. Chadwick, professor of Anglo-Saxon, accepted him as a research student, and in 1920 he was elected to a fellowship at Emmanuel. On 23 March 1922, at Westbourne Park Baptist Chapel, London, he married Samuel Clegg's daughter Mary (1897-1961), a strong partner in all his work. They had three sons, Richard (1923-2014, later Baron Attenborough, film producer and director), David ('b'. 1926, later Sir David Attenborough, naturalist and broadcaster), and John ('b'. 1928, motor industry executive). 
Attenborough enjoyed his life in Cambridge: his own studies had issued in 'The Laws of the Earliest English Kings', published in 1922 and still in print eighty years later, and he was an enthusiastic and effective tutor. The study of English literature, however, had in 1919 won a tripos of its own; linguistic and historical studies such as Chadwick had excelled in were increasingly criticized; and the rise of the movement known as the new criticism may have suggested that Attenborough might find himself no happier, though for different reasons, than he had been in Bangor. In 1925 the principalship of Borough Road College, Isleworth, a teacher training college, fell vacant, and Attenborough successfully applied for the post. The college, which had moved from Southwark to Isleworth in 1908, was one of the best-known and most reputable colleges for training teachers, and had survived the strains of the war, though like many colleges it was in financial difficulties. Next to survival, its objects in 1925 were to secure and maintain financial stability, to improve conditions for its staff and students, to provide degree courses for students who would be equipped to teach in secondary schools instead of the elementary schools of the old dispensation, and to secure the establishment of university delegacies to direct and extend the new courses. That was all congenial work for Attenborough, and he made good progress with it in the years that he spent at Isleworth, though he had insufficient time to improve student accommodation and humanize student life, tasks that fell to his successor. 
In 1931 another opportunity presented itself irresistibly to Attenborough, and he applied for, and was appointed to, the post of principal of the University College of Leicester, taking up the post on 1 January 1932. Leicester was if anything a more difficult case than Borough Road. Housed in the former Leicestershire and Rutland Lunatic Asylum, it had been founded on local initiative as a war memorial, opened in 1921, and kept in being from year to year by expedients. From a handful of such economical subjects as English and Latin, both taught in the first years by the principal, R. F. Rattray, and biology, as a science demanding a minimal investment in laboratory space and equipment, it had contrived to add chemistry and other subjects. Nevertheless, student numbers remained small, its finances were precarious, and internal conflicts had led to Rattray's resignation. On the eve of the depression in the early 1930s it demanded energy and faith of those who would nurse it to the status of a university, which had been its goal from the beginning. 
Attenborough brought to his new post 'two of the qualities that at that stage it needed most: steady enthusiasm and patience in adversity' (Simmons, 159). Despite the onset of the economic depression he was remarkably successful in attracting bequests, donations, and grants from the local authority, enabling the college to expand its accommodation, library, laboratories, and student numbers. He also strengthened the college's social life by creating a new staff common room, instituting an annual dance at a local hotel, and holding regular musical recitals. During the Second World War conscription severely disrupted the college's normal courses, but Attenborough was able to welcome the evacuated King's College of Household and Social Science, and to run officers' courses on radio maintenance for the government. He also worked hard to secure support from the University Grants Committee, an endeavour that bore fruit in 1945, towards the end of the war, when the committee agreed to recommend the college for a Treasury grant. With the return of peace he oversaw a 'violent expansion' of the college (ibid., 157), acquiring new halls of residence, sports grounds, and land for further expansion, introducing new subjects (including social work and education), creating professorships from 1946 onwards, and securing a royal charter in 1950. The net result was a rapid increase in full-time student numbers, from 109 in 1945-6 to 730 in 1950-51. When he retired, in ill health, in 1951 Attenborough left the college 'immeasurably stronger and sounder than the College he had found in 1932' (ibid., 159). Under his successor, C. H. Wilson, the long-cherished goal of university status was finally achieved in 1957. 
Of firm left-wing views, Attenborough was active in arranging accommodation and employment for refugees from the Spanish Civil War and from Nazism; during the Second World War he and his wife provided a home for two German Jewish girls. He, like his wife, was musical, and had a highly developed aesthetic sense. On one occasion a brick was thrown through his window by a local man enraged that the purchasing committee of Leicester Art Gallery (of which he was chairman) had spent $400 on a Sisley. His main recreation was photography, and he provided the photographs for Nikolaus Pevsner's 'The Leaves of Southwell' (1945) and for W. G. Hoskins's 'The Heritage of Leicestershire' (1946) and 'Midland England' (1949). (He and Hoskins were close friends, having undertaken excursions together by car in Leicestershire and the east midlands from the late 1930s, and in 1948 he set up the first department of local history in an English university, with Hoskins as reader.) Balding from an early age, and of neat appearance, he had a great sense of humour, and, as Bryan Forbes recalled, 'scattered new ideas with the same recklessness as he smoked his pipe, and his listeners were scorched by both' ('The Times', 28 March 1973). On his retirement he and his wife moved to Four Elms, Cockrow Hill, Thames Ditton, Surrey, where he enjoyed gardening, but following her death in a car accident in 1961 he moved to Richmond, Surrey, where all three sons lived, staying with each of them in turn for two months at a time. In 1970 the University of Leicester honoured him by naming a new eighteen-storey tower block, designed by Arup Associates and housing the faculties of arts and social sciences, the Attenborough Building. He died on 20 March 1973 at Putney Hospital, London, of bronchopneumonia following a stroke, and was cremated, according to his wishes. He was survived by all three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 95630


Stanford, John Montague Benett- (1870-1947), cinematographer and landowner, was born at the family estate of Pythouse, West Tisbury, Wiltshire, on 5 February 1870, the only legitimate son of Vere Fane Benett-Stanford (1839-1894), landowner and Conservative MP for Shaftesbury (1873-80), and his wife, Ellen (died 1932), daughter and heir of William Stanford of Preston Manor, Brighton. He attended Eton College until the age of sixteen and, although he had passed his army examinations, was apprenticed to the London, Brighton, and South Coast railway because his father thought him too young for a military career. In his youth he lived the life of the archetypal late Victorian gentleman-adventurer, exploring and mapping parts of Kenya and central Africa at the age of twenty-three, and shooting in South Africa and India. He served as a young officer in the Royal Dragoons until 1892, when he resigned his commission. From 1892 to 1900 he held the rank of lieutenant in the Royal Wiltshire yeomanry. On 4 July 1893 he married Evelyn (1868-1957), daughter of Captain Burchall Helme of Broadfield Court, Leominster, and had two children: a son, Vere (1894-1922), and a daughter, Patience (1899-1904). 
Benett-Stanford worked as a war correspondent and cinematographer in the Sudan campaign and the South African War. How he first acquired a movie camera and practised 'living picture' production is unclear. However, in 1898 he embarked for the Sudan with a Prestwich camera to report General Kitchener's final battle with the Mahdists at Omdurman, and took the first ever combat footage, a 75 foot film entitled 'Alarming the Queen's Company of Grenadier Guards at Omdurman'. That film, his later 'The Seaforth Highlanders' Return to Cairo after the Fall of Omdurman and Khartoum', and 'The Sirdar's Reception at Guildhall', were all widely shown throughout England during the Sudan sensation of 1898-9. All three films were printed by George Albert Smith of Brighton; 'Alarming' was distributed by Phillip Wolff, and 'The Seaforth Highlanders' and 'Sirdar' (produced by Robert Paul's Animatograph works) were distributed by the Warwick Trading Co. Early in 1899 Benett-Stanford made at least two films near Quinta Vigia, his family's home in Madeira: 'Panorama of Madeira' and 'Oxen Hauling up Surf Boats at Madeira'. In England that same year he filmed 'The Shamrock: after the Launch', 'Feeding the Pigs', 'Horses', 'Express', and 'Coaches'; all seven films were printed by Smith and distributed by Warwick. 
In October of 1899, armed with a Bioscope camera and an agreement with the Warwick Trading Co., Benett-Stanford set out to film the South African War. In the short period that he worked in South Africa (he left in early 1900 because, according to a contemporary account by Victor Cook, he had been injured during an engagement), he sent back at least five films, each running for about one minute: 'The Fifth Northumberland Fusiliers Digging Entrenchments: the Passing of the Armoured Train'; 'Lancers Crossing the Modder River'; 'Troops Passing over Modder River by Train'; 'The Ambulance Corps at Work'; and '4.7 Gun'. Like his Sudan films, the South African films earned a considerable following and were shown in town halls, music halls, and other venues throughout England. After the South African War, however, he apparently gave up cinematography and rarely spoke of it again. It has been suggested that he may have felt that it was not the activity of an officer and gentleman; the fact that Philipp Wolff used his name in his advertising in 1898 (certainly a showman's advertisement in the 'Era' was not a place for an officer and gentleman's name to appear) supports this speculation. An interest in motor cars seems also to have absorbed his energies. 
Because he so thoroughly embellished accounts of his early life, Benett-Stanford's real accomplishments outside his films remain obscure. Beneath his portrait at Pythouse was a case of medals, many of which he apparently awarded to himself. He always claimed that he had participated in the 1897 Tirah campaign in India, but since he was no longer in the regular army at that time (having retired from the dragoons), his claims must be received with some scepticism. He also claimed to have been made a fellow of the Royal Geographical and the Royal Zoological societies as a result of his African treks in the early 1890s, but these claims cannot be verified either. He was an officer in the Territorial Army and served with the motor volunteer corps in First World War; he retired with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, but his major contribution to the war effort seems to have been lobbing rocks at conscientious objectors from the back seat of his Rolls-Royce. 
After the First World War Benett-Stanford pursued the activities of a country squire: as well as serving as a justice of the peace and a county councillor he rode to hounds, shot, entertained, feuded, and wrote occasional pieces for 'Notes and Queries'. Perhaps in part because he was crushed by his son's untimely death from tuberculosis (probably a result of his being gassed on the western front), he did not age gracefully; he battled with neighbours, his mother, and stepfather (his father died in 1894, and his mother remarried in 1897), the trustees of his estate, and various acquaintances, and was referred to variously as Mad Jack and Roaring Jack. In 1904 he had been fined for assaulting a carter who had blocked the path of his motor car; and in 1910, while on Territorial Army manoeuvres, he was involved in an altercation with a publican, which also resulted in court action. His business interests in the motor industry involved him in litigation in 1905 and 1911. There were sales of the contents of his Wiltshire home in 1919 and 1935. Although he was the last lord of the manor of Preston, his mother's estate in Brighton, a long-running feud with his mother (which included his threat to turn Preston Manor into a girls' school) finally persuaded her to leave it to the municipality of Brighton. He regularly claimed to have exercised the right of 'droit de seigneur' on the girls in the neighbourhood, undoubtedly another of his embellishments. 
Benett-Stanford's retreat into Blimpishness as he grew older may be marked by the accounts of two contemporaries. In 1906 it was said of him: 'While the country gentry of England can show us such sterling representatives of their class as Major Benett-Stanford they will still form the backbone of social order, and may safely disregard those who prate so dolefully of the decadence of our land' (Gaskill, 70). An obituarist concluded: 'He was out of tune with present times and tendencies... John Benett-Stanford was born 300 years too late' (Beevers 35). Benett-Stanford died from heart failure at his home, Pythouse, Tisbury, Wiltshire, on 18 November 1947, and was buried at Norton Bavant. 


@@@@@


doc= 95631


Briggs, Sir Harold Rawdon (1894-1952), army officer, was born at Pipestone, Minnesota, USA, on 14 July 1894, the second of the two sons of Henry Edwin Briggs (1856-1895), banker, and his wife, Georgina Martha Tunnard (1867-1942). In the early 1890s his parents had emigrated to the United States, where his elder brother Rawdon Briggs (1893-1960) was also born. The family returned to England and settled in Bedford, where Henry Edwin Briggs died, allegedly from excessive drink, leaving Georgina to bring up the two infant sons; in 1908 she married George Samuel Jebb. Both sons attended Bedford School and served in the British army. 
After attending the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst, Harold Briggs was placed on the unattached list for the Indian army as a subaltern on 15 August 1914 and was naturalized as a British subject on 24 August. Attached to the 4th battalion, King's regiment, in March 1915, he fought with the regiment in France, but in 1916 transferred to the 31st Punjab (later redesignated the 16th Punjab) regiment of the Indian army. With his new unit he saw action in Mesopotamia and Palestine. In 1917 he was appointed to command one of the battalion's companies with the rank of acting captain. During the inter-war period he served in India and saw action on its turbulent north-west frontier. Transferred to the 10th Baluch regiment in 1923, he served with it in the 1930 Waziristan campaign. In October 1937 he was promoted to command the unit. 
Briggs married, at Shalford, Surrey, on 10 September 1925, Iris Myrtle Grace ('b'. 1894), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Algernon Winn Chaldecott of the Punjab cavalry. They had one son and one daughter. In 1940 he married Irene Mona Wood (1896-1965), widow of Engineer Commander Alfred Oswald Wood RN, and daughter of Herbert Henry Capper, journalist, of Ceylon. 
During the Second World War Briggs saw action in Eritrea, north Africa, and Burma. On 24 September 1940 he was promoted to acting brigadier and placed in command of the 7th Indian brigade. The unit was deployed to Port Sudan, from where it advanced southward along the coast into Italian-held Eritrea. The brigade contributed to the capture of Keren (March 1941) by drawing off Italian units, and played an important role in the subsequent assault on the port of Massawa. The Italians capitulated soon afterwards, freeing up British forces for the north Africa campaign, which was going poorly. 
At the end of April 1941 the 7th Indian brigade rejoined the 4th Indian division, from which it had been detached for the Eritrea campaign. Briggs saw action in operation Crusader, launched by Claude Auchinleck to relieve Tobruk in the autumn of 1941. Although Briggs captured two German positions on the Libyan frontier, the operation failed badly. Rommel drove the British back into Egypt, destroying much of their armour in the process. Briggs's brigade covered the retreat. In December 1941 his 7th brigade spearheaded an attack by the 4th Indian division that captured Benghazi, but a counter-attack by Rommel drove him out in January 1942. In May Briggs was promoted and put in command of the 5th Indian division, held in reserve behind the Gazala line. The division fought in the rearguard action at Mersa Matruh, covering the Eighth Army's retreat to El Alamein, where Briggs took part in the first battle (July 1942), though his division was withdrawn before Montgomery's decisive victory in October. 
Hitler's drive toward the Caucasus in the summer of 1942 raised concerns about the security of Persia, and the War Office moved Briggs and the 5th Indian division there to augment British forces in the early autumn. However, by early 1943 the failure of the Germans' Caucasus campaign and the crushing defeat of German forces at Stalingrad removed the threat to Persia. In June 1943 the 5th Indian division was redeployed to India, where it joined General William Slim's 15th corps. 
Briggs remained with Slim, who was promoted to command of the Fourteenth Army, for most of the Burma campaign. In February 1944 his troops fought in the battle of the Admin Box (named for the administered area British troops defended). In March most of his brigade was airlifted to Imphal, whence it advanced on Kohima, engaging in heavy fighting until June. The battle for Kohima was Briggs's last combat assignment. He was promoted from his brevet brigadier rank to major-general in July 1945 and given administrative assignments in India. Promoted lieutenant-general, he was appointed in April 1946 general officer commanding in Burma, where he gained experience in combating internal unrest. Knighted (KCIE) in 1947, he retired to Limassol, Cyprus, in January 1948, when Burma obtained independence. 
Briggs's retirement, however, proved short lived. In March 1950 his old commander William Slim, now chief of the imperial general staff, recalled him to serve as director of operations during the Malayan emergency, with the task of co-ordinating the police and military services. Since 1948 communist insurgents had been conducting a guerrilla war to expel the British and gain control of Malaya. Operating in large units and with little intelligence on the insurgents' whereabouts and intentions, the army had made little progress in combating them. Briggs, who arrived in April, recognized that the key to victory lay in separating the guerrillas who operated in the jungle from their base of support in the Chinese peasant population living along its fringe. His 'federation plan for the elimination of the communist organisation and armed forces in Malaya', put to the British defence co-ordinating committee on 24 May 1950, was soon known as the Briggs plan, though it drew on many ideas already circulating in Malaya. 
The Briggs plan created an elaborate committee system to co-ordinate security, and a scheme to establish control over the populated areas including the formation of a home guard in towns and villages. Its linchpin was a massive relocation of Chinese squatter communities to new villages away from the jungle and less accessible to the insurgents. These would be protected and equipped with amenities like schools, clinics, and running water. Disconnecting the active cadres in the jungle from their logistic support among the people would force the insurgents to focus on getting food to survive. At the same time an improving standard of living in the new villages would inspire ordinary Chinese to provide the security forces with intelligence on the insurgents. Intelligence and food denial together would make the cadres vulnerable to attack by small military units. 
Although Briggs devised the strategy for victory, he could not successfully implement it, despite the speed of the resettlement programme, by which about 400,000 squatters were moved by early 1952. A divided system of command, which gave the director of operations control of the security forces while the high commissioner (Sir Henry Gurney) retained political oversight, as well as uneasy relations with the police commander, Nicol Gray, hampered the Briggs plan. Gurney was assassinated in October 1951, and Briggs retired a frustrated and disappointed figure at the end of November. He handed over command to General Sir Rob Lockhart, having remained in Malaya longer than the maximum period of eighteen months he had originally agreed to serve. The security situation did not improve until the arrival in February 1952 of General Sir Gerald Templer with a dual appointment as director of operations and high commissioner. Unity of command allowed Templer to energize Briggs's strategy. 
Briggs did not live to see victory in Malaya. His health irreparably damaged, he died in Limassol on 27 October 1952. He had been created KBE in the new year honours list of 1952. He served with distinction in both world wars but is best remembered for his service as director of operations during the Malayan emergency. In his memoir 'Defeat into Victory' Field Marshal Slim provided the best commentary on Briggs's distinguished career: 'I know of few commanders who made as many immediate and critical decisions on every step of the ladder of promotion, and I know of none who made so few mistakes' (p. 166). The Briggs plan, the strategy for victory over communist insurgents, continues to be studied by academics and military officers interested in counter-insurgency. 


@@@@@


doc= 95632


Lavis, Henry James Johnston- (1856-1914), vulcanologist and physician, was born at 107 Bayham Street, Camden Town, London, on 19 July 1856, the son of Frances Lavis (1827-1880), an artist, who was a daughter of John Lavis, a shoemaker in Cheriton Fitzpaine, Devon. His mother already had a daughter, Bertha Lavis, born in 1847. He was a descendant of the Huguenot de Levis family, which had settled in Devon in the seventeenth century. His father, not named on the birth certificate, was Henry-James Johnston. 
Johnston-Lavis was educated at the grammar school, Iver, Buckinghamshire, where his interest in geology was sparked by a fossil thrown at him by another boy. On leaving school, he began medical training in Marseilles, France, the location chosen for the benefit of his mother's health. In 1873 he transferred to University College, London, where he remained as a medical student until 1878, undertaking some of his studies at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington. At University College he was inspired by the teaching of the influential geologist John Morris, and at the age of only nineteen was elected a fellow of the Geological Society. His first paper (1876) was on the Triassic strata at Sidmouth; some bones he had discovered there were found to be a new species of amphibian, and named 'Labyrinthodon lavisi' in his honour. He qualified as MRCS, LRCP, and LSA in 1878. 
Johnston-Lavis entered medical practice in Stalbridge, Dorset, and then moved to Plaistow, before gaining the degree of bachelor of science (Paris). In January 1879 he married Antonia Francoise Bourdariat de Saint-Aupre (1853-1917), with whom he had six children. Towards the end of 1879 he moved to Naples, where he started a medical practice for English-speaking communities, acquiring the degree of doctor of medicine and surgery in Naples in 1884. He was also appointed chief medical officer to the works of Sir W. Armstrong, Mitchell and Co. Ltd at Pozzuoli in the Campi Flegrei district to the west of Naples. His dedication and selfless attitude was exemplified by his treatment of cholera patients. 
In Italy Johnston-Lavis was able to pursue his geological interests. He published a monograph (1885) on the earthquakes that occurred at Ischia in 1881 and, more devastatingly, in 1883. He urged that investment be made in earthquake monitoring stations. On discovering that very little had been written about Monte Somma and Vesuvius, he devoted much of his spare time to their study, making detailed field observations and presenting a paper on the subject to the Geological Society in 1884. He continued these investigations on behalf of the British Association, submitting regular reports for the following eleven years, until 1895. Fieldwork occasionally involved considerable risks: during one eruption, he and a companion were cut off by a lava flow, only escaping through Johnston-Lavis's knowledge of the Monte Somma cliffs surrounding the central vent. On another occasion, in 1882, he discovered a lava tunnel, within which was a 'glistening forest of stalactites' of various colours: 'bird's egg blue, acquamarine, salmon white, yellow and reddish brown'. With his mouth and nose covered against the acidic gases, and linked to waiting colleagues by straps, he plunged into the tunnel to collect specimens, to be pulled out at the last minute into fresh air, coughing and spluttering, with his prizes ('Nature', 1882, 294-5). His scientifically accurate geological map of Vesuvius, produced in 1891, was the culmination of 250 days of detailed survey work and represented the first detailed geological map of the area, and a valuable record of lava flows up to 1888. In 1892 he was appointed professor of vulcanology at the Royal University of Naples. 
During the early 1890s Johnston-Lavis spent several summers working in the spa town of Harrogate, Yorkshire; his writings included 'Prescriber's Guide to the Harrogate Mineral Waters', published in 1892. In 1894 he moved to the south of France, qualifying in medicine again at the University of Lyons in 1895, with a thesis on the link between shellfish and gastric problems, a relationship he had recognized early in his career. After spending a season at Monte Carlo, he moved to the small community of Beaulieu-sur-Mer, near Nice. Beaulieu was gaining popularity as a resort, leading to the development of hotels and businesses. Using an inheritance from an Italian aristocrat, he was able to build the Hotel Empress in Beaulieu, and also his home, Villa Lavis. One of the founders of the Queen Victoria Memorial Hospital in Nice, which opened in 1906, he served as senior consulting physician there until his death. He also spent summers at Vittel in the Vosges, France, where he held the position of English consulting physician to the Etablissement de la Societe Generale des Eaux Minerals de Vittel. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Johnston-Lavis was in Paris. As the railways could not be used, he left for the south of France by road, and was killed on 10 September 1914, when the car in which he was a passenger burst a tyre, crashing at Estivareilles, Alliers, near Bourges, Cher. He is buried in Beaulieu with his wife, mother-in-law, and son, Marcus Antonius Johnston de Lavis-Trafford (1880-1960). His son was also a medical doctor at Nice, who shared his father's interest in archaeology, and was a pioneer of winter sports in the French Alps. His daughter Sylvia (1887-1971) married the Belgian mineral prospector Francois Fournier (1857-1935), who made a fortune from his discovery of a major gold deposit at Las Dos Estrellas in Mexico. 
Johnston-Lavis published over 200 articles, mostly concerning southern Italian volcanoes. His detailed and accurate contemporary observations remain crucial to an understanding of earlier eruptions of Vesuvius, and remain of value in understanding the volcano's behaviour. His large-scale geological map of the volcano was not superseded until 2003. He acquired a magnificent collection of books, lithographs, gouaches, engravings, photographs (mainly albumen prints), and geological specimens, which he offered to the geology museum at University College, London, in 1913. The collection was finally moved in 1921, having been delayed by the war, and was first opened to the public in 1925. At the time it was described as 'probably the finest collection in existence (the Neapolitan Collections not excepted) of specimens, maps and literature relating to South Italian volcanic phenomena' (K. W. Earle in 'Proceedings of the Geological Association', 39, 1928, 96-8), and was the subject of an exhibition at University College in 2005-6. His specimen collections include 1524 rocks, many from Naples, and particularly illustrative of his geological map. Some, such as those of the 1906 Vesuvian eruption, were carefully collected in triplicate in order to offer some to the British Museum and the Smithsonian Institute in Washington DC. Many of the 1600 minerals remaining are also from the Naples district, and include rare and unstable sublimates especially from the 1906 eruption of Vesuvius. These specimens and photographs are of importance as a record of areas which were submerged by the products of later eruptions. 


@@@@@


doc= 95642


Cobbold, Lady Evelyn (1867-1963), traveller and convert to Islam, was born on 17 July 1867 at 13 Great Stuart Street, Edinburgh, the eldest of the six children (five daughters and one son) of Charles Adolphus Murray, seventh earl of Dunmore (1841-1907), and his wife, Lady Gertrude (1847-1943), who was a daughter of Thomas Coke, second earl of Leicester of Holkham, and his first wife, Juliana. Her father, the seventh earl of Dunmore, was an officer in the Scots Guards, lord-in-waiting during Disraeli's government of 1874-80, and a noted traveller, who published in 1893 an account of his journeys in the Pamir mountains of central Asia. In later life he became a Christian Scientist. Her elder brother, Alexander Edward Murray (1871-1962), who succeeded as eighth earl of Dunmore, won the Victoria Cross in 1897 during the Tirah campaign on the north-west frontier of India. 
Lady Evelyn's interest in both travel and Islam developed during a childhood punctuated by winters in Algeria and Egypt, where she accompanied her father on sorties into the desert. In Algeria she learnt to speak Arabic and delighted in escaping her governess to visit local mosques with her Algerian friends. She later considered that, 'unconsciously I was a little Moslem at heart' ('Pilgrimage', xiii). However, she forgot Arabic and her Muslim friends amid the European social scene in Cairo, where, on 23 April 1891, she married John Dupuis Cobbold (1861-1929), a country gentleman, sportsman, and brewer who at the age of twenty-one had succeeded as head of Cobbold's brewery in Suffolk. Their marriage was unhappy, but produced a son and two daughters. 
Influenced by her traveller father and perhaps encouraged by tales of her relative, Jane Digby, who settled in Syria with her Bedouin husband, Lady Evelyn yearned to escape Suffolk and the 'restlessness and mad endeavour of modern life' to return to the desert ('Wayfarers', 4). In 1911 she set out with an American friend, Frances Gordon Alexander (died 1931), on a comfortable three-week round trip from Cairo to the Libyan desert. The diary of their uneventful but romantic journey was published in 1912 under Lady Evelyn's name in London and Frances's in New York. The two texts are almost identical but Lady Evelyn's is more enthusiastic for Islam as a simple, democratic, living faith. 
Lady Evelyn travelled further in the Middle East before the First World War. She chanced upon T. E. Lawrence near Petra in 1914, and lent him enough money to return to Damascus (Lawrence, 287). By the time they met again in Egypt the following year, Lady Evelyn had renounced Christianity for Islam and taken the Muslim name Zainab ('scented flower'). Though Islam seemed to offer an antidote to modern, secular Western society, she only began to question her religious identity after a chance meeting with the pope, who assumed she was Catholic. Subsequent study of Islam persuaded her that Islam was the religion 'most calculated to solve the world's many perplexing problems, and to bring to humanity peace and happiness' ('Pilgrimage', xiv). 
A private and independent person, Lady Evelyn eschewed the mosque and Muslim Mission at Woking, but attended affiliated social and pan-Islamic meetings in nearby London. There she befriended numerous Turcophiles, including Marmaduke Pickthall, whom she unsuccessfully encouraged publicly to profess Islam during dinner at Claridge's in 1915, two years before his eventual public declaration (Fremantle, 257). After the First World War she urged the British government to prevent further fragmentation of the Ottoman empire and guarantee the temporal power of the Ottoman caliph. She donated money to Pickthall's pro-Turkish Islamic Information Bureau, and in 1919 was the only female signatory of a memorial to the government calling for appeasement towards Turkey. 
Lady Evelyn did not attempt to convert members of her family and though her husband sympathized with Turkey, he was not attracted to Islam. When they finally separated in 1921 Lady Evelyn took possession of a house in London and the substantial Glencarron estate on the north-west coast of Scotland, where she pursued her passion for deerstalking, shooting, and fishing. 
In 1933, at the age of sixty-five, Lady Evelyn became the first British Muslim woman to make the 'hajj' (pilgrimage to Mecca). She travelled in style, hiring a chauffeured car and receiving special attention through introductions from Harry St John Bridger Philby. Her 'hajj' diary, published by Murray's in 1934, received a mixed reception because it combined travelogue with a bold treatise on Islam and Muslim history for Western, non-Muslim readers. Lady Evelyn presented Islam as a tolerant, peaceful, flexible Abrahamic faith. She also drew upon her privileged experience of both the male and female spheres in Arabia to defend and justify Islamic codes regarding the social and legal position of Muslim women. Her second book for Murray's, by comparison a dull account of a trip to Kenya, was published in 1935. But it was for making the 'hajj' that Lady Evelyn became known. Overcoming prohibitions against women, she talked about her experience at the Central Asian Society's dinner club and the Travel Club, contributed articles to such journals as the 'Geographical Magazine', and became a patron of the Muslim Society of Great Britain. 
For all her love of travel, Lady Evelyn considered Britain home. On the eve of the 'hajj''s concluding feast of sacrifice she longed to see 'green fields, grey skies, to hear the splash of rain', and so obtained permission from Ibn Sa'ud to leave early ('Pilgrimage', 237). Eccentric and difficult in later life, Lady Evelyn continued to flit between London and Glencarron until, about 1959, a broken hip forced her into an Inverness nursing home, where she remained bedridden and died of cardiovascular degeneration on 25 January 1963. In accordance with her wishes, she received a Muslim burial in a remote spot at Glencarron. Her family persuaded the doubtful officiating imam that the grave was facing Mecca, and a slab of stone was placed upon it inscribed with a Koranic verse describing God as 'the light of the heavens and the earth' ('Koran', 24: 35). 


@@@@@


doc= 95643


Burt, William Mathew (c.1725-1781), colonial governor, was born at Elim in Jamaica, the first of fourteen children of Colonel William Pym Burt (died 1750), a planter in Nevis, and subsequently chief justice and treasurer of St Kitts, and his second wife, Louisa, only daughter of Sir William Mathew, captain general and governor of the Leeward Islands, and his wife, Katherine Remee, 'nee' van Leembutt, who was a maid of honour to Mary II. He was the great-grandson of William Burt, who left England in 1635 and became deputy governor of Nevis in 1685. 
Burt's early years were spent in St Kitts, where he was a member of the council from 1745 to 1755. He was well thought of, and in 1751 the St Kitts assembly resolved 'nemine contradicente' that: 'it is the opinion of this House that the Honourable William Mathew Burt Esq, President of His Majesty's Council in this island,... did execute this command with great justice, prudence, diligence and integrity to the general satisfaction of all the people of this island and has constantly behaved as a person qualified and fitting for such command. (minutes of the St Kitts assembly meeting, 25 Feb 1751, TNA: PRO, CO 241/6, section 12, p. 19)' Some members of the assembly were not completely happy with this eulogy, and at the next meeting it was decided to add the words 'with great loyalty and zeal for His Majesty's service' (minutes of the St Kitts assembly meeting, 4 March 1751, ibid. section 13, p. 3). 
With the islanders' praises ringing in his ears Burt moved to England and acquired a country estate at Maiden Earley, near Reading. In reply to an enquiry from the secretary to the lords commissioners for trade and plantations he wrote from Bond Street with some asperity 'tis not my intention to return for some years to St Christophers. I am perfectly satisfied with the propriety of this determination' (Burt to the lords commissioners, 26 July 1755, TNA: PRO, CO 152/28, bundle Bb62, p. 149). The lords commissioners consequently decided to replace him on the St Kitts council with someone else. On 29 August 1754, at St George's, Hanover Square, London, he married Sarah (1727-1781), the daughter of Colonel John Foster of Jamaica. They had three children: Elizabeth, Louisa, and Charles Pym. 
When the Seven Years' War broke out, Burt was consulted by the British cabinet and was involved in planning the British expedition that attacked first Martinique and then Guadeloupe in 1759, eventually capturing the latter, where Burt was sent as crown agent. He returned to England, and was elected MP for Great Marlow in 1761. His first speech in the Commons was described by James Harris as 'dull as far as could be heard' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 164), and he was later accused by Harris of rambling 'from Africa to America' (ibid.). In 1768 he contested Great Marlow again and was badly defeated. By then he was a wealthy man, owning a town house in London as well as his manor at Maiden Earley and property in St Kitts. He also owned land on Prince Edward Island. 
In 1776 Burt was appointed captain-general, governor, and commander-in-chief of the Leeward Islands. With a liking for military matters, he devoted much of his energy to warlike preparations and, when the long-expected war with France started, he found good opportunity for indulging his taste. Dominica was captured by the French in September 1778, and St Kitts was thought to be their next objective. Burt took energetic steps to prepare the defence of the island but he was frequently at odds with the house of assembly. With the aid of slaves from government supporters and his own money he built storehouses, roofed Charles Fort, built carriages for the serviceable cannon, and bought ammunition and provisions that he stored at Brimstone Hill. When the expected attack did not take place and the time came for paying for the stores, the house of assembly refused to foot the bill. 
Burt was thanked by the king for his services and promised a peerage but died suddenly at Antigua on 27 January 1781 between four and five o'clock in the morning, apparently in a state of delirium. He was buried on the island. There were rumours that he had been poisoned. He had by then become very unpopular and was said to have been something of a martinet, with an irascible temper. In January 1782, a year after his death, the long-expected attack on St Kitts came. Brimstone Hill was inadequately prepared and, after a gallant but fruitless defence, surrendered. The British flag was lowered, and the fleur-de-lis waved for a while over St Kitts. 
Fifty years after Burt's death his grandson, William Mathew Hansard, petitioned the king, on the grounds that the bills for fortifying Brimstone Hill and supplying it with provisions and ammunition, estimated at $7,381 19's'. 10died, had fallen entirely on Burt and had never been repaid, and that this had ruined Burt's descendants. But the British government, in the form of Viscount Goderich, turned a deaf ear. 


@@@@@


doc= 95645


Burt, Sir Archibald Paull (1810-1879), colonial judge, was born on 1 September 1810 in St Kitts, the second son and second of the seven children of George Henry Burt (1787-1851), sugar planter, merchant, and speaker of the house of assembly of St Kitts, and his wife, Eliza Anne (1787-1835), only child of William McTair and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Earle. He was the great-great-great-grandson of Colonel William Burt, who sailed from England to the West Indies in 1635 and started a dynasty of colonial administrators. 
Burt was sent by his father across the Atlantic to a private school in Richmond, Surrey, and was admitted to the Middle Temple to study law on 12 April 1825, at the age of fourteen, but was not called to the English bar until 1845. However, his Middle Temple qualification was sufficient for his admission to the St Kitts bar when he returned to the island in 1830. He built up a successful legal practice and also formed a trading partnership with another barrister, Francis Spencer Wigley. Their earnings as barristers enabled them to invest in a number of sugar estates. When slavery was abolished in 1834, Burt, already a member of the house of assembly, owned three slaves: a washerwoman aged forty called Sarah; a twelve-year-old house servant called John; and a one-year-old baby. On 4 June 1836, at St George's, Basseterre, Burt married Louisa Emily (1814-1870), only daughter of Dr John Bryan. They had twelve children, two of whom died in infancy. By 1837 Burt had taken silk. He became a member of the legislative and executive councils and of the administrative committee of St Kitts and later followed in his father's footsteps, becoming speaker of the house of assembly. A leading layman in the Church of England, he was chancellor of the diocese of Antigua between 1855 and 1860. 
In 1848 Burt was provisionally appointed attorney-general of St Kitts, and the following year the appointment was confirmed, the lieutenant-governor having told the governor: 'Of unblemished private character Mr Burt unites many qualities which befit a servant of the Crown... he is endowed with considerable power of application to business as well as with that sound sense and equal temper that are peculiarly wanted in this office. (Robert James Mackintosh to James Macaulay Higginson, 5 Sept 1849, TNA: PRO, CO 239/99, no. 44, 10823/56)' The salary was $300 a year, half that paid to the chief justice, who in 1856 died of apoplexy while sitting on the bench. The new lieutenant-governor wanted to appoint Burt to the vacant chief justiceship, but the governor vetoed the appointment, arguing that someone should not be appointed to the bench in a colony where he had practised and been resident. Nevertheless the lieutenant-governor continued to press for Burt's appointment, referring to his 'high legal reputation and great talent, probably equal to if not greater than that of any lawyer in the West Indies, and also the unbounded esteem in which he is held in this community' (Hercules Robinson to Ker Baillie Hamilton, 17 Nov 1856, TNA: PRO, CO 239/99, no. 61, 11348/56). Acrimonious letters were exchanged, and the governor sought the support of the secretary of state, knowing that it was unlikely that his decision would be countermanded. The refusal of Burt's appointment was confirmed, but the Colonial Office seems to have realized that an injustice had been done to Burt and the secretary of state for the colonies was soon writing about a vacancy on the Jamaican bench, suggesting that it 'could be made available for the promotion of Mr Burt' (Henry Labouchere to Ker Baillie Hamilton, 31 Jan 1857, TNA: PRO, CO 239/103, no. 69, 6383/59). It was then found that in Jamaica a lawyer could not become a judge unless he had practised at the Jamaican or English bar, the converse of the position in the Leeward Islands. With apparently no prospect of promotion in the West Indies, Burt wrote to the Colonial Office, indicating his willingness 'to serve the Crown in any of Her Majesty's possessions' (Burt to the duke of Newcastle, 20 June 1859, TNA: PRO, CO 239/103, no. 5, 6383). A year later he was offered and accepted the position of civil commissioner and chairman of quarter sessions in Western Australia. 
Burt uprooted himself from St Kitts, leaving in June 1860 and travelling via Southampton to Australia, arriving at Fremantle on 29 January 1861. Before he left St Kitts, the house of assembly unanimously voted him a gift of $500 as a mark of esteem; 750 people signed an address praising his service to the island, concluding 'in you, the poor and distressed will lose a friend and a father' ('Illustrated News of the World', 22 Sept 1860); and a public meeting presented him with a purse with which to buy, when he reached London, a candelabrum. Five months after his arrival in Fremantle Burt became Western Australia's first chief justice. He was a sympathetic and humane judge, particularly considerate towards the interests of the Aborigines and concerned at their mistreatment. He became a trusted adviser of the governors of the colony and was very much the Victorian paterfamilias, faithful to the Anglican church and a figure of dignity whose word was law not only in his court but also at home. Burt found social conditions in the Swan River settlement somewhat less orderly and predictable than they had been in St Kitts, and he ordered from London a revolver as well as four tweed suits. His opinion that all who came before him were equal and entitled to the same fair treatment frequently brought him into conflict with the views of the settler establishment. Particularly notable was his role in the 1872 case of 'R. v. Burges', in which the latter was accused of murdering an Aborigine. The jury found Burges guilty of manslaughter, but Burt sentenced him to five years' imprisonment, declaring that the prisoner's acts had retarded peaceful colonization. The colonists were outraged, and the newspapers portrayed Burges as a martyr. 
In 1870 Burt was devastated by the death of his wife. In 1871 his second son died of a fever, aged thirty-three. Four days later his daughter-in-law died, aged thirty-four. Just over a month later, his tenth son died of typhoid, aged seventeen. The month after that his brother-in-law and business partner, Francis Spencer Wigley, died. Weighed down by personal sorrow and public criticism, Burt applied in July 1873 for leave of absence to return to St Kitts to try to salvage the affairs of the partnership into which he had entered with Wigley. But his attempt was unsuccessful, and the partnership was declared bankrupt. At the end of 1873, a year otherwise full of misery, there was some consolation. He was awarded a knighthood and was dubbed by Queen Victoria herself on 12 December. He returned to Perth in 1874, strengthened by the Colonial Office's confidence in him, but his relations with the press continued to be strained, as were his relations with the crown solicitor and the attorney-general. 
In November 1879 Burt contracted a leg infection, which developed into erysipelas, and he died at his home, Strawberry Hill, Adelaide Terrace, Perth, on 21 November. The union jack was flown at half-mast on the town hall tower, all public offices were closed, the bells of all the city's churches were tolled, and the previously hostile newspapers paid tribute to 'a courteous gentleman of unimpeachable integrity' (Morling, 7). The funeral on 23 November was one of the largest ever seen in Perth, and his coffin was placed in the family vault at East Perth cemetery. J. M. Bennett, an Australian legal historian, later described Burt as 'a commanding lawyer and a man of great independence and diligence, well versed in all aspects of colonial administration... So strong were the foundations on which he set the law and its institutions in the colony that they survived the mischief worked by lesser lawyers who succeeded him in the nineteenth century. (Bennett, dust jacket)' 



@@@@@


doc= 95651


Hinton, Alfred Horsley (1863-1908), photographer, was born at 255 Goswell Road, Clerkenwell, London, on 24 August 1863, the son (he had two older sisters) of Alfred Hinton ('b'. 1825/6), cheesemonger, and his wife, Mary Sarah, 'nee' Witherington ('b'. 1822/3). The family moved to Walthamstow, Essex, where he was brought up. He trained as an artist and draughtsman but also had a formidable writing talent. 
From 1887 to 1891 Hinton was the editor of the short-lived 'Photographic Art Journal', and from 1889 also had some involvement with a photographic apparatus company in London. He married, on 23 April 1890, Louisa Jane ('b'. 1866/7), daughter of William Fisher Rolfe, manufacturer, of Woodford Green, Essex. Following the demise of the 'Photographic Art Journal' he worked for Ralph Winwood Robinson, son of Henry Peach Robinson, as manager of the Guildford branch of Robinson's photographic portrait studio between 1891 and 1893. 
Hinton never took to portraiture. His own photographic interests were in atmospheric, moody, and romantic large-format pictorial landscapes -- most often of the under-photographed Essex marshes or the Yorkshire moors -- which he printed, dramatically and exquisitely, in platinum. It seems likely that he gained his expertise in both combination printing (prints made from several different negatives to make a composite whole) and platinum printing (using platinum, rather than silver, for longevity and aesthetic effect and to give a wide range of subtle grey tones rather than the various shades of brown otherwise available) during his two years with Robinson. 
After experiencing the daily monotonous grind of a commercial portrait studio Hinton soon went back to journalism and became the editor of 'Amateur Photographer' from 1893 until his death. Finally he had found his calling. As editor of the most popular and widely read of British photographic publications he had a huge influence on British amateur photography for the next fifteen years. He wrote clear instructive articles about the intricacies of photographic technique, but also introduced a well-received bias towards the art of pictorial photography, giving the magazine a serious artistic validity it had not previously possessed. He also had an acerbic tongue and wrote provocatively and with conviction. 
Hinton became the British photography world's most called upon spokesperson and frequently contributed articles and weekly columns to 'The Times', the 'Daily Telegraph', 'The Graphic', and various other art journals both in the UK, Europe, and the USA. He was the English correspondent of the 'Photo-Club de Paris' through his contacts with Robert Demachy and, initially, was a friend and frequent correspondent of Alfred Stieglitz, the instigator and leader of the American 'Photo-Secession', although the relationship soured as both men sought leadership of art photography. 
In 1892 Hinton had been a founder member of the Linked Ring Brotherhood, a group of photographers who had split away from the Photographic Society (by 1894 the Royal Photographic Society, RPS) to give more emphasis to photography as a creative art rather than a technical science. Hinton exhibited his platinum landscapes in the Linked Ring's annual photographic salon from 1892 to 1908, his prices ranging from 2 to 7 guineas. But while many of the Linked Ring members eventually drifted back to the RPS and were members of both organizations for a while, Hinton's application for RPS membership in 1894 was blackballed, and although he exhibited with the organization occasionally over the next decade, he never became a member. His journalistic pen was sharp, he was hugely influential, and he was perceived to be undesirable. 
Something of a workaholic, Hinton also produced a great number of books on photography aimed at simplification and communication, including 'Handbook of Illustrations' (1894), 'Use of the Hand Camera' (1898), 'Platinotype Printing: a Simple Book on the Process' (1904), and 'How to Ensure Correct Exposure' (1907). He died prematurely, of enteric fever, on 25 February 1908, at his home, Ardshiel, Montalt Road, Woodford Green, Essex. His widow survived him. According to various contemporary accounts he had great personal charm. His obituary spoke of 'A lover of nature and natural history, an indefatigable worker, [a] nervously energetic temperament quick to give and receive appreciation, ever ready to lend a helping hand or friendly counsel to a photographic society or an isolated individual' (F. Lambert, 'Photographic Journal', March 1908, 165-6). He was given a one-man posthumous exhibition by the RPS from 8 April to 5 May 1908, and 'Amateur Photographer' established the Hinton memorial fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 95652


Baker, Beatrice May (1876-1973), headmistress and internationalist, was born at 2 High Street, Hereford on 4 May 1876, the third daughter and youngest child in the family of three daughters and a son of Edward Joseph Baker, a gentleman's tailor in Hereford, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Pugh. The family's business, with premises in High Street, Hereford, was sufficiently successful to support a servant and allow all four children to attend Hereford high school. In 1896 Baker secured a $30 bursary for three years in order to pursue an arts degree at Royal Holloway College. Perhaps for financial reasons, she remained at the college for only one year, but gained a London University BA degree, and took great pride throughout her working life in her university education. 
A brief period boarding in Islington and working locally as a schoolmistress at the Central Foundation School preceded the decisive application for a teaching post in Cardiff in 1902. The Cardiff Intermediary School for Girls predated the local boys' high school by three years. Consequently, the founding headmistress Mary Collin enjoyed a rare degree of freedom in the development of its ethos. Collin and her deputy, Marion Layton, educated at Bedford College, London, and Newnham College, Cambridge, respectively, made exacting academic standards an intrinsic part of the new school's ethos, and their political beliefs and styles of leadership offer clues to Baker's political development. Collin was an advocate of women's suffrage, a supporter of the Women Citizens' Association when it opened a Cardiff branch in 1910, and a member of the Women's Liberal Association. Her personal style, which Baker adopted, combined carefully presented respectability with such overtly modern touches as the active encouragement of cycling. It was at Cardiff that Baker met her lifelong companion and deputy, Lucy Jane Rendall (1881/2-1966). 
In 1911 Baker accepted a post at a private school for the daughters of gentlemen lodged in Badminton House, in the suburb of Clifton, Bristol. After a brief trial period she became headmistress and proprietor, the school's third since its foundation in 1858. At the age of thirty-five she proceeded with Rendall to transform a modest, dignified private school into an ambitious academic and socially aware institution with a reputation that extended well beyond Bristol. 
By 1918 five of Baker's eight staff had studied at Oxford, Cambridge, or London. Societies for the study of archaeology, debating, drama, and reading were founded. Staff and students established a holiday cottage for families from the Bristol slums, and girls were expected to be prepared to quote an item of news or poetry on demand. The transformation alienated some. One parent complained of a conscientious objector on the staff: 'they'll have to get rid of him, or I'll write to the 'Daily Mail'' (Cooper, 7). But others were attracted to the combination of public-school aspirations and progressive ideology. Parents in the inter-war period included members of the Trevelyan family, the potter Bernard Leach, the publisher Victor Gollancz, the painter Stanley Spencer, and the poet and author Naomi Mitchison. By 1919 supporters agreed that Baker's ambitions for the school necessitated a move from Clifton to a graceful country house in the Bristol satellite town of Westbury-on-Trym. In 1931 Badminton was reconstituted as a public school, with a distinguished board of governors (including Gilbert Murray, Edith Major, and Ernest Barker) and a nascent national profile. 
Baker's genius was to marry an internationalist ethos to the public-school tradition. The life of the school was interlaced with international rhetoric and symbolism, designed in Baker's words to create 'forward looking citizens of a new world' (Blewitt, 222). In practice this meant a near-veneration of the ideas and processes of the League of Nations, and a rejection of the emotive nationalism that prevailed in the school's competitors. 
Baker's students carried excerpts from the covenant of the League of Nations in their pockets (Conradi, 68). She led annual pilgrimages to the league's headquarters in Geneva. Bristol suburbs were subjected to conversion drives in support of the peace ballot, and nationalist heroes were supplanted by pacifist exemplars in a syllabus which presented British history as 'a dark legend of peasants being massacred by barons, the iniquities of the slave trade, and a wicked foreign office bent on reintroducing opium to the five ports' (Valery, 20). Activism and political protest were presented as legitimate, even necessary, forms of engagement with society and the state. 
In the chapel Van Gogh's 'Blue Cart' took the place of a crucifix behind the altar and the scripture was taken from anyone from Plato and Marx to those Baker called the 'modern prophets' -- chiefly Emerson, Carlyle, and Thoreau. Christian duty was presented as a rejection of international and social divisions. As the author Iris Murdoch, once a pupil at Badminton, dryly observed, Jesus often had to share the stage with Lenin (Storry, 53). 
Baker took in the future Indian prime minister Indira Nehru, whose father languished in an Indian gaol, and won her lifelong respect, but refugees (there were many from Europe) found Baker an emotionally remote and demanding figure and even her admirers found her fierce idealism daunting. The Second World War, and the attendant collapse of the league and its aspirations, were a blow to Baker's idealistic vision of world citizenship. She led the school doggedly through its wartime relocation to Dorset, but retired in 1946. In retirement she entertained and corresponded with former students into her nineties. 
Known universally as BMB, Baker was short of stature, had piercing blue eyes, and wore her silver hair tied firmly down with a black band. She died at Greyfriars Nursing Home, Nailsea, Somerset, on 28 September 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 95654


Rudge, Mary (1842-1919), chess player, was born in Leominster, Herefordshire, on 6 February 1842, the youngest child in a family of two sons and five daughters of Henry Rudge (1795/6-1874), a surgeon, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Barrett (1801/2-1863). 
Mary Rudge learned chess in early childhood and became the first Englishwoman to play the game competitively to a high standard and over a long period. As early as 1864 she and her elder sister Emily Rudge (1838/9-1873), using the pseudonyms of Snowdon and Vesuvius, played in the fourth correspondence chess tournament sponsored by 'Cassell's Illustrated Family Newspaper'. From 1870 to 1873 they competed in several more such postal competitions; Emily also won a women's tournament at Malvern in 1872. 
The break-up of the family home following the death of her father led to Rudge and her unmarried sister Caroline (1833-1900) moving to Bristol, where their brother Henry (1837-1891) was a curate. The Bristol and Clifton Chess Association had decided in 1871 to admit women as members, one of the first chess clubs in the world to do so, and this fortunate coincidence provided the second step in her ladder to chess proficiency. Soon an expert was writing that 'It is considered that Miss Rudge has not a superior among the ladies of this country' ('Chess Player's Chronicle', Feb 1875, 197). 
In the 1870s Rudge played a long series of matches receiving odds from Edmund Thorold (1833-1899) of Bath, a widower whose sister Eliza Mary Thorold (1835/6-1904) was one of her principal rivals. Edmund Thorold was one of England's leading provincial amateurs but, as Rudge increased in proficiency, she was able to defeat most male opponents on level terms. On several occasions she won prizes in tournaments competing with recognized experts, notably in 1878 at Grantham. A cautious player, she employed quiet openings, took few risks, and eschewed the speculative play preferred by most of her amateur contemporaries. She won her games by sound technique, exploiting opponents' errors. 
From 1879 the Rudge family ran the Luccombe House preparatory school, Redland, Bristol, but they fell on hard times when it failed in 1885. Henry Rudge moved to Lancashire but Mary and Caroline remained in Bristol, probably living with their widowed sister Sarah Heslop. In 1889 an appeal on Mary Rudge's behalf was published, saying she was in 'very depressed pecuniary circumstances' ('British Chess Magazine', June 1889, 231). This led to a donation of $20 from the Bristol club, whose championship cup she had just won, in recognition of her services to the club in match play. She also received an invitation to visit Dublin, where she stayed between 10 July 1889 and 8 May 1890 as the guest of the chess problem composers and journalists Thomas and Frideswide Rowland (Frideswide was the youngest daughter of Richard Brydges Beechey). 
Rudge was one of the strongest players in Ireland at this period and in later years paid further visits to Dublin. In the 1889-90 Armstrong cup (one of the earliest chess leagues in the world) she played second board below the Irish champion, James Porterfield Rynd. She was unbeaten, winning eight games and drawing three, one being against John Howard Parnell, elder brother of the Irish nationalist politician. This excellent performance (fourth best individual result) helped the Clontarf club to win the competition. She also shared second prize in the second correspondence tournament of the 'Dublin Evening Mail' (1890-93), organized by the Rowlands, defeating the top English amateur, William Gunston, who won first prize. 
Rudge next won the ladies' challenge cup in Cambridge, at the 1890 meeting of the Counties Chess Association. For the next few years she abstained from female tournaments, probably because of the gulf in skill between her and the opposition, but continued to enjoy success against men, notably in winning the second-class tournament of the Southern Counties Chess Association in 1896. She also became a member of the Ladies' Chess Club, founded in 1895, but could play little part in its London-based activities. 
The peak of Rudge's career was her overwhelming victory in the first ladies' international chess tournament, held in London in the summer of 1897 to celebrate Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee. She conceded just one draw against nineteen opponents to win the $60 first prize, donated by the newspaper magnate Sir George Newnes MP, and became acknowledged as lady champion of the world. She explained her success by saying that she cultivated her talent for chess 'more by practice over the board than book study; by correspondence games, matches friendly and otherwise' (Rudge, 27). 
Although Rudge was not noted as a chess problemist one of her mate-in-two compositions was published in the 'Lady's Pictorial' on 4 January 1896. In that genre of the game, another Englishwoman, Edith Elina Helen Baird (1859-1924) (Mrs W. J. Baird, 'nee' Edith E. H. Winter-Wood), was considered the equal of the top male problem composers, although she rarely competed as a player. Rudge's last known public appearance as a player in England was on 26 November 1898 when she defended stoutly against the world champion, Emanuel Lasker, during his simultaneous display in Bristol. When the game was broken off without result, owing to the lateness of the hour, Lasker did not concede defeat but admitted that Rudge 'would probably win if she played the best moves all the time' ('Bristol Mercury', 3 Dec 1898). 
At the end of 1899 Rudge was in Ireland again, as resident player during afternoons at the Dublin Bakery Company's restaurants and giving exhibitions in clubs. Arguably she was for a time the world's first female professional chess player, although she was probably paid in hospitality not cash. After 1900 she was rarely heard of, having apparently retired from tournament chess, although occasional correspondence games were published. Money worries and poor health marred her later years, until an appeal, launched by the Gloucestershire Chess Association, appeared in several chess publications in 1912 asking for subscriptions to fund a pension for her. Frideswide Rowland described her as being 'quite helpless from rheumatism' ('Cork Weekly News', 17 Feb 1912). Her last reported competitive game was a draw for Gloucestrians against the British Correspondence Chess Association in a 1913 postal match. 
In 1915 Rudge was reported to be playing chess with wounded soldiers at the British Home and Hospital for Incurables, Streatham, where she lived. In 1917 her first cousin James Barrett died intestate, leaving an estate worth over $16,000, but her claim to be the sole heir was successfully contested by a male relative of the deceased. Nevertheless, probate records suggest she received a substantial share of this inheritance shortly before she died, in Guy's Hospital, London, on 22 November 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 95664


Melville, William (1850-1918), police officer and intelligence officer, was born in Sneem, co. Kerry, Ireland, on 25 April 1850, the eldest of three sons of James Melville, tenant farmer, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' O'Connor. After attending the local Christian Brothers' school until the age of fifteen he worked for his father, who was then a baker and publican in Sneem. He left Sneem in unexplained circumstances; going to collect the weekly stock delivery from the railway station in Killarney he boarded a train, probably bound for Dublin, and eventually reached London. 
On 16 September 1872 Melville applied to join the Metropolitan Police, stating on his application that he was employed as a baker in Lambeth, south London. He was admitted into E division of the Metropolitan Police as PC 310 and stationed at Bow Street. He was dismissed on 22 November 1872 for insubordination, having taken part in the agitation for improved police pay and conditions, but was reinstated a week later. Promotion to detective sergeant in the CID came in June 1879. Earlier, on 20 February 1879, he married Catharine (Katy) Reilly, originally from co. Mayo. 
In March 1883 Melville was appointed to the special Irish branch. This covert operation within the Metropolitan Police CID, commanded by Superintendent Adolphus Williamson, had been formed in response to the Irish-American dynamite bombing campaign in Britain. He immediately began surveillance work, observing a member of a Liverpool-based group of Fenian dynamiters outside the houses of parliament ('Irish Times', 26 May 1883). In April 1883 he followed a member of another Fenian group, led by Thomas Gallagher, who were plotting explosions in London, and gave evidence at their subsequent trial ('The Times', 14 June 1883). 
To identify possible bombers the special Irish branch sent nine of its twelve officers abroad to work alongside seaport customs officials. In March 1884 Melville and his family moved to Le Havre in France. Intelligence that he gathered led to the arrests of Fenians planning to assassinate Queen Victoria in Westminster Abbey during the celebrations of her jubilee in June 1887. Promoted inspector, Melville was awarded $25 for his part in thwarting the jubilee plot. In December 1888 he returned to London, where his wife died on 19 March 1889, leaving him with four young children -- two sons and two daughters, one of whom died in infancy. He was remarried, on 8 August 1891, to Amelia Foy (1851/2-1918), widow of William Foy, a former colleague in the special Irish branch. 
As the Irish-American bombing threat receded, the special branch (as it had become) was turning its attention to counter-subversion activity against anarchists from the European mainland who had obtained asylum in Britain. In late 1891 Melville uncovered the so-called Walsall plot to manufacture a bomb for use against the tsarist regime in London; he personally arrested the Walsall socialist Joseph Deakin, at Euston Station in January 1892. Melville gave evidence ('The Times', 2 April 1892) at the trial of six men allegedly connected with the Walsall conspiracy who were convicted and imprisoned. The publisher and the editor (David Nicoll) of 'The Commonweal' were subsequently imprisoned for an article that questioned whether Melville was 'fit to live' and alleged that the Walsall affair had been a police plot. Detective Sergeant Patrick McIntyre later asserted in articles published in 'Reynolds's Newspaper', in April 1895, that the plot had been initiated by Melville's agent Auguste Coulon. Though McIntyre's allegations were coloured by a grievance against Melville, they were corroborated when official papers were released a century later, revealing that Coulon had been in Melville's pay since July 1890. 
Melville took over as the head of special branch on 20 March 1893 on the retirement of Williamson's successor, Chief Inspector John Littlechild. Over the remainder of his career within special branch Melville was involved in many well publicized operations against militant foreign anarchists in London. In February 1894 he was present in the aftermath of the explosion in Greenwich Park that killed the French anarchist Martial Bourdin, after which he led a raid by armed police on the anarchist Autonomie Club in Windmill Street. In April 1894, after a violent struggle at Victoria Station, he arrested Theodule Meunier, who was extradited to France and imprisoned for his part in bombings in Paris. In the same month, in Farringdon Road, he arrested Francis Polti, an Italian anarchist, carrying a bomb casing wrapped in brown paper, which was apparently intended to be used to blow up the stock exchange. In December 1897, after correspondence with the Russian secret police, he arrested the Russian revolutionary Vladimir Burtsev as he was leaving the British Museum reading room, on a warrant for publishing an incitement to assassinate Tsar Nicholas II. 
Melville was increasingly involved in protecting visiting foreign rulers to Britain from terrorist threats. In July 1889 he had protected the shah of Persia during a state visit to Britain. In 1901 he worked with Gustav Steinhauer of the German secret service to thwart a plot against the Kaiser during the funeral of Queen Victoria. He received gifts and awards from many of the crowned heads of state who were beneficiaries of his protection while they were in Britain. After his retirement, in November 1903, he was appointed MVO. The mayor of Westminster started a national testimonial to Melville in recognition of his successful operations, often at the risk of his own life, against militant foreign anarchists based in London ('The Times', 1 Jan 1904). Subscribers included the German ambassador and Arthur Conan Doyle, and a cheque for $2000 was presented to him in May 1904. 
The public announcement ('The Times', 10 Nov 1903) that Melville was retiring from the Metropolitan Police concealed his employment, from 1 December 1903, in counter-espionage investigations for the newly created intelligence departments of the War Office directorate of military operations. Sir Edward Henry, commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, confirmed Melville's qualification for the post, which paid $400 in addition to his police pension of $280: 'He is shrewd and resourceful and altho' he has a tendency towards adventuring he can keep this in check when it suits his interests to do so' (Cook, 147). Working from an office in Victoria Street, London, as 'W. Morgan, General Agent', he monitored tsarist agents in Britain during the Russo-Japanese War, but mainly followed up reports around the country of German agents undertaking reconnaissance, particularly of British coastal defences. In a letter to the 'Daily Express' (28 Feb 1906), however, he informed its readers 'I am still in London, quietly enjoying... my well earned retirement'. 
When the Secret Service Bureau was set up in 1909, in response to concerns about the extent of German espionage, Melville continued as chief detective under the military head of the new bureau, Vernon Kell. He was referred to by his initial, M. In 1912 he travelled to Ostend to follow a Royal Naval gunner, George Parrott, who was supplying gunnery secrets to a German agent; he was a prosecution witness during Parrott's trial proceedings, when he was described 'as a retired superintendent of the Metropolitan police' ('The Times', 21 Nov 1912, 15 Jan 1913). His work contributed to the bureau's successful operation on the outbreak of war to round up all the effective agents of the German naval espionage network in Britain. 
Melville's health deteriorated during the war as a result of a kidney complaint, and, after an operation, he retired from MI5 (as the bureau had been redesignated) on 31 December 1917. During his residence in Britain he had lived mainly in south London, latterly at Lydon Road, Clapham, and finally at Kenmare, 24 Orlando Road, Clapham. He died in the Bolingbroke Hospital, Wandsworth, Surrey, on 1 February 1918, from kidney failure. After a requiem mass at St Mary's, Clapham Park Road, Clapham, he was buried on 5 February at St Mary's Roman Catholic cemetery, Kensal Green. 
Melville was remembered as 'a silent, reserved man, never given to talking wildly' (Andrew, 6). In appearance he was heavily built and physically tough. A supporter of Irish home rule, an enthusiast for Gaelic sports, and a member of the National Liberal Club, he was one of several Irish Catholics in the newly created special branch of the Metropolitan Police, one of whom, Patrick Quinn, succeeded him as head of the branch. His career coincided with a considerable change in British policing. When he joined there was no permanent police agency to deal with political crime; Melville's actions against anarchists helped to justify the continuation of the force. Methods were also transformed; the aversion within the British police hierarchy against underhand methods, such as the use of regularly paid informers, also diminished, and Melville made considerable use of them. 
His second son, Sir James Benjamin Melville (1885-1931), barrister and politician, was born at Le Havre on 20 April 1885, and after education at Westminster City School worked for the Eagle Insurance Company. He then studied law, and was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1906, and in May 1911 appeared as defence counsel for two of the group of east European revolutionaries whose activities culminated in the Sidney Street siege. Politically a Liberal, he was involved with the Fabian Society, as was his wife, Sarah Tugander (1885-1974), whom he married on 1 July 1915. She was born in Russian-occupied Poland into a Jewish family who settled in the Mile End area of east London, and worked as a typist, becoming private secretary to the Conservative politician Andrew Bonar Law. 
James Melville was commissioned in the Army Service Corps during the First World War, and served in Gallipoli and later in the Salonika campaign, where he was badly wounded. He reached the rank of major. In 1918 he joined the Labour Party, and organized the local party in Kensington. Successful in legal practice, he was appointed KC in 1927, and was defence counsel for the bookseller in the trial, in 1928, arising from the publication of the 'Well of Loneliness'. Adopted as Labour parliamentary candidate in Lancaster (1922) and Walsall (1926), he was selected in 1928 as the party's candidate for Gateshead, amid resentment from some trade unionists within the party that a safe seat was allocated to a former Liberal and lawyer. After winning the seat with a large majority in the general election of 1929 he was made solicitor-general in Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government, and was involved in drafting abortive legislation to reverse the 'Trade Disputes Act', introduced by the Conservatives following the general strike. He was knighted in the same year. His health, never robust as a result of his wartime injuries, broke down, and he resigned the office in October 1930; he died in London on 1 May 1931. He was buried at St Mary's Roman Catholic cemetery, Kensal Green, after a requiem mass in Westminster Cathedral. He was survived by his wife and their daughter. He shared his father's strong Roman Catholic and Irish identities, was active in the Gaelic League, the Irish Literary Society, and the Catenian Society of Catholic laymen, and addressed the commemoration of Roman Catholic emancipation in the Albert Hall in September 1929 as the first Catholic solicitor-general since the Reformation ('The Times', 14 Sept 1929). 


@@@@@


doc= 95669


Claudia Severa (fl. AD 97-105). Genialis and his freedman Gentilis may be attested by a tombstone at Rome, and Brocchus is otherwise known from an altar he dedicated to Diana when serving in Pannonia (modern Hungary). A few more correspondents or persons named in letters are known from other evidence. But Cerialis, Lepidina, and Severa, and most of the other persons in the tablets, are known only from this evidence, which gives snapshots of life at Vindolanda for a few years from about AD 97 to 105. 
The most interesting letter to Genialis is from Haterius Nepos, a fellow officer, who wrote that he was expecting to see him at Coria (Corbridge). Haterius, who twenty years later became prefect (governor) of Egypt, is known from an inscription in Italy to have conducted a census of the Britons of Annandale in southern Scotland about the time he wrote to Genialis. Other letters to Genialis are fragmentary. One unknown correspondent declined an invitation, 'for I am very painfully affected by a headache'. Another wrote that 'if there is anything you believe might be useful to me, either send it or keep it on one side. As to what we need, I have sent word to you through our Paternus and Gavo.' Gavo, perhaps a Briton, occurs in two tablets as a civilian supplier. Genialis's slave Candidus had a letter from a friend 'regarding the Saturnalia costs'; his freedman Gentilis was also at Vindolanda. After handing over to Cerialis, Genialis wrote to him: 'I am indicting... seven men before you or Genitor, because it is in your power to release them.' He was evidently nervous about one man: 'because I once did something mean to him, I have been until now 'lingering in the thickets', to be safer there if you send him back'. 
Two sets of tablets derive from Cerialis's routine duties. There are several dozen reports called 'renuntia', with a standard laconic formula: day and month (but not year), then: ''Renuntium' of the ninth cohort of Batavians. All at their places who ought to be, and the equipment. The 'optiones' [deputy centurions] and curators reported.' Finally it registered who delivered the report; in the only complete example this was 'Arcuittius, 'optio' of the century of Crescens'. A single 'renuntium' noted that someone was absent, a man 'from the century of Exomnius', clearly without leave -- for which application had to be made to the prefect. A batch of requests survives. After giving their name and century, each man writes: 'I ask you, Lord Cerialis, that you hold me worthy for you to grant me leave.' Three men state where they want to go: two to Coria, one to the unidentified Ulucium. One Buccus adds why he wants leave, at Coria: 'so that I can buy' something. 
A more elaborate letter to the prefect came from Masclus, an outstationed 'decurio' (cavalry troop commander). Addressing Cerialis as 'his king', a form of flattery applied by poets to patrons -- although perhaps Cerialis, like some earlier prefects of Batavians, was truly 'of royal stock' -- he asked 'whether the whole detachment should return or just half of it'; and wishes that Cerialis 'may be very happy and propitious to me'. A postscript reveals his real motive for writing: 'the comrades have no beer, which I ask that you order to be sent.' 
Cerialis had to keep his soldiers provisioned. Several tablets refer to corn, both wheat and barley, being delivered; on one Masclus is named as bringing wheat both in June and September. The regiment had its own pigs, looked after by Candidus; and Atrectus 'the brewer' probably made beer in the Batavians' own brewery. Cerialis also had to organize working parties. One tablet records thirty 'structores', sent to 'build the guest-house' ('hospiti[u]m'), accompanied 'by the 'medicus' Marcus', a precaution in case any sustained injury; it also refers to men 'burning stone', to produce lime for mortar, and to a third group preparing clay for 'the fort's wattle-fences'. Another tablet registers '343 men in the workshops', whose occupations and employment included: leather workers or shoemakers; 'builders at the bath-house'; working lead; 'at the hospital' ('valetudinarium'); 'at the kilns'; digging clay; plastering; making tents; and preparing rubble. 
Cerialis's private correspondence includes his own drafts. In one such, carefully composed, with words crossed out and others substituted, he sought to influence appointments. After some flattering remarks, he asks his correspondent Crispinus to greet the governor, 'Marcellus, my consular', then makes an elaborate request. This he then summed up: 'fulfil whatever I await from you and set me up with very many friends so that I can enjoy a pleasant military service. I write this to you from Vindolanda... [my] winter-quarters.' Other letters and documents show how important friends were to him. Eight pages cover 'expensa', mainly for entertaining, over several years, starting about AD 101 (the consuls for 103 and 104, perhaps for 102 as well, are registered). An early entry has: 'at dinner, Niger and Brocchus'. These two had written jointly to Cerialis, probably just before their visit; a postscript says 'expect us'. Brocchus is registered as a guest in three subsequent entries. On most occasions chicken or geese were eaten. One Sautenus, perhaps the regimental poultryman -- one entry refers to him 'in stabulo', 'in the poultry-yard' -- is mentioned several times. After a meal 'at Sautenus's place', costs were summarized, then the numbers of geese (and probably chickens) still available entered. One of the latest entries registers 'the arrival of the governor', when various items 'were consumed at lunch'. 
A different tablet lists barley, beer, wine and vinegar, pork fat, and fish sauce, consumed between 19 and 25 June. On 24 June the 'lord' ('dominus'), 'through Privatus', probably a slave, donated wine for 'the festival of the goddess', presumably Fortuna, whose feast day it was. Cerialis himself and his wife were away: 'the 'domini' [the lord and his lady] have remained at Briga', surely staying with Brocchus and Severa, for Briga, perhaps Kirkbride near the Solway coast, seems to have been Brocchus's base. The place also occurs in a letter from Severa to Lepidina. First she expressed the hope that she can visit: 'I, sister, just as I promised that I would ask Brocchus, and that I would come to you -- I did ask him, and he replied that it is always permitted to me... to come to you in whatsoever way I can.' But, after a gap in the text, in which she perhaps indicated that she might not manage it, she concluded: 'I shall remain at Briga. Farewell, dearest sister and most longed for soul.' She herself invited Lepidina to visit her on a special occasion: 'I ask you warmly to come to us on 11 September, sister, to celebrate my birthday, you will make the day more enjoyable by your presence. Greet your Cerialis. My Aelius and our little son greet you. Farewell, sister, dearest soul, as I hope to prosper, and hail.' The main part of Severa's letters were clearly dictated, written by a scribe; she added the tender greetings in her own inelegant hand. 
On one occasion Brocchus invited Cerialis to 'come with your Lepidina, to stay with us beyond the new year'. Cerialis was a passionate hunter, as Brocchus clearly was too: his altar in Pannonia to the goddess of hunting confirms this. A draft letter to him from Cerialis begins: 'If you love me, brother, I ask that you send me hunting-nets.' In another draft letter Cerialis refers both to 'my huntsmen' and to 'Brocchus having returned'. A list names two breeds of hunting dog, 'vertragi' and 'segosi', and another tablet mentions repair of dog-collars. It was presumably when the Batavians left Vindolanda that a list was compiled of 'the nets that we have left behind': one for thrushes, one for duck, together with three snares to catch swans, and a fishing net. Seven further snares were left 'with a veteran'. 
Brocchus sent Cerialis other items too: a 'delivery note' lists clothing 'from Brocchus', including 'dining-tunics'. No clothes for Lepidina seem to be named, but her footwear has been found in the 'praetorium', notably a stylish sandal, size 33, decorated with rosettes and stamped with the maker's name. It was surely Lepidina who wore a round cap woven from hair moss stems, no doubt to repel insects. Like Brocchus and Severa, Cerialis and Lepidina had offspring with them: shoes found in the 'praetorium' were suitable for children between two and ten -- of course, the varying sizes may belong to one or two growing boys from the four years or so that their parents were there. A line from Virgil's 'Aeneid' (9.473), written in clumsy capitals on the back of a draft letter, was probably a child's writing exercise; 'segn', in normal handwriting, which follows, is no doubt the comment, 'segn[iter]', 'slack', by a tutor, a slave, or freedman. Two further tablets with Virgilian quotations, one the first line of the 'Aeneid', the other a famous quotation about the golden age from the 'Georgics' (1.125), were written by adults. 
Lepidina evidently had her own slave girls. A letter from a woman correspondent may concern new ones: 'So may I be in good health, lady, to bring you two slave-girls [?], one... the other free from fever [?].' A fragment, probably written by one female slave to another, ends with greetings for 'our two girls'. A letter from Cerialis himself to his household stresses that 'if any friends should have come' in his absence, 'you should all make sure they are well received'. He mentions 'two chickens' and 'wine', and adds that, 'after the lunch-guests have been sent on their way, you should hurry to Coria in the four-wheeler'. 
An inventory gives insight into Lepidina's kitchen: 'two shallow dishes; five side-plates; three vinegar-bowls; three egg-containers; on the cross-beam, a platter; a shallow dish; a container; a bronze lamp; four bread-baskets; two cups; in a box, two ladles'. A list of provisions has spices, roe-deer, salt, young pig, ham, wheat, and red deer, while, on another tablet, 'ordered through Adiutor from London' were a set of cooking bowls, mustard, anise, caraway, and thyme. A lengthy invoice, with prices per item, lists 'two locks, six cloaks with buckles, five headbands, nine pounds of hair, ten loin-cloths, a saddle, fifteen cloaks made of bark [?], ten bags, three sets of skillets, two sets of reins', and, most expensive of all, 'five curtains, one scarlet, one green, two purple, and one yellow'. 
Soon after Cerialis entertained the governor to lunch, the ninth Batavians left Vindolanda: they were transferred to the continent as part of a set of troop movements to reinforce the expeditionary army of the emperor Trajan in the Second Dacian War, which opened in June AD 105. The Batavians were to end up in Raetia (modern Bavaria) at a fort that took their name, Batava Castra (Passau). Whether Cerialis continued to command them is at present unknown. He may have retired from the service after leaving Vindolanda. 
The Vindolanda tablets have been described (in the magazine 'Current Archaeology') as 'probably the most important -- and certainly the most dramatic -- discoveries made in Roman Britain in the twentieth century'; in 2003 experts at the British Museum voted the tablets the 'top treasure' in the museum for a special edition of BBC Television's 'Meet the Ancestors'. Of the initial finds of the 1970s the writing materials were particularly striking. As well as the well-known thicker tablets on which wax had been spread, to be incised with a metal stilus (of which the scratched traces can seldom be read), at Vindolanda hundreds of 'leaf tablets' were also found. These thin, carefully prepared slivers of wood, written on with ink, are of a kind hitherto scarcely known. It had not previously been realized that this cheap substitute for papyrus had been in regular use for letters, accounts, and daily records, at least in the north-western part of the Roman empire. In the later 1980s, after more tablets had been excavated, their full significance became apparent. They supply detailed evidence for an otherwise very badly recorded period, between the recall of the governor Julius Agricola in AD 84 and the building of Hadrian's Wall, begun in AD 122. More important is that they illuminate many aspects of Roman military life, such as the supply of food and other goods and the associated record keeping, internal routine, social activity -- including the presence of officers' wives and other women -- hunting, relations with Britons, and literacy. Further, they offer valuable information about the Latin language and Roman handwriting. Several hundred individuals are recorded by name. A handful of these crop up repeatedly in both letters and documents, so that at least for a small group one has a biographical 'snapshot' for which there is as yet no parallel from the Roman period in Britain. All books on Roman Britain published since the 1980s and many dealing with other aspects of Roman history now refer to the Vindolanda evidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 95673


Marwick, Allan Graham (1877-1966), colonial administrator, was born at Richmond, Natal, the fourth surviving son of Thomas Marwick, a blacksmith and wagon builder who had come to Natal from the Orkney Islands, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Mackenzie, who had come with her family from Caithness. He attended school in Richmond and in 1895 joined the Natal civil service, in which two of his brothers, John and Robert, also served. They were known for their exceptional fluency in the Zulu language: he and his brother John, who later became prominent in South Africa as a labour recruiter and Natal politician, are said to have tested this by walking through the night with a party of Zulu migrants, who were shocked to discover in the morning that the companions with whom they had been chatting were white youths. He joined the border mounted horse on the outbreak of the South African War in 1899 and was in Ladysmith during the siege. 
Marwick was appointed native sub-commissioner in Mbabane, Swaziland, in January 1903, thus becoming a founder member of a skeletal administration. The country was administered through the Transvaal until 1906 when it became a high commission territory. Marwick became assistant commissioner (equivalent to district commissioner) in Mbabane in 1907 and remained in that position until 1916. The defining moment of his life came in the later months of 1907, when he acted as official escort and interpreter for a Swazi deputation to London led by Prince Malunge, the favourite son of the queen regent, Labotsibeni. Its main object was to protest against the land partition that was about to be pushed through by the resident commissioner, Robert Coryndon, and a special commissioner, George Grey, brother of the British foreign secretary. Marwick was present at an interview with the colonial secretary, Lord Elgin. He interpreted the latter as giving an assurance that the third of Swaziland that was designated as crown land would be made available for Swazi occupation. This promise was soon repudiated when the high commissioner, Lord Selborne, permitted crown land to be sold to white settlers to raise revenue. When the Swazi protested, Marwick stood by his interpretation of Lord Elgin's words and continued to argue throughout his life that the Swazi had been betrayed. Through his steadfastness on this issue and his friendship with Prince Malunge, who died in 1915, Marwick gained the respect of the Swazi royal family. He performed a further service for them when he escorted a deputation to inspect Lovedale, the school in the eastern Cape chosen for the education of the young heir to the throne, Sobhuza, who was installed as paramount chief in 1921. Marwick became a mentor to the future king and remained his lifelong friend. 
From 1916 to 1932 Marwick served as assistant commissioner in the southern district of Hlatikulu. In the latter year he returned to Mbabane as assistant commissioner and deputy resident commissioner. The Pim report of January 1932 had been politely critical of the administration, and recommended Marwick's appointment as deputy resident commissioner with special responsibility for native affairs and 'the framing of native policy' ('Financial and economic situation of Swaziland', 'Part papers', 1932, Cmd 4114, 44). He was promoted resident commissioner in 1935, holding that post until his retirement in 1937. 
The Swazi were under pressure from the late 1920s to accept some form of 'indirect rule'. Marwick was always sceptical about this doctrine. He believed that the 'traditional' constitution of the Swazi nation was an adequate basis for modernization and that, as a result of agreements with the Swazi, the British government had no legal right to interfere with it. With Pixley Seme, the South African lawyer and founder of the South African Native National Congress, he was the co-editor of a document entitled 'The original Swazi political organization'. This was the founding text of Swazi 'traditionalism', of which Marwick became a leading ideologist. In the early 1930s he sought to enlist the support of several social anthropologists, including Winifred Hoernle, Isaac Schapera, and Bronislaw Malinowski, and the philosopher and educationist John Dewey, all of whom visited Swaziland. 
After his retirement in 1937 Marwick remained in Mbabane and devoted himself to tireless campaigning against legislation that purported to give the colonial government the right to appoint or dismiss the paramount chief and subordinate chiefs. He provided many of the arguments that were incorporated in the Swazi petition of 1942 and used his knowledge of the inner workings of the administration and the Dominions Office to advise Sobhuza on how to deal with, and to outwit, his various successors as resident commissioner. The proclamation of 1950 recognizing the paramount chief as the sole native authority in Swaziland was as much a victory for Marwick as for Sobhuza. His historical critique of the 'perfidy' of the British in their dealings with the Swazi over eighty years was brought together in an official publication, 'The Attitude of the Swazi towards Government and its Causes' (1955). This was the best-documented and most damning indictment of British colonial policy ever written by a long-serving official and it is not surprising that it was rapidly suppressed. His last years were clouded by the clash between his nephew, Sir Brian Marwick, and Sobhuza over the pace of change towards democracy in Swaziland. Sobhuza believed that Allan Marwick took his side against Sir Brian, and sympathized with him over his wayward 'child'. 
Marwick was described by Sobhuza in 1935 as 'a Swazilander in the truest sense of the word' ('Times of Swaziland', 7 Nov 1935), and by Alan Booth as 'the most trusted colonial official of all in the eyes of the Swazi monarchy and chiefdom' (Booth, 254). He was appointed OBE in 1925, but he told Margery Perham that the greatest compliment that he had ever received was to be made an honorary member of the general council of the Swazi nation -- the 'libandhla' -- in 1937. He had the Swazi appellation 'ndhlavela', a reference to the regiment or age grade to which he belonged. He was married to Kathleen Parker, with whom he had a son, Toby, and daughter, Hazel. He died in Mbabane on 7 October 1966, and was survived by his two children, his wife having predeceased him. In a eulogy at his funeral one of King Sobhuza's representatives, Mfundza Sukati, said: 'One of the pillars of the Swazi Nation has fallen' ('Times of Swaziland', 14 Oct 1966). 


@@@@@


doc= 95674


Kuper, Hilda Beemer (1911-1992), social anthropologist, was born in Bulawayo, Southern Rhodesia, on 23 August 1911, the daughter of Joseph Beemer, a Lithuanian Jew who with his brother ran a trading business in Northern Rhodesia, and his wife, Antoinette, 'nee' Renner, who was also Jewish and was from Vienna. Hilda's father died during the influenza pandemic of 1918 and she then moved with her mother, three sisters, and a brother to Johannesburg. She enrolled at the then new University of the Witwatersrand in 1928 to study social anthropology and French. She had been drawn to anthropology by Winifred Hoernle, an inspiring teacher, who gave her a good grounding in the French, German, and American, as well as the British, schools of this emerging discipline. Her other teachers included the historians W. M. Macmillan and Margaret Hodgson (later Ballinger), the palaeontologist Raymond Dart, and the young anthropologist Isaac Schapera, with whom she had her first exposure to fieldwork in Bechuanaland. Her fellow students included Max Gluckman, a childhood friend, and Leo Kuper (1908-1994), her future husband. After her graduation Schapera recommended her to pursue further studies in anthropology with Bronislaw Malinowski at the London School of Economics. While there she undertook a course of psychoanalysis and was a member of a Marxist study group. She established a close relationship with Malinowski and acted as his research assistant in the preparation of his last major book, 'Coral Gardens and their Magic' (1937). She always acknowledged his influence on her fieldwork methods, though she came to disagree with his views on such issues as the tribe as a harmonious whole, the role of conflict, and the relationship of history to social anthropology. 
After two years in London Hilda Beemer was awarded a fellowship by the International African Institute to do fieldwork in Swaziland. She was with three of her mentors, Hoernle, Schapera, and Malinowski, at an education conference in Johannesburg when she met Sobhuza II, paramount chief and later king of Swaziland, for the first time in July 1934 -- the beginning of a long and close friendship. Sobhuza suggested that she should do fieldwork at Lobamba, the royal village of his mother, the queen mother Lomawa, about ten miles south-east of the administrative capital, Mbabane. Malinowski accompanied her to Swaziland and helped her to establish a good relationship with Lomawa. Her acceptance by the Swazi was further facilitated by the rapidity with which she acquired a good working knowledge of siSwati. Her first significant published work on the Swazi was a study of the structure and function of the regimental system. The writing of her dissertation was delayed by periodic bouts of malaria and by theoretical uncertainty, but she finished it in 1942. She had by then abandoned the structural-functional approach and had concluded that the organizing principle of Swazi society was rank. She was, however, also concerned with conflict, and sought to show how, in the context of colonial rule and land alienation, colour had become a complicating factor -- an index of inequality. Her dissertation had, perhaps unfortunately, to be published in two parts and by two different presses: 'An African Aristocracy: Rank among the Swazi' (1947) and 'The Uniform of Colour: a Study of White-Black Relationships in Swaziland' (1947). Her other works on Swaziland included a score of articles, a monograph, 'The Swazi: a South African Kingdom' (1963 and 1986), a novel, 'Bite of Hunger' (1965), and a play, 'A Witch in My Heart' (1970). 
Hilda had married Leo Kuper, who was then practising as an attorney, in 1936. After distinguished war service in South African military intelligence, he trained as a sociologist at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, and then under Charles Madge at the University of Birmingham. Although her work on the Swazi emphasized the important political and social roles of women, Hilda Kuper was not a feminist, and subordinated her own academic career to that of her husband. She resigned from her post at the University of the Witwatersrand in order to accompany him to America and England, and returned with him to Durban when he became head of the sociology department there in 1952. It is, perhaps, surprising that she did not turn her attention to the Zulu in Durban, but, while bringing up two young daughters, Mary and Jenny, she devoted her time there to research on another 'tribe' -- the Indian minority in South Africa. Her work on kinship, religion, and caste in the diverse Indian community of Durban was brought together in 'Indian People in Natal' (1960). 
The Kupers were founder members of the Liberal Party in Natal and were active opponents of apartheid. They moved to Los Angeles in 1961 after Leo's appointment as a professor of sociology at the University of California. Hilda's own appointment as a professor of anthropology at the same university came two years later. Until that time she had had a relatively short teaching career, including five years, 1940-45, in Johannesburg, and two years, 1959-61, at the University of Natal, but she acquired a reputation as a dedicated and stimulating teacher. Leo had begun an academic career relatively late, but he rapidly made up for lost time. His major contributions to the study of South Africa were 'Passive Resistance in South Africa' (1957), 'Durban: a Study in Racial Ecology' (1958), and 'An African Bourgeoisie' (1965), a book on South Africa's emerging black middle class. He also co-edited an important collection, 'Pluralism in Africa' (1969). In his retirement he produced two books, 'Genocide: its Political Use in the Twentieth Century' (1981) and 'The Prevention of Genocide' (1985), which were both retrospectively and prophetically critical of the ability of the United Nations to cope with genocide. 
Hilda Kuper undertook her last major work, 'King Sobhuza II, Ngwenyama and King of Swaziland' (1978), an authorized biography, out of gratitude, but reluctantly. She was aware of the difficulty of writing the life of a friend with the unwelcome 'help' of an advisory committee. The book was, however, based on over forty years of close observation of its subject, as well as on interviews and archival research, and was one of the best-informed and most revealing biographies of a twentieth-century African leader. Some critics alleged that she allowed herself to be co-opted by Sobhuza, and that through her publications as a whole she gave intellectual respectability to his 'traditionalist' agenda. There is an element of truth in these assertions, but it is equally clear that she would have been unable to produce her remarkable body of ethnographic work without his support. She genuinely admired Sobhuza, whom she saw as 'a good king, a wise statesman, [and] a gracious man' (dedication in Kuper, 'The Swazi', 1986). She sympathized with his low-key resistance to colonial rule, and supported his efforts to regain Swazi land and self-respect. She took Swazi citizenship in 1970, preferring this to South African or American citizenship, and thereafter always travelled on a Swaziland passport. Her Swazi name was La Bema, derived from her maiden name. 
Hilda and Leo Kuper formed an unusually happy and creative intellectual partnership and both made major contributions, in related but different fields, to the study of Southern African society. Hilda Kuper died in Los Angeles on 23 April 1992, and Leo Kuper died there on 23 May 1994. They were survived by their daughters, Mary and Jenny, the latter an expert on international law in relation to the rights of the child. 


@@@@@


doc= 95675


Duma, Dervish (1908-1998), diplomatist and leader of the Albanian community in Britain, was born on 4 July 1908 in Borsh on the southern coast of Albania, then still part of the Ottoman empire, the son of Emin Duma (died 1922), from a local landowning family. In 1914 the village of Borsh was razed to the ground by Greek troops and his family fled to Vlora. He attended an Italian school in Vlora and a secondary school in Gjirokastra. Both his father and his mother had died by the time he was fourteen. In 1921, the year before his father's death, he was chosen to be among the first group of pupils to attend the American Vocational School in Tirana, founded by Harry T. Fultz. After graduation in engineering in 1926 he worked in Vlora as an assistant engineer for the Italian oil company AIPA until November 1927. In 1928, with a recommendation from Fultz, Duma found employment with Sir Jocelyn Percy, who had arrived in Albania in the autumn of 1927 to set up the Albanian gendarmerie, later the Royal Albanian Gendarmerie, under King Zog. Duma served Percy and his small group of British officers, initially in Shkodra and Mirdita and later in Tirana, as an English interpreter, and in 1931 was appointed secretary-general of the gendarmerie of the royal court. It was with Percy's assistance and an Albanian government scholarship that Duma was sent to study in England in October 1932. From 1933 to 1935 he studied public administration at the London School of Economics and went back to Albania in December 1935 to join the diplomatic service. 
Duma returned to London almost immediately to serve as second secretary at the Albanian legation in London and, concurrently, as first secretary of the Albanian delegation to the League of Nations in Geneva. That he was already a diplomat of note can be inferred from the rumours which spread in the spring of 1937 that he was to be appointed Albanian foreign minister. He nevertheless remained at the Albanian legation in London, where he was charge d'affaires in 1939. A British Foreign Office memorandum described him as 'Perhaps the brightest of the young Albanians here... a bit of a radical, but basically quite sound' ('The Guardian', 21 May 1998). 
In April 1939 Italy invaded and occupied Albania. Duma was recalled to Tirana but, rather than serve Mussolini's growing fascist empire, he resigned and stayed in England. In August 1939 Sir Eric Bowater offered him employment with the Bowater Paper Corporation, which had paper mills in England, Scandinavia, and North America, and later a steamship company. Duma had a long and successful career with Bowaters, from which he retired in 1974. He travelled annually to the United States and Canada, both to look after the company's interests and to maintain links with the growing communities of Albanian immigrants there. 
In November 1940 Duma inaugurated the BBC's Albanian service and began a series of nightly broadcasts to Albania at war. He also assisted Zog when the king arrived in London in 1941 with his entourage of thirty-five relatives and friends. The king, with Queen Geraldine and his five sisters, initially held court on the third floor of the Ritz Hotel, and Duma assisted them in various practical matters. He was also in close contact over the years with Sir Jocelyn Percy; Faik Bey Konitza, the noted publicist and Albanian ambassador to the United States; Archbishop Fan Noli, the one-time prime minister of Albania; the British writer and anthropologist Edith Durham, and the British feminist Sylvia Pankhurst. In the decades after the Second World War Duma became the leading figure of the Albanian exile community in London. He was also a prominent member of the Anglo-Albanian Association, founded in 1912 by Edith Durham and Aubrey Herbert. At the time of his death he was its chairman, having served it for sixty-two years. 
In 1936 Duma had married Naftali Andoni (died 1966). As the 'eminence grise' of the Albanian community in Britain, he was proud that his son, Alexander, played a central role in the resumption of diplomatic relations between the two countries, and in 1992 became the first Albanian representative in London since 1939, in the role of honorary consul. On 15 February 1993, when the BBC resumed its broadcasts in Albanian, which had been suspended by the government of Harold Wilson on 20 January 1967 for financial reasons, it was Dervish Duma who was invited to inaugurate the new Albanian service. He died at Dene Place, Ripley Lane, West Horsley, Surrey, on 6 May 1998, of heart failure. He was survived by his son, Alexander. 


@@@@@


doc= 95676


Dollar, Robert McVey (1844-1932), shipowner and philanthropist, was born at Falkirk, Stirlingshire, on 20 March 1844 (and baptized there on 5 April), the eldest son of William Dollar (died 1873) and his wife, Mary Wilson, 'nee' Melville (1814/15-1853). His father managed the timber yard of his father-in-law, Robert Melville, a prosperous man whose family were also shipowners. Robert and his younger brothers, John Melville ('b'. 1846) and James ('b'. 1849), grew up in a close-knit family and they were to stay together for the rest of their lives. When their mother died in 1853, followed by their maternal grandfather in 1854, their father took to the bottle, making Robert a lifelong teetotaller. After attending parish school he started work in a lathe shop at the age of twelve. His father was married again, in 1856, to Mary Easton, whose family were also in the timber trade. The following year William Dollar took his young family to Canada, where he managed a sawmill owned by his new wife's cousin Charles Easton. 
At the time much of the Canadian timber trade was in the hands of Scottish merchants, notably the Glasgow firm of Pollok Gilmour & Co. In Canada Robert Dollar followed the family calling into the timber trade, becoming at the age of nineteen a logger, with the hazardous task of rafting logs downstream to the mills. With his brother John he bought a farm in 1863 by scrimping and saving from their wages. The following year at Gatineau in Quebec, where he was working as a cook, he began to teach himself bookkeeping. He was surprised at his studies by the manager, who did not dismiss him for using the company's time for such a purpose, but instead provided him with books. Promotion followed as a clerk in a remote camp, 150 miles from the nearest inhabitants, and in 1866 as a manager in charge of forty men. From 1870 to 1872 he was working for Pearly and Pattee on the Coulonge River, making a success of building dams to improve the flow of the current to carry logs downstream. By this time he had saved enough to go into business in the Muskoka district of Ontario, buying timber and starting a mill at Bracebridge. This early venture was overwhelmed by the black Friday panic on Wall Street in 1873, resulting in a loss of $5000. While he was working to pay off his debts he married, in 1874, Margaret Proudfoot, with whom he had four children, Alexander Melville (1878), Robert Stanley (1880), Mary Grace (1885), and John Harold (1887). 
Free of debt in 1876 Dollar went back into business, opening no fewer than eight camps in the Muskoka district. This time he prospered and in 1880 began to export square timber to England, going further afield in Ontario in search of supplies. This led him in 1882 to move his operations to Michigan, where larger timber, suitable for the English market, was more plentiful. Settling at Marquette he built a mill beside the railtrack in the country to the west of Newberry, which he named Dollarville. Using all his spare cash he bought a large tract of federal-owned forest, yielding a handsome profit. As well as managing his own affairs, he started an operation for the British Canadian Lumber Company. Running a lumber business involved incessant travelling in search of customers. During 1887 he covered more than 30,000 miles. Rheumatism brought on by years in logging camps during the harsh Canadian winter, and his growing trade with the United Kingdom, led him to return to Scotland for the first time in 1884. Visiting his mother's grave in Falkirk he noticed that the town did not have a library. Mindful that 'no town in the United States of the size of it would have been without a library', he donated $1000 'to start a good sized library' (Dollar, 1.25). 
On another trip to escape the cold Dollar visited California and decided to move to San Francisco with his brothers in 1888, buying the last remaining redwood forest, the Meeker tract on the Russian River in Sonoma county in the north. He was naturalized an American citizen in that year. He built a mill in 1893 on the coast at Usal, which he ran for six years. Finding it difficult to charter vessels to bring out his timber, he followed in his grandfather's footsteps and bought his first steamer, 'Newsboy', in 1895, laying the foundations of what was to become the Dollar line with its characteristic black smoke stack and white $ sign. The purchase coincided with the Klondike gold rush, which increased demand for shipping up the west coast. By the end of the century he owned four ships. 
Just as he had done on the east coast Robert Dollar began to explore the possibilities of the export market, entering the China trade in the aftermath of the Boxer rebellion in 1901. As was his custom he visited China with his wife in 1902 to establish a market for timber and investigate the opportunity for exports and trade elsewhere in the Pacific. This began a period of nearly incessant travel around the Pacific for almost the rest of his life. He became a 'kenspeckle' figure in the Orient, making friends of emperors, presidents, and merchants and earning the title of Captain Dollar, though he was not himself a mariner. As he reflected, 'The first principle of trade is to get acquainted and to be friendly with whom you trade' (Dollar, 1.145). He was quick to see the potential of trade with both China and Japan, his fleet transporting lumber from the Pacific coast of America and returning with cargoes of low-cost iron from China, together with immigrants carried in steerage. His approach to both countries was coloured by contact with Christian missionaries, whose work he praised constantly. He was also a stern critic of those who wished to grant independence to the Philippines, which had become an American territory in 1902, believing that American investment was an essential ingredient for prosperity. 
After the First World War, which had proved profitable for his shipping line, Dollar fiercely attacked the United States shipping board for its lack of vision in failing to develop the American merchant marine. He regarded a national merchant shipping fleet as fundamental to American trade. Having failed to persuade the board to commence a round-the-world shipping service he set out to prove the potential. In 1920 he had told his sons, all of whom were working for the line, to begin buying stock in competitors so as to gain a controlling interest, while acquiring surplus ships at discount prices. Four years later he acquired the Pacific Steamship Company and inaugurated his own round-the-world service with ships purchased from the board. By 1926 the Dollar family had a near monopoly of the Pacific trade and the round-the-world service was carrying over 45,000 passengers a year, yielding a profit of $6 million. Although Robert Dollar had condemned mail subsidies before the war he was quick to bid for them in the more uncertain economic times of 1928. Winning a lucrative contract he borrowed heavily to build six new mail liners, only two of which entered service, 'President Hoover' and 'President Coolidge' in 1931. By then the trade depression had placed the shipping line heavily in debt, increased by the move into the passenger business initiated by his son Robert, who was nominally vice-president but effectively in charge of business decisions. 
Dollar had kept a diary for much of his North American life, and privately printed the first of four volumes of memoirs in 1918, emphasizing his early struggles, setting out his business precepts, and recording his travels and philanthropy. He gave freely to charities both in San Rafael and elsewhere, including his native Falkirk, where on being made freeman on a visit in August 1912 he gave money for a monument and drinking fountain in memory of Sir John de Graham, the Scottish patriot who fell at the battle of Falkirk in 1298. He purchased the Arnotdale estate for $5600 in 1920 and donated it to Falkirk as a public park, which was renamed Dollar Park in his honour. He gave money for new stairs to the pulpit in the parish kirk in 1896 and in 1926 a set of chimes so that hymns could be played at eight o'clock every morning as well as for divine services. His return to Falkirk in March 1924 to celebrate his eightieth birthday was marked by speeches on the theme of 'the dear auld hame'; he made a last visit home in July 1928, when he presented two stone lions to be placed at the entrance to Dollar Park. 
Dollar died on 16 May 1932, of pneumonia, at his home, Falkirk, San Rafael, California, which he had purchased in 1906 and is now reserved as a historical community centre for the arts. He was a devoted family man, each morning beginning with readings from the 'Bible' and closing with a walk in the grounds with his grandchildren. One of a number of Scots who made fortunes in North America in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, but who did not forget their native land, Dollar is estimated to have made a fortune of over $40 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 95678


Mays, (Thomas) Raymond (1899-1980), racing driver and businessman, was born at Eastgate House, Bourne, Lincolnshire, on 1 August 1899, the only child of Thomas William Mays (1856-1934), woolstapler and later manufacturer of fertilizer, and his wife, Annie Beatrice, 'nee' Shilcock (1875-1973). His father was a pioneer motorist who competed in hill climbs and speed trials. Raymond or Ray, as he was known, often accompanied him to competitions and on business trips by road. Even as a small child Mays was fascinated, if not obsessed, by cars and speed. 
Mays was taught at home before entering Oundle School, Northamptonshire, in May 1912, where he remained until December 1917. At school he enjoyed tennis and rugby but 'never worked any harder than necessary' (Mays, 'Split Seconds', 14). A few days after leaving Oundle he joined the Guards officer training establishment at Bushey Hall, Hertfordshire. He was commissioned into the Grenadier Guards in May 1918 and was initially posted to Chelsea. He stayed at the luxurious Grosvenor Hotel rather than in barracks and indulged to the full his taste for the high life and musical theatre. He saw Jose Collins in 'The Maid of the Mountains' over eighty times. In October he was posted to Maubeuge in France and after the armistice to Cologne, where life was 'pleasant and... peaceful' (ibid., 18). 
Mays declined a permanent army commission and in October 1919 entered Christ's College, Cambridge, where he read engineering. His father always intended him for the family wool business but Mays's compelling ambition was 'to make my mark in motor-racing' (Mays, 'Split Seconds', 19). Having acquired a Speed Model Hillman for which his father reluctantly paid, he and Amherst Villiers of Caius College, Cambridge, another motor-obsessed Old Oundelian, devoted more time to motoring than to their academic pursuits. In 1920, the year he began competing, Mays won both the Cambridge University Auto Club hill climb and the inter-varsity hill climb at Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire. In 1921 he secured the first of numerous wins on the Brooklands circuit. That summer he entered as many climbs and speed trials as he could manage. These included his first attempt at the renowned Shelsley Walsh speed hill climb, an event that had fascinated him from childhood. Thereafter he entered it repeatedly, recording fastest time of the day on over twenty occasions and setting records several times. 
In 1921, with his father's business struggling, Mays left university without taking a degree. After a few months gaining experience with a wool firm in Glastonbury he joined the family firm on a salary of $260 p.a. Cars, however, remained his preoccupation even though his aspirations far outstripped his financial resources. Through charm and persuasion he acquired a Brescia Bugatti, which he could scarcely afford, and the sponsorship in kind from Englebert Tyres, Speedwell Oil, and Lodge Plugs that allowed him to continue competing. He may have been the first sponsored driver ('Autocar', 19 Jan 1980). Mays specialized in hill climbs, though he also raced an aeroplane across Skegness beach. Throughout he was greatly assisted by Villiers, who supplied design and mechanical expertise in return for free board and lodging at the Mays family home, Eastgate House, Bourne. 
In 1923 Mays set the Shelsley Walsh record for the first time, beating Malcolm Campbell into third place. Mays welcomed the resulting publicity because it improved his chances of securing much-needed financial assistance. He obtained support from Ettore Bugatti, Humphrey Cook, his wealthy friend and fellow racer, and Selwyn Edge, a motor racing pioneer who was managing director of AC cars. His partnership with AC was unsuccessful but from the late 1920s, aided by Cook, Villiers, Peter Berthon, and Murray Jamieson, he became a dominant force in British motor sport at the wheel of Mercedes-Benz, Vauxhall-Villiers, Invictas, and Rileys. Cook had inherited a large fortune from his family's drapery business, and in 1933 he suggested forming a company to develop a British racing car with Riley engines to compete in international Voiturette class events, offering also to back the project financially. Berthon, Jamieson, and Reid Railton contributed as designers and Mays was fund-raiser and driver. Victor Riley agreed to co-operate and English Racing Automobiles (ERA), whose cars bore a badge designed by Gordon Crosby, was launched at Bourne in late 1933. 
Mays was the ERA project's 'leading light' and 'star personality' (Fletcher, 226). ERA unveiled its first car at Brooklands in 1934. The firm initially ran purely as a works team but, later, models were sold and raced privately by Earl Howe, Dick Seaman, Prince Bira, the band leader Billy Cotton, and others. Though initially dogged by handling problems, ERAs 'were the first cars for many a year to represent Britain in international motor racing and bring it regular success at such level' (McGregor, 2). Before a crowd of around 400,000 at the Nurburgring in 1935 ERAs took four of the first five places. Mays himself won. 
ERA foundered in 1939 when Cook opposed the plan of Mays and Berthon to establish Automobile Developments Ltd, for the production of distinctively British grand prix cars. Cook wound up ERA's Bourne operation, while the plans of Mays and Berthon were suspended with the outbreak of the Second World War. In June 1939, on the eve of the war, Mays achieved a 37.37 second run in an ERA R4D at the Shelsley Walsh speed hill climb, which was not bettered for ten years. 
In 1945 Mays formed Raymond Mays and Partners Ltd, to retail Rolls Royce and Bentley road cars, having owned a Bentley Derby since 1935. Subsequently he took on a Ford dealership and 'Raymond Mays Converted' Fords competed in early saloon car races. He also returned to competition, winning the RAC national hill climbing championship in 1947 and 1948, its first two years. Between 1946 and 1950 he won the standing start kilometre event at Brighton speed trials in an ERA R4D four times. He stopped competing in 1950 to concentrate on the British Racing Motors or Berthon Raymond Mays (BRM) project. 
Mays and Berthon founded BRM Ltd at Eastgate House in 1945 with the aim of building an all-British grand prix car that could beat continental constructors and enhance national prestige. The 'age of austerity' was an inauspicious time to launch the project but Mays personally secured substantial financial support from motor accessory and engineering companies. The British Motor Racing Research Trust was formed to administer contributions from some 350 firms. Well-equipped workshops behind Eastgate House soon housed a workforce of around thirty. The first BRM, with its distinctive and ear-splitting roar, was completed in December 1949. When demonstrated before the royal family and a huge crowd at Silverstone in May 1950, however, the car failed to leave the grid. This 'wretched launching was almost an omen of what lay ahead' (Stanley, 47). The BRM project, in many ways muddled and directionless, encountered prolonged financial, legal, administrative, and technical problems, as well as some appalling luck. Mays, for all his charm and enthusiasm, lacked the 'temperament and training to weld together a winning Grand Prix team' (ibid., 12). 
In 1952 the British Motor Racing Research Trust sold out to one of its principal supporters, another Old Oundelian, Alfred Owen of Rubery Owen, the Black Country engineering firm. Owen Racing took over the project though Mays remained involved as race manager, publicist, and fund-raiser. BRM's chequered history continued, though its cars recorded successes with such drivers as Juan Fangio, Mike Hawthorn, and Stirling Moss. A first formula 1 grand prix victory was achieved in 1959 but the team's greatest triumph came in 1962 when Graham Hill became world champion and BRM secured the constructor's championship. By this time Mays's involvement was marginal. BRM severed all links with Bourne in 1974. 
Mays produced two 'ghosted' books: 'Split Seconds' (1951), an autobiography which one reviewer judged 'perhaps the most interesting of the many motor-racing books published since the war' ('TLS', 10 Aug 1951), and 'BRM' (1962). It was suspected that the authors of 'BRM' must have glossed over any number of matters to avoid libel actions ('TLS', 14 Dec 1962). Mays contributed an 'excellent' chapter on hill-climbing technique for Lord Howe's volume on 'Motor Racing' (1939) in the 'Lonsdale Library' series ('TLS', 12 Aug 1939) and a piece for 'Speed: the Book of Racing and Records' (1950). For all his driving skill he accumulated twenty-nine motoring convictions and fines totalling $134 by March 1936 ('The Times', 3 March 1936). 
Mays was sociable, elegant, debonair, and intensely patriotic. His cars and clothing, down to the black beret and neck ties he often wore when racing, were always immaculate and his conversation was peppered with extravagant phraseology. He 'chain smoked all the time' (Fletcher, 228). In appearance he was tall and slim with a military bearing. His dark wavy hair was receding by his twenties and he was bald in later life. Mays loved to entertain and over the years many theatrical stars including Ivor Novello, Norma Shearer, Ben Lyon, and Bebe Daniels visited Eastgate House. When he was a castaway on BBC's 'Desert Island Discs' in 1969 his choice of music reflected his long-standing love of the stage. He chose an umbrella as his luxury and W. MacQueen Pope's 'Gaiety: Theatre of Enchantment' (1949) as his book. Aside from his fixations with cars and musicals he was an accomplished dancer and tennis enthusiast. 
Mays, who never married, spent his whole life at Eastgate House, Bourne, in the company of his beloved mother until 1973. After her death he lived alone, a somewhat isolated figure. He was made CBE in 1978. Mays died at home on 6 January 1980. After his funeral, at Bourne Abbey church on 11 January, he was cremated. A memorial service at St Paul's, Knightsbridge, took place on 22 January. His connection with Bourne has been commemorated by a blue plaque on Eastgate House, a memorial unveiled in 1984, and through Raymond Mays Way, otherwise known as the Bourne by-pass or A151. In October 2012 celebrations in Bourne commemorated the 50th anniversary of the 1962 world championship triumph. 
Mays was one of the great drivers of his day. As a motor sport businessman his achievements were less clear cut. He acknowledged that BRM did not achieve all he had hoped for but was probably right to claim that the project laid the foundation for Britain's later success in top-level motor sport (Mays and Roberts, 211). 


@@@@@


doc= 95683


Toms, Isaac (1710-1801), Independent minister and writer, was born on 22 August 1710 in London, son of Philip Toms, a mercer in the Royal Exchange, and his wife, Elizabeth Kempster. His paternal grandfather was Peter Toms (died 1686), a mercer of Plymouth; his maternal grandfather was John Kempster (died 1692), vicar of Brixham, Devon, from 1651 until his ejection in 1662. His elder brother John was a druggist in London, and his sister married a Mr Slater. 
At the age of nine Toms was sent to the grammar school at Dukinfield, near Manchester, for four years, and then for a further four years to St Paul's School, London. At this time he attended anatomical lectures at Gresham College. Though his father hoped to bring him up to trade, he chose to prepare for the ministry, and entered himself as a student of Thomas Ridgley and John Eames at the dissenting academy at Moorfields. He continued his studies while living in the family of Sir Daniel Dolins in Hackney, as chaplain and private tutor to Dolins's son. This was a very demanding appointment: Toms spent eight hours a day reading to young Dolins, who had defective sight, and in order to attend lectures at the academy he had to rise at 4 a.m. He took Dolins through a course on the principles of natural and revealed religion, and himself became proficient in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac, mathematics, and experimental philosophy. He stayed on after concluding his course at the academy, and spent a total of eleven years in Sir Daniel's family until young Dolins's death in 1742. Dolins, who had wished to buy an estate in the country and build a chapel there, left his tutor $700 and all his books. 
Toms had occasionally occupied pulpits in and around London, but he now wanted to minister to his own congregation. He turned down the offer of a valuable Church of England living belonging to the Bedford family -- 'he was a dissenter upon conviction' (Ray, 33) -- and accepted an invitation to settle in Hadleigh in Suffolk, with the small annual stipend of $30. He began his ministry in 1743 or 1744, was ordained on 31 July 1745, and spent the rest of his life in this post. His success meant that a new gallery had to be added to the meeting house. He was engaged in a wide range of preaching, educational, and charitable activities: until 1785 he preached twice on Sundays and frequently on other days; he catechized on Monday mornings, inviting children of all denominations; he established lectures and schools for poor children in the neighbouring villages; he distributed books, medicine, food, fuel, and money to the villagers. 'He was at all times easy of access' ('Evangelical Magazine', May 1801, 179). No doubt these activities were made possible by his legacy from Dolins, who had specifically left money for the distribution of religious books. He did much to spread knowledge of the cruel treatment of protestants by priests, magistrates, and soldiers in France. A French pastor, Jacob Bourdillon -- spelled Boudillon by Ray -- provided an annual account for him, which he circulated. Toms tried to persuade the Independent minister at Northampton, Philip Doddridge, to lead a national response by dissenters, but Doddridge explained in a helpful letter of 2 February 1751 that he was prevented by illness from doing so. 
Toms wrote a number of popular religious tracts. He was closely involved with the work of the Society for Promoting Religious Knowledge among the Poor, founded in 1750, and he regularly sent letters to the society describing the villagers' reception of their books. Five of his anonymous tracts published in the 1740s -- 'An Humble Attempt to Assist Parents and Masters in the Religious Instruction of Youth', 'The Swearer's Monitor', 'The Sabbath-Breaker's Monitor', 'The Intemperate Person's Monitor', and 'The Lewd Person's Monitor' -- were very widely distributed by the society, totalling 51,375 copies by 1797 (publishers' advertisements and the society's annual 'Accounts' identify his authorship). His books and pamphlets were sold very cheaply, often for a few pence, with discounts for those buying them for free distribution. The most interesting of his more ambitious works are 'The Shining Convert' (1747), an account of the paralysed illiterate farm labourer Thomas Seeger, with a preface suggesting how to make devotional writing attractive, and 'The Christian Instructor' (1748), which digests the fruits of his education at the Moorfields academy on natural and revealed religion for the benefit of masters of families and youth destined for business. He also published several anti-Catholic works. His many unpublished (and barely legible) hymns and poems survive in manuscript in Dr Williams's Library. 
Toms married Sarah Say (died 1799), the daughter of Samuel Say (1676-1743), the Independent minister at Westminster. They had four surviving children: Sarah (1749-1809); Samuel Say (1750-1834), minister at Framlingham, who became a Unitarian; Elizabeth (died 1831), who married after her father's death Daniel Fisher, tutor at Homerton Academy; and Mary (died 1819). In old age Toms was assisted for a while in his ministerial duties by William Gunn, who then moved to Towcester, Northamptonshire, as minister in 1796 and returned to succeed Toms as minister at Hadleigh in 1800. Toms was still conducting the afternoon service until the end of 1798. He died in early January 1801, having been effectively a prisoner in his own house for three months. His funeral sermon, published as 'An Old Disciple', was preached at Hadleigh on 15 January by John Mead Ray (1753-1837), Independent minister at Sudbury. (Ray gives the date of his death as 2 January, while the obituary in the 'Evangelical Magazine' gives 12 January.) 
Toms was a great admirer of the stars of 'the last age' ('Shining Convert', viii), and had a picture of Richard Baxter over his desk, but he also had a lively interest in recent philosophy and physico-theology, and in writers associated with the evangelical revival. His publications and charitable work indicate his commitment to the education of the poor and his confidence that the rational basis of Christian belief could be plainly demonstrated. 


@@@@@


doc= 95687


Robson, Edward Robert (1835-1917), architect and surveyor, was born in Durham on 2 March 1835, the eldest son of Robert Robson and his wife, Susanna. His father was a prominent local builder, an alderman, justice of the peace, and three times mayor of Durham. Educated at private schools, Robson entered his father's business in 1851, remaining there for three years. Among his father's clients was the architect John Dobson, and in 1853 Robson was articled to him, joining one of the largest and most successful practices in the north of England. Robson's next move took him to London, and three years' work as a draughtsman for George Gilbert Scott. Scott's was the best Gothic practice in the country, and working for him introduced Robson to many of the rising stars of the architectural profession. It also introduced him to the most advanced Gothic architecture of the period, and it seems likely that Robson had a hand in Dobson's Inglethorpe Hall, Norfolk (1858-60), which goes well beyond his master's usual range. 
In 1858 Robson travelled through Europe and the following year went into partnership with J. W. Wilson Walton (later Walton-Wilson). In 1860 he was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects, and became a fellow in 1864. But this did not mark the start of a career in private practice. While his partner managed an office in London, Robson returned to Durham where he was appointed architect to the cathedral. He remained in that role until 1864, restoring the tower with George Gilbert Scott (1858-61), and the north side of the Galilee with C. Hodgson Fowler (1864). This work left little opportunity for independent commissions, although he did build the churches of St Cuthbert in Durham (1858-63) and St Mary in West Rainton (1864), and the Mowbray almshouses in Bishopwearmouth (1863). And, in 1861, his job also provided him with the means to marry Marian, eldest daughter of Henry Longden, iron founder of Sheffield. They had three children, a daughter and two sons, the youngest of whom, Philip Appleby Robson, followed his father into architectural practice and also wrote on school building. 
Robson left Durham in 1864 to become architect and surveyor to the corporation of Liverpool, a post he held until 1871. Restricted by the terms of his contract, which prevented him from taking on private commissions, he found in the church of St Anne's, St Anne Street (1870-71), a rare opportunity to act as an architect in his own right. None the less, he did become an accomplished surveyor and was elected a fellow of the Surveyors' Institution in 1872. He completed the municipal buildings begun by his predecessor John Weightman (1862-8) and erected a great Gothic screen wall in Stanley Park, Anfield (1868-71). 
Perhaps because the air of the city was bad for his health, and perhaps because he wanted a greater chance to design in his own right, Robson left Liverpool for London, having been appointed surveyor to the newly created school board there. On taking up the job in July 1871 on $500 a year, he experienced a drop in both salary and status, but he was promoted to architect less than twelve months later and his pay was doubled. More importantly, the move to London allowed Robson to work independently, and he established a partnership with J. J. Stevenson, an arrangement which lasted until 1876. None the less, as architect to the London school board Robson was busy enough: during his time there he had overall responsibility for nearly 300 new schools. In search of appropriate models he toured Europe and America, summing up his conclusions in 'School Architecture' (1874), a book that became the standard text on its subject. More important still, in issuing circulars, assessing competitions, and designing schools of his own, Robson developed a distinctive approach to board school building. 
The result was a strikingly new sort of school. 'Lighthouses! Beacons of the future! Capsules, with hundreds of bright little seeds in each, out of which will spring the wiser, better England of the future', as Sherlock Holmes described them (A. Conan Doyle, 'The Complete Sherlock Holmes Short Stories', 1928, 515). Frequently building in slums, Robson and the board were determined that these schools should impress their young users and their families. They were large, imposing, and often as many as three storeys high. They dominated their surroundings. Most remarkably of all, and after some initial hesitation, Robson rejected Gothic models in favour of an eclectic English Renaissance style: more fitting, as he suggested, for secular schools. Their elevations, with fancy gables, colourful brickwork, and terracotta ornamentation, were highly fashionable. Their plans -- usually featuring separate classrooms entered from a central schoolroom, and separate playgrounds and entrances for boys and girls -- would influence elementary school design until the early years of the twentieth century. To be sure, Robson was not a lonely pioneer: others had already built in this 'Queen Anne' revival style. Nor was his planning as original as he claimed. None the less, Robson was the mastermind behind hundreds of schools, and he became the single greatest advocate of the board school style. From Bonner Street, Hackney (1875), to Oban Street, in Bromley-by-Bow (1881), his own schools brilliantly embodied the reforming idealism of the school board for London itself. 
Robson remained at the school board until 1884, when he became consulting architect to the Education Department, a job he held for the next twenty years. Once again, it appears that he wanted more opportunity for private practice. Administrative work for the department and his continued role as an adviser to the London school board made this difficult. However Robson did find some time, working with John Whichcord and forming a partnership with J. J. Gott between 1910 and 1914. He built the People's Palace in the Mile End Road (1886), the New Art Gallery, Regent Street (1888), and worked at various schools -- including Cheltenham Ladies' College (1896-8) and the enormous Jews' Free School in Spitalfields (1904-5). Above all, though, at the Education Department he did for the nation what he had done for London. His rules for school building, which were issued annually between 1884 and 1904, influenced designs throughout the country. 
Robson spent his last years living in Blackheath, Kent, and he died at his home there, 2 The Paragon, on 19 January 1917. He was buried at Shooters Hill five days later. For much of his career Robson was less architect than surveyor, and for still more of it he was less surveyor than civil servant. Although his son attempted to claim credit on his father's behalf for inventing the Queen Anne revival style, this was clearly not the case. Nor was his work always appreciated -- he was accused of profligacy, incompetence, and even corruption. On a number of occasions the school board of London voted to take him to law. But through his example, his writings, and his role as a pioneering public servant, he transformed the architecture of education and influenced schools all across England. Although twice offered a knighthood, he turned the honour down. His memorial is appropriately found in schools throughout the country. 


@@@@@


doc= 95689


Anderson, Alfred (1896-2005), joiner and soldier, was born on 25 June 1896 at 20 Kinloch Street, Dundee, the third son of Andrew Anderson (1864-1945) and his wife, Christina, 'nee' Emmerson (1868-1945). His parents had emigrated to Chicago, Illinois, and were married there in 1888. However, nostalgia for Scotland or a downturn in the American economy sent them home in the 1890s. One of Alfred Anderson's earliest memories was associated with the celebrations accompanying the end of the South African War. Dundee was 'en fete' and, at a victory parade, a sergeant picked him up and carried him on his shoulder through the cheering crowds. Soon afterwards the family left Dundee for the nearby planned village of Newtyle, over the Sidlaw Hills on the edge of Strathmore. Alfred went to school there and at the Harris Academy in Dundee. Meanwhile his father's business as an undertaker and joiner flourished. From an early age Alfred became used to the sight of bodies and helped with the 'coffining' before funerals. The village 'killing house' or abattoir also accustomed him to the ever-present slaughter of animals. He claimed that this long experience of death meant that the sights he encountered at the western front had a less powerful effect upon him than on many of his comrades. 
In 1912 Anderson joined the Territorial Army for no other reason than that it would introduce him to friends, provide an opportunity for physical activities and sports, and, most important, offer a week's holiday during the annual camp in nearby locations in Perthshire. The 1914 camp was in late July, soon after Alfred turned eighteen, and most of the young men with whom he trained died in the trenches. With the outbreak of the First World War, these members of the Territorial Army were enrolled in the 5th battalion of the Black Watch, which recruited mainly in Perthshire and Angus. After a relatively brief training the battalion left for the front, crossed the channel in a cattle boat, and the kilted men found themselves laughed at and molested by village women as they marched through northern France. 
For well over a year Anderson remained at the front, experiencing all the rigours of the trenches. He was batman to Lieutenant Bruce-Gardyne and then to Fergus Bowes-Lyon, the son of the earl of Strathmore and brother of Elizabeth, later Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother. Throughout this period the only relief for the troops was rest periods behind the lines. Anderson retained vivid memories of the sudden and unexpected peace of the Christmas truce, of the conditions in farms where they were billeted, of encounters with Indian soldiers, and many of the terrifying features of trench warfare. At the battle of Loos in September 1915 the Black Watch took severe casualties with Bowes-Lyon among the dead. Anderson, however, survived. Some weeks later he was injured by shrapnel at a forward listening post. Evacuated in great pain hours later, he was repatriated to a hospital in England. His war was over and his injuries saved him. Promoted sergeant, he became an army physical trainer at a camp in Yorkshire. There he met his future wife, Susannah Iddison (died 1979), daughter of a watchmaker. They were married at St Andrew's Church, Kirkby Malzeard, near Ripon, on 2 June 1917, when both claimed to be twenty-one (though Anderson was in fact twenty). They had two sons and three daughters. 
At the end of the war Anderson was keen to stay in the army with the rank of sergeant-major, but familial duties called. He was summoned home to take over the family business. His subsequent life was uneventful apart from a period running the Home Guard in Newtyle during the Second World War, but his great longevity was to bring him considerable fame in his last years. He lived long enough to become an emblem of the past and a representative of an entire generation. Although a few veterans of the First World War survived him, he was, by the end of his life, the last living member of the pre-1914 Territorial Army, the last soldier to have gone to war in the autumn of 1914, and the last survivor of the celebrated Christmas truce of that year. He became a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and was repeatedly featured in newspapers, in television documentaries, and in a number of books about war veterans. His sharpness of mind, his great dignity, and his acute wit marked him out as a striking figure, physically active until he was past 105. The cricketer and artist Jack Russell painted his portrait when he was 107. Shown the result, Anderson said 'You've made me look older than I am' (private information). Lionized in the Black Watch, he enjoyed having generals pay court to him. The prince of Wales met him on several occasions, at Anderson's home and at regimental events, and he later unveiled a memorial to him in Alyth, where Anderson spent his final years, except for the last six weeks, which he spent at Mundamalla Nursing Home in nearby Newtyle. He died there of bronchopneumonia on 21 November 2005. His funeral, at Alyth parish church on 25 November, was attended by a representative of Prince Charles, the French consul-general, senior politicians, and army officers, as well as many soldiers past and present. Obituaries and accounts of the funeral were printed in the national newspapers and there were items on television news. His remains were cremated at Perth crematorium. He was survived by two daughters and two sons (one daughter having predeceased him), and by ten grandchildren, eighteen great-grandchildren, and two great-great-grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 95696


Weld, Jane Charlotte (1806-1871), convert to Roman Catholicism and benefactor, was born at Purley, near Windsor, Berkshire, and baptized on 10 August 1806 at Sunninghill. She was the eldest of the six children born to Edward Lesmoir Gordon ('c'.1763-1832) and his wife, Jane ('c'.1788-1873), daughter of Joseph Halliday of Bath. Her father, a scion of the protestant family of Lesmoir of Aberdeen, possessed independent means and was a member of the royal household at Windsor. Between 1815 and 1822 he deserted his wife and six children, fleeing to France to avoid his creditors. The difficulties and deprivations of those years left their mark on his daughter, who was educated by her mother until the age of sixteen when, for reasons which are obscure, she was sent to a Roman Catholic convent in Ghent. 
On 25 August 1825, while still a minor, Jane Gordon married Samuel Weld ('c'.1793-1851), the eldest son of William Weld (1762-1837) of Weld House, Kensington, and Heath House, Twickenham, a descendant of the Welds of Rushton, Flintshire. He was a solicitor with Capron and Weld, the leading Roman Catholic law firm in London. They had a daughter, Caroline Jane, born in 1826, who died in infancy, and a son, Gordon Samuel (1829-1863). 
On 14 May 1836, eleven years after her marriage, Jane Weld was received into the Roman Catholic church. Neither at the time of her marriage nor during the next decade does she seem to have been under pressure to embrace the family's faith, though she was said to have had a long-standing interest in Roman Catholicism. During 1835 and 1836 she had attended Nicholas Wiseman's lectures at the Sardinian chapel, and she corresponded with him immediately before her reception. In 1843, while visiting Florence, Samuel Weld was granted a barony by the grand duke of Tuscany 'for rendering him some service'. She became known as Baroness Weld, a title she used for the rest of her life. The following year Samuel retired from his legal practice and the family then lived abroad mainly in Paris, where other members of the Weld family were living, and in Rome, where there was a community of wealthy English Catholics. Samuel died in 1851 at 6 place de Sorbonne, Paris. Jane had his body returned to England, where he was buried in St George's Roman Catholic Cathedral, London. 
On 10 August 1853 Jane Weld married John Frederic Winterbottom (1800-1868), a barrister of Lincoln's Inn and close friend of her late husband. Resident at Tile Barn, East Woodhay, Hampshire, her second husband was a committed member of the Church of England involved in charitable activities, and the possessor of a fine collection of paintings. Wiseman, the catalyst for her conversion, meanwhile became a personal friend, and after her second marriage he was a frequent visitor at her London home, 75 Victoria Street, Westminster. Endeavouring to meet the religious demands that Wiseman placed upon his followers, she gave money, time, and energy to the enterprises that fulfilled his wishes and expectations. After Wiseman's death it was those of his successor, Henry Edward Manning, she sought to fulfil. In 1865 she was a member of the original group of financial supporters of the Roman Catholic cathedral to be built in Westminster, consecrated to Wiseman's memory, who were later known as 'the pioneers of the cathedral'. She gave $11,000, some of which was for a chapel in memory of her son. When the cathedral was built this sum, having greatly increased by investment, paid for the richly ornate and decorated lady chapel. 
The determining factors underlying Weld's charitable activities were her first-hand knowledge of the plight of the poor gained from her experiences as a member of the Catholic Women's Association for the Visiting of Hospitals in London and her compliance with Wiseman's belief that the church's most effective mission to the sick and the poor was achieved by the work of members of religious communities. She became a founder member and lifelong supporter of the St Elizabeth and St John Hospital, Great Ormond Street, provided financial assistance to the work of St George's Hospital and Paddington Lying-in Hospital, and provided the funds to establish a convent house for the Sisters of Mercy in Hanwell, later providing the $2000 required for the building of a convalescent home for poor women attached to it. Through donations and legacies she aided the work of the Sisters of St Vincent de Paul, the Little Sisters of the Poor, the Dominican Sisters of Mercy and Charity, the Aged Poor Society, the Westminster Fund for Poor Children, the Providence Row Night Refuge, and the Young Men's Catholic Society. 
Church building was another object of Weld's benefactions. A. W. N. Pugin, a fellow convert, was her preferred architect and after his death his son Edward Pugin received her approval. The building of the new church of St Aloysius in Oxford was made possible by her legacy of $7000. She also left $2000 for a church to replace the mission of St Joseph, Newbury, and $5000 for one to be built in Twickenham. She paid for a chapel to be built in St George's Cathedral, Southwark, in memory of her first husband. The mortuary chapel for her second husband was built in the churchyard of St Thomas's Church, Woolton Hill, East Woodhay. The Roman Catholic cemetery at Kensal Green, London, was the chosen site for the chapel built for her son and herself. 
In poor health, Weld left England in September 1871 and died at 42 rue Eglise, Ostend, Belgium, on 24 November 1871. She had inherited substantial property from her first and second husbands (both of whom had approved and supported her charitable activities), and from her son, who predeceased her. She left the bulk of this property (about $48,000) to religious and charitable purposes connected with the Catholic church. Her will, dated 14 May 1866, and ten codicils were challenged by her mother and unmarried sister who, along with her other surviving siblings, were provided only with small annuities. In a case heard in the court of probate in July 1873 they contended that it was the product of the 'undue influence' asserted on her by members of the Catholic hierarchy. Their counsel played on the role of her successive Jesuit confessors, Peter Gallwey and Albany Christie. Other evidence, however, indicated that the will was consistent with her long-held religious beliefs and that, as the judge emphasized in his directions to the jury, 'she was not only of sound mind, but... was of unusually business-like habits' ('The Times', 10 July 1873). The jury's immediate decision to uphold the validity of the will was applauded in a leading article (ibid., 12 July 1873) as a vindication of the right of testamentary disposition, thereby protecting the wishes of individuals who sought to use their property to promote public objectives. 
An intelligent, sensible woman of great energy, a lively conversationalist and a good companion, Jane Weld numbered among her associates such socially prominent Catholic women as the duchess of Norfolk, Baroness Petre, Lady Georgiana Fullerton, and Lady Herbert of Lea. Her achievements were prompted by a willingness to fulfil the wishes of the clergy who exercised persuasive leadership over the community of wealthy Victorian Catholics to which she belonged. 


@@@@@


doc= 95697


St John, Ambrose (1815-1875), Roman Catholic priest and headmaster, was born in Islington, London, on 29 June 1815, the younger son of Henry St John (1768-1833) and Catherine (died 1856), the daughter of the Revd Henry Wigley of Pensham House, Worcestershire. Ambrose was the grandson of St Andrew St John, dean of Worcester, and the great-grandson of John, tenth Lord St John of Bletso. He entered Westminster School in 1829, became a king's scholar the following year, and in 1834 went to Christ Church, Oxford, where he was elected to a studentship. He proved to be a good classical scholar and a keen Orientalist, studying Hebrew and Syriac under Edward Pusey, though he only gained a third-class degree in 'literae humaniores' (1837). St John graduated MA in 1840, and, after taking holy orders, served as curate (1841-3) to Henry Wilberforce, first at Bransgore, in Hampshire, and then at Walmer, near Deal. It was Wilberforce who provided the link with John Henry Newman, who first met St John on 21 April 1841 at the consecration of Ampfield church, in John Keble's parish of Hursley. 
On 7 August 1843, suffering increasing doubts about the Church of England, St John joined Newman's community at Littlemore; but the anticipated visit of 'about 3 months, perhaps for a longer time' ('Letters and Diaries', 9.428) turned into an association of thirty-two years. St John left Littlemore on 30 September 1845 for a visit to Prior Park, Bath, and, after three days there, was received into the Roman Catholic church; he returned to Littlemore in time to be present at Newman's reception on 9 October. At his confirmation at Oscott College St John asked if he could take a vow of obedience to Newman; the request was turned down, but for the rest of his life St John acted as if he had taken one. In the autumn of 1846 he and Newman set off for the College of Propaganda Fide in Rome to study for the priesthood; there the Romans spoke of the fair-haired, blue-eyed Englishman as Newman's guardian angel. The two were ordained priests on Trinity Sunday 1847 by Cardinal Fransoni at Propaganda, and, after a short novitiate, returned to Birmingham, where Newman was to establish the first oratory of St Philip Neri in England. 
St John remained at the Birmingham Oratory for the rest of his life, effectively acting as Newman's right-hand man. By nature vivacious, energetic, and practical, St John took easily to parish work, and was indefatigable in pulpit and confessional alike. In September 1849 he and Newman volunteered to help the priest at cholera-struck Bilston, risking their lives in the process. As well as shouldering many of the tasks at the oratory, St John acted as superior when Newman was in Dublin overseeing the Catholic University; and in December 1855 he and Newman went to Rome to resolve a dispute with the newly formed London Oratory. 
In 1857, when Newman was asked to undertake a new translation of the 'Bible' from the Vulgate version, he chose St John as one of the chief translators. St John began work on the book of 'Psalms', adding a commentary from the Hebrew text, but the 'Bible' project was abandoned (and his translation of the 'Psalms' left unpublished). St John saw through three other major translations: the 'Raccolta' (1857), a vast Italian collection of prayers, which ran to numerous editions and was praised by the 'Weekly Register' (14 Nov 1857) for its 'great felicity of expression'; the 'Doctrine of Holy Indulgences' (1868), also from the Italian; and Joseph Fessler's 'True and False Infallibility of the Popes' (1875) from the German. 
In January 1862, at Newman's request, St John dropped his literary work to undertake the headmastership of the Oratory School. It had been founded by Newman in 1859 as a public school for Catholics at the request of a group of Catholic converts, led by Edward Bellasis; but the experiment nearly collapsed when the first headmaster and his staff mutinied in December 1861. Bellasis and James Hope-Scott, the school's main benefactors, came to the rescue and enabled St John to take over, under Newman's presidency. St John soon remedied the deficiencies in Catholic training and teaching that he had inherited and over the next decade ensured that the school was re-formed along the lines originally intended by Newman. From the outset the school had employed the Eton dame system, to provide female care for the younger boys. Now, under St John, discipline was tightened up and the school became more orderly. St John and Newman worked together on many school tasks: dealing with parents, whom they treated as partners in education; undertaking the individual interviews with boys after the end-of-term exams, at which St John read out a report about character; and even, from 1865, overseeing the production of an annual Latin play, for which St John acted as stage-manager. As a pioneering venture -- employing laymen, not clerics, as masters, catering 'for youths whose duties are to lie in the world' (draft prospectus in Shrimpton, 279) rather than ecclesiastical life -- the Oratory School met with fierce opposition from supporters of the other Catholic establishments, and in 1867 St John was sent to Rome to prevent the school's closure; during his audience with Pius IX the pope commented on how much he had aged. 
Due to his chronic asthma and exhaustion, St John retired from the headmastership in 1873 and returned to ordinary oratorian duties. Newman had intended him to act as his literary executor and biographer, but he overworked on the Fessler translation, which was intended to support Newman's efforts in rebutting William Gladstone's 'Vatican Decrees'. He died as a result of sunstroke and 'brain fever' at Ravenshurst Farm, Edgbaston, on 24 May 1875, and was buried at Rednal near Bromsgrove, in the private cemetery belonging to the Birmingham Oratory. Newman had already paid St John a glowing tribute in 'Apologia pro vita sua'. Now, shortly after his death, Newman acknowledged that 'As far as this world was concerned I was his first and last' ('Letters and Diaries', 27.305). In recognition of this deep spiritual friendship and absolute loyalty, Newman asked to be (and was) buried in the same grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 95700


Mary Jane Hickling Kernahan (1857-1941), was born at Audley, Staffordshire, on 25 January 1857, the only daughter of Samuel Goodland Gwynne ('b'. 1827/8), mathematics master at Taunton College, and his wife, Jane Woolley, 'nee' Wright ('b'. 1832/3). She was educated at home by her father and at University College, London. On 1 August 1878 she married George Thomas Bettany (1850-1891), who, in addition to being a publisher's reader, was a scientific author and lectured in botany at Guy's Hospital, London, and in biology at Girton and Newnham colleges, Cambridge. He was the son of George Bettany (1819-1883), a schoolmaster and author. On her first husband's death she was awarded a civil list pension in consideration of his services to the spread of scientific knowledge and of her own 'destitute condition' ('The Times', 11 July 1892). Writing under the names Jeanie Gwynne Bettany and Jeanie Gwynne Kernahan, she became a prolific novelist, her most notable books being 'The House of Rimmon' (1885) and 'Trewinnot of Guy's' (1898). After converting to the Roman Catholic church in 1898 she wrote works on religious themes such as 'The Gate of Sinners' and 'The Sin of Gabrielle' (both 1908). She died on 17 January 1941. Her child from her first marriage, George Kernahan Bettany (1891-1949), became a thriller writer under the name George Kernahan Gwynne Bettany. 


@@@@@


doc= 95701


Graves, Philip Perceval (1876-1953), journalist and author, was born at Sandiford House, Stamford Road, Bowdon, Cheshire, on 25 February 1876, the eldest son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Alfred Perceval Graves (1846-1931) of Dublin, inspector of schools and poet, and his first wife, Jane (died 1886), eldest daughter of James Cooper of Cooper's Hill, near Limerick. Graves's family had been established in Ireland since the seventeenth century and was prominent in literature, education, and the church; his grandfather Charles Graves was bishop of Limerick. His great-uncle was Leopold von Ranke, the German historian. Five years after the death of Philip's mother, by which time he was fifteen, his father took as his second wife von Ranke's great-niece, Amy Ranke (1857-1951); among the children of the second marriage was the poet and novelist Robert von Ranke Graves. As a young man the red-haired Philip was sensitive, hot-tempered, and 'had his share of the notorious Graves arrogance' (Graves, 'Robert Graves', 22), and his relationship with his stepmother was difficult. In the words of a younger brother, he was also 'an exceptionally brilliant boy with an almost photographic memory' (ibid., 21), and won scholarships to Haileybury College in 1889 and to Oriel College, Oxford, in 1895. At Haileybury he was head of school in 1894-5, although at Oriel, where he read classics, he fared less well, in his finals in 1899 gaining only a third. 
Graves had hoped to enter the Indian Civil Service but failed the medical on grounds of incipient tuberculosis. Partly for health reasons and partly because of family connections with the Levant, he was sent to Cairo, where he became correspondent of the 'Egyptian Gazette' and shared a flat with Ronald Storrs. Already 'a master of his absorbing and entertaining craft' (Storrs, 49), in 1906 he was invited to join 'The Times'. Two years later he was appointed its correspondent in Constantinople, where until recently one of his younger brothers, Richard Massie Graves (1880-1960), had been acting third dragoman at the British embassy. Graves arrived in time to observe the Young Turks' revolution of July 1908 against the Hamidian regime, and remained until the outbreak of war with Germany in 1914. During these hazardous times, which took in the Balkan wars, he formed a close professional relationship with the British embassy's chief dragoman, Gerald Fitzmaurice, and came to share his view that the Young Turks' Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) had simply replaced one 'camarilla' with another. In February 1913 he told Aubrey Herbert that the committee had been trying to get rid of him and Fitzmaurice (diaries of Aubrey Herbert, 24 Feb 1913, Som. ARS DD/HER/70/2). This was not paranoia: 'I trust they will not arrest Graves who irritates them to madness by making the most of their follies and never patting them on the back when they do well', the ambassador, Sir Louis Mallet, wrote to the Foreign Office (Mallet to Nicolson, 17 Feb 1914, TNA: PRO, FO 800/372). Mallet, for whom Graves had contempt, adopted the opposite policy. On 17 July 1912 Graves had married the popular (Leila) Millicent (1885-1935), daughter of Gavin Gilchrist of Moda, Constantinople, with whom he had a daughter. 
During the First World War Graves was a captain in military intelligence in the Middle East. After he arrived in Cairo in January 1915, with the reputation of being the leading British expert on the Turkish army, his writing skills were put to use on the constant updating of 'The Turkish Army Handbook', on which he was assisted by T. E. Lawrence. In the following year he joined the Arab Bureau, and at the end of 1917 was a member of Gilbert Clayton's 'political camp' at General Allenby's advanced general headquarters at Bir Salem in Palestine. Graves, who spoke Turkish well, assisted his uncle, the senior Levant service officer Robert Windham Graves (1858-1934), in interrogating Turkish prisoners and examining captured documents. 
After the armistice with Turkey in October 1918 Graves resumed his position as correspondent of 'The Times' in Constantinople, and it was here that he broke the story for which he is most remembered. This concerned the so-called 'Protocols of the elders of Zion', a document that had first surfaced in 1905 and purported to reveal that all important events were manipulated by a secret society of Jews in the interests of establishing a Jewish world state. At the instigation of the antisemitic editor of the 'Morning Post', H. A. Gwynne, the 'Protocols' were presented as authentic in a series of articles in his newspaper in July 1920 and then in book form as 'The Cause of World Unrest' (1920). Gwynne had been informed in February by the political intelligence department of the Foreign Office that the 'Protocols' were almost certainly spurious and his own business manager dismissed them as 'moonshine'. Nevertheless, it was Graves, on the basis of evidence supplied to him by a Russian in Constantinople (Mikhail Raslovlev), who most convincingly debunked them. In three articles in 'The Times' (16, 17, 18 Aug 1921) he showed that they consisted for the most part of passages clumsily cut and pasted by the Russian secret police from a political pamphlet directed against Napoleon III and published in Brussels in 1865. Lest his own motives be suspect Graves stated in the preface to his book 'Palestine, the Land of Three Faiths' (1923) that he did not believe in political Zionism. 
Despite this triumph won in Constantinople and his admiration for the courage and military genius of the emerging Turkish leader, Mustafa Kemal, Graves was soon uncomfortable in Turkey. He saw the national assembly at Ankara, which was the focal point of resistance to both foreign occupation and the old regime in Constantinople, as the chrysalis of a 'new CUP', and when in November 1922 it elected a new caliph he concluded that it had made this move the better to prosecute its pan-Islamic schemes through a puppet. His discomfort increased when a man with whom his relations were bad was appointed to high office, and it was in these circumstances that he left. 
After Constantinople, Graves was employed by 'The Times' as a special correspondent, chiefly in Ireland and India but also in the Levant and the Balkans. Eventually he came to rest in the imperial and foreign department in London where, among other things, he wrote special articles and leaders. He also gave his time increasingly to writing books. Almost all on the Middle East except for 'A Record of the War', the vast twenty-four-volume work published quarterly by Hutchinson he took over from Storrs in the third quarter of 1940 and wrote almost entirely himself, these were terse and packed with facts but also contained strong expressions of opinion. In his 'Life of Sir Percy Cox' (1941) Graves rejected outright the charge that Cox shared some of the blame for the fall of Kut during the Mesopotamian campaign and claimed that he was 'the greatest of British proconsuls of our time' (p. 341). 
Graves's first wife had died in 1935 and on 16 July 1937 he married, at St Ethelburga's in Bishopsgate, Katherine Eleanor Dewar, daughter of W. H. E. H. Palmer; Storrs was best man. At the end of 1945 he retired from 'The Times' and moved to co. Cork. However, he did not stop writing, and in 1950 published his edition of the memoirs of King Abdullah of Transjordan. His time was otherwise much occupied by his interests in entomology, fly-fishing, and early British history. He died at his home, Ballylickey House, Bantry, co. Cork, Ireland, on 3 June 1953. His second wife and his daughter from his first marriage, Elizabeth Millicent (Sally) Chilver (1914-2014), who became principal of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, survived him. 
Graves's literary output sometimes bore the marks of the haste in which it had to be composed. A great patriot and believer in the civilizing mission of the British empire, he was occasionally too indulgent of the official point of view. Nevertheless, fired by a broad and raging curiosity and marked by the individualism characteristic of his family, he was a first-class journalist. His lasting importance is that he deflated one of the most pernicious myths about the Jews. 


@@@@@


doc= 95706


Goodchild, John (1697-1756), linen draper and philanthropic society administrator, was born early in the year 1697. Nothing is recorded of his parents but he had a brother Thomas who was a purveyor of dairy produce to the royal household. John Goodchild was described as a gentleman of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields when, on 14 July 1720 at the church of St Nicholas Cole Abbey, London, he married Isabella Wray (1693-1731) of Masham in Yorkshire, sister of Sir John Wray, twelfth baronet. 
Goodchild's residence and business premises were on the north-east corner of Charing Cross. His first son, John, born the year after his marriage, probably grew up as an apprentice in his father's business but the second, Cecil Wray, born in 1729, and the third, Robert, born in 1730, both attended Westminster School. His wife, Isabella, died in 1731 and four years afterwards he purchased a house and a copyhold estate at Teddington in Middlesex. At Teddington, Goodchild maintained a 'factory', a warehouse, and a large 'Bleachfield for Scotch and Irish Linen' (Rocque). He employed spinners and weavers throughout a large area of west Middlesex. A justice of the peace for the county Goodchild took an interest in local government and he was a regular attender at the Teddington church vestry. He supported the incumbent, Stephen Hales, in his schemes to rebuild the church and enlarge the churchyard, funds for this purpose being raised by the sale of pews; Goodchild bought one for his family and two for his employees. His son Cecil Wray, who had graduated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1751, was ordained priest in September 1753 and soon after was appointed curate to Hales at Teddington. 
At this time Hales was assisting William Shipley (1715-1803) in his plan to establish a society for the encouragement of arts, manufactures, and commerce, and he persuaded Goodchild to attend the foundation meeting at Rawthmell's Coffee House, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, on 22 March 1754 ['see 'Founders of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce]. One of only eleven original members, Goodchild became closely involved in the work of the institution, attending ten of the fifteen meetings held up to February 1755, a total exceeded only by Shipley and Husband Messiter. When officers were first chosen on 5 February 1755 he was named as treasurer of the society. The society's income from subscriptions was $360 19's'. in 1755 and $632 2's'. in 1756. Most of these sums went in rewards to artists and inventors but there were also small administrative expenses and the rent for the society's premises. Goodchild gave his time to all these matters. He advocated the giving of a premium for buff leather, and kept the society informed of the value of Hales's ventilating machines on ships. He proposed Peter Woulfe (1727-1802), chemist and inventor, as a member. When Goodchild died at Teddington in the last few days of December 1756 the society was well prepared for the remarkable growth in its national and international standing that characterized the subsequent decade. 
Goodchild's burial took place at St Mary's churchyard, Teddington, Middlesex, on 3 January 1757 and his death was reported to the Society of Arts on 5 January when Shipley took over the office of treasurer until the younger John Goodchild was chosen to succeed to the office. The latter had been granted administration of his father's estate on 11 January 1757, but proved unsuccessful in business and was declared bankrupt in 1759 when the society, having suffered a small loss in his accounts, abolished the office of treasurer. 


@@@@@


doc= 95709


Davies, (Albert) Meredith (1922-2005), organist and conductor, was born on 30 July 1922 at 27 Beresford Road, Upton, Birkenhead, Cheshire, the second son of Elias Aaron Davies, Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Norah Annie Margaretta, 'nee' Parry. At the age of eight he became a junior exhibitioner at the Royal College of Music as a cellist. Showing aptitude for the organ, he was taken as a pupil by the organist George Thalben-Ball. In 1936 he was admitted as a fellow of the Royal College of Organists, then in 1941 he went as an organ scholar to Keble College, Oxford. Called up in 1942, during the Second World War, he served for three years in the Royal Artillery, before returning to Oxford after the war to complete his degree, graduating with a second-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1947. 
Davies, appointed organist and choirmaster at St Albans Cathedral in 1947, was married there on 29 January 1949 to Betty Hazel, the 21-year-old daughter of Kenneth Leslie Bates. There were four children of the marriage, three sons and a daughter. Later in 1949 he moved to Hereford Cathedral where, as well as his duties as organist, he conducted at the Three Choirs festivals of 1952 and 1955. Encouraged by Sir Adrian Boult to become a full-time conductor, Davies took courses at the Accademia di Santa Cecilia in Rome during 1954 and 1956, before leaving Hereford to become organist at New College, Oxford, a post from which he resigned in 1959. Meanwhile he was conductor of the City of Birmingham Orchestra (1957-60) and the City of Birmingham Choir (1957-64). 
Davies had a particular affinity with the work of Benjamin Britten. A performance of Britten's 'Spring Symphony' in 1960 led to the composer's inviting Davies to conduct with the English Opera Group (EOG) at the Aldeburgh festival. During the next five years Davies conducted many of Britten's operas with the EOG, on tour, at Aldeburgh, and at Sadler's Wells Theatre in London. These included 'The Rape of Lucretia', 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', 'Albert Herring', and 'The Turn of the Screw'. Davies made a very successful Covent Garden debut in November 1960, conducting Britten's 'Peter Grimes'; his handling of the big choral scenes won particular praise. In July 1961 he gave the North American premiere of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' in Vancouver, then conducted the Covent Garden production of the opera at the Edinburgh festival and in London. Davies had perhaps his greatest triumph in May 1962 when he conducted the main orchestra, choir, and soprano soloist (Heather Harper, who had had only ten days in which to learn her part) at the premiere of Britten's 'War Requiem' in the newly built Coventry Cathedral; Britten, who had been expected to conduct the whole work, instead conducted the chamber orchestra accompanying the tenor and baritone soloists. Davies also conducted the triumphant first performance of the work in Westminster Abbey in December 1962. Britten had complete confidence in Davies's skill as a conductor and his interpretation of his works. 
Also in 1962 Davies conducted Delius's 'A Village Romeo and Juliet' for Sadler's Wells Opera; the South American premiere, in Buenos Aires, of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'; and 'The Turn of the Screw' for the EOG at the Edinburgh festival. During 1963 he conducted a new production of 'Peter Grimes' for Sadler's Wells, which the company took to Germany, and Poulenc's 'Dialogues des carmelites' at Covent Garden. At the 1964 Aldeburgh festival he conducted the premiere of Malcolm Williamson's 'English Eccentrics', based on the book by Edith Sitwell. Other composers with whose work Davies became associated included Ralph Vaughan Williams (Davies's recordings of his 'Riders to the Sea' and 'Sir John in Love' were highly acclaimed), Anthony Milner, Alan Bush, and Jonathan Harvey. 
In September 1964 EOG made a historic tour of the Soviet Union, visiting Riga, Leningrad, and Moscow. During the tour Davies began a five-year relationship with Cara Lancaster, a stage manager for EOG, with whom he had two children, a son and a daughter. Davies, who had been appointed conductor of the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra, travelled to Canada directly from Russia. He returned to Britain several times during his seven years in Vancouver: in 1965 to conduct Britten's 'Billy Budd' at Covent Garden; in 1967 to conduct the premiere of Lennox Berkeley's 'Castaway' at Aldeburgh; and in 1969 to take the EOG's 'Midsummer Night's Dream' to the Flanders festival and to conduct 'English Eccentrics' for the London Opera Centre. 
Davies was appointed conductor of the Royal Choral Society in 1972, and the same year joined the teaching staff of the Royal College of Music. He continued to conduct opera from time to time, including the London premiere of Alexander Goehr's 'Arden Must Die', given by the New Opera Company at Sadler's Wells, and Puccini's 'La rondine', presented by the EOG at the same theatre, both in 1974. He conducted 'The Turn of the Screw' for English Music Theatre (successor to the EOG) at the 1976 Brighton festival and in 1980 took over 'Mary, Queen of Scots' from the composer, Thea Musgrave, when she became ill and was unable to conduct it for Scottish Opera. In 1979 Davies was appointed principal of Trinity College of Music, London, where he remained until 1988, inaugurating an opera group at the college, which gave yearly performances at the Bloomsbury Theatre; he also worked with the London Schools Symphony Orchestra. He was appointed CBE in 1982. 
On retirement Davies went to live in Alresford, Hampshire. He was chairman of the Delius Society from 1991 to 1997; a great admirer of Delius, he made fine recordings of his operas 'A Village Romeo and Juliet' and 'Fennimore and Gerda'. He died at his home, 10 Mallard Close, New Alresford, on 9 March 2005, of congestive cardiac failure. A memorial service was held in St Albans Cathedral on 2 October 2005, and the students of Trinity College performed the 'War Requiem' in his memory at Rochester, Southwark, and Brighton in March 2006. He was survived by his wife, Betty, two sons, and two daughters, one son from his marriage and the son from his relationship with Cara Lancaster having predeceased him. 


