@@@@@


doc= 95720


Bloom, Alan Herbert Vauser (1906-2005), horticulturist, was born on 19 November 1906 in Over, near Swavesey, Cambridgeshire, the son of Charles Herbert Bloom, grocer and draper, and later market gardener, and his wife, Katherine Annie Jane, 'nee' Whitworth. His father's family is thought to have been descended from Huguenots who had come to East Anglia with Cornelius Vermuyden in the reign of Charles I. Interested in plants from the first, Bloom worked in a number of East Anglian nurseries when he left school, then joined his father's business. By the age of twenty-four he had his own thriving wholesale nursery in Oakington, Cambridgeshire, where he bred new aubrietas, dianthus, and campanulas, the last remaining a special favourite. He named his first new variety 'Dianthus' 'Oakington' in 1927. On 16 April 1931 he married Doris Hilda Heavens, the twenty-year-old daughter of Henry John Heavens. By 1938 Blooms Nurseries in Oakington was one of the largest in England but following the outbreak of the Second World War food crops became the priority and Bloom turned his hand to agricultural production, about which he wrote in 'The Farm in the Fen' (1944). 
Bloom bought Bressingham Hall, with 228 acres of land at Bressingham, Norfolk, in 1946, and spent nearly all of his life there except for a brief, unsuccessful sojourn with his young family to try farming in Canada from 1948 to 1950. He returned to revive the fortunes of his nursery and from then on he focused on his chief love, hardy perennial plants, breeding new kinds and skilfully propagating and promoting good old varieties. The handsome semi-evergreen hybrid 'Heuchera' x 'brizoides' named by his father 'Blooms' variety' won a Royal Horticultural Society award of merit in 1930-31 at a time when such perennials were usually disparaged except in cottage gardens. To give his plants the best advantage Bloom introduced island beds (his first notable example was at Bressingham itself in 1953) which sailed like stately floral galleons through ample lawns. Less labour-intensive than borders, they allowed plants to be viewed from all sides, permitted easy access for the gardener, and allowed more light so plants were more sturdy and needed less staking. They could also be introduced into the smaller gardens whose owners were buying more plants than the old estates. In 1957 Bloom became founding chairman of the Hardy Plant Society, an important body for stimulating enjoyment in herbaceous hardy plants, which by the time of his death had 10,000 members. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 30 October 1956 he married Flora Elizabeth Mackintosh, the 27-year-old daughter of Alfred Mackintosh. 
Bloom introduced into cultivation more than 200 plants that he had bred and named and was responsible for thousands of others that were distributed from the Blooms nurseries. Many of them became staples of European and North American gardens, but despite his remarkable skill he remained humble before the workings of the natural world; he did not consider his plants so much a matter of pride as 'of pleasure' and always gave credit to those that had come his way not through a breeding programme but 'as chance or self-sown seedlings', as was the case with 'Dianthus' 'Oakington'. His great skill was in perceiving the potential of new varieties, discerning their qualities, coaxing them into growth, and working up stocks for commercial sale. He believed that for 'the gardening public' a 'plant stands or falls on its own merits, for beauty and reliability' (A. Bloom, 'Introductions from Blessingham', in R. Bird, ed., 'Plantsmen on Plants', 1990, 204). 
Bloom was always a hands-on gardener but he had a shrewd business sense and realized that speedier propagation methods and new methods of retail trading and of attracting customers were the coming trend. His two sons, Robert and Adrian, joined him in the business in 1962. A steam enthusiast from a young age, Bloom had the previous year bought his first traction engine, and by the end of 1962 had collected fourteen engines, which formed the nucleus of Bressingham Steam Museum. In 1965 he laid the first of several narrow- and standard-gauge tracks. In 1972 he handed over the running of Blooms Nurseries to his sons, formed the steam collection into a trust (of which he was founding chairman and later president), and retired to his six acre private garden at Bressingham Hall with its nursery in which he and a small band of helpers raised by hand special plants 'which objected to mechanisation' (personal knowledge). His elder son Robert died in a car crash in 1995 but his younger son Adrian and grandson Jason continued the family business at Bressingham Gardens, though the Plant Centre was taken over in 2007. 
Bloom had a wild streak though brought up strictly and remaining a Quaker throughout his life. At seventy he had his ears pierced. He wore hoop earrings and let his hair grow long, and looked like a kind of horticultural pirate. Though he had been a sickly child, outdoor life had improved his health and even in his nineties he was an attractive and charismatic figure. He wrote about thirty books, including an autobiography, 'Come You Here, Boy!' (1995), and made regular broadcasts, the last occasion only a few months before he died. Proud that his was the only family in which the Royal Horticultural Society's prestigious Victoria medal of honour had been awarded to both father and son (Adrian), he also received the Veitch memorial medal and was appointed MBE in 1997. He died of bronchopneumonia at Bressingham Hall on 30 March 2005 and was survived by his wife, Flora, his son Adrian, and his four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 95722


Brown, William Christopher (1928-2005), civil engineer, was born on 16 September 1928 at Beech House, Croesyceiliog, Monmouthshire, the second of two sons of William Edward Brown (1892-1965), joiner, cabinet-maker, and sometime county councillor, and his wife, Margaret Eliza, 'nee' Hughes (1891-1953), descended from a family of farmers. Brown's grandfather had established a joinery and cabinet-making business, which was continued by his two sons on his death. Brown, later a self-styled 'hands-on' engineer, derived pleasure as a boy from visiting the workshop, making articles in wood (including toys during war time), and using tools fashioned by his grandfather and father, the latter having served apprenticeship to a blacksmith. From Monmouth School, he was awarded a state scholarship for a two-year degree course in civil engineering at University College, Southampton. A first-class degree led to a two-year graduate studentship (extended to three years) at Imperial College, London, under A. J. S. Pippard and S. R. Sparkes. His research topic concerned the buckling behaviour of metal plates in structural engineering, which contributed to his first professional paper in 1956. 
Brown joined Freeman, Fox & Partners (FFP) in 1951. He worked on the design of the Volta Bridge, a trussed arch, when he was seconded to Halcrow to work on site during 1956. He then returned to FFP where he developed a close working relationship with Gilbert Roberts, taking over leadership of Roberts's engineering team on his retirement in 1969. Roberts was undoubtedly the leader in the resurgence of British expertise in the design of long-span road bridges after the Second World War, a role that Brown inherited and further developed. He became a partner of FFP in 1970. Meanwhile, in 1964 he married Celia Hermione Emmett; there were no children of the marriage. 
The most spectacular consequence of changes in bridge-building techniques was seen in the (first) Severn Bridge (span 988 metres, completed 1966) with its 'aerofoil' deck form, which saved approximately 25 per cent in weight by comparison with the trussed deck of the Forth Bridge (span 1006 metres, completed 1964) and with rectangular box (as opposed to cellular) bridge towers. A cross-braced truss design had been considered for the Severn Bridge but the destruction of its model during wind tunnel testing provided a fortuitous opportunity for a successful trial of an aerofoil form. The optimization of bridge decks remained a special interest of Brown throughout his further career, in relation particularly to their dynamic and aerodynamic characteristics. In 1974 he designed his own simple wind tunnel, which was rebuilt in 1988 with greater capability, to test and improve aerofoil forms to minimize air resistance and avoid risk of 'flutter' -- potentially catastrophic wind-induced oscillation. Some of his later designs introduced slots in the deck between two or more box structures beneath carriageways or rail-tracks. 
In 1969 FFP shared the first annual MacRobert award, for the Severn Bridge superstructure, designed by the team led by Roberts and Brown. The citation described it as 'awesome in its striking simplicity'. The following year saw a setback for FFP's reputation as a leading bridge designer, with the collapse during construction of the Milford Haven Bridge in June, followed by the more serious collapse of the West Gate Bridge across the River Yarra in Melbourne in October. The royal commission report on this latter event identified numerous factors contributing to the accident, criticizing Brown and other partners of FFP. Such experiences led to the Merrison report on design and construction of box-girder bridges (1974), which identified the need for clear codes of practice supported by research, which lagged behind practice, coupled with independent design checks. 
Brown's last major bridge project with FFP that proceeded to construction was the (first) Bosphorus Bridge (span 1074 metres, completed 1973), for which, after supervising design, he was resident partner for construction in 1972-3. He resigned from FFP in 1985. In 1987 he set up his own consultancy, Brown Beech and Associates (Beech being a toponym recalling his birthplace). His principal commission was as engineer and project director for the second Bosphorus Bridge (span 1090 metres, opened 1988). He prepared preliminary designs for a number of other major bridges. He was appointed lead designer for the Messina road and rail bridge (span 3300 metres), but a change of government led to suspension of the project. This would have been by far the longest span bridge, made possible by Brown's multi-box form of bridge deck. 
Brown was an innovative, ingenious, and highly numerate engineer. He contributed also to techniques of bridge construction including, for example, to notable savings in cost in forming the suspension cable. He was appointed OBE in 1966 and elected a royal designer for industry in 1977, serving as master of the Faculty of Royal Designers for Industry from 1983 to 1985. He was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1978 and a fellow of Imperial College in 1987. He received several honours from overseas. From 1967 Brown lived at 1 Allen Mansions, Allen Street, Kensington, London. His death at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital from a heart attack on 16 March 2005 was followed by cremation at Mortlake crematorium. He was survived by his wife, Celia. 


@@@@@


doc= 95726


Brainin, Norbert (1923-2005), violinist, was born on 12 March 1923 in Vienna, Austria, the son of Adolf Brainin (died 1930), furrier, and his wife, Sophie (died 1938). He was raised in the Jewish faith. Even though his parents must have felt the impact of the economic downturn that brought the country to its financial knees in the early 1920s, he seems to have enjoyed all the trappings of a relatively wealthy central European childhood. Like others from similar backgrounds, he was introduced to music at an early age. As a boy of six he heard the thirteen-year-old Yehudi Menuhin play in Vienna in 1929. Overwhelmed by the experience, the young Brainin immediately decided to become a violinist, a course from which he never wavered. He began violin lessons at the age of seven with his cousin, Max, an architect and a passionate amateur musician. Under his tutelage Brainin progressed quickly on his quarter-size instrument and it was soon clear that he needed to be taught professionally. After being tutored by a series of teachers that included Theodore Paschkus, Solomon Auber, and Heinrich Schwarz, Brainin became a pupil of the nineteen-year-old leader of the Vienna Philharmonic, Ricardo Odnoposoff, at the Vienna Conservatory from 1933 to 1935. But it was Rosa Hochmann-Rosenfeld who probably influenced him most, because it was she who introduced him both to chamber music and to the great violin pedagogue Carl Flesch. 
In 1938 Brainin was struck by two severe blows: the death of his mother and the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany. Having been orphaned at the age of fifteen, he was raised by one of his paternal uncles, with whom he later fled to London. Although the Brainins were emigres and were unfamiliar with Britain, they quickly recognized the commercial possibilities that Europe's biggest metropolis had to offer and soon began to trade as furriers in fashionable New Bond Street. Nevertheless, Brainin must have felt the trauma of displacement, because shortly after arriving in England he became involved with some of the refugee groups that had sprung up around the capital. As an affable and talented young man he rapidly became a familiar face at those gatherings by playing at some of their concerts. His education also progressed apace in England, where he attended a boarding school at Leigh-on-Sea and where he began to take lessons with Carl Flesch. But Brainin's relationship with Flesch was short-lived, since Flesch fled London for The Hague in anticipation of the blitz. (He subsequently spent two years in Nazi-occupied Holland before being allowed to move first to Budapest and then to Lucerne, where he died in 1944.) Continuity was achieved at least in part, however, when Brainin was accepted as a pupil by Flesch's assistant, Max Rostal. 
Brainin's musical education was again interrupted when in 1940 he was interned as an enemy alien at a camp in Prees Heath, Shropshire. Although he worked as a machine tool fitter at the camp, music remained his passion and he soon sought out others who shared his enthusiasm. As a teenager he was naturally drawn to other internees of the same age, and among the friends that he made at the camp was the young Austrian violinist Peter Schidlof (1922-1987). Schidlof was also of Jewish descent but had been educated at a Roman Catholic boarding school. His early musical education was equally unconventional, because his first violin lessons were with the local blacksmith's son. After arriving in Britain as a refugee in 1938 he attended Blundell's School at Tiverton in Devon, before being interned. After Brainin was released later in 1940, Schidlof was moved from Shropshire to a camp on the Isle of Man, where he befriended yet another young Austrian-Jewish violinist, Siegmund Nissel (1922-2008), who had fled Vienna on the last 'Kindertransport' in 1938. 
By 1941 Brainin, Schidlof, and Nissel had all been released from internment and were able to continue their studies with Max Rostal. After the war they joined the Rostal Chamber Orchestra and it was as members of that group that they met the young English cellist Martin Lovett ('b'. 1927), the fourth member of what was to become the Amadeus Quartet. Brainin was now part of an exciting nexus of young musicians and his playing went from strength to strength; he won the gold medal at the international Carl Flesch violin competition in London in 1946 with a performance of Brahms's violin concerto, and went on to play Beethoven's violin concerto with the London Philharmonic Orchestra at the Royal Albert Hall in January 1948. 
For a young virtuoso the lure of a solo career must have been very tempting, but chamber music was never far from Brainin's thoughts and when Schidlof converted successfully from the violin to the viola, they joined with Nissel and Lovett to form the Brainin Quartet. With a unified playing style that benefited from their close contact with Rostal the group quickly came to the attention of some of Britain's leading musicians. One of the first to be impressed by the quartet's playing was Imogen Holst, who invited them to perform at Dartington Hall on 13 July 1947. For Brainin that performance was an artistic epiphany, and in later life he recalled that: 'something decisive happened, in my head, my soul, and my heart; and this was entirely caused by the music we played. Above all, by Beethoven's quartets, but also by those of Schubert, Mozart, and Haydn... I couldn't 'think' about anything else... Already in 1947 I sensed, that playing string quartets would become the purpose of my life. (www.schillerinstitute.org)' With the success of the Dartington Hall concert behind them Brainin, Schidlof, Nissel, and Lovett made their Wigmore Hall debut as the Amadeus Quartet on 10 January 1948, having decided that a more neutral name would serve their purposes better. News of this sensational band of young players spread like wildfire through the close-knit chamber music community. Demand for tickets for their Wigmore Hall concert soon far outstripped supply and those lucky enough to secure a seat began to sing the quartet's musical praises, both nationally and internationally. Central Europe was conquered next and it was at Hamburg that the quartet made its German debut in 1950. There the young players caused a sensation, prompting 'the audience in its enthusiasm almost [to] smash... the entire hall' (www.schillerinstitute.org). News of that success soon attracted wider interest and the group then toured America and the world in 1953 and 1954 respectively. On 17 April 1948 Brainin had married Kathe, the 29-year-old former wife of Hans Helmut Block, and daughter of Hugo Kottow, a German grain merchant; they had one daughter, Anne. 
Although clearly gifted the quartet benefited greatly from the advent of long-playing records and it was through these that its fame and performance style reached a wider audience. As three of the ensemble's members had been born in central Europe, it was almost inevitable that the group would become associated with the works of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, and Schubert. Their interpretations of Schubert's music were particularly highly regarded and their recordings of that composer's 'Trout' quintet with the pianist Clifford Curzon and of the C major quintet, first with William Pleeth and later with Robert Cohen, became benchmarks against which all other recordings of those works were judged. For Brainin, however, it was the music of Beethoven that was the greatest challenge for a chamber musician, and he later argued that if 'a violinist... cannot play the Beethoven quartets, that is who hasn't the equipment to play them, [he] is not a violinist in the fullest possible sense'. Moreover, he felt that a 'certain technique is involved' in playing those works and that in order 'to do justice to the music, the expression, and all that is necessary, you must have this technique'. According to Brainin the style of violin playing that was taught in Vienna equipped a player best for this music, and: 'it is exactly [that] kind of violin playing which you need in order to play Beethoven's music... It means producing a certain singing 'tone'. It's like the 'bel canto' technique in singing. And, like a singer, you have to rehearse this every day. Every day. (www.schillerinstitute.org)' As time progressed, the Beethoven quartets became increasingly important to the group and it was while re-recording those works in 1987 that Peter Schidlof died of a heart attack. Because of the personal and musical relationships that had developed over the previous forty years, the remaining members of the quartet felt that it would no longer be possible to continue as a unit without him. It was agreed, therefore, that they should pursue independent careers and that they should disseminate their performance style by teaching and giving masterclasses. Brainin was particularly sought after as a teacher and was affiliated to the Hochschule fur Musik in Cologne and the Royal Academy of Music in London from 1976 and 1986 respectively. 
Brainin's performance style was that of a musical literalist, who looked to 'Urtext' scores as the basis for his interpretations. He argued vigorously against the use of poor editions and was a particularly strong advocate of consistency in performance. He was a musician whose roots were planted firmly in the fertile artistic soil of central Europe, and his performance aesthetic had much in common with that of other musical giants from that tradition. Nevertheless, he was a cosmopolitan musician who maintained that his playing was not the product of a single method but the synthesis of the Russian and Viennese schools: the Russian through Flesch and the Viennese through his experiences as a boy in Vienna. During his career he played on at least two instruments made by distinguished Cremonese makers: the first was a violin made by Pietro Guarneri, which was bought for him by the founders of Dartington Hall, Leonard and Dorothy Elmhirst, in 1947, and the second was the Stradivarius of 1713 known as the Gibson, which he bought in 1988. 
From the 1980s Brainin became particularly interested in pitch. He argued that A=440 Hz, the pitch used commonly in Britain and elsewhere, was harmful to singers and inappropriate for performing music from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. He advocated the widespread adoption of A=432 Hz, a pitch that he felt made early music both fuller and more transparent and vocal music less hazardous to perform. Brainin was not the first musician to address this thorny question: Sir Henry Wood had also challenged existing trends when he adopted French pitch for the Promenade Concerts in London in 1895, a drop of approximately a semitone from that used normally in Britain at that time. But unlike Wood, Brainin was keen to pursue his argument scientifically, and in tests supervised by Bruno Barosi of the International Institute of Violinmaking at Cremona in Italy, he tuned a number of Stradivarius's instruments to the lower pitch and played the same work under the same conditions. As the instruments responded by resonating more fully at A=432 Hz, Brainin felt that his thesis had merit and that further investigations into this fundamental aspect of performance practice were essential. 
A large man with a large appetite for life, Brainin was known both for his wit and for his absent-minded behaviour. He was admired greatly for his musical honesty and his devotion to his art. At the time of his death he was involved with the establishment of the Norbert Brainin Foundation at Asolo in Italy, which he hoped would have both a pedagogic and an archival role. He was appointed OBE in 1960 and received honorary degrees from institutions in Britain and abroad. He died of cancer of the colon at Northwick Park Hospital, Brent, London, on 10 April 2005. He was survived by his wife, Kathe, and their daughter, Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 95748


Bruce, Donald William Trevor, Baron Bruce of Donington (1912-2005), politician, was born at 76 Norbury Court Road, Norbury, Surrey, on 3 October 1912, the son of William Trevor Bruce (died 1934), a wealthy insurance broker, and his wife, Mary Frances, 'nee' Law. The family left Norbury for Lincolnshire when Donald was quite young but had already started at Norbury preparatory school. He received his secondary education at Donington grammar school in Lincolnshire. He did not go on to university but, under his father's influence, trained locally to become a chartered accountant. In 1930 he moved to London, where he was articled to a City firm of accountants. He qualified as a chartered accountant and industrial economist. 
By the early 1930s Bruce had established himself with sufficient confidence to become involved in Conservative Party politics. He joined the North Paddington branch of the Junior Imperial League and was an active campaigner for the local Conservative MP in the lead-up to the crisis of 1931 that brought the collapse of Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government and the formation of a national government led by MacDonald and Stanley Baldwin. By then Bruce, a firm young patriot, had also enlisted in the Territorial Army (the Middlesex yeomanry), in which he served for four years. He had the build of a guardsman, broad-shouldered, a craggy face even as a young man, with beetle brows covering sharp eyes. Altogether it was a combination that appeared to prepare him for a military career or possibly that of a traditional Conservative MP. That would certainly have reflected the Bruce family background. Despite all this Donald Bruce underwent an extraordinary transformation to end up a left-wing member of the Labour Party, which he joined in 1935 after a short spell with the still more radical Independent Labour Party. This remarkable change took root following the collapse of the MacDonald government of 1931 at a time of economic crisis, widespread depression, and social deprivation, all of which made a profound impression on the young Bruce. Nevertheless, it was clearly a highly unusual conversion. On 15 July 1939 he married Joan Letitia, the 22-year-old daughter of Henry Claud Butcher, cycle manufacturer. They had one son and three daughters. 
Immediately following the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Bruce rejoined the army, eventually rising to the rank of major in the Royal Signals. After taking part in the Normandy landings, which brought a mention in dispatches, he was recruited to General Eisenhower's intelligence staff. None of this affected his by then well-developed political convictions, and while still in uniform he was selected as Labour candidate to contest the hitherto safe Conservative seat of North Portsmouth in the general election of 1945 -- which he went on to win by a majority of 1042. Bruce followed up his political transformation by joining the Fabian Society and the campaigning Keep Left group within the Labour Party, which included new MPs from the 1945 intake like Michael Foot. He quickly made a reputation as a powerful advocate of socialism and came to the attention of Aneurin Bevan, who had just been appointed minister of health by Prime Minister Attlee. Soon afterwards Bevan accosted Bruce in the doorway of the Commons' smoking room and offered to make him his parliamentary private secretary. Bruce was stunned and flattered but grasped the opportunity. He became Bevan's chief lieutenant during the preparation of legislation to establish the National Health Service and Bevan sent him to Sweden and Denmark to study the socialized health systems in both those countries. He became devoted to Bevan and was soon regarded in the inner sanctum of government as 'Nye's hairshirt' -- chiefly because he was always prepared to argue with Bevan himself against compromises the minister was under pressure to make, most notably to the medical profession in the critical months when the NHS was struggling to be born. By the time the NHS was launched in July 1948 the two men had become firm and close friends. Indeed, Bruce was -- and remained -- among the few men around him whom Bevan trusted. Bruce in turn always insisted that his election as a Labour MP in the Labour landslide of 1945 was a crowning moment and his association with Aneurin Bevan his greatest achievement. 
In the general election of 1950 Bruce lost his redrawn Portsmouth West constituency by 945 votes. When he tried again for a parliamentary seat in the Wrekin in the general elections of 1959 and 1964, he failed each time. By then he had already set up his own accountancy firm, which he personally ran until 1974 when it merged with Halpern and Woolf, with Bruce remaining a senior partner. Halpern and Woolf were later taken over by Casson Beckman, which eventually merged with Baker Tilly, for whom Bruce was still working as a consultant well into his later years. Yet he never ceased his active role as a left-wing campaigner in the Labour Party and a committed Bevanite. 
In 1974 Harold Wilson, on returning to office, created Bruce a life peer as Baron Bruce of Donington. He was one of the first British appointees to become a member of the European parliament after Britain's entry into the EEC. He was rapporteur for the Labour Group but resigned in 1979 when direct elections for the European parliament were introduced. In fact he had never really believed in the European project. On one occasion in 1979, before he resigned as rapporteur, he sensationally refused to sign the EC accounts because, he claimed, there was evidence of 'scandalous duplicity' in the handling of financial controls. When in 1979 he was appointed in the House of Lords as opposition spokesman on Treasury economic and industrial questions, he was a constant critic of European institutional practices. He continued in that role until 1990, when he decided to stand aside. Throughout those active years he established a reputation as one of the predictably sternest, often infuriating, critics of virtually everything proposed in the name of the European Union. 
Bruce remained an active and assiduous attender in the Lords to the end of his life, never hesitating to become involved in controversy -- especially where Europe was concerned. By the end of his life he was the last remaining member of the Parliamentary Labour Party of 1945 still to be sitting in parliament, a badge he wore with great pride. His first marriage ended in divorce in 1980 and on 12 February 1981 he married Cyrena Shaw Heard, a 64-year-old widow and daughter of Cyril Charles Shaw, mining engineer. He died of prostate cancer at Avon House nursing home, Kensington, London, on 18 April 2005. He was survived by his wife, son, and one daughter, two daughters having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 95749


Darling, Julia Rose (1956-2005), poet, playwright, and novelist, was born on 21 August 1956 at 8 College Street, Winchester, Hampshire, the eldest daughter and second of five children of John Ramsay Darling, a science teacher at Winchester College, and his wife, Patricia Rosemary (Vicky), 'nee' Vickers, a nurse and a Quaker. She was educated at Winchester County High School for Girls and St Christopher's School, Hertfordshire, from where she was expelled at the age of fifteen. She then did a cordon bleu cookery course before studying fine art at Falmouth School of Art. She grew up in the house where Jane Austen died and remembered its being constantly visited during her childhood. When she plastered anti-apartheid and 'women's right to choose' posters on the windows of the house, the Jane Austen Society complained. She later drew on her early experiences for her first novel, 'Crocodile Soup' (1998). 
In 1980 Darling moved to the north-east. She never returned south, falling in love with Newcastle -- the bridges, the architecture, and the way people talked. (She was also particularly attached to the Isle of Wight, where she went every summer with her family.) She worked with community arts in Pennywell, and set up the Women's Intellectual Group (WIG). In the same period she created the political cabaret 'Sugar and Spikes' with Ellen Phethean. She was always drawn to working collaboratively across a range of art forms: she worked with musicians, glass artists, and film makers. On 13 October 1984 she married Ivan Paul Spears, a 28-year-old trade union organizer later known as Ieuan Einion, and son of John Sears, furniture maker. After the birth of her two daughters, Scarlet ('b'. 1984) and Florence 
(Florrie; 'b'. 1986)
, she started to write in earnest. Her first collection of poems, 'Small Beauties' (1988), was published by Newcastle Libraries. Her group Poetry Virgins was formed to perform the poems in 'Small Beauties'. She wrote a number of plays for the theatre (notably for Live Theatre, Quondam, and Northern Stage) and the radio. Her plays included 'Doughnuts Like Fanny's' (2002), a comic play about the life of Fanny Cradock, 'Attachments' (2002), and 'Manifesto for a New City' (2004), a musical. She also wrote short fiction -- 'Bloodlines' (1995) was a collection about different women coping with difficult lives. It was her publishers who encouraged her to embark on a novel. Like almost all of her writing, 'Crocodile Soup' (1998) is the work of a comic spirit, a wholly unexpected tale of love, knowledge, and eccentricity, driven by endless invention. It brought Darling's work to a national readership and established her reputation. 
In 1990 (her marriage having ended in divorce) Darling met her long-term partner, Beverley Anne (Bev) Robinson, and brought her daughters up with her; they made a welcoming home together in Heaton. The house was always teeming with friends, teenagers, neighbours, dogs, and cats. In 1995 Darling was first told that she had breast cancer. She dealt with cancer in an extraordinary way and passionately believed in living in the moment. She was the most uplifting and exhilarating of company. 
Darling held a Royal Literary Fund fellowship at the University of Newcastle from 2000. Later, she became a fellow in creative writing and health there, enjoying the company of other writers enticed there by the innovative head of department, Linda Anderson: Jo Shapcott, Cynthia Fuller, Margaret Wilkinson, Linda France, Bill Herbert, Tom Shakespeare, Sean O'Brien, and Jackie Kay among others. She loved the sense of a writers' community. She belonged to many groups, yet still retained a strong sense of her own individuality. She was instrumental in establishing successfully Proud Words, the first gay and lesbian literary festival in England. 
When her cancer returned Darling started writing poetry as a way of coping with the illness. She did an MA in creative writing at Newcastle University, specializing in poetry. Afterwards she produced two collections, edited by Jo Shapcott, 'Sudden Collapses in Public Places' (2003) and 'Apology for Absence' (2004), both inspired by her experiences. Having cancer made her work harder, as if she was attempting to cram it all in. In 2003, the year in which she won the prestigious Northern Rock Foundation writer's award, she published 'The Taxi Driver's Daughter', a witty novel about a family on the verge of collapse. Even when dealing with difficult subjects, her work exhibited both lightness of touch and humour. She believed that poetry should be a part of the life of every hospital; her last book was an anthology about illness, 'Poetry Cure' (2005), compiled with Cynthia Fuller, which she hoped would be read by doctors and patients everywhere. 
'Dying is very surreal', Darling said. 'Death is such a palaver. Ho hum the nurses come' (personal knowledge). In her weblog, which appeared sporadically but was eagerly awaited, she wrote that there were positive things about dying -- one was that she was in no pain unless she tried to dance the hokey cokey, and another that you only had to 'do' death once. The weblog was later dramatized on BBC Radio 4, produced by Sue Roberts, who produced many of Darling's radio plays, and acted by her close friend Charlie Hardwick. Darling took control of her own death. She chose her own funeral, burial plot, and gravestone. She said, 'You don't see many lesbian gravestones' (personal knowledge) and wanted to acknowledge her much loved partner and her daughters on hers. She managed to predict her own peaceful death in her poem 'End': she died at home on 13 April 2005 in the late afternoon, with the sun shining. She was survived by her partner, Bev, and her two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 95751


Hughes, David John (1930-2005), novelist, was born on 27 July 1930 at 6 Park Close Road, Alton, Hampshire, the only child of Gwilym Fielden Hughes (1899-1989), schoolmaster, writer, and broadcaster, and his wife, Edna Frances, 'nee' Cochrane (1903-1996). His father was the Yorkshire-born son of a Congregational minister from Caernarvonshire, and his mother was born in Lancashire. He was observant of his roots, perhaps the more so as his childhood was disrupted by the Second World War. In 1937 his father had moved from the headmastership of Alton senior boys' school to that of Queen's Road senior boys' school, Wimbledon, but two years later the family was evacuated to Chichester, and then back to Alton. They did not return to London until the war was over. 
Hughes was educated at Eggar's Grammar School, Alton, and then at King's College School, Wimbledon. As an Alton choirboy he reported sermons for the 'Hampshire Herald'; at the age of seventeen he offered poems to John Lehmann's 'Penguin New Writing'. During national service at RAF Warrington (1948-50) he read J. B. Priestley under his desk. At Oxford, where he read English at Christ Church and edited 'Isis', he kept in touch with Lehmann, giving him the idea for a BBC programme, 'New Soundings', and in 1953, when Lehmann was setting up his new title, the 'London Magazine', he took on Hughes (who had graduated with a second-class degree earlier that year) as his assistant editor. Lehmann, an autocrat, liked Hughes, whom he described as 'sweet-tempered and able', though he noticed 'grim psychological struggles in his relations with his family' (Wright, 212). Nevertheless Hughes left in 1955 to work for another autocrat, Rupert Hart-Davis, in publishing. (The 'London Magazine' soon followed to the same address; Alan Ross, who succeeded Lehmann as editor from 1961, became one of Hughes's closest friends.) Hart-Davis, recognizing Hughes's ambition, gave him a paid half-day off a week to write and in 1957 his first novel was published, 'A Feeling in the Air'. 
It was as 'a young poet' (Zetterling, 152) that, the same year, he was introduced by Patrick Woodcock to the Swedish film star Mai Elisabet Zetterling (1925-1994), newly parted from Tyrone Power. Woodcock mischievously introduced Mai Zetterling as 'a middle-aged Latvian refugee who speaks only German' ('The Independent', 19 June 2002). Hughes was tall and dark, Zetterling was tiny, elfin, blonde. They married in Oxford on 23 April 1958, in which year Hart-Davis published Hughes's second book, 'J. B. Priestley: an Informal Study of his Work'. 
Hughes's second novel, 'Sealed with a Loving Kiss', followed in 1959, but for the next sixteen years his career -- apart from a stint as editor of Michael Heseltine and Clive Labovitch's magazine 'Town', 1960-61 -- was largely allied to Zetterling's. Hughes left his damp basement in Bayswater, Zetterling her smart flat in Kensington, and they bought and restored a tumble-down old rectory, Berry Grove, at Liss in Hampshire. Zetterling, determined to be more than a decorative studio actress, gave herself five years to get established as an independent film-maker. Hughes collaborated with her, whether as co-writer, sound man, or stills photographer, on the short 'The War Game' (1962; nominated for a BAFTA award), 'Loving Couples' (1964; nominated for the palme d'or at Cannes), the controversial 'Night Games' (1966; nominated for the leone d'oro at Venice, but banned from public performance there), 'Dr Glas' (1968; based on the novel by Hjalmar Soderberg), 'The Girls' (1968; based on Aristophanes' 'Lysistrata'), and 'Vincent the Dutchman' (1972; a BAFTA award-winning drama-documentary about Van Gogh). 
In 1964, the year he published 'The Road to Stockholm and Lapland', a relaxed account of a drive through northern Europe in Zetterling's Sunbeam Rapier convertible (most of her films were shot in Sweden), Hughes made his mark with a fourth novel, 'The Major'. Brief, spare, impressively violent, it told the story of the mundane Major Kane's vicious campaign to reclaim his family house from an aged tenant. In 1968 came 'The Man Who Invented Tomorrow', a tease of H. G. Wells. But exile did not suit Hughes. Unhappy in the remote house near Uzes, in Languedoc, that Zetterling had fallen in love with four years before, deracinated and unable to write, he returned in 1974 to London. They divorced in 1976. 
Hughes lived in Pimlico, then for a period in New York, teaching, before marrying, at Lambeth register office on 1 November 1980, Elizabeth Jane Booth, 'nee' Westoll ('b'. 1947), daughter of James (Tim) Westoll, landowner and ornithologist. He and Elizabeth settled down in contentment to live in London, finally at 163 Kennington Road, with a second home at a farmhouse in the hills above Llandovery in Carmarthenshire, and then in Aldington, Kent; they had a son, Merlin, and a daughter, Anna Rose. After the subtle, well-crafted novels 'Memories of Dying' (1976), 'A Genoese Fancy' (1979), and 'The Imperial German Dinner Service' (1983), Hughes scored his most notable success with 'The Pork Butcher' (1984). A haunting tale of a German ex-soldier returning to France to the site of a Second World War massacre in which he had participated, it displayed all Hughes's finest characteristics as a writer: wit, economy, sensuality, and a brutal power of surprise. The book won the W. H. Smith literary award and was turned in 1989 into a film, 'Souvenir', that Hughes deplored. His last work of conventional fiction was the light-hearted 'But for Bunter' (1985), published in America as 'The Joke of the Century' (1986), in which twentieth-century history was taken over by the Fat Owl of Frank Richards's remove. 
J. B. Priestley liberated Hughes, he said, by his 'insistence on being his own man' ('Himself and Other Animals', 6); by unbending frankness, Priestley achieves a direct relationship with his reader. In 'J. B. Priestley' (defined, tellingly, as 'a chapter of autobiography'; p. 220) the 28-year-old Hughes asserted the duty of an author as 'clearly and honestly and in the round' to expose his personality: 'I have often felt that the difficulty of conveying oneself on paper, pleasantly and without falsehood, is something a writer must conquer before his images of other people can satisfactorily pass that way' (p. 48). One of his earlier books, the decidedly experimental 'The Rosewater Revolution' (1971), exploring the margins of fiction and non-fiction, was initially subtitled 'aspects of myself'. 'Conveying oneself', conveying David Hughes in the full round, became the purpose of his later books, often to the discomfiture of reviewers. 
All the characters in 'The Little Book' (1996; half fiction, half not, and written almost as a love letter to his wife, Elizabeth) were 'aspects of myself', from Dave Higgs, Davis Fielden, and Hugh Dickinson to D. J. House and Davina Darley. After a brush with cancer he imagined a 'book to end books', 'the unwritable bible', 'the little book that said it all' ('The Little Book', 8, 10). 'Himself and Other Animals' (1997), a revision of the life of his friend (and sometime Hart-Davis author) Gerald Durrell that he had undertaken on his return to England in 1974, was as much about the author as his subject, the zookeeper in his several habitats, lunching in Jersey, drinking in the Midi. 'The Lent Jewels' (2002), an explicitly personal, slyly inconclusive investigation of religious faith, purported to be about the death from scarlet fever of five out of the six daughters of Archibald Campbell Tait (a future archbishop of Canterbury) in one month in 1856. Hughes's last book, 'The Hack's Tale' (2004), a journey by autoroute, autostrada, and pilgrims' way into the worlds of Froissart, Boccaccio, and Chaucer, was a cry of frustration at the twenty-first-century media. 
Benign, solicitous, clubbable, with an air of the bohemian schoolmaster, Hughes seemed never happier than at the lunch table, glass in hand, full board before him, and a long afternoon ahead. Mai Zetterling called him 'a sensualist 'par excellence'' (Zetterling, 160). But he was a writer of the utmost seriousness, a painful perfectionist and a scrupulous critic. A man of appetites, he concealed his difficulties with art. Handsome, romantic, 'positively Byronic', for Zetterling he was 'a secretive person, even to himself' (ibid., 154, 157). 
Elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1986, Hughes served on its council from 1989 to 1996, edited its journal from 1992 to 1996, and in 1998 became a vice-president. He was editor of the New Fiction Society, 1975-8 and 1981-2, film critic of the 'Sunday Times', 1982-3, and fiction critic of the 'Mail on Sunday', 1982-99. From 1986 to 1995, with Giles Gordon, he edited an annual, 'Best Short Stories', for Heinemann. A brilliant technician who strove for 'good words exactly positioned' ('The Little Book', 36), he was as diligent in encouraging younger writers as he was in keeping old friendships in spruce repair. He died on 11 April 2005 at St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth, London, of sepsis and infective arthropathy (in his bad ankle) accompanied by liver and kidney failure. He was survived by his wife and their two children, and buried on 19 April in Bonnington, Kent, by the church of St Rumwold of which he had written vividly in 'The Hack's Tale' (p. 63) -- dedicated to 'a saint so holy he only lived a day'. 


@@@@@


doc= 95753


Scott, Margaretta Mary Winifred (1912-2005), actress, was born at 6 Mandeville Place, Westminster, on 13 February 1912, the daughter of Hugh Arthur Scott (1878-1951), music critic, and his wife, Bertha Eugenie, 'nee' Casano (1878-1965). Her mixed Scottish, French, and Spanish ancestry may have accounted in part for the attractively exotic strain in some of her earlier work in particular. She was educated at the convent of the Holy Child Jesus, in Cavendish Square, London, and studied acting first with Rosina Filippi and then at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. She shared a scholarship there with Celia Johnson, who became a lifelong friend, and she was awarded the Kendal prize. 
Scott's seventy-year career in the theatre began when, aged fourteen, she appeared as Mercutio's page in 'Romeo and Juliet' at the Strand Theatre, London. This was followed by a season with the Repertory Theatre, Hull, before she started her West End career proper in 'Her Shop' at the Criterion in July 1929. With her stunning dark beauty, eloquent voice, and versatility, she quickly established herself as a popular stage star with a wide emotional range, appearing in about fifty productions during the following decade. Though she graced many modern plays, such as 'The First Mrs Fraser' and Emlyn Williams's 'A Murder has been Arranged', in which, one critic noted, she 'played the heroine with an emotional assurance beyond her 18 years' ('The Times', 21 April 2005), she made her major impact in Shakespearian roles. For instance, at the Haymarket in 1931 she played first the Player Queen in 'Hamlet', and then succeeded Fay Compton as Ophelia, and in the following year was a notably fiery Viola in 'Twelfth Night' at the Garrick. However, she was probably most tenaciously associated with the Open Air Theatre, Regent's Park, where, in four seasons (1933, 1934, 1936, and 1937), she played many leading roles, famously Olivia and Viola (in all four seasons) in 'Twelfth Night', Hermia in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', Juliet in 'Romeo and Juliet', and Rosalind in 'As You Like It'. She also played prolifically in the West End, had seasons at the Old Vic and at Stratford, and during the Second World War, when she wasn't starring in 'Major Barbara' for Birmingham Repertory Theatre or at the Aldwych in 'Watch on the Rhine', she was touring in 'Quiet Weekend' for ENSA, as Marcia contemplating weedkiller for her golf-mad husband. 
As she entered middle age Scott evinced a most commanding authority, allied to her still potent beauty, in a series of notable character roles including Katherine Parr in 'The Young Elizabeth' at the New Theatre, 1952; Gertrude to Peter O'Toole's 'Hamlet' at the Bristol Old Vic, 1958; Mrs Rossiter in the ripe drama of Victorian corruptions 'The Right Honourable Gentleman' at Her Majesty's, 1965; Jocasta to Derek Jacobi's Oedipus in 'Oedipus Rex' at Birmingham Rep, 1972; and Lady Bracknell in 'The Importance of being Earnest', at the Old Vic, 1980. She was back at the Open Air Theatre in 1985 as the wheelchair-bound Madame Desmemortes in 'Ring around the Moon', and in her last role, as the imperious Mrs Hepworth, in the Chichester revival of 'Hobson's Choice' (1995), she was grateful to have a week off in a very hot August because of the burden of her period costume. For someone aged eighty-three this seemed little to ask. 
If there was some slight slackening of Scott's stage work in the 1950s this was due to the importance she attached to family life. On 14 September 1948 she married the composer of film scores and much decorated RAF flying ace John de Lacy Wooldridge (1919-1958), with whom she had two children, Susan and Hugh. Her marriage was cut tragically short by John Wooldridge's death in a car accident. In the late 1950s and early 1960s she also taught at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, winning the respect of many students who went on to become famous. 
Though the theatre was her first allegiance Scott also had distinguished careers in film and television. Apart from an uncredited part in Alexander Korda's 'The Private Life of Don Juan' (1934) she made her film debut in 'Dirty Work' (1934), in which she and Basil Sydney played a pair of upper-class crooks, and in many of her films she vividly espoused a haughty aristocratic demeanour, often ruthless, sometimes merely opportunistic. Of her nearly thirty films, among the most memorable were 'Things to Come' (1936), as Roxana, Ralph Richardson's mistress in this science-fiction classic; 'The First Gentleman' (1948), as the prince regent's mistress helping him on with his boots; the snobbish Mrs Dixon in John Guillermin's excellent thriller 'Town on Trial' (1957); and a mother-in-law from hell in 'A Woman Possessed' (1958), an unusually classy vehicle for the infamous Danziger brothers. She was a less minatory presence as Marcia in 'Quiet Wedding' (1941), a gracious heroine opposite Anton Walbrook in 'The Man from Morocco' (1945), and the Empress Eugenie in the supremely idiotic 'Idol of Paris' (1948), which she would later recall with a chortle of horror. But perhaps her finest work on film was as the coldly sensual, but humanly understandable Alicia in 'Fanny by Gaslight' (1944), giving possibly the most stylish performance in any of the Gainsborough melodramas. 
Scott embraced television early and played Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing' (1937); she later recalled playing Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice' (1947) when Robert Adams, the first black actor to appear in Shakespeare on British television, playing the Prince of Morocco, dropped in a dead faint at her feet, and she was left improvising (this being live TV), 'Help, ho! the Prince!' (McFarlane, 517). Though she appeared in many popular series, the one for which she was perhaps most famous was 'All Creatures Great and Small' (1978-90), in which she played the benign aristocrat, Mrs Pumphrey, owner of the pampered Pekinese, Tricky-Woo. There was, however, a great deal of more challenging work than this in all the acting media, and she left her mark in them all. 
As well as devotion to her family and to a large circle of friends, to many of whom she was Peggy, Scott also gave tirelessly of her time to many theatrical charities, including service on the board of the Actors' Charitable Trust, which managed Denville Hall, the retirement home for former actors. Further, and -- given her imposingly patrician acting persona -- surprisingly, she was a founder signatory (and the last surviving one) of the actors' union, Equity, in 1934. Though she was known for playing malevolent mistresses and dangerous dowagers, she was a woman of great warmth, kindness, and good humour, enormously respected for both her professional and her personal qualities. She died at her home, 30 Molyneux Street, St Marylebone, London, on 15 April 2005, of pneumonia and breast cancer, and was survived by her daughter, Susan, an actress, and son, Hugh, a theatre director. 


@@@@@


doc= 95754


Evans, Gwynfor Richard (1912-2005), politician, was born on 1 September 1912 at Y Goedwig, 24 Somerset Road, Barry, Glamorgan, the eldest of the three children of Daniel James (Dan) Evans, ironmonger, and his wife, Catherine Mary, 'nee' Richard, shopkeeper. His industrious and godly parents established the Dan Evans department store in the booming coal-exporting port of Barry, and it was in this vibrant town of constantly shifting cultural borders on the periphery of 'Welsh' Wales that Evans was brought up. 
The supreme irony of Evans's upbringing is that perhaps the greatest Welsh patriot of the twentieth century saw more of England than of Wales during his youth, with the family home directly in the shadow of the west country. Initially the politics of identity were of little consequence to the Liberal-supporting Evans family as the language of the home shifted from Welsh to English. Such a situation was not uncommon for the handful of Welsh-speaking families in Barry. This linguistic shift was reinforced by the thoroughly English education Evans received at the Barry county school, where he excelled at cricket. During these adolescent years this sickly child developed into a handsome young man but the key change was psychological. In 1929 he experienced a quasi-religious conversion and came to see Wales as a Christian nation in need of salvation from Englishness, modernism, and war. 
Evans fervently believed that he had been called to save a nation (a familiar Welsh nonconformist trope) but his messianic fervour while at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where he studied law between 1931 and 1934, was initially directed towards the town's pacifist and Christian societies, believing the recently formed Plaid Cymru to be too irrelevant to make any impact. However, after graduating with a second-class degree Evans did join Plaid Cymru, having reconsidered his earlier view that the party was in thrall to the prelapsarian ideas of its brilliant but utterly maverick president, Saunders Lewis. Though Evans and Lewis shared more in common than either would perhaps care to admit, Evans from the outset intended to change Plaid Cymru and make it a wholly pacifist and constitutional party, much to Lewis's extended and very public chagrin. These moves (and a somewhat exaggerated rediscovery of his command of the Welsh language) were adumbrated during a two-year period at St John's College, Oxford, between 1934 and 1936, where he obtained a further second-class degree in law. But it was upon his return to Wales and a period as an articled clerk with W. B. Francis, solicitors, in Cardiff that Evans's precocious vision of transforming Plaid Cymru began to mature. 
Evans's pacifism crystallized into a clearly defined absolutist stance under the influence of the Peace Pledge Union. With war looming ever larger he resolved to save his dream of a peaceful Wales through selfless proselytizing. By 1939 he had abandoned the legal profession, deciding instead (much to his family's horror) that he would work on the family's farm in Llangadog, Carmarthenshire. This financial security and an unconditional discharge from military service allowed him to become an assiduous secretary of the Welsh Pacifists and a young tyro within the ranks of Plaid Cymru in extremely trying days. He also became a central figure in the more ecumenical New Wales Union, a body that proved vital in maintaining a sense of Welshness in the age of total war. Nevertheless, his stance proved extremely difficult for his family in Barry, since Evans combined two ideologies that were inimical to many. On 1 March 1941, at the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist chapel, Crwys Road, Cardiff, Evans married Rhiannon Prys Thomas (died 2006), daughter of Adolphus Daniel (Dan) Thomas, bank manager. They made their first home at Wernellyn, Llangadog, where they had seven children. Thus was set a pattern of political widowhood for Rhiannon, who bore her husband's frequent campaigning absences and self-absorption with remarkable forbearance. 
The summer of 1943 saw Evans assume the 'de facto' presidency of a rudderless Plaid Cymru with the nominal president, Abi Williams, indisposed because of a 'nervous condition'. Despite the enormous difficulties and the suspicion that Plaid Cymru was a crypto-fascist party, Evans set about transforming the party's sect-like image. First he saved the party from disappearing completely and then started to make a deliberate pitch for the votes of Welsh-speaking, Liberal Wales by conjuring a gentle vision of Wales as a historic nation. Shedding the declamatory excesses of Saunders Lewis was vital, as was Evans's readiness to develop an eclectic political philosophy that combined elements of socialism, conservatism, pacifism, nationalism, and enviromentalism. Despite this 'big tent' approach, his first foray into parliamentary politics was utterly inauspicious as a candidate in Merioneth during the general election of 1945. 
Undaunted, and despite his natural reserve, Evans became party president in August 1945. He quickly became ever more convinced that nationalist failure should be ascribed to too little engagement with constitutional politics. At a local level this plunged Evans into vicious and landmark battles with the Labour Party on Carmarthenshire council, a body to which he was elected in 1949 and on which he sat until 1974, over the Welsh language. At a national level his repeated denunciation of Labour policy towards devolving power in Wales saw extended bouts of fisticuffs that, despite Plaid Cymru's ostensible insignificance, set the rhetorical tone for much of Welsh politics over the next five decades. He also exerted influence through such bodies as the BBC's Welsh advisory council and the court of the University of Wales. These moves were of a piece with his view that Plaid Cymru could not be exclusivist about how best to defend the interests of Wales. Crucially Evans also saw the need for a wider body of people to campaign for a Welsh parliament along the lines of the Scottish Covenant Association. In 1949 the Parliament for Wales campaign was launched -- the first mass campaign for devolution since the ill-starred venture of Young Wales half a century earlier. 
Despite these ventures and ceaseless campaigning, electoral success proved elusive for Evans personally and his party in the general elections of 1950 and 1951. Two years later he moved to Talar Wen, Llangadog, Carmarthenshire, a beautiful house designed by his brother-in-law, Dewi Prys Thomas, which served as both family home and an assertion of the potentialities of Welsh architecture. Another significant consolation came in his being nominated president of the Welsh Congregationalists in 1954 -- the radical denomination to which he was by now utterly devoted. But this accolade and a record number of parliamentary candidates for Plaid Cymru at the general election of 1955 failed to prevent further electoral ignominy. Evans became an increasingly divisive figure within his party and by the latter part of the decade two clear camps had developed. His acolytes saw him as an eirenical figure who deserved beatification for having devoted his life to the defence of Wales. Others, though, particularly supporters of Saunders Lewis, saw Evans as having turned a once radical party into a cult of insufferably nice pacifists wedded to a pointless constitutional cause. 
These tensions over nationalist strategy exploded in the late 1950s over the question of how best to resist the construction by Liverpool corporation of the Tryweryn dam in Merioneth, the parliamentary constituency that Evans was still coveting. The unsuccessful fight to prevent the drowning of the village of Capel Celyn proved a pivotal moment in Welsh political history and nobody did more than Evans to expose what for many was a shocking injustice. However, the Tryweryn battle came close to destroying his political career as he vacillated between the polar opposites of parliamentary pressure and non-violent direct action. Having procrastinated for two years, he ultimately plumped for the former course in 1959, fearing that a long term of imprisonment would destroy the party. The financial future of his market gardening business was also a consideration, as was his fervent belief that he and Plaid Cymru could make a long-promised electoral breakthrough in Merioneth at the general election of that year; but a familiar fate awaited him and he came last. 
This and other similarly disappointing results provoked five years of internecine strife within Plaid Cymru, as an epic battle between 'constitutionalists' and 'actors' raged. In 1961 Evans, in despair, had to be dissuaded from resigning, though nothing could prevent him from relinquishing the Merioneth parliamentary nomination in 1962. In middle age Evans had little of the iconic about him, as Welsh nationalist politics fractured shortly before the nadir of Plaid Cymru's electoral fortunes, the general election of 1964. By then some activists espoused violent and non-violent action; others argued for the party to adopt a more republican, left-wing stance and abandon the 'via media' that Evans carefully trod. The latter tendency had by now brought him into lethal battle with Emrys Roberts, the party's mercurial but hubristic general secretary, who engineered what Evans (not without reason) perceived to be a coup. Roberts's sacking plunged the party into another bout of melancholy introspection between 1964 and the general election of March 1966. The upshot of this was that Evans's hopes of a parliamentary breakthrough in his newly adopted Carmarthen constituency looked as fanciful as ever. 
Evans, predictably, lost to Labour's Lady Megan Lloyd George but the event, as one unwittingly prescient journalist put it, was a 'strange, listless affair', partly because of her absence through illness ('Western Mail', 24 March 1966). Within a few weeks of her victory Megan Lloyd George died, leaving Evans to fight a by-election in July 1966 in which the most optimistic nationalists hoped he would come second. To the surprise of everyone (not least himself) he won the seat. As election upsets go, it was one of the greatest shocks ever. True, Evans was the legatee of a truly gruesome period for the Wilson government, but he was also the beneficiary of a patriotic and to a lesser extent nationalist shift in Welsh political consciousness that he himself had helped to create in Carmarthen and elsewhere. 
The effect of the Carmarthen victory transformed Evans's image. From now on he was seen as a national redeemer by many in his hyperventilating party, the man who had led Wales to freedom after centuries of servitude. Despite his loathing of Westminster, the new member for Carmarthen (and member for Wales, as he was colloquially known) skilfully used his parliamentary position to ask hundreds of questions about Wales -- a tactic that in turn prompted the Labour Party and in particular the Welsh secretary, George Thomas, to attack Evans with a fanatical zeal. Almost inevitably Evans lost the Carmarthen seat at the general election of 1970 but the effect of his by-election win on his party and Welsh politics would be profound. From now on Welsh and, from 1967, Scottish parliamentary nationalism became permanent fixtures in a new and plural British politics. 
Evans spent the next four years trying to regain his Carmarthen seat and to propagate a love for Welsh history among a new generation of patriots. This he achieved through his extremely popular (and tendentious) history of Wales, 'Land of My Fathers', published in 1974. He regained the Carmarthen seat in the general election of October 1974. He returned to Westminster accompanied by Dafydd Elis-Thomas and Dafydd Wigley, two younger and tougher MPs who made the next five years less of a parliamentary penance for him, though by the end he was suffering from mental exhaustion. Together this triumvirate exacted a number of concessions, first from the Wilson and then from the Callaghan governments -- the most notable being the promise to hold a referendum on an assembly for Wales in 1979. The overwhelming rejection of an assembly by the people of Wales was a crushing blow for Evans, who interpreted the vote as a denial by the Welsh of their own existence. In the subsequent general election of 1979 he lost his seat. Utterly dispirited, he began to plan an act of patriotic martyrdom during 1980 in order to reinvigorate Welsh nationalism. This plan never came to fruition because the Conservative government handed him a cause on a plate when they broke their own manifesto commitment to create a separate Welsh-language television channel. In May 1980 Evans threatened to fast to the death unless the government capitulated. Amid scenes of mounting apprehension verging on blind panic when it became apparent that Evans was deadly serious, the government capitulated for fear Wales would become ungovernable. In 1982 the Welsh fourth channel, S4C, was launched -- a living monument to the suicidal threat of a somewhat inconsistent pacifist. 
Evans relinquished the presidency of Plaid Cymru in 1981 after thirty-six years -- a record of unbroken leadership only bettered at the time by Marshal Tito in Yugoslavia. A last and misguided attempt to regain Carmarthen at the 1983 general election did not dim his passion for politics nor his prolific writing. In 1986 he and Rhiannon moved to Pencarreg, Carmarthenshire, though their latter years were difficult ones, with Rhiannon succumbing to Parkinson's disease almost immediately after the move. Eventually old age and osteoporosis ravaged his body too, though as he faded from public view his revered status grew in equal measure. He had already received an honorary doctorate from the University of Wales in 1973 and the Cymmrodorion medal in 1984, but the ultimate proof of his popularity among a section of the Welsh people came in 2004 when the Welsh public voted him the greatest living politician and fourth in a list of all-time Welsh heroes, after Aneurin Bevan, Owain Glyn Dwr, and the singer Tom Jones. 
Evans died at his home, Talar Wen, Pencarreg, on 21 April 2005. His funeral service at Bethel Congregationalist Chapel, Aberystwyth, on 27 April was described as the nearest Wales has ever seen to a state funeral. His ashes were scattered a few weeks later on the hill fort of Garn Goch, Carmarthenshire, a part of Wales which provided emotional solace to this complex and sometimes contradictory man. Despite his unconventional personality and the fact that he did not bequeath a coherent political philosophy Evans's legacy was by the time of his death secure. Though all parties contributed to the process of political devolution for Wales, it is arguable that the national assembly for Wales would not exist were it not for Gwynfor Evans and his simple love for his nation at a time when the concept of Wales as a political nation did not exist. 


@@@@@


doc= 95756


Joanna Wendy Margaret Kilmartin (1929-2005), deserved much of the credit: she provided a stable and comfortable home life and encouraged his gift for translation. 


@@@@@


doc= 95757


Paolozzi, Sir Eduardo Luigi (1924-2005), sculptor and printmaker, was born on 7 March 1924 at 6 Crown Place, Leith, Edinburgh, the only son and elder child of Alfonso Rudolfo Armando Antonio Paolozzi (1901-1940), confectioner, and his wife, Carmela Maria, 'nee' Rossi (1902-1955), daughter of Pietro Rossi and his wife, Margherita Coletta. He was baptized at the Roman Catholic church of St Mary Star of the Sea, Leith, on 20 March. 
Paolozzi's parents were born in Viticuso in the province of Frosinone, Italy, his mother's family emigrating to Scotland in the early years of the twentieth century, his father following in 1920, after service in the Italian army. In 1925 Paolozzi's father rented a confectionery shop at 10 Albert Street, off Leith Walk, and the family moved into the flat above it, where Paolozzi's sister Yolanda Margherita was born in 1932. Paolozzi attended Leith Walk primary school and Holy Cross Academy, Leith, and from the ages of nine to fifteen spent summers at the Italian youth camp, Colonia Marina XXVIII Ottobre a Cattolica. After the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, when Paolozzi was in his last year at school, his father tried to find him a position in an engineering works, but without success. When Italy declared war in June 1940 the family shop was one of several Italian shops looted by an angry mob. Paolozzi, his father, grandfather, and other male kin were arrested under the emergency powers of the 'Enemy Aliens Act', and interned in Saughton gaol, Edinburgh. His father and grandfather subsequently lost their lives with 800 other Italians and Germans when the 'Arandora Star', transporting them to Canada, was sunk by a German U-boat. On release from prison Paolozzi took casual jobs, but in October 1941 joined the general evening class at Edinburgh College of Art, an essentially craft-based course that included 'designs for all commercial purposes with special reference to the processes of reproduction' ('Edinburgh College of Art Prospectus, 1940-1941', 55). He initially envisaged a career in commercial art, but his ambitions changed on transferring to the full-time course. 
In June 1943 Paolozzi's art training was interrupted by service in the pioneer corps, during which he discovered a copy of Amedee Ozenfant's book, 'Foundations of Modern Art' (1931), the modernist spirit of which remained a lifelong inspiration. On leave in London in 1943 he met his future wife, Freda Madge Elliott ('b'. 1925), the daughter of Ernest George Elliott, journeyman tiler. After fifteen months' service he successfully convinced an army medical board that he was mad by invoking the spirit of Donatello. His discharge enabled him to study at the Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art, Oxford, in October 1944, but within a year he knew he 'wanted to make things' (interview, BL NSA), so in 1945 he transferred to the Slade School of Fine Art, London, to study sculpture, and lived in the Slade hostel in Cartwright Gardens. At the Slade Paolozzi's friends included William Chattaway, Richard Hamilton, Nigel Henderson, Raymond Mason, and William Turnbull. Like them Paolozzi enthusiastically embraced European modernism, especially the art of Picasso and the surrealists, developments disapproved of by his teachers, including the Slade sculpture master, A. H. Gerrard, with whom Paolozzi clashed. Paolozzi's first sculptures, two casts, 'Horse's Head' and 'Fisherman', were roughly modelled in red, white, and blue concrete respectively, and exhibited with similarly Picasso-inspired ink and collage drawings of Newhaven fishing subjects, at the Mayor Gallery early in 1947, and praised by Robert Melville in 'Horizon'. 
The success of his first sculptures persuaded Paolozzi to abandon his Slade diploma, and in June he left for Paris, living there for the next two years, first in an attic room in the rue Bude on the Ile St Louis, previously occupied by Raymond Mason, where Freda Elliott joined him, and then in a 'chambre de bonne' where they lived on the rue de Chanaleilles. He worked in a studio on the rue Visconti belonging to the artist Gregoire Michonze, and mixed with British and American artists and writers, including Peter Rose-Pulham (who encouraged him to meet Francis Bacon, of whose art he became a lifelong admirer), Saul Bellow, Stanley Geist, and Jesse Reichek. He exhibited twice with the international artists' group known as 'Les mains eblouies' at the Galerie Maeght, Paris, and had two further one-man shows at the Mayor Gallery, one of Paris fair and lottery drawings (1948), and a second which included bas-relief sculptures (1949). He met, among others, Arp, Braque, Brancusi, Dubuffet, Helion, Leger, and Tristan Tzara, but the artist who impressed him most in Paris was Giacometti. 
When Paolozzi returned to London as instructor in textile design at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in 1949 the sculpture he brought back included 'Forms on a Bow' in plaster, which the Contemporary Art Society commissioned in bronze for the Tate Gallery. Giacometti's surrealism of the 1930s also influenced other sculpture Paolozzi made in 1951 such as 'Cage', commissioned by the Arts Council, 'Fountain', designed for the Festival of Britain, and his short-listed entry for the Unknown Political Prisoner international sculpture competition (1952-3). On his return to London he lived briefly with Lucian Freud and the Hendersons in Chisenhale Road, while working in a studio in Bunsen Street, before moving into a flat in Holland Road. On 7 July 1951 Paolozzi and Freda Elliott married at Kensington register office. They set up home in a flat in Kathleen Raine's house in Paultons Square, Chelsea. With the birth of their first daughter in 1954 the Paolozzis moved to Gull Cottage, Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex, which remained the family home until 1988, and where their second and third daughters were born in 1957 and 1960. 
At the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA), early in 1952, Paolozzi gave a lecture illustrated with his own collages, magazine advertisements, and images from the cinema and science fiction, but for which he provided little or no commentary. Their sources were almost entirely American. The audience included the artists Richard Hamilton and Nigel Henderson, and the critics Lawrence Alloway and Reyner Banham, who with Paolozzi and others became founder members of the Independent Group later that year. The images themselves were overlooked until 1972, when they were published as facsimile prints entitled 'Bunk!', and Paolozzi was recognized as a formative influence on pop art. Also in 1952 Paolozzi exhibited three sculptures and three drawings at the Venice Biennale. The following year he was awarded the British critics' prize. In 1953 he collaborated with his fellow Independent Group members Nigel Henderson, the architects Peter and Alison Smithson, and the engineer Ronald Jenkins, on 'Parallel of Life and Art', an exhibition at the ICA that used photography to examine visual relationships between art and science in the modern world. In 1954 he created Hammer Prints with Henderson, to supply the trade with original designs for ceramics, textiles, and other domestic products. In 1955 he played the part of the deaf mute in the film 'Together' (directed by Lorenza Mazzetti) alongside the artist Michael Andrews. In 1956 Paolozzi worked again with Henderson and the Smithsons on another exhibition, 'This Is Tomorrow', at the Whitechapel Art Gallery. Their 'Patio and Pavilion', which consisted of an ordinary lean-to garden shed, expressed the 'fundamental necessities of the human habitation', and was 'furnished with symbols for all human needs', including a bicycle wheel and other odds and ends. In 1956 Paolozzi received a William and Noma Copley Foundation award. 
Between 1955 and 1956 Paolozzi taught sculpture at St Martin's School of Art, and afterwards developed a process of making sculpture which he called 'the metamorphosis of rubbish' ('The Times', 2 May 1958). It involved pressing obsolete found objects in plaster, and casting the impressions in wax sheets, from which heads and figures were assembled for recasting in bronze. The resulting sculptures, some larger than life, have a distinctly mechanized look, and others, with such titles as 'Icarus' and 'St Sebastian', ironically assume a mythological or religious identity. In an interview in 1959 Paolozzi said he was interested, 'above all, in investigating the golden ability of the artist to achieve a metamorphosis of quite ordinary things into something wonderful and extraordinary that is neither nonsensical nor morally edifying' (Roditi, 160). The new sculpture was shown in London at the Hanover Gallery (1958), and in 'New Images of Man' at the Museum of Modern Art, New York (1959), as well as at the Venice Biennale (1960), by which time the British Council and the New York dealer Betty Parsons were promoting Paolozzi's sculpture abroad. The robotic pathos of the sculpture was often seen as a commentary on the uncertainties of the cold war, and from this period dates Paolozzi's international reputation; he won the David E. Bright Foundation award for best sculptor under forty-five, in New York (1960) and the Watson F. Blair prize in Chicago (1961). In 1960 he met the heiress Gabrielle Keiller who acquired a large collection of his work, some of which is now in the Dean Gallery, Edinburgh, together with examples from her collection of surrealist art, which Paolozzi helped form. 
In 1960 Paolozzi bought a studio in Dovehouse Street, Chelsea, later acquiring three more adjacent studios, where he worked for the rest of his life. In 1960-62 he taught a course he called 'The translation of experience' at the Hochschule fur Bildende Kunste in Hamburg, which was based on surrealist methods and made extensive use of James Joyce's 'Finnegans Wake'. In 1961 he began to make more abstract sculpture referenced by, among others, German architecture and expressionist cinema. He welded it from pre-fabricated aluminium units on the shop floor of an engineering works, a process based on the aesthetic pioneered by the American sculptor David Smith, which was illustrated in Paolozzi's two books 'Metafisikal Translations' (1962) and 'The Metallization of a Dream' (1963). With his machine-age sculptures Paolozzi captured the mood of post-war Germany, and the collages he made in Hamburg for the film 'The History of Nothing' (1962) poetically evoked its pre-war past. In 1964-5 he made 'As Is When', a set of ten screen prints based on the life and philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein, with whose love of 'low' culture and unhappy experience of living in a foreign land Paolozzi identified. Part figurative, part abstract, 'As Is When' was a milestone in the history of screenprinting, and questioned the limits of visual language to describe things and ideas. Meanwhile Paolozzi's sculpture, which in 1964 he began to paint with bright colours to resemble his prints, questioned the necessity of the third dimension to represent solid form. In 1964 Paolozzi's 'Wittgenstein' prints and sculpture were exhibited at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, and the following year he told Richard Hamilton, 'Some people need, perhaps, [the American art critic Clement] Greenberg, I need Wittgenstein' (Spencer, 'Writings and Interviews', 128). In 1967 he won the purchase prize for international sculpture at the Solomon Guggenheim Museum, New York, and first prize for sculpture at the Carnegie International Exhibition, Pittsburgh. 
In 1968 Paolozzi was made a CBE, and became tutor in ceramics at the Royal College of Art, a post he held until 1989. In the late 1960s he assembled elaborate novels from 'cut-up' texts in the manner of Raymond Roussel and William Burroughs, but only the briefer 'Kex' (1966) and 'Abba Zaba' (1970) were published as books. In 1969 he published a chapter of his illustrated anti-war novel 'Why We Are in Vietnam' in the magazine 'Ambit', of which, with the novelist J. G. Ballard, he was contributing editor. Although a regular visitor to America, including California, where he was visiting lecturer at Berkeley in 1968, Paolozzi became increasingly disillusioned with the 'American dream', which he parodied in a pop idiom in two sets of prints, 'Moonstrips Empire News' (1967) and 'General Dynamic F.U.N.' (1970), the second with an introduction by Ballard. In 1969 he visited Japan to make the sculpture 'Osaka Steel' for the World Expo, Osaka (1970). In 1970 he supplied designs for Lanvin's spring collections in Paris. In his one-man exhibition at the Tate Gallery in 1971 Paolozzi criticized the links between Vietnam, big business, and the art world: the cover of the catalogue illustrated an American soldier's boot, and a gold ingot was reproduced on the back. 
In the 1970s Paolozzi's graphics substituted Mickey Mouse for an abstract language that was distinctly European. In his sculpture he worked mainly in relief. In 1972 he was commissioned by the architect Michael Spens to design tapestries and nine ceiling panels for Cleish Castle in Scotland (now in the Dean Gallery, Edinburgh), which led to the commission from Glasgow University for aluminium doors for Whitfield Partners' new Hunterian Art Gallery (installed in 1980 but later unsympathetically rehung). In 1972 he was elected an associate member of the Royal Academy, and gave part of his collection of popular culture, 'The Krazy Kat Arkive', to St Andrews University for research (now in the archive of art and design, V&A). In 1974 he began a lifelong association with the model maker Ray Watson as his principal assistant. In 1974-5 he worked as guest of the German academic exchange service in Berlin, where retrospective exhibitions of his art were held at the Nationalgalerie, and Kupferstichkabinett. The abstract language of his reliefs, which evoked the Bauhaus, was developed synaesthetically in 'Calcium Night Light' (1974-7), a suite of nine prints dedicated to the American modernist composer Charles Ives. In the later 1970s Paolozzi was briefly represented by the Marlborough Gallery, London. Between 1977 and 1980 he was professor of ceramics at Fachhochschule, Fachbereich Kunst und Design, Cologne. In 1977 a large cast-iron sculpture 'Hommage a Anton Bruckner' was commissioned for the grounds of the Brucknerhaus, Linz, and in 1978 a similar outdoor sculpture 'Camera' was made for the European Patent Office, Munich. 
In 1980 Paolozzi won first prize in a competition to redevelop the banks of the Rhine in Cologne, and by 1986 twenty-seven of his bronze sculptures were installed in conjunction with stones and water. Between 1980 and 1986 he also designed the mosaic decorations for Tottenham Court Road underground station, and made the sculpture 'Piscator' outside Euston Station, London. By this time Paolozzi began to speak of such public works as 'social sculpture', and of 'placing objects in a culture, not to present objects as culture' (private information). He was professor of master class at the Internationale Sommerakademie fur Bildende Kunst, Salzburg (1981-2), and in 1981 appointed professor of sculpture at the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste, Munich, a post he held until retiring in 1991. In Munich he made a close study of the antique sculpture in the Glyptothek, which led to a return to the figure in his art, and arranged for his students to draw in the museum when the building was closed. In 1982 he received further commissions for public sculpture in Germany, and was also consultant for Richard Rogers and Partners' unsuccessful competition entry for the National Gallery extension, London. In 1983 he received the grand prix d'honneur at the Fifteenth International Print Biennale, Ljubljana, Yugoslavia. 
By the mid-1980s Paolozzi's fragmented imagery began to reflect the ecological and global issues that were of increasing concern to him. In 1984 he exhibited cut and fractured heads, the fruits of his Munich studies, in his large exhibition 'Recurring themes', at the Edinburgh International Festival. In the early 1980s he selected material from the collections of the Museum of Mankind of the British Museum, to explore post-modern attitudes to Africa and third-world cultures, for his exhibition 'Lost magic kingdoms and six paper moons', which toured widely in England and Wales between 1985 and 1989. In 1984-5 he designed the sets for Percy Adlon's film 'Herschel und die Musik der Sterne', and played the part of the archbishop. In 1986 his sculpture 'For Leonardo' was installed outside the Alte Pinakothek, Munich, and the large relief 'On This Island' in the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre, London. 
In 1986 Paolozzi was appointed her majesty's sculptor in ordinary for Scotland. The National Portrait Gallery appointed him a trustee in 1988, and in the new year honours of 1989 he was knighted. In 1991 he was presented with the Goethe medal in Frankfurt. He was also a Royal Academician (1979); honorary member of the Architectural Association (1981); honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy (1987); visiting professor, Royal College of Art (1989); corresponding member of the Bayerische Akademie der Bildenden Kunste, Munich (1990); cavaliere officiale, ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana (1991); honorary professor of the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste, Munich (1991); honorary fellow of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland (1991); and the holder of nine honorary degrees and fellowships from British universities. 
In 1991 'The Manuscript of Monte Cassino', a large three-part bronze sculpture to commemorate the Italian community in Scotland, was unveiled outside St Mary's Cathedral, Edinburgh. In 1992 a twelve-foot high bronze version of 'Newton after Blake' was commissioned for the courtyard of the new British Library, and unveiled by Cherie Booth (wife of the prime minister, Tony Blair) in 1997. In 1993 the queen unveiled 'The Wealth of Nations', in front of the Royal Bank of Scotland, Edinburgh. In 1995 he gave a large collection of his work to the National Galleries of Scotland, for exhibition in the Dean Gallery, which opened in 1999. Included in the permanent displays are Paolozzi's 'Vulcan', a 27 foot tall stainless steel figure, and a reconstruction of his studio. In the late summer of 2000, shortly after completing a suite of prints about the cryptologist Alan Turing, he collapsed in his London studio. Although in intensive care and not expected to survive, he made a partial recovery, and visited Edinburgh in October 2002 for the inauguration of his three stained glass 'Millennium Windows' in St Mary's Cathedral, and again in 2004 for a party in honour of his eightieth birthday. He remained in care in a London nursing home until his death from a pulmonary embolism at the Hammersmith Hospital on 22 April 2005. He was cremated on 13 May at West London crematorium, Kensal Green, and was survived by his three daughters (his marriage having ended in divorce in 1988). 
The recurring subject of Paolozzi's art was the relationship between man and machine, and the role of artificial intelligence in the post-industrial age. He also made several animated films on related themes and was a prolific writer of novels and poetry. His innovatory sculptural language was based on the cut, a process derived from making collage, which became his signature style. His role as an initiator of avant-garde exhibitions, and the ideas behind his Wittgenstein sculpture and prints, were of significance for concept-based art movements. His art became part of the postmodern urban landscape of Europe, when the influence of American art and theory declined, and narrative and decoration were no longer considered incompatible with the modernist spirit of art and architecture. He once said that artists, like the early Italians and Russians, 'should be able to embrace rather complex and broad-ranging content, from designing a pullover to painting their mother, and all in one week' ('Conversations', 5). 
From his teenage experience in Scotland, of cigarette cards and the cinema, Paolozzi believed that popular culture (the dynamism of which is present in his best work) was innately superior to much fine art, a belief he still upheld in the salons of Hampstead when he was a Royal Academician and the holder of several honorary degrees. Herein lies the paradox of Paolozzi's humble beginnings and his later social and professional life, as well as his equivocal attitude to the intensely capitalized commodity known as pop art, of which he was unquestionably a founding father, but about which he felt uncomfortable, saying: 'I don't want to go down in history as a pop artist. I would much rather go down, perhaps [as] an observer about something, [which] I would have thought, had much deeper European roots' (interview, BL NSA). To remain independent of the reductive fashions of the art market, and to make only what he wanted to, he avoided dealers; his few involvements with them were brief and generally unproductive. To compensate he assiduously cultivated social contacts, and from an early period was familiar with architects and architectural practice, knowledge which was useful when he made models and entered competitions. He also controlled his work by publishing his prints and sculpture in unique or very small editions, often with different colourways or minor variations, thus bringing an innovative approach to the reproductive conventions of graphics and sculpture. 
Paolozzi's generosity was legendary, and he gave his work away liberally, to both friends and institutions. But his psychology was complex, and he could manipulate people as skilfully as he did objects. He was an amusing and challenging conversationalist, and loved the theatre as well as the cinema, but music moved him most as a spur to creativity. He remained an art school teacher all his life, his longest attachment being to the Royal College of Art, where he channelled the fees he received from Wedgwood and Rosenthal for his stylish designs into student scholarships. Of Paolozzi's legacy his friend the novelist J. G. Ballard said: 'if the entire twentieth century were to vanish in some huge calamity, it would be possible to reconstitute a large part of it from Paolozzi's sculpture and screenprints' (Grigor and Grigor). He left behind a vast archive of work in progress, comprising valuable ephemeral material collected over a lifetime, which will remain an important tool for art and cultural historians of the twentieth century for generations to come. 


@@@@@


doc= 95760


Farnon, Robert Joseph (1917-2005), composer and musical arranger, was born on 24 July 1917 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, the second son and third of four children in a musical family: his father, a clothier, played the violin, and his mother played the piano. He himself learned to play the violin, piano, percussion, and trumpet, while still young. He gained experience on radio as a teenager and became, at nineteen, lead trumpet in the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation Orchestra (conducted by Percy Faith). He was also, from 1937 to 1943, a member of the Happy Gang, broadcasting skits, comedy routines, and a variety of musical items each weekday lunchtime on CBC Radio. On trips to New York he played in jam sessions with Dizzy Gillespie and Oscar Peterson, both of whom became lifelong friends. He studied composition with Louis Waizman, and initially had high-art ambitions, composing two symphonies (the first given a performance by Eugene Ormandy and the Philadelphia Orchestra in 1942). In September 1944, as a Canadian army captain, he came to Britain as conductor of, and arranger for, the Canadian band of the allied expeditionary forces. His forces' post gave him an opportunity to experiment creatively within lighter idioms. 
Farnon decided to settle in England after the war. British bandleaders like Bert Ambrose and Lew Stone had already taken to his music, and he soon found work as an arranger for Geraldo, whose band he took over when Geraldo embarked on an American tour in 1947. The next year the Robert Farnon Orchestra was heard frequently on radio, and he was also working for Decca as a house conductor and arranger. His reputation was clinched with Decca's release of the vinyl 78 rpm disc number F9038 towards the end of 1948. This became one of the most celebrated of all light music recordings containing, as it did, 'Portrait of a Flirt' on one side, and 'Jumping Bean' on the other. The latter has been used more widely as a signature tune than any other piece of light music. 'Jumping Bean' begins with a snarling brass tritone (the 'devil's interval' or 'diabolus in musica'), but then menace turns unexpectedly to comedy as the tension suddenly evaporates. The tritone was also used to comic effect in 'Peanut Polka' (Decca LF1020, 1950). It is a mark of Farnon's talent that the tritone loses its usual associations with the demonic in the context of his musical idiom and becomes, instead, a source of amusement. 
Farnon became interested in composing for screen, and made his first individual and distinctive contribution to film music with his score to 'Just William's Luck' in 1947, in which he created an influential vocabulary of comic musical devices. Humour in music was always something at which Farnon excelled. The next year he was composing for another William film, as well as providing music for 'Spring in Park Lane', one of Britain's commercially most successful films, starring Anna Neagle and Michael Wilding. The closing titles music, for orchestra and wordless chorus, revealed his orchestral palette at its richest. The opening titles music anticipated his arrangements of traditional material on Frank Sinatra's album 'Great Songs from Great Britain' (1962). Sinatra (who nicknamed Farnon the Guv'nor) was just one of many singers for whom he composed and arranged; the list included Tony Bennett, Gracie Fields, and Vera Lynn, as well as such lesser-known figures as Beryl Davis, Denny Dennis, and Donald Peers. Farnon's film score to 'Captain Horatio Hornblower RN' (1951) showed his ability to compete with the swashbuckling Hollywood style of Erich Korngold. Among the many other films for which he composed were 'Expresso Bongo' (1959), starring Cliff Richard, and the final Bob Hope and Bing Crosby collaboration, 'Road to Hong Kong' (1962). In the mid-1950s, in Toronto, he married Patricia (Pat) Smith, a casting director, with whom he had five sons and two daughters. About 1959 they moved to Guernsey, where Farnon continued to compose prolifically. During the 1970s, when interest in light music had faded, he was writing scores for TV series, including 'Colditz' (1972-4) and 'Secret Army' (1977-9). 
Farnon was a versatile composer who could turn his hand to any musical mood, but he was without equal in his ability to communicate joy through music. Andre Previn reputedly called him 'the greatest living writer for strings in the world' ('The Times', 27 April 2005). His polished technique can be heard to effect in 'Westminster Waltz' (Decca F10818, 1956), which won for Farnon one of his four Ivor Novello awards; another was given for outstanding services to British music (1991). In 1996 he received a Grammy award for best instrumental arrangement (for 'Lament', performed by J. J. Johnson and the Robert Farnon Orchestra). He was honoured with the order of Canada in 1988. 
Farnon was influenced early in his career by the British light music composer Eric Coates, especially regarding the care taken over orchestral effects, but became himself a major influence on the sound of light music after the Second World War. Many of his characteristic devices, such as the use of divided strings sweeping up and down in parallel motion, as well as decorative wind phrases, harp glissandi, and other musical devices that he termed 'gingerbread', were widely imitated. His music had an influence on the film composers Quincy Jones and John Williams. He never lost his interest in more classically oriented composition, as is evident in his rhapsody for violin and orchestra (a BBC commission of 1958), or one of his last works, the third symphony (first performed in Edinburgh in the month after his death). He regretted that he did not have more opportunity to work with jazz players he admired, especially with personal friends like Gillespie and Peterson. 
Early in the twenty-first century there was a revival of interest in Farnon's compositions, thanks to their being championed by the conductors Ronald Corp and John Wilson. He was therefore enjoying renewed attention in the years before he died peacefully, during the early hours of 23 April 2005, in St Martin's, Guernsey. He was survived by his wife, Pat, and their seven children. A memorial service was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 24 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 95767


Trotman, Alexander James, Baron Trotman (1933-2005), industrialist, was born at 30 Twickenham Road, Isleworth, Middlesex, on 22 July 1933, the son of Charles Arthur Trotman, stoker, and later upholsterer, and his wife, Agnes Smith, 'nee' Thomson. At the time of his birth registration his parents lived at 12 Beaconsfield Road, east Twickenham, but they later moved to Edinburgh, where Trotman attended Boroughmuir high school and acquired his lifelong Scottish accent. After completing his secondary school education he joined the Royal Air Force as a national serviceman and served as a navigator, with the rank of flying officer. While in the RAF he married, at the Wesley Methodist Chapel, Brompton, on 22 January 1955, Lorna Fletcher, a 21-year-old GPO telephonist from the village of Brompton, near Northallerton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and daughter of John James Fletcher, a bricklayer's labourer. The marriage was later dissolved and in 1963 Trotman married his second wife, Valerie Anne. In all he had four children. No mention was made of either wives or children (or recreations) in his 'Who's Who' and 'Burke's Peerage' entries. 
On leaving the RAF Trotman joined the Ford Motor Company at Dagenham. He built his early career in the purchasing department, where he was charged with the task of chasing deliveries of components for the Ford Consul. This was followed in 1961 by his appointment as chief product analyst on the Archbishop project, which resulted in the production of the Cortina model, of which more than three million were sold. Such success caught the attention of Henry Ford, and in 1967 came an elevation to chief product planning director for Ford Europe, with the objective of bringing about greater co-ordination between Ford's British and German operations. 
Trotman harboured a desire to work in the company's American arena, but found that it was impossible to transfer across the Atlantic. In consequence he resigned his position in Europe and, after paying his own fare to America, applied for and got a post at Dearborn, Michigan, in 1969, though initially at less than his British salary. In 1972 he gained an MBA from Michigan State University. He become chief car planning manager in 1975 before returning to Europe as vice-president of Ford's truck operations in 1979. Four years later he took up the post of president of Ford's Asia Pacific region. Based in Melbourne, Australia, he faced strong Japanese competition, especially from Toyota and Honda, but succeeded in making Ford the Australian market leader within a year. His success did not go unnoticed and in 1984 he was recalled to Europe as chairman of Ford Europe, where his chief challenge lay in raising productivity levels in Britain to those in Germany. He returned to the United States in 1989 as vice-president of the company, in charge of all North American operations. Success with cars such as the Taurus and the Mercury Sable led to his being appointed chairman and chief executive of the Ford Motor Company in 1993. 
Trotman's tenure in office lasted five years, during which he set about trying to transform a group of regional organizations into a global company through the Ford 2000 project, to bring about higher levels of integration. Hitherto the European and American plants had had little to do with each other, each producing models with their own suppliers and model-specific technical specifications. Crucial to Trotman's plan was the standardization of components across as many models as possible to reduce costs by economies of scale in purchasing and production on a global scale, while leaving branding and marketing targeted at specific consumers. Also central to his plan was making the European operation responsible for the design and production of small and medium-sized models like the Mondeo, with the American counterpart taking responsibility for large cars and sports utility vehicles. Though traditionally Ford had always sourced all its component parts from within, Ford 2000 was to break this mould too. Internal suppliers such as Visteon were spun off and told to compete in the wider market, with other remaining internal firms being forced to compete for the first time with outsiders for contracts. This strategy generated massive savings in costs of $5 billion in 1995 alone and went a considerable way towards restoring Ford's short-term profitability. Nevertheless, a degree of tension was created within Ford owing to the way in which the programme was implemented. There were two camps on Ford's board. The first favoured rapid implementation and the second a more incremental approach. Trotman backed the former and started by getting rid of 15 per cent of senior management as well as a considerable number of middle managers in order to reduce administration costs. 
Trotman portrayed his Ford 2000 strategy as one that would release chaotic creativity. The eventual outcome was rather different. Not all models created were successful when sold across markets. The European-designed Mondeo sold well in Europe, but its American variants, the Contour and the Mercury Mystique, both failed to make a significant impact. Perhaps critics were correct in their assertion that the European and North American markets were quite distinct and should be treated as discrete entities. A further outcome of the Detroit-driven policy was that Ford Europe felt it had lost its autonomy and its executives appear to have suffered considerable demoralization. Eventually in 1998 the tensions caused by Ford 2000 were such that Trotman was invited to step aside as chairman in favour of William Clay Ford, Henry's grandson, and as chief executive by Jac Nasser. 
In essence Trotman was a visionary, who foresaw correctly that globalization was inevitable in the automotive industry and tried to meet the challenges it presented. He was knighted in 1996, and made a life peer in 1999, the year in which he led an inquiry into small businesses on behalf of the British government. With homes in Florida and north Yorkshire, he was a member of the board of directors of the IBM Corporation (1995-2005) and of the New York stock exchange (1996-2002), while also a non-executive director of ICI (1997-2003) and its chairman from 2002 to 2003. He was president of the Hakluyt Foundation from 2002. He died of leukaemia on 25 April 2005, at the Friarage Hospital, Northallerton, Yorkshire. He was survived by his wife, Valerie, and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95768


Walsh, Kathleen (1911-2005), actress, was born at 2 Granville House, Tetcott Road, Chelsea, London, on 15 November 1911, the daughter of James Walsh, taxi driver and later mechanical engineer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Murphy, both of Irish descent. Kay, as she was known (or sometimes Katy to friends and colleagues), and her sister Peggy were raised in a small Pimlico flat by their grandmother, who had moved from Ireland. Her early years were spent in poverty and instilled in her both a determination to shake off such indigence and a lifelong sympathy for left-wing views. She had little formal education, but was highly intelligent, read widely, and became a sharply articulate woman -- a classic auto-didact. 
Walsh's initial ambition was to be a dancer. She said in 1991: 'I can't remember a time when I didn't dance. The first memory of a public performance was darting into Church Street, Chelsea, and dancing to a barrel organ, aged three' (McFarlane, 'Autobiography', 594). She danced in Andre Charlot's revues and scored some success as a solo dancer in New York in the early 1930s, as well as in straight plays. In one of these, in 1934, she was spotted by a film talent scout and the rest of her career was spent in film, with just a few television appearances. She was fair-haired, pretty, and purveyed what one writer called 'the common touch' (Quinlan, 482), which would stand her in good stead for the next several decades of notable screen work. Though she never really became a fully fledged star, she was always incisive and convincing, with a demotic appeal uncommon among English film actresses of the time. 
Walsh's first film role was an uncredited part in the long-forgotten musical comedy 'How's Chances?' (1934), but, after being noticed on stage by the director Basil Dean, joint managing director of Ealing Studios, she appeared in sixteen further films during the decade. Many of these starred such scarcely remembered popular comics of the day as Sandy Powell and Ernie Lotinga, but also and most famously George Formby, with whom she co-starred twice (in 'Keep Fit', 1937, and 'I See Ice', 1938), under the watchful eye of Mrs Formby. Many actresses who cut their teeth on these unsophisticated entertainments went on to more demanding fare and Walsh was no exception. Perhaps her most significant film of the 1930s was 'Secret of Stamboul' (1936), for, while making it, she met David Lean (1908-1991), then a film editor, fell in love with him, lived with him for four years, and became his second wife on 23 November 1940. In 1937 he edited the sea-going romance 'The Last Adventurers', in which she had a starring role. 
Marriage to Lean was a mixed blessing: on the one hand Walsh did some of her finest screen work in films he directed; on the other, his serial womanizing (he married six times and conducted numerous affairs) and perhaps his sense of intellectual inferiority, compared with the clever, perceptive Walsh, made him a difficult partner. 'Being in love with David was a killer, and how I survived I don't know', she said later ('The Times', 28 April 2005). He gained considerably from his association with her. When he was editing Gabriel Pascal's film version of 'Pygmalion' (1938) she provided some 'filler' dialogue which even Shaw did not recognize as other than his own. She had dragged Lean to see a Steiner Hall production of 'Great Expectations' before the war and assisted on the screenplay when he so memorably filmed it in 1946; and the powerful, mutely gothic opening of his 'Oliver Twist' (1948) was her idea. Not himself a reader, Lean was influenced by her taste. Further, when she was starring with Peter Ustinov in the mildly amusing 'Victorian' comedy 'Vice-Versa' (1947), she noted the talented young Anthony Newley and recommended him to Lean to play the Artful Dodger in 'Oliver Twist'. 
While claiming to be interested only in 'working, just working' (McFarlane, 'Autobiography', 595), Walsh reached a new stature with her 1940s films, especially in the three directed by Lean. She brought a brisk humanity to Freda, who marries the sailor played by John Mills in 'In Which We Serve' (1942, co-directed by Noel Coward); was very believable as the rebellious lower-middle-class daughter in 'This Happy Breed' (1944), enacting a moving scene of reconciliation with Celia Johnson near the film's end; and, though she felt the character had been softened, she was extremely poignant as life-battered Nancy in 'Oliver Twist' (1948). By this time her marriage to Lean had fallen apart and they divorced in 1949. Walsh's second marriage, on 14 March 1953, to the Canadian psychologist Elliott Jaques (1917-2003), with whom she adopted a daughter, Gemma, in 1956, was also dissolved, though she retained his name in several official functions for the rest of her life. 
From 1950 Walsh settled rather early into character parts, but there was a string of memorable and substantial roles throughout the decade. She was wonderfully sly and insinuating as the housekeeper in Alfred Hitchcock's 'Stage Fright' (1950); a warmly sympathetic hotel manager in 'Last Holiday' (1950), the second of five films with her friend Alec Guinness; touchingly fallible as the vicar's wife in 'Lease of Life' (1954); and worldly and forthright as the woman who unmasks the murderer Dirk Bogarde in 'Cast a Dark Shadow' (1955). Best of all, though, were perhaps the 'winter cruise' segment of the Somerset Maugham compendium 'Encore' (1951), in which she played an unstoppably loquacious traveller, and her role as the barmaid Coker, her own favourite, with Guinness in 'The Horse's Mouth' (1958). She went on acting until 1981, and there were cherishable moments such as her mean-spirited Aunt Cissie in 'The Virgin and the Gypsy' (1970), based on the novel by D. H. Lawrence. She enjoyed working with Bette Davis in a bad film, 'Connecting Rooms' (1970), less so with Joan Fontaine in a better one, 'The Witches' (1966). Her television work was comparatively negligible, but everything she did was worth watching. A consummate actress, a woman of rare wit and character, and a spirited hostess, Walsh was working on her memoirs in her last years. She died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, on 16 April 2005, of multiple burns, following an accident. 


@@@@@


doc= 95773


Todd, Ronald (1927-2005), trade unionist, was born on 11 March 1927 at 4 Apsley Road, Walthamstow, Essex, the fifth of six children of George Thomas Todd, builder's labourer, and later builder, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Pauline. His parents were also market traders in Walthamstow market. The Todd family was a characteristic product of traditional east London cockney culture, and showed an almost tribal elan in sustaining its claim to be among the few born within the sound of Bow bells -- which on a clear day in Walthamstow was just about validated. 
The Todd family were practising Catholics and Ron Todd went to St Patrick's Roman Catholic School in Walthamstow, which he left at fourteen to get his first job sweeping the floor in a local barber's shop, after which he worked as a plumber's mate. His father, George, had been a regular in the Royal Marines and as soon as Todd was eighteen in 1945 he joined his father's regiment and for a brief spell they were actually together in the same camp. At the very end of the Second World War he was posted to Hong Kong as a marine commando and served for two years on the China border, during which time he had a spell in charge of Japanese prisoners of war. On 17 November 1945, at Our Lady's Church, Walthamstow, he married Josephine Mary Elsie (Jo) Tarrant (died 1996), a nineteen-year-old factory worker, daughter of Samuel Joseph Tarrant, builder. They had a son and two daughters. 
Todd's first job after demobilization was as a gas fitter in London's East End, but needing a better-paid job in 1954 he joined Ford Motors as an assembly line worker in the Dagenham plant, then one of the largest car plants in Europe. At the same time he also joined the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU) -- and began his long climb to the leadership of that union. He worked for eight years on the Ford production lines and within five years was voted deputy convenor for the whole Dagenham plant -- then with about 40,000 workers. In 1962 he became a full-time official of the TGWU -- in the metal, engineering, and chemical group of the union -- and seven years later was appointed senior regional officer which, in 1975, led to his appointment as regional secretary for the entire London and south-east area. Three years later he was promoted to the role of national organizer. 
On 28 June 1984 Todd was elected general secretary of the TGWU to succeed Moss Evans. The union was then the largest in the country with nearly 1,500,000 members, and Todd won his election on a 41 per cent turnout of union members -- unusually high for any union ballot -- with a majority of 44,817 over his main challenger, George Wright, a Labour moderate. Wright immediately challenged Todd's victory by questioning the validity of the ballot. Moss Evans, having conducted the ballot through the independent Electoral Reform Society, repudiated the charges made by Wright and declared Todd the winner. Yet Todd refused to duck Wright's challenge and demanded a second ballot -- despite all efforts to dissuade him -- saying, 'I am determined that the members of this union should have the full democratic right to elect a leader whose credibility is beyond doubt' ('The Guardian', 2 May 2005). He was, of course, also sensitive to a national mood distrustful of the unions and on the whole approving of Margaret Thatcher's recent trade-union reforms. The second ballot was a triumph for Todd. The turnout, in June 1985, was again above 40 per cent and his majority over Wright increased to 76,840. It established Todd as 'the trade unions' Mr Honest' -- a reputation that helped carry him through the most challenging years any trade-union leader experienced in post-war Britain. 
Todd made no pretences to be an intellectual figure; posturing was alien to his character. Nor was he an electrifying orator. He never commanded the same attention as his illustrious predecessors such as Ernest Bevin, Frank Cousins, or Jack Jones. Yet he won enormous respect as a down-to-earth 'man of the people' whose word was his bond -- qualities that certainly put him on equal terms with those earlier more famous figures. He never betrayed his working-class background, always rejected honours and baubles, and insisted on remaining plain Mr Ron Todd. 
None of this prevented a difficult life for him on both the industrial and political fronts. Much of Todd's period as leader of the TGWU coincided with the most turbulent years in Britain's post-war industrial affairs. Margaret Thatcher's campaign to 'tame the unions', aided by Norman Tebbit, reached a peak during Todd's watch. In addition there was the government drive to privatize the old state industries, which led to increased unemployment and, together with new legislation curbing union powers, provoked widespread conflict, social unrest (including the year-long miners' strike), falling union membership, and a decline in the overall authority and influence of trade unionism. Todd also faced internal problems within the TGWU, notably from his thirty-nine-member executive committee, which sought a more militant political response to Thatcher's policies. One of his most emotive battles came with the government's abolition, in 1989, of the national dock labour scheme -- the legacy of Ernest Bevin's wartime plan to end casual dock labour when he was minister of labour in Churchill's war cabinet. Todd was prepared to call a national dock strike to fight government plans but in the end backed down when he recognized that a strike would almost certainly end in failure because of the government's new legal restrictions and, perhaps more telling, a rank-and-file fear of challenging those new powers. 
Nor was life any easier with Todd's political allies in the Labour Party. Todd clashed fiercely with the Labour leader Neil Kinnock, especially after Labour's defeat in the general election of 1987 -- Thatcher's third victory in succession. It was after that defeat that Kinnock set about reforming Labour policies, notably discarding the party's policy on nuclear disarmament, and effectively laying the basis for what was to become Tony Blair's 'new' Labour Party. This provoked major conflict between Kinnock and Todd, starting at the Labour Party conference of 1988 and continuing until they both left the scene after the election of 1992. The primary cause was Kinnock's abandonment of unilateral nuclear disarmament. Todd denounced this as a betrayal, recalling how his predecessor Frank Cousins had started the party on the road to nuclear disarmament in 1960 by defeating the then Labour leader, Hugh Gaitksell. But in addition to this Todd objected to Kinnock's arguments in favour of 'modernizing' the Labour Party to increase its electoral appeal. What was particularly surprising at the time was that Todd's criticism of Kinnock was resented even by many of his friends on the left, not least because his strident and inflexible views seemed uncharacteristic -- especially since Kinnock was a long-standing member of the TGWU. The truth is that there was an almost chemical lack of rapport between the two men: Kinnock had become impatient with what he, and others, were persuaded was a failure among the trade-union leadership to recognize changing social and political mores. On Todd's side there was a deepening fear that Labour's historic mission was being abandoned in favour of populism. It was a breach between Labour leadership and trade unions never to be resolved and that continued into and through the Blair era, long after Todd had departed the scene. 
In many ways Todd was a most unusual trade-union 'baron'. He was a committed patriot -- his friendship with the queen mother and his stance as an unapologetic royalist enabled him to recruit her as an honorary member of the TGWU. He was also a man who cherished his service in the Royal Marines, always attending their annual reunions. Yet none of this detracted from Todd's holding firmly to his socialist convictions -- and possibly an even greater paradox, to his commitment to nuclear disarmament. 
It was Todd's warmly effusive and generous cockney character quite as much as his ardent socialism and trade unionism that combined to establish him in the public eye as one of the most popular of all trade-union leaders during the most testing period for post-war trade unionism. Todd possessed a very British quality of presenting a face of humour amid considerable turbulence. It was, indeed, that character of patient courage that helped sustain him during a period of tremendous pressures and political tensions in his seven years as leader of the largest trade union in the country. Being elected general secretary of the TGWU in those days was akin to joining the royal household of Britain's labour movement. It was an inheritance Todd fought to sustain with humility, humanity, palpable integrity, and dedication -- and always against the tide as Margaret Thatcher's policy to curb trade-union influence bit deeply into the nation's industrial life. 
Todd served as a TUC member of the National Economic Development Committee (1985-92), a member of the Employment Appeal Tribunal (1986-9, and president for most of that time), honorary vice-president of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, a patron of the Margaret Centre Macmillan Appeal, TUC representative on various anti-apartheid committees, and chairman of Trade Unions for Labour Victory, which successfully organized the retention of the Labour Party political levy among trade unionists following the 'Trade Union Act' of 1984. He played a leading role in the trade-union campaign against apartheid in South Africa and in preparing for Nelson Mandela's release from prison, remaining a close friend of Mandela thereafter. He was also powerfully influential in paving the way for his successor, Bill Morris, to become the first black leader of any British trade union -- indeed the first black man to head any major British institution. He retired as TGWU general secretary in the spring of 1992 and a few months later from the TUC general council, on which he had served since 1984, and of whose international committee he was chairman. 
In retirement Todd spent much time on his long-standing hobby, palaeontology. He had a collection of 300 fossils, which evoked the nickname from his critics of Toddosaurus, to which he would respond with the quip, 'Don't knock the dinosaurs -- they ruled the earth for 200 million years' (private information). He also collected Victorian songbooks and in retirement took a course in sign language to help the deaf and dumb. Even more unusually for a trade-union leader he wrote poetry and published five booklets of poems. He died of acute myeloblastic leukaemia on 30 April 2005 at Oldchurch Hospital, Romford, Essex. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95774


Orme, Stanley, Baron Orme (1923-2005), politician, was born on 5 April 1923 at Sale Memorial Hospital, Sale, Cheshire, the son of Sherwood Orme, corn miller's bookkeeper, and later clerk at a cotton mill, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Drew. He was brought up in difficult financial circumstances. He left elementary school at fourteen, and worked as an instrument maker's apprentice at the Metropolitan-Vickers plant in Trafford Park industrial estate. In 1942 he enlisted in RAF Bomber Command as a warrant officer and navigator. His fellow airmen had a great regard for his skill as a Pathfinder navigator, and his sheer courage as an aircrew leader. Throughout his life he felt that in view of the number of sorties that he undertook, and his repeated postings, he was lucky to be alive, and to have survived the war. 
On demobilization in 1947, Orme returned to the Metropolitan-Vickers factory at Trafford Park. Having joined the Labour Party in 1944, he worked hard to improve his education in classes at the National Council of Labour Colleges and in night classes organized by the Workers' Educational Association. He became a powerful convener of shop stewards for the Amalgamated Engineering Union (working closely with Hugh Scanlon) and sat on Sale borough council from 1958 to 1965. On 20 January 1951 he married Irene Mary Harris, a 27-year-old solicitor's clerk, of Sale, and daughter of Vernon Fletcher Harris, musician. It was a close marriage, but there were no children. 
Orme was disappointed to be defeated in his attempt to win Stockport South in the 1959 general election. He won Salford West in 1964, and worked closely with a political soul-mate, the Labour MP for Salford East, Frank Allaun. His maiden speech, devoted to industrial issues from the point of view of a skilled engineer, instantly identified him as a politician to watch. As a back-bencher he supported the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, criticized Harold Wilson's refusal to condemn America over the Vietnam war and his dithering over Ian Smith's unilateral declaration of independence in Rhodesia, and opposed Barbara Castle's white paper 'In Place of Strife' of 1969. He was firmly identified with the Labour left and occasionally made a great deal of trouble for the government, but most ministers realized that he never made trouble for the sake of it: he was far too intense and serious about his politics and the interests of working-class people. 
Increasingly concerned by the civil rights situation and then the outbreak of the 'troubles' in Northern Ireland, Orme was made a junior spokesman on the province by Wilson in 1972. Along with Jock Stallard and Kevin McNamara, he organized the vote against internment in the Commons. However, when he became minister of state for Northern Ireland following the first general election of 1974, under Merlyn Rees, he started by signing detention orders, which caused a breakdown in relations with some of his former allies without fully endearing him to the Unionist leadership. He subsequently felt humiliated by the protestant working class spurning the attempts by the general secretary of the TUC, Len Murray, and others to reach a compromise. He was loyal to Rees, but perhaps misread the situation. Nevertheless he did do a considerable amount of good work at the Northern Ireland Office, in particular by piloting through a bill outlawing religious discrimination in employment, and by arranging subsidies to keep the great shipyard of Harland and Wolff in existence. 
Orme was no doubt thankful to wash his hands of Northern Ireland and move on to being minister of state at the Department of Health and Social Security in April 1976, in Jim Callaghan's government. Five months later he was promoted to be minister for social security and a member of the cabinet, but his time in that post was again unhappy, given the need for tight curbs on government expenditure. Following Labour's defeat in the 1979 election he served successively as opposition spokesman on health and social services (1979-80), industry (1980-83), and finally energy (1983-7). He held the latter post through the miners' strike of 1984-5, when he publicly supported but privately criticized the intransigent leader of the miners, Arthur Scargill, and then through the subsequent decimation of the British coal industry and the privatization of the gas industry. Complex, deep-thinking, more than a little secretive, often suspicious of his colleagues, prone to respond to questions by posing another question in reply, he was a fair-minded if sometimes irascible chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party, basically loyal to but not uncritical of Neil Kinnock, from 1987 until 1992. 
Orme, who had held Salford West until the 1983 election, and Salford East thereafter, retired from the House of Commons at the 1997 election, and was immediately made a life peer, as Baron Orme, of Salford. A keen and lifelong supporter of Manchester United Football Club and of the Lancashire cricket team, he lived his final years in Northwood Grove, Sale. He died on 28 April 2005 at Trafford General Hospital, Davyhulme, following a stroke, and was survived by his wife, Irene. 


@@@@@


doc= 95776


Stewart, Lorn Alastair (1917-2005), television producer, was born at 3 Yardley Park Road, Tonbridge, Kent, on 7 November 1917, the only son of Haldane Campbell Stewart (1868-1942), director of music at Tonbridge School, and later choirmaster and organist at Magdalen College, Oxford, and his wife, Elinor Dorothy, 'nee' Hunt. His elder sister Jean Stewart (1914-2002) was a distinguished viola player. As a young boy he learned to play the piano, and in 1937, after leaving school, he joined the sound effects department of BBC radio drama. During the Second World War he served as a wireless operator in the Middle East and worked in intelligence. On demobilization he returned to the BBC, initially as a programme engineer. On 6 April 1946 he married Sheila Mary Williamson, the 24-year-old daughter of Frank Williamson, shipbroker. They had a daughter, Judith. The marriage later ended in divorce. 
At the BBC Stewart progressed up the hierarchy and was able to indulge his interest in new music. He produced music programmes that included 'Sing It Again' and 'BBC Jazz Club', and secured Frank Sinatra for Cyril Stapleton's 'Show Band Show' for a mere $50. In 1958 he transferred to BBC Television and produced 'Juke Box Jury', hosted by David Jacobs. The disc jockey Jimmy Savile hosted the popular 'Teen and Twenty Disc Club' on Radio Luxembourg, and in 1963 the BBC producer Barney Colehan recorded a pilot for television. After discussion it became a chart show, produced by Johnnie Stewart, who named it 'Top of the Pops'. The first programme was broadcast on new year's day 1964, with Savile as host. Because of the explosion of British beat groups, the charts were filled with home product and Stewart was confident of success. 
At first 'Top of the Pops' was broadcast from a converted church in Dickinson Road, Manchester. For three years Stewart used four presenters, alternating Savile, Alan Freeman, Pete Murray, and David Jacobs. Stewart devised simple rules: the programme would always end with the number one record, which was the only record that could be repeated from the previous week. He included the highest new entry and the highest climber and nothing going down was included. Quality was not the issue: the record-buyers determined the content, although Stewart did include a 'Tip for the Top'. Stewart's only mistake was not to archive all the programmes. Harry Goodwin's still photographs were used in the chart rundowns, and he shot the silhouette of Stewart that ended each programme, though many assumed that the still was of Billy Fury. The programme was screened at peak time and, although aimed at the young, it attracted a family audience spanning the generations. In a brilliant move Stewart created a popular female dance troupe, which became Pan's People. The audience was also an important ingredient of 'Top of the Pops'. The hysterical screaming was genuine. As Stewart put it, ''Top of the Pops' was the simplest show in the world and also pure murder on the ears' ('Music Week', 28 Jan 1995). Initially all records were mimed. The Musicians' Union felt that asking artists to mime was depriving their members of work, but Stewart argued that many acts could not create the same sound live. In the end Johnny Pearson formed a Top of the Pops orchestra with experienced session musicians. 
Stewart sometimes felt antipathy towards the music he was promoting. In 1965, after the Small Faces had appeared on 'Top of the Pops', Stewart thanked them politely. Their leader, Steve Marriott, felt insulted by Stewart's patronizing comments, and as a consequence of Marriott's rude response Stewart broke his own rules so that the Small Faces could never play 'Top of the Pops' again. Presenting the show from Manchester created problems as many of the bigger acts did not want to travel. In 1967 'Top of the Pops' moved to the Lime Grove Studios in west London. The new presenters included Stuart Henry, 'Emperor' Rosko, Simon Dee, and Kenny Everett, who were all connected with BBC Radio 1. John Peel made such a mess of presenting a programme in 1968 that Stewart told him he would never work on TV again. Later, after Stewart had moved on, Peel proved to be a witty and sardonic host. Stewart started the 'Top of the Pops' review of the year, the first of which was broadcast before the queen's speech on Christmas day 1967. He also produced Alan Freeman's magazine show 'All Systems Freeman'. 
Stewart was given a year's sabbatical in 1971 and went to North America. His set designer, Stanley Dorfman, took over as producer of 'Top of the Pops' and amended Stewart's rules, adding an LP spot, which one week included a ten-minute piece by Yes. Stewart returned and reinstated the original concept. His return coincided with another wave of home-grown British talent, with the 'glam rock' of Slade and T. Rex doing well. The presenters now included Noel Edmonds, Dave Lee Travis, and Tony Blackburn. 
Stewart left 'Top of the Pops' in 1974. In 1978 he produced the pop quiz 'Cheggers Plays Pop' with Keith Chegwin. He then worked in South Africa on a local version of 'Top of the Pops'. He retired to Ibiza but returned to the UK when his health deteriorated, living latterly at Dorrington House residential nursing home, Quebec Road, Dereham, Norfolk. He died there on 30 April 2005 of bronchopneumonia and severe peripheral vascular disease. He was survived by his daughter, Judith. 'Top of the Pops' outlived him, finally being taken off the air in 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 95777


Foster, Trevor John French (1914-2005), rugby league player, was born at the Church House Inn, 14 Portland Street, Newport, Monmouthshire (the childhood home of the poet W. H. Davies), on 3 December 1914, the third son and sixth and youngest child of Richard Foster, innkeeper and former soldier, and his wife, Mabel Elizabeth Janet, 'nee' Bower. He was educated at St Joseph's convent school then Holy Cross School, Newport, leaving at fourteen to assist his father, whose sight was failing. He played rugby union at Holy Cross, and joined the former pupils' club Newport Hibernians in 1935, progressing via Pill Harriers to join Newport for the 1937-8 season. He was an instant success as a blindside wing-forward, leading Newport's scorers with twelve tries in thirty-four matches. Within a few months he played for the Possibles in the final Welsh trial and was travelling reserve for Wales against Ireland at Swansea. 
Noticed by rugby league scouts even while still in junior rugby, Foster was visited at the start of the 1938-9 season by Harry Hornby, chairman of Bradford Northern. When Hornby put $400 on the table he initially declined, keen to secure his Welsh rugby union cap and concerned about his parents and the family business. His elder sister Freda told him, 'What if you break your leg next Saturday? You may never again get such a chance in your life. I'll look after Mum and Dad' (Foster, Gate, and Lush, 13). He later described signing as 'the greatest thing I ever did' (Collins, 55). Among the last of nearly 400 Welsh players to 'go north' between the wars, he formed a bond with Bradford that lasted long beyond his playing days. 
Foster took rapidly to rugby league as a second row forward, finding that 'There was a lot more space and room to move. This suited my style of play' (Foster, Gate, and Lush, 18). Conscripted in 1940 into the King's Own Yorkshire light infantry, he joined the Army Physical Training Corps as a sergeant-instructor. Successive postings in Yorkshire allowed him, until posted to Egypt early in 1945, to continue playing rugby league with great success. Trophyless since 1906, Bradford won championships in 1940 and 1941 and the challenge cup in 1944. He also played for Wales in five rugby league internationals and, under the wartime dispensation allowing league players in the services to play union, seven union internationals. He also played in two league versus union matches played under union rules but won by the professional code. 
Demobilized in 1946, Foster went that year with the first post-war Great Britain touring team, known as the Indomitables after the aircraft carrier on which they travelled, to Australia and New Zealand. Injury ruled him out of the Ashes tests but the captain, Gus Risman, reckoned him 'the most popular member of the party' (Foster, Gate, and Lush, 174) and he received, and declined, an offer to emigrate and play for South Sydney. Instead, aged thirty-one, though claiming (as he would until very old) to be two years younger, he returned to a leading role in Bradford's unprecedented feat of playing in three consecutive challenge cup finals at Wembley (1947-9). Foster scored tries in the two victories, in 1947 and 1949. On 13 June 1949 he married, at St Patrick's Church, Westgate, Bradford, Jean Florence Unsworth, a 23-year-old nurse from Bradford, and daughter of Leonard Unsworth, assistant racing manager. They had four children, Simon, Jane, Sara, and Bridget, and for five years from the late 1950s fostered Joseph Elston. They separated in the mid-1970s. 
Always a prolific try-scorer by forward standards -- his career total of 144 remained at his death a record for a Welsh forward -- Foster peaked with twenty-two in 1947-8, including six in one match against Wakefield Trinity. Contemporaries admired his mix of power and pace with subtlety and fine judgement. The New Zealander Cecil Mountford called him 'one of the greatest forwards it has been my pleasure to watch', noting his 'ability to hold the ball until he could part with it to advantage and to take the tackle if such was inevitable, rather than let a colleague do so' (Foster, Gate, and Lush, 87 and 169). 
Foster retired in 1955 after 432 matches for Bradford, 16 for Wales (including 7 as captain), and 3 Great Britain tests. By then he was the club's assistant coach and had been, in 1949, rugby league's first national coaching organizer before resigning to concentrate on his playing duties. In 1958 he became a director at Bradford and in 1960 chief coach, resigning both posts at the end of 1960 when significant decisions were made without consulting him. In 1963 Bradford went out of business. Foster, now coaching at Leeds after a short spell with Keighley, and his former team-mate Joe Phillips drove the public campaign that led to the club's re-formation and readmission to the rugby league in 1964. The local paper said that 'but for his enthusiasm... it is doubtful that the club would exist today' ('The Independent', 6 April 2005). This was the most public expression of a remarkable record of service to his adopted community -- as an education welfare officer from 1957 to 1981, youth sports coach, and active supporter of the Bradford Police Club for Young People -- that earned copious recognition late in life. He was the first recipient (in 1998) of the lord mayor of Bradford's lifetime achievement award, appointed MBE in 2001, and awarded an honorary doctorate by Bradford University in 2002, the same year that a road near Bradford's Odsal Stadium was named Trevor Foster Way. 
Foster remained a vigorous and genial presence at Bradford matches, acting as timekeeper from 1986 until 2004. Aged eighty-nine he had to be dissuaded, on a wet day when he had no raincoat, from accompanying charity walkers on the Bradford leg of a trek around rugby league grounds. Only three days before his death he attended the launch of a book celebrating his life. A lifelong Catholic, he appeared as Christ in a 1956 pageant at Odsal and in 2001 received the Benemeriti medal from Pope John Paul II for his work in the church. He died on 2 April 2005, the same day as the pope, in Bradford Royal Infirmary following a heart attack. He was survived by his wife, Jean, two daughters, and a son, his daughter Jane having died in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 95778


Johnson, Douglas William John (1925-2005), historian, was born at 43 Pitt Street, Leith, Edinburgh, on 1 February 1925, the son of John Thornburn Johnson, land surveyor and town planner, and his wife, Christine Douglas, 'nee' Mair. His parents had married in Edinburgh in 1916, but at the time of his birth lived at 1 Seward Road, Hanwell, London. From his Scottish mother he may have drawn an understanding of the auld alliance between Scotland and France. He was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Lancaster, and was fifteen when on 18 June 1940 he heard General Charles de Gaulle's appeal to the French on the BBC to ignore the armistice requested by Marshal Petain and continue the war against Germany. Often at school he wore the cross of Lorraine, a symbol of his support for the Free French. In 1942 he won a scholarship to read history at Worcester College, Oxford. He was called up for military service in the Northamptonshire regiment in 1943-4, but was invalided out. He returned to Oxford, graduating with a second-class degree in modern history in 1946, then continued with graduate studies, writing a BLitt thesis on Sir James Graham, home secretary to Robert Peel in the 1840s. 
In 1947 Johnson was one of the first cohort of foreign students to be awarded a scholarship to the prestigious Ecole Normale Superieure in the rue d'Ulm, Paris, the training ground of France's academic and intellectual elite. He encountered a post-liberation Paris that was divided by powerful animosities inherited from the occupation. He was inspired by the Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser, and met the left-wing, Catholic, former resister and future historian Francois Bedarida. This was also, however, post-liberation Paris of some gaiety. At a joint ball with the women students of the Ecole Normale Superieure of Sevres he met Madeleine Rebillard, whom he married in 1950. They had one daughter. 
While Madeleine taught at Rouen to fulfil the terms of her government scholarship Johnson was appointed a lecturer at the University of Birmingham in 1949. In Paris he had studied nineteenth-century French history with Charles Pouthas, and in 1963 (the year in which he was promoted to a professorship at the University of Birmingham) he published 'Guizot: Aspects of French history, 1787-1874'. Organized thematically, it explored the career of an austere Calvinist politician who sought to reconcile the gains of the French Revolution with ordered government, wrote 'whiggish' histories setting the French and European struggle for liberty in a millennial context, and as sometime ambassador at the court of St James was a great admirer of the English constitution of 1688, which French liberals had tried to imitate in 1830. 
In 1968 Johnson succeeded Alfred Cobban as professor of French history at University College, London, a post he held until his retirement in 1990. He was head of the department of history (1979-83) and dean of the faculty of arts (1979-82). In London he continued his research into French history; his publications included 'France and the Dreyfus Affair' (1966), 'The French Revolution' (1970), and 'Michelet and the French Revolution' (1990), and he was general editor of the 'Fontana History of Modern France'. He also developed a new role, as an ambassador of Franco-British relations, at a time when de Gaulle's successive vetoes of British entry into the Common Market had done much to damage them. In 1965, on the invitation of Paul Barker of 'New Society', Johnson gave a lecture at Chatham House entitled 'The political principles of General de Gaulle'. After 1976 Johnson became a pillar of the Franco-British Council, set up in 1972 by Edward Heath to improve understanding between the two countries. With Francois Bedarida and the economic historian Francois Crouzet he edited 'France and Britain: Ten Centuries of History' (1980), attracting contributions from a galaxy of historians, journalists, novelists, politicians, and diplomats. Under the auspices of the Franco-British Council he co-edited 'A Day in June: Britain and de Gaulle, 1940' (2000) and 'Cross-Channel Currents: a Hundred Years of the Entente Cordiale' (2004). From 1993 Johnson sat on the scientific council of the Fondation Charles de Gaulle. The French government showered him with honours. He was made a commandeur des Palmes Academiques in 1987, and chevalier (1990) then commandeur (1997) of the Legion d'honneur. Although he advised Margaret Thatcher on French matters the British government neglected to recognize his services. 
Less formally Johnson provided benign but decisive support to a wide range of academics and graduate students who were studying French society, politics, and culture. As president of the Association for the Study of Modern and Contemporary France, founded in 1980, he used his contacts to invite a wide range of French figures to its conferences. He was instantly recognizable in his beret basque and cashmere scarf. His geniality, generosity, witty interventions, and deadpan humour endeared him to a wide field of lovers of France. In 2000 Martyn Cornick and Ceri Crossley edited a 'Festschrift' in his honour, 'Problems in French History'. The occasion was marked by 'an evening with Douglas Johnson' at the French Institute in London, when he did what he did best, telling stories about his encounters with French people and situations over more than half a century. He died of cancer of the oesophagus at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, on 28 April 2005. He was survived by his wife, Madeleine, and their daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 95793


Harrod, Sir (Henry) Roy Forbes (1900-1978), economist, was born in London on 13 February 1900, the only child of Henry Dawes Harrod (died 1918), a solicitor and a member of the London metals exchange, and his wife, Frances Marie Desiree, who was one of the eleven children of John Forbes-Robertson, art critic and journalist, and the younger sister of Johnston Forbes-Robertson, the actor. Frances Harrod, aided by her literary and artistic gifts and her maternal determination, exercised an immense influence on her son, overshadowing that of her husband, whose later years were darkened by his bankruptcy (after misinvesting his remaining capital in a copper mine in Anglesey, he was 'hammered' on the metals exchange in 1907 and remained an undischarged bankrupt until 1917, the year before his death). 
Roy Harrod won a scholarship to St Paul's School (from its preparatory school, Colet Court), but stayed there for only two years. His mother insisted that he move to Westminster School, which he duly entered as a king's scholar at the second attempt in 1913. Five years later he won a history scholarship to New College, Oxford. After a period from September 1918 in the Royal Garrison Artillery, he went to Oxford and obtained a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1921, despite a discordant relationship with his philosophy tutor, H. W. B. Joseph, and another first, in modern history, only twelve months later. He was elected by Christ Church, Oxford, to a lectureship in 1922, and in 1924 to a studentship (that is, fellowship) in modern history and economics, which he held for forty-three years until he retired in 1967, combining it for the final fifteen years with the Nuffield readership in international economics. He was a fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, from 1938 to 1947 and from 1954 to 1958. From 1945 to 1961 he was joint editor of the 'Economic Journal'. On 8 January 1938 he married, at St Mary's Church, Snettisham, Norfolk, Wilhelmine Margaret Eve (Billa) Cresswell ['see below']. They had two sons. 
Apart from some study of British currency, banking, and public finance in the context of the Oxford modern history school, Harrod's immersion in economics began after his election to Christ Church. His principal mentors in the subject were J. M. Keynes and colleagues (with whom, at King's College, Cambridge, he spent the autumn of 1922 as part of two terms' leave before embarking on his tutorial responsibilities at Christ Church), and F. Y. Edgeworth, Drummond professor of political economy at Oxford. His own principal contributions to economics, dating mostly from the 1930s, covered three main areas of theory: the firm; aggregate demand; and economic growth and fluctuations. 
Under the first head, Harrod was an originator of the marginal revenue curve, clarified the relation between short-period and long-period cost curves, and helped to develop the theory of pricing and output decisions of imperfectly competitive producers, that is, those that are in some degree 'price-making'. His papers on these topics were reprinted in 'Economic Essays' (2nd edn, 1972). As regards aggregate demand, Harrod's 'International Economics' (1933; 4th edn, 1957) and 'The Trade Cycle' (1936) pioneered the application of the 1931 'multiplier' concept of R. F. Kahn to an economy engaging in foreign trade. Harrod showed how an increase in exports would, in the presence of underutilized resources and inflexible prices, expand total output and employment up to the point at which imports had risen to match the new level of exports. Keynes's use of the multiplier mechanism in 'The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money' (1936) followed Kahn in concentrating on the closed economy, where it was investment and saving, rather than exports and imports, that were brought into balance through changes in income. Furthermore, in 'The Trade Cycle' fixed investment was largely influenced by changes in aggregate output, an innovative linkage that Harrod called 'the relation' and that subsequently (following Samuelson and others) became known as the accelerator or, in a looser form, the capital-stock adjustment principle. 
The relationships between investment and saving and between output change and investment were both of central importance in Harrod's path-breaking formulation of a one-sector growth model -- 'An essay in dynamic theory' ('Economic Journal', 1939), later incorporated in 'Towards a Dynamic Economics' (1948; 2nd revised edn, 1973) -- in which he sought to analyse the macroeconomic properties of a long-run expansion path. In the so-called Harrod-Domar model (the Russian-American economist Evsey Domar having produced in 1946 a model similar in important respects to Harrod's) the odds were overwhelmingly against the attainment of steady-state growth. This finding initiated a spate of theoretical literature on macroeconomic growth models from the 1950s onwards. 
Harrod's own economic writings after the Second World War concentrated mainly on questions of policy, especially British economic management ('Are these Hardships Necessary?', 1947; 'Topical Comment: Essays in Dynamic Economics Applied', 1961; 'Towards a New Economic Policy', 1967) and international monetary issues ('The Dollar', 1953, and 'Reforming the World's Money', 1965). Following the Keynesian revolution and the post-war development of 'growth economics', Harrod became a persistent and somewhat extreme advocate of fiscal and monetary expansion, arguing that an economy must be run under strong demand pressure if it was to realize its full growth potential, and that inflation and balance-of-payments deficits should be curbed not through general restraints on demand but through direct intervention -- namely, incomes policy in the case of inflation, and export subsidies and import restrictions in the case of payment deficits. Internationally, Harrod favoured a rise in the official price of gold to enhance the volume of international reserves. His insistence on expansionary policies at all points owed something to his belief that, even in the post-Keynesian era, it was easier to maintain economic activity at a high level than it would be to restore it after another slump. 
Besides his economic writings, Harrod made noteworthy contributions to biography and to philosophy. His official 'Life of John Maynard Keynes' (1951), though criticized for undue obtrusion of its author's personality in selecting and presenting material, was a compelling and magisterial account of Keynes's career and achievements. 'The Prof' (1959), his memoir of F. A. Lindemann, Viscount Cherwell, was a slighter work, more in the nature of an extended essay, recalling the author's own disappointingly short period of service in Winston Churchill's 'S branch' in the early part of the Second World War as well as painting a sympathetic portrait of the aloof and controversial figure of Cherwell. 
In philosophy, Harrod's most ambitious venture, and one to which among all his work he himself attached particular importance, was 'Foundations of Inductive Logic' (1956). This attempted -- unsuccessfully, in the opinion of professional philosophers -- to refute Hume by providing a strictly logical justification for induction, that is, for assuming that 'because the sun has risen every day so far, it will do so again tomorrow'. But his most influential philosophical work was a paper in 'Mind' (1936) entitled 'Utilitarianism revised', which sought to defend the utilitarian approach against certain criticisms by elaborating the doctrine. Harrod argued, first, that morality is concerned with means rather than ends, that is, with the promotion of whatever ultimate goals are sought by the greatest number of people, and, second, that utilitarian principles call for adherence to universal rules of conduct (rather than case-by-case decisions) in matters (for example, promise-keeping) where repetition and predictability are themselves socially beneficial. 
Harrod combined originality of mind with breadth of interest, and immense power of assimilation and concentration with a fluent and sometimes picturesque writing style. Although not averse to lecturing or orating (including political campaigning, to which he gave considerable energy through much of the inter-war period, besides standing unsuccessfully for parliament as a Liberal Party candidate at Huddersfield in the general election of 1945), he preferred to write (including memoranda and letters to his colleagues on college or university business, characteristically marked 'Immediate' on the envelope). He was of lean physique and above-average height; even in later years, when he had a stoop, his manner retained an Olympian element. He was irresistibly discursive with pupils, to whom he conveyed a sense of contact with great minds and grand decisions, and unfailingly courteous to all. 
Harrod was made FBA in 1947 and knighted in 1969. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Aberdeen, Glasgow, Warwick, Pennsylvania, Poitiers, and Stockholm. In 1962-4 he was president of the Royal Economic Society. He was an honorary student of Christ Church (1967) and an honorary fellow of Nuffield College (1958) and New College (1975). He died at the family home, the Old Rectory, Holt, Norfolk, on 8 March 1978. 
Harrod's wife, Wilhelmine Margaret Eve Harrod, Lady Harrod (1911-2005), architectural conservationist, was born on 1 December 1911 at New Hunstanton, Snettisham, Norfolk, the daughter of Lieutenant (later Captain) Francis Joseph Cresswell (died 1914) of the Norfolk regiment and his wife, Barbara, 'nee' ffolkes (1884-1977). Her father was killed in action at Mons in the early stages of the First World War, aged thirty-one, and in 1918 her mother married, as her second husband, General Sir (Edward) Peter Strickland (1869-1951); she was created DBE in 1923 following a gruelling tour of duty with her husband in Ireland. Billa Cresswell's early years were peripatetic because of her stepfather's postings, and she was educated privately and then, briefly, at the Sorbonne. She then became a wardrobe mistress at various London film studios. In the early 1930s she was briefly engaged to John Betjeman, the poet and Victorian conservationist; they remained lifelong friends. She met Roy Harrod at Sezincote in Gloucestershire, then owned by the Dugdale family. After their marriage she provided hospitality for generations of her husband's colleagues and students at their Oxford house, initially at 6 Beaumont Street, and after 1940 at 91 St Aldates, opposite the entrance to Christ Church meadow. (The latter home was subsequently incorporated, in the early 1980s, into a new quadrangle of Christ Church.) Nancy Mitford reputedly based the character of Fanny in 'Love in a Cold Climate' on her. She was first drawn into the conservation movement by the campaign to save Beaumont Street from redevelopment. Her love of her home county had already borne fruit in her writing, with Charles Linnell, the 'Shell Guide' to Norfolk (1957). Her two passions were brought together after her husband's retirement, and their permanent move to Holt, Norfolk, where they had acquired the Old Rectory in 1962. In 1970 she took a leading role in founding the Friends of Norwich Churches, and in 1976 she was the founding chairman of the Norfolk Churches Trust, which raised large sums for the preservation of Norfolk churches, and was in some cases able to restore parish church status to churches that had been made redundant. In 1972 she published 'Norfolk County Churches and the Future', with illustrations by Osbert Lancaster and John Piper, and an introduction by Sir John Betjeman. She was appointed OBE in 1992. She died on 9 May 2005 at her home, the Old Rectory, Holt. She was survived by her two sons. 
P. M. Oppenheimer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 95796


Montefiore, Hugh William (1920-2005), bishop of Birmingham, was born on 12 May 1920 at 35 Palace Court, Bayswater, London, the third son of Charles Edward Montefiore Sebag-Montefiore (1884-1960), senior partner of the family stockbroking firm, a former lieutenant in the Royal Artillery, and a noted philanthropist, and his wife, Muriel Alice Ruth, 'nee' de Pass (1891-1977), eldest daughter of Charles de Pass, also a stockbroker. Though his parents used the surname Sebag-Montefiore, in adult life he always used the abbreviated surname, Montefiore. 
Montefiore's Sephardi Jewish parents were ill matched: his father energetic, bold, and practical; his mother artistic, romantic, and reticent. (Later in life she was diagnosed with manic depression and after her husband's death converted to Christianity.) In 1925 the family moved to 2 Palace Green, Kensington. They had eight servants and attended the Lauderdale Synagogue in Paddington. Hugh went to two preparatory schools before entering Rugby School in 1933. A comment in an early school report -- 'careless, slapdash and takes no pains' (Peart-Binns, 20) -- stung him into becoming a lifelong workaholic. His social conscience was awakened when he visited the Rhondda valley and Durham, where the dire situation of unemployed miners affected him. He joined the officers' training corps, gained his rugby colours, and loved etching and painting. He had to work hard to achieve success. His final school report contains a clue to a character trait: 'Enterprising and fluent -- occasionally rather too much of both -- but always interesting' (ibid., 26). 
Montefiore had thought of becoming a rabbi until one wintry afternoon, aged sixteen, when his life was abruptly and indelibly changed: 'I suddenly became aware of a figure in white whom I saw clearly in my mind's eye. I heard the words 'Follow me'. Instinctively I knew that this was Jesus' ('Oh God, What Next?', 1). He had not even read the 'New Testament'. His parents were devastated but continued to show him affection. For his brothers and the wider Jewish community it was apostasy. 
Montefiore went to St John's College, Oxford, in 1939 to read a shortened one-year 'war' version of classics, before enlisting for army service. He served with the Royal Buckinghamshire yeomanry (99 field regiment RA). Rigid discipline and a vigorous sense of duty were implanted. At 6 feet 3 inches he was imposing, with a large, mobile, sharp, and intelligent face. He was promoted to captain and served in India and Burma, where he was fearless in leading his men. During the battle of Kohima he narrowly escaped death when a Japanese bullet nicked the sleeve of his pullover, killing the colonel lying next to him. There were two momentous changes in Montefiore's own life during the war. First, he made the decision to be ordained in the Church of England. Second, he had always felt shy and awkward with girls until he was attracted by the brains and beauty of Elisabeth Mary Macdonald Paton (died 1999) of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, who was to take a first in English, and whom he met at Student Christian Movement meetings. Her father, William Paton, was a Presbyterian and one of the great figures of ecumenism. They became engaged as Montefiore joined the army and were married in St Albans Cathedral on 1 December 1945, a fortnight after his repatriation, when she was twenty-six. They had three daughters. 
After returning to St John's College Montefiore achieved a first in theology in 1947 and proceeded to Westcott House Theological College, Cambridge. For ordination in 1949 he went to welcoming, warm-hearted Newcastle, serving his curacy at St George's, Jesmond. 'He got things done' was his vicar's verdict (private information). And it was done with vivacity, verve, boldness, and imagination. Two years later he made a wrong decision by returning to Westcott House as chaplain and tutor, then vice-principal. He felt himself a 'tertium quid' with the regime of Kenneth Carey, Alan Webster, and later Robert Runcie. The immense teaching load of 'New Testament' doctrine with twenty-seven supervisions a week was endangering his marriage and led him to the verge of a breakdown. He suffered a ruptured disc that affected him spasmodically for the rest of his life. He was invited to be chaplain of St John's College, Oxford, but Carey held him to his contract by refusing to release him, and when he was able to resign, in 1954, it was without a job to go to. 
Charles Raven, an old Caian and former vice-chancellor of the university, came to the rescue by recommending Montefiore as fellow and dean of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, to which was added in 1959 a lectureship in the faculty of divinity. He made himself available to undergraduates and ensured that the well-attended chapel had an 'open' table to all who presented themselves for holy communion. Another characteristic, already well developed, was now immense, namely his insatiable lust for activity -- lecturing, writing, preaching, thinking, reading, endless pastoral calls, and much travelling. In personality he moved from ebullience to depression, was adversarial and vulnerable, self-confident and guilt-ridden, and always 'driven' beneath a cloud of self-doubt. 
Montefiore was on the top of Mount Carmel during a sabbatical in 1963 when a telegram arrived offering him the living of Great St Mary's, Cambridge, in succession to Mervyn Stockwood and Joe Fison, who were respectively elevated to the bishoprics of Southwark and Salisbury. Montefiore did not have Stockwood's magnetism nor the fire for God of Fison, a prophet who disturbed with affection. He rather saw this as an opportunity to bring academic learning to the service of pastoral ministry. With the help of two curates, a Roneo machine spluttering out sermons, and a red mini driven Jehu-like, the parish was organized for up to seven services on a Sunday as well as weekday celebrations. There were criticisms of Montefiore for being too donnish in the pulpit, and for being brusque with people. Nevertheless Great St Mary's continued to draw 'town' and 'gown' and attracted capacity congregations to hear the outstanding preachers and leaders of the age. 
Montefiore's arrival at Great St Mary's in 1963 coincided with the publication of John Robinson's 'Honest to God'. It was a fertile time for radical thinking. Montefiore contributed with 'Truth to Tell' (1966) and an essay in 'Soundings' (1967). He was too much of a whirlwind, courageous, and full of enthusiasms to be in the academic top rank of theological thought, but there was a distinctive legacy in 'The Probability of God' (1985), on the support that science could give to theistic belief, and 'Credible Christianity' (1994). He regarded his major contribution as the essay 'What I Believe', which he wrote for the doctrine commission report, 'Christian Believing' (1976). He had been appointed to the new commission in 1967. 
Montefiore appeared to enjoy deliberately provoking controversy, sometimes with unintentional consequences. He read a paper at the annual conference of modern churchmen at Oxford in July 1967 in which he speculated about whether Jesus was homosexual in nature. He did not describe Jesus as a homosexual, but the use of the word was sufficient to cause a conflagration. Ian Paisley charged him with 'diabolical blasphemy' (Peart-Binns, 127), and many erstwhile supporters were hostile. There was a clamour for him to resign. The prime minister's appointments secretary, John Hewitt, was determined that he should never be a diocesan bishop and, until Hewitt retired, he was effectively blocked. 
In 1969 Montefiore published 'The Question Mark: the End of Homo Sapiens', about the terrifying results of man's obsession with growth and rapid and easily acquired prosperity. This book, praised by U Thant, Arthur Koestler, and Gordon Rattray Taylor, led to Montefiore's notable involvement with environmental and technological concerns. He chaired commissions on population control, reprocessing nuclear waste at Windscale, cultural pluralism, management accountability, and designing for survival. In 1972 he organized and chaired an independent commission on transport, which, in less than a year, produced 'Changing Directions', which stopped just short of advocating the restriction of car ownership. In 1976, as president of the Heathrow Association for the Control of Aircraft Noise, he went to America for a one-day hearing on Concorde and criticized the way in which the United Kingdom government had measured noise levels and subsequently misled parliament. Labour and Conservative MPs tried to lampoon him but failed because his arguments were based on hard evidence. 
At Cambridge the pace and self-inflicted pressures were unsustainable, resulting in absence from duties for three months. How long could he keep the Great St Mary's circus on the road? John Robinson, then dean of Trinity College, Cambridge, may not have looked like God's messenger, but he was Bishop Mervyn Stockwood's forerunner when, in the late autumn of 1969 over lunch, he slipped into the conversation, 'Oh, by the way Hugh, would you like to be Bishop of Kingston?' The approach was sanctioned by the archbishop of Canterbury and the appointment was announced on 7 January 1970. 
The suffragan see of Kingston-upon-Thames covers an area from Brixton and Clapham to Wimbledon and Richmond. Dissatisfied with proposals of where he should live, Montefiore's mother lent him the money to buy White Lodge in Wandsworth, which would be his home again when he left Birmingham. David Sheppard was his fellow suffragan at Woolwich. Led by Stockwood, Southwark was at the time the most exciting diocese in the Church of England. Intellectually a radical socialist and emotionally a high-church tory with friends in high places, Stockwood had a sense of theatre. He knew how to perform and needed a strong supporting cast. The imprint of Stockwood was unmistakable in Montefiore, who was perhaps unwise to learn his bishoping from him. Gradually Montefiore made his own way and revealed great pastoral concern and care for people. 
Montefiore was not ideally suited to a secondary position. Archbishop Donald Coggan endeavoured to place him into the deanery of St Paul's Cathedral, to no avail. The Church of England was waiting to see who would be Birmingham's new bishop in 1977, the first appointment under the new Crown Appointments Commission. When fifty-seven-year-old Montefiore was named there was an immediate campaign to reject him, orchestrated by the 'Birmingham Evening Post' and some local Conservative MPs, notably Anthony Beaumont-Dark. How could such a bishop come to the home of the motor car and British Leyland? The 'welcomers' were those who recognized his extraordinary combination of intellect, moral passion, and concern for the underprivileged. 
After the calm, reassuring, and uneventful episcopate of Laurence Brown, Montefiore swept in on his episcopal chariot like an imperial Caesar come to administer justice. He bullied, cajoled, and annoyed to get his way. Yet in his study he was superb at listening, caring, and encouraging. If he unintentionally caused pain he was distraught. He bore no malice and his flashes of temper were soon forgotten. He visited all the clergy and their families and photographed them, not merely as a memory aid but so that he could hold them and their needs in prayer in his private chapel. Hours of time were spent with sad cases of moral failure, scandal, or breakdown, and, although he could be fierce, he searched for practical solutions. 
Temperamentally Montefiore was a hierarchical person with a dash of the patriarch. He inaugurated 'The Bishopric', a periodical to further his teaching ministry. His presidential addresses to the diocesan synod were on matters of public moment in church and state. His style was usually animated and often adversarial. He was a 'loner' in his intellectual work, rapidly formulating with precision what he wanted to say. He was always in danger of unwarranted dogmatism, and because he fly-whisked criticism aside it required very determined alertness to challenge him. Examples of his endless initiatives were: a 'vision' (a favourite expression) for lay education and training in the parishes directed by himself; an appeal in 1984 for bicycles and mattocks to be sent to the battered church in Uganda; and a diocesan pilgrimage of 3000 people to Canterbury in 1986. He energetically sought good relations with the Islamic and Hindu faiths and the Afro-Caribbean community. 
In 1982 Montefiore succeeded Graham Leonard, bishop of London, as chairman of the Church of England's board for social responsibility. It was a daring appointment of someone who could be unpredictable and volatile. The major time-consuming topics were the Church of England's response to the Warnock report, 'Human Fertilization and Embryology' (1984), and the welfare state and social diversity in an ever-changing Britain. However, Montefiore's greatest triumph in the general synod came earlier, in 1983, when he was unexpectedly eirenic on the controversial report 'The Church and the Bomb', which opted for unilateral disarmament. He was neither dove nor hawk, and his speech and its accompanying successful amendment were a 'tour de force', saving the day. It required the government to provide adequate defence, urged it to negotiate disarmament urgently, and insisted that nuclear weapons could only be held on the basis of 'no first use'. 
None the less, Montefiore's demeanour did not make him one of the synod's most persuasive speakers. He was considerably better on his feet in the House of Lords, where he made his maiden speech on 23 January 1985. For the next two years he was a frequent speaker. When the 'Shops Bill' (1986), which would have ended the regulation of Sunday trading in England and Wales, occupied the house for eight long days, Montefiore strenuously opposed total or extensive deregulation. On one occasion he was supported by twenty spiritual peers, a near record for the twentieth century. The bill was later unceremoniously thrown out by the House of Commons. 
Montefiore almost made history when he introduced his own bill -- the 'Infant Life (Preservation) Bill' -- on 17 December 1986. Its simple and single aim was to change the twenty-eight week limit for abortions to twenty-four weeks. During the debate on 29 January 1987 there was much passion, noticeably from opponents. However, it passed its second reading. Afterwards Lord Whitelaw, leader of the house, informed Montefiore that three peers, violently against the bill, threatened to filibuster it out of existence. It went to a select committee whose members were largely hostile. By the time the committee reported Montefiore had retired and his bill lapsed. 
Montefiore's energies were consumed in principles and causes to which he tenaciously clung like a limpet, until he reversed his position, which was then equally vociferously defended. In 2004 he was forced to resign from his twenty-year trusteeship of Friends of the Earth when he switched from opposing nuclear power to advocating its use. Similarly, he continually re-examined his own beliefs. He was agnostic on the virgin birth but did not doubt the empty tomb or the physical resurrection of Jesus. He was a vocal critic of the views of David Jenkins, bishop of Durham. 
Montefiore was the most remarkable bishop of his time. He wrote twenty-eight books (twelve of them in retirement) and edited or contributed to a further forty-five works, including important pamphlets. In 1987, still at the height of his powers, he resigned to care for his wife, who was suffering from Alzheimer's disease. Montefiore never realized the respect and affection in which he was held until 7000 people attended a farewell eucharist at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham on 31 March. 
Retirement brought Montefiore an inner emptiness, which was assuaged with writing books, lectures, exhortations, and a weekly column in 'Church Times'. He chaired Transport 2000 and a charity for the homeless. He was taken ill on his eighty-fifth birthday, while dining with one of his daughters, and died the following day, 13 May 2005, at St George's Hospital, Tooting, of an aortic aneurysm. At his funeral at St Mary Magdalene, Wandsworth Common, on 21 May the congregation were invited to clap the man they loved. There was thunderously charged applause. Private cremation followed. For all Montefiore's achievements there was an underlying melancholy about this engaging and sensitive man, a living tornado with a human face. He said: 'I was deracine; an exile from the Jewish community and, I felt, not really accepted in the Christian community' ('Oh God, What Next?', 240). 


@@@@@


doc= 95802


Tyrrell, David Arthur John (1925-2005), virologist, was born at Kaombe, Salcombe Road, Ashford, Middlesex, on 19 June 1925, the elder son of Sidney Charles Tyrrell, an accountant who had fought in the First World War, and his wife, Agnes Kate, 'nee' Blewett, a schoolteacher specializing in French and mathematics, who subsequently gave up her career to care for her family. Tyrrell had a gift for languages, later speaking French fluently as well as German. At primary school he was somewhat 'dreamy, forgetful and untidy' (Kerr and Taylor-Robinson, 352) but he excelled at his grammar school in Ashford, where he came top of his class. During the Second World War the family moved to Sheffield, where Tyrrell was a pupil at King Edward VII School, excelling not only at science subjects, but also at German and music. Although he had to drop music this remained a major interest throughout his life. 
Tyrrell contemplated teaching but was dissuaded by some aspects of his own school, particularly the attitude of some of his teachers. Stimulated by a family friend who was a general practitioner and an increasing interest in science, he embarked on a career in medicine, starting in the medical school of Sheffield University, where he came under the influence of Charles Stuart-Harris, who subsequently had a major role in Tyrrell's career. After qualifying Tyrrell was encouraged to become involved in clinical research, particularly relating to infectious diseases. He met his wife, (Betty) Moyra Wylie, a general practitioner, while investigating an outbreak of poliomyelitis. She was the daughter of John Wylie, also a medical practitioner. They married at the parish church in Woodlands, Yorkshire, on 15 April 1950, and had two daughters and a son. 
The defining experience in Tyrrell's career was being appointed as a research assistant at the Rockefeller Institute in New York. There he gained experience in research methodology and an insight into the interaction between viruses, cells, and mechanisms of viral interference. Research departments in the USA were generally less formal than in the UK and this enabled Tyrrell to rub shoulders with eminent basic scientists who were able to fertilize his innate curiosity and inquiring mind. He especially enjoyed the interaction between those trained in clinical medicine, like himself, and those with experience in basic sciences. Throughout his career Tyrrell had the knack of bridging the divide between clinical and basic research. Informality, combined with the highest scientific standards, was of benefit to numerous younger research workers who either trained with him directly or who sought his advice during their careers. 
In 1954 Tyrrell returned to Sheffield to work in the Virus Research Laboratory, but three years later Sir Harold Himsworth, secretary of the Medical Research Council (MRC) invited him to join the MRC's Common Cold Unit (CCU) in Salisbury, Wiltshire, to work on the common cold virus that hitherto had not been isolated. The research was carried out in the Harvard Hospital, originally funded by the American Red Cross to deal with war-time epidemics of infectious diseases. Subsequently, the prefabricated buildings were found to be ideal for housing and isolating volunteers for experimental work on the common cold. Tyrrell used the volunteers for studying the transmission and some aspects of the pathogenesis of common cold viruses, growing viruses (later designated rhinoviruses) in cell cultures in test tubes. His success resulted from his unique and ingenious but essentially simple idea that if cultures were not only oxygenated but also incubated, not at the conventional temperature of 35-7 degree C, but at 33 degree C, rhinoviruses could be readily cultivated. Indeed, using himself as an experimental model, Tyrrell showed that nasal temperature was a few degrees lower than body temperature. 
Tyrrell then extended his work with cell cultures by collaborating with a Swedish ear, nose, and throat specialist, Bertil Hoorn, who had developed an organ culture system which was more physiologically akin to the natural condition than the 'in vitro' cell culture system. Thus when fetal ciliated trachea and nasal epithelium were inoculated, if infected the cilia would stop beating after a few days. This technique resulted in the identification not only of more hitherto uncultivatable rhinoviruses, but also of a new group of human viruses, the corona viruses, which were shown to induce respiratory infections (SARS being an example). To identify these viruses elegant electronmicroscopy was carried out in conjunction with June Almeida at St Thomas's Hospital medical school. The discovery of the rhinoviruses provided Tyrrell with a worldwide reputation. His volunteer studies became renowned and many of his researchers returned to the Harvard Hospital regularly, often during holidays. By the time of his death well over 100 rhinovirus types had been identified but since they all differ from one another antigenically, vaccination against the common cold was considered unrealistic. 
In 1967 Tyrrell was appointed to head the division of communicable diseases at the MRC's Clinical Research Centre at Northwick Park Hospital in Harrow, London. Although by 1970 he was the centre's deputy director he continued to visit and direct research at the CCU, covering such areas as gastrointestinal and respiratory infections in children, as well as identifying as many as possible of the causes of febrile convulsions in infants and children. In 1985, however, the MRC decided to close the Clinical Research Centre and Tyrrell returned to work full-time at the CCU. Together with John Pattison and Mary Anderson, then at University College, London, Tyrrell directed studies on adult volunteers relating to the pathogenesis of parvovirus B19. This virus had been established to be the cause of sickle cell crises in patients with chronic haemolytic anaemia. The virus also caused miscarriages if acquired in pregnancy. These studies showed that some of the features of infection, including rash and joint symptoms, were due to an immunological mechanism. 
While at the Clinical Research Centre at Northwick Park, and during his last few years, Tyrrell was involved in research at the Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Research Foundation, which he also served as chairman. The reality of chronic fatigue syndrome (otherwise known as ME) as a disease entity was doubted by many medical practitioners, but as a result of Tyrrell's dedication, integrity, and persuasion, together with some of the research conducted by the research foundation, most practitioners became convinced that the syndrome, although not fatal, was debilitating and worthy of investigation. 
Tyrrell, with his insatiable curiosity and breadth of knowledge, chaired many committees. Members were not only impressed by Tyrrell's chairmanship and leadership, but also came away having themselves acquired enhanced perception of some of the problems being discussed. Among the committees he chaired were the Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (1981-91), the Consultative Committee on Research into Spongiform Encephalopathies (1989-90), the Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee (1990-95), the Biological Sub-Committee of the Committee on Safety of Medicines (1989-92), and the Task Force on Chronic Fatigue Syndrome / Myalgic Encephalomyelitis / Post Viral Fatigue Syndrome (1993-99). He was also a managing trustee of the Nuffield Foundation (1977-92). Many honours were bestowed on him. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1970 and appointed CBE in 1980. He was also given honorary doctorates by Sheffield and Southampton, the Stuart prize of the British Medical Association (1977), the Ambuj Nath Bose prize (1983), and the Conway Evans prize, awarded jointly by the Royal College of Physicians (London) and the Royal Society (1986). 
Tyrrell was a committed Christian and his musical interests involved acting as organist and choirmaster at All Saints' Church in Whiteparish, Salisbury, where he lived. He was president of the Christian Medical Fellowship and president of the Friends of the Christian Medical College at Ludhiana (Punjab) for almost twenty years. He died at Salisbury District Hospital of prostate cancer on 2 May 2005. He was survived by his wife, Moyra, and two daughters, his son having predeceased him. A symposium on RNA viruses and disease was held in his memory at the Royal Society, London, in October 2006. This was well attended by scientific colleagues, including many he had mentored, and friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 95810


Hall, Keith Graham Clifford (1910-1964), optometrist, was born on 28 March 1910 at the Red House, Chesterton Road, Chesterton, Cambridge, the son of the Revd Albert Clifford Hall (1876-1963), Congregational minister and general secretary of the Young Men's Christian Association, and his wife, Bessie Mabel, 'nee' Watt (1875-1973). He was brought up first in Cambridge, the family later moving to Purley, where he attended Caterham School, Surrey. After a year with a City shipping firm he became an apprentice optician, qualifying by evening courses at Northampton Polytechnic. With his father officiating he married Winifred May (Susan or Maisie) Gibbard (1904-1987) at Purley Congregational Church on 10 May 1934. They had three children, Timothy, later a Royal Navy dental surgeon, Christopher, who died in infancy, and an adopted daughter, Alison. 
Clifford Hall founded his first practice in Worcester Park in May 1932, starting contact lens fitting in 1934. He added practices in Banstead and North Cheam before founding in 1945 the first British optometric practice specializing in contact lenses at 139 Park Lane, later moving to the sixth floor of 140 Park Lane. He saw three new patients per day, each taking over three hours. As people travelled long distances he tried to get everything done in one visit. He fitted members of at least two royal families, and Esmond Knight, the actor blinded in 1941 while serving in the navy. In 1945, of the five clinics fitting contact lenses in London, his was the only one run by an optometrist, the others being run by dispensing opticians under the supervision of ophthalmologists. In 1946-7 the waiting list for a new contact lens appointment with Clifford Hall was over a year. 
On his first visit to the United States in 1939 to visit the contact lens pioneer Theo Obrig, Clifford Hall met Frank Dickinson aboard the 'Queen Mary' and they became firm friends. After the war he visited the USA twice more, visiting major contact lens practitioners and learning the American methods of contact lens fitting. He visited Belgium and Germany in 1946 and soon after went to Rio de Janeiro and the Russian sector of Berlin. In 1959 he visited Soviet Russia to see the first contact lens department in Moscow. A planned visit to meet Otto Wichterle (inventor of soft lenses) in Prague in 1964 was forestalled by illness. Clifford Hall's interest in soft lenses started in 1948 when he predicted that the future would lie in a disposable soft lens with the consistency of a 'well sucked fruit gum' (private information, Timothy Hall). By invitation of Norwegian ophthalmologists, he built an extensive practice in Norway, specializing in fitting lenses for keratoconus in Oslo, Trondheim, and Bergen on a regular basis. He also worked in Denmark for some years. 
With Dickinson, Clifford Hall wrote 'An Introduction to the Prescribing and Fitting of Contact Lenses' (1946), the first technical British book on contact lens fitting. He published extensively on keratoconus. He was a fellow of the American Association of Optometry and president and treasurer of its British chapter, and senior examiner for the British Optical Association from 1948. His enthusiasm and high standards contributed much to the development of contact lenses and he published widely. Constantly willing to share his experience of contact lens fitting, he was a lecturer and examiner noted for his sincerity, integrity, and sense of humour. The International Society of Contact Lens Specialists awarded him the Herschel gold medal in 1958, and he was twice president of the Contact Lens Society. He died of a coronary thrombosis on 16 November 1964 in Bergen, Norway, and was cremated at Worth crematorium, Surrey. Frank Dickinson wrote that 'Keith's devotion to his work was a source of inspiration to us all -- his death has removed one of the most highly regarded figures in the world of optometry... from the outset he set a high standard which was never compromised' ('Optometry Today', 12 December 1997). The Keith Clifford Hall Book Collection, part of the British College of Optometrists Library, was founded in 1971 at Dickinson's suggestion. A Westminster city council plaque was unveiled outside Clifford Hall's former practice in Park Lane in 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 95816


Lambert, Joyce Mildred (1916-2005), botanist and ecologist, was born on 23 June 1916 at 50 Oakbank Grove, Herne Hill, London, the daughter of Loftus Sidney Lambert, clerk for an electrical supply company, and later estate agent, and his wife, Mildred Emma, 'nee' Barker. She was brought up in Brundall, Norfolk, her family's ancestral county, to which she was devoted. She was educated at Norwich High School for Girls and then, in 1939, graduated in botany from the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. After a short period as a schoolteacher in Norwich she was appointed lecturer in botany at Westfield College, London. In this formative period she fell under the influence of some of the outstanding botanists and naturalists of her time, each of whom helped shape her career and destiny in different ways. It was the Norfolk naturalist A. E. (Ted) Ellis and the botanist A. R. Clapham (then at Oxford) who encouraged her in the 1940s to study the ecology of the fens bordering the River Yare in the Surlingham-Rockland area of Norfolk. 
In 1948 Lambert moved to Cambridge University and began working with the geomorphologist J. N. Jennings on the Bure valley. They published their collaborative work in three classic papers. In 1952 Jennings published the results of his own extensive research in the area, which concluded that most if not all of the great pattern of lakes known as the Broads were of natural origin. In her study Lambert used a similar basic stratigraphical technique: removing core samples of peat with a borer. Significantly however, she used a borer with a narrower diameter and took vast numbers of very closely spaced samples. These revealed, to her own and the scientific community's astonishment, that the sides of the lakes were almost vertical. The conclusion was inevitable -- the Broads were artificial. But how could such vast excavations have been undertaken in an area so subject to inundation -- and for what purpose? Further historical and archaeological studies backed by Cambridge University revealed that there had once been digging of peat for fuel on a monumental scale -- the residents of each fenland parish had had turbary rights entitling them to dig within a certain area, but the practice had been abandoned by the end of the fourteenth century as the area became increasingly prone to flooding. These multidisciplinary studies were published in 1960 in a further book, 'The Making of the Broads', with Lambert and Jennings as the senior authors. 
In 1950 Lambert had been appointed lecturer in botany at Southampton University. Her contributions there, in research and teaching, though overshadowed by her East Anglian studies, were significant. Known to everyone at Southampton as Bloss (an abbreviation of Blossom), she became one of the most inspiring teachers of plant ecology Britain has produced. She coined what is probably the most elegantly simple definition of this often over-complicated subject: 'What grows where, and why?' (personal knowledge). She inspired her students by example and experience. She described working under Sir Harry Godwin at Cambridge and once being given a huge ecological tome one Friday and told to read and distil it into a 3000 word presentation by the following Tuesday. 'But Professor Godwin', she had complained, 'it's by Braun-Blanquet and I don't speak German.' 'Then I suggest you learn it' was Godwin's reply. She did (personal knowledge). At Southampton, too, Lambert made a pioneering contribution to the use of computers in botanical science in her collaboration with her head of department, Bill Williams, on the multivariate analysis of plant communities. Their elegant publications on association analysis, a statistical procedure that determines the frequency of association of different species in the same habitat, became among the most widely cited papers in the history of plant ecology. 
Joyce Lambert was of striking appearance, short and almost spherical, with close-cropped silver-grey hair embroidered with a yellowish fringe at the front where the smoke from her ever-present Kensitas cigarettes curled upwards. She was a most companionable woman with inimitable enthusiasm and spirit, and rich good humour, quick talking, and with a deep mischievous laugh enhanced by a smoker's throatiness. She was also delightfully opinionated; she never, for instance, saw the point of installing an internal telephone system in the small Southampton botany building, saying that standing at the top of the stairs and shouting had always been perfectly satisfactory. She was an ardent supporter of Norwich City football club and after her retirement in 1980 returned to the house in Brundall that her grandfather had built in the 1920s. She spent some years looking after her ageing mother and enjoying her garden and then, because of increasing infirmity, for the last three years of her life was confined to a nursing home, Oakwood House, Old Watton Road, Colney, Norfolk. She died there on 4 May 2005 of bronchopneumonia. She received no significant award and was mystifyingly denied the formal recognition her remarkable work merited. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 95817


Lings, Martin (1909-2005), scholar of Islam, was born on 24 January 1909 at Barciecroft, Burnage Lane, Burnage, Lancashire, the son of George Herbert Lings, cotton spinner and ornithologist, and his wife, Gladys Mary, 'nee' Greenhalgh. After spending much of his childhood in the United States he returned to England to finish his studies. He became head boy at Clifton College, Bristol, and matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1929 to read classics, but soon switched to English. At Oxford he came under the influence of C. S. Lewis, who encouraged the cultivation of his literary gifts. Throughout childhood Lings had experienced 'nostalgia for the past' (Lings, 'Frithjof Schuon', 15), and Lewis's compelling evocation of the 'surpassing greatness of the Middle Ages' (Lings, 'The Elements', 9) provided him with a fixed point from which to judge other epochs. Though Lewis awakened in Lings a love for Old English poetry and Dante's 'Divine Comedy', Lings did not follow Lewis into Christian faith. Before coming to Oxford he had forsaken corporate worship. Though he had not abandoned private prayer he focused instead on the search for beauty in literature, nature, and art. When he left Oxford with a second-class degree in English in 1932 the composition of poetry was his sole aspiration. 
In 1935 Lings accepted a lectureship in Anglo-Saxon and Middle English at Vytautas Magnus University in Kaunas, Lithuania, where he remained until 1939. During this period he discovered the writings of the French traditionalist Rene Guenon. In his encounter with Guenon Lings felt he had come 'face to face with the truth' (Lings, 'Frithjof Schuon', 15). Guenon criticized the marginalization of religion in modern civilization and argued for the existence of a common core of esoteric truth in all of the world's great faiths. But Guenon believed esoteric truth was best pursued through the adoption of a valid form of religious ritual under the guidance of a spiritual master. After corresponding with Guenon Lings looked first to Hinduism, but soon turned to Islam. In 1938, with the approval of Guenon, he visited Frithjof Schuon, another traditionalist thinker who lived in Switzerland. Schuon had been initiated into the Shadhiliyyah Sufi order by the celebrated Algerian Sheikh Ahmad al- 'Alawi in 1932 and under Schuon's guidance Lings embraced Islam and took the name Abu Bakr Siraj ad-Din. 
Adrian Patterson was a close friend of Lings from Oxford and shared his literary tastes and spiritual interests. Patterson had taken up a position at Cairo University and become an intimate of Guenon's household. In 1939 Lings went to Cairo to visit both Patterson and Guenon and the outbreak of the Second World War prevented him from leaving. In a fateful turn of events in the coming months Patterson died tragically in a horse riding accident and Lings took his place as a lecturer in English literature at the university. He also replaced Patterson as Guenon's personal assistant. During these years Lings temporarily abandoned his poetic ambitions and focused on his spiritual pursuits. He concentrated on learning Arabic and writing a manuscript later published as 'The Book of Certainty: the Sufi Doctrine of Faith, Wisdom and Gnosis' (1952), which reflected the maturation of his newfound convictions. On 14 August 1944, while on leave back in England, Lings married Lesley Smalley, a childhood friend with whom he had kept in touch over the years. Aged thirty-one at their marriage, she was a chartered physiotherapist, and daughter of Edgar Smalley, cotton waste merchant. There were no children of the marriage. 
Guenon's death in 1951 and the Egyptian revolution of 1952 signalled the end of Lings's Egyptian sojourn. When the new government dismissed British staff from Cairo University he returned to England. There he resumed his education at the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, where he graduated BA in Arabic in 1954 and PhD in 1959. He also secured a job as assistant keeper (1955-70), deputy keeper (1970-71), and finally keeper (1971-3) of oriental manuscripts and printed books at the British Museum. 
Though Guenon had become estranged from Schuon before his death and Schuon had distanced himself from Islam, Lings remained loyal to his mentors. He also remained committed to Islam, becoming a leading expositor of the Sufi vein of traditionalist thought. Through a series of publications including 'A Muslim Saint of the Twentieth Century' (1961), the revised version of his PhD dissertation, on Sheikh Ahmad al- 'Alawi, Lings earned a reputation as a sympathetic and incisive commentator on Sufi mysticism. In 1976 he was closely involved with the World of Islam festival in London and wrote the festival's companion volume on Koranic calligraphy. However, his most highly acclaimed work was undoubtedly 'Muhammad: his Life Based on the Earliest Sources' (1983), for which he received commendations from the governments of Pakistan and Egypt. In this work Lings followed the earliest traditions and utilized his own considerable literary abilities to produce a vivid narrative of the Prophet's life from a believer's perspective. His other published works included studies of the esoteric meanings in Shakespeare's plays, and a volume of 'Collected Poems' (1987, revised and expanded 2002). 
Lings was a diminutive man. Lewis once likened his movements about Magdalen College to those of a 'furtive mouse' ('Collected Letters', 2.24). He was also a gentle, serious individual who gave generously of his time to those seeking spiritual guidance. He died of heart failure at his home, 3 French Street, Westerham, Kent, on 12 May 2005, and was buried beneath the garden he had so lovingly tended. A memorial service was held in the chapel of Magdalen College, Oxford, on 24 September 2005. He was survived by his wife, Lesley. 


@@@@@


doc= 95824


Ratcliffe, Derek Almey (1929-2005), ecologist and conservationist, was born on 9 July 1929 at 80 Crouch Hill, Islington, London, the only son of Frank Bernard Ratcliffe, a solo organist and cinema pianist, and his partner, Kathleen Marie Almey, who later taught English and French. His first experiences with nature were on his maternal grandfather's Jarvis Farm, south of Cromer, Norfolk, where he collected butterflies and moths, and later common birds' eggs. Nine years later his family moved to Carlisle, where he developed a passion for the wildlife of the Lake District and of the uplands beyond in south Scotland and the Pennines. He joined Carlisle's active Natural History Society, where he came under the tutelage of Ernest Blezard, the curator of natural history at Tullie House Museum. His first step on the literary ladder was a school essay on peregrines and ravens, for which he won a prize at Carlisle grammar school. Almost six decades later he published the 'New Naturalist' book 'Lakeland: the Wildlife of Cumbria' (2002), which contained a rich seam of original observations on the nature of that popular region. 
In 1947 Ratcliffe won a city corporation scholarship to study zoology at Sheffield University. Bored by dull practicals and lectures, he switched to botany and found inspiration in the teaching of Roy Clapham and colleagues. He graduated in 1950 with first-class honours in botany, and won a Nature Conservancy studentship at the University College of North Wales, Bangor. There he studied mountain vegetation under the supervision of Paul Richards, completing his PhD in 1953. There followed a year's national service in the Royal Army Education Corps at Catterick. In 1956 he was appointed scientific officer in the Nature Conservancy in Edinburgh, where he worked on the Scottish Highlands Vegetation Survey, and was promoted to senior scientific officer in 1958. With Donald McVean he made a pioneering description and classification of upland vegetation in the Scottish highlands, published in 'Plant Communities of the Scottish Highlands' (1962). Many of the areas he visited had not been formally studied before, and some of the fieldwork entailed bicycle and foot journeys of more than thirty miles in successive days. By the late 1950s he was one of the best-travelled naturalists in the UK, with a keen eye for nesting birds and rare plants. 
During 1961-2, on behalf of the British Trust for Ornithology, Ratcliffe led the first national survey of peregrine falcons. The Home Office, which wanted facts and figures to address concerns from pigeon fanciers alleging that peregrines were ruining their sport, had instigated this. The upshot of the survey was a milestone in environmental science: Ratcliffe found that numbers of peregrines were in decline, and in some parts of Britain they had ceased to breed. The cause of the decline was persistent pesticides, notably DDT, which caused eggshell thinning and catastrophic breeding failure. Ratcliffe published a classic paper on eggshell thinning in the journal 'Nature' in 1967, and a more detailed paper in the 'Journal of Applied Ecology' in 1970, both of which were among the most frequently cited ornithological scientific publications. 
Ratcliffe had transferred to the Nature Conservancy's Monks Wood experimental station in 1963, where he continued his work on peregrines and other raptors, and in 1966 he was promoted to principal scientific officer. A year later he was appointed scientific assessor to the Nature Conservancy's nature conservation review, which developed into a major inventory of Britain's best sites for wildlife and habitats. At the heart of this work was the exposition of a philosophy for nature conservation founded on the use of such concepts as 'diversity', 'fragility', and 'naturalness', which enabled scientists systematically to compare sites and even regions. This became, and remained, the cornerstone of nature conservation, culminating in the publication of the two-volume book edited by Ratcliffe, 'A Nature Conservation Review' (1977). In 1970 Ratcliffe had been appointed deputy director (scientific) of the Nature Conservancy, based at Belgrave Square, London, and on new year's day 1974 he became chief scientist of the newly established Nature Conservancy Council. During the late 1970s and 1980s, until his retirement in 1989, Ratcliffe effectively led the science base of the statutory nature conservation movement, providing leadership for the designation of hundreds of sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) and the opposition to the large-scale afforestation of upland areas in the 1980s. On 22 March 1978 he married (Marie) Jeannette Chan-Mo, a 33-year-old personal secretary and daughter of the late Emmanuel Chan-Mo, clerk. 
During six decades, from his early encounters with wildlife through to difficult and sometimes strained relations with politicians and senior civil servants, Ratcliffe earned himself the status, according to the 'Sunday Times', of one of the people who had most influenced the twentieth century. His publications were remarkable for the breadth of subjects in which he had expert knowledge. He published two classic bird monographs, 'The Peregrine Falcon' (1980, revised in 1993) and 'The Raven' (1997), and a highly original book, 'Bird Life of Mountain and Upland' (1990). He enjoyed writing about his travels and experiences, and captured these first in 'Highland Flora' (1977), later in his memoir of early years in the field, 'In Search of Nature' (2000), and finally in 'Galloway and the Borders' (2007), published after his death. He also wrote many scientific papers, chapters in books, and articles, which all had the hallmark of first-hand observation, clarity, clear analysis, and fluent writing. He was an outstanding photographer, with some of his pictures becoming conservation icons, such as the wave of conifers breaking over the uplands of Kirkcudbrightshire, Rannoch Moor with its relict pine stumps exposed, and the great beeches of the New Forest. He received several awards, including the degree of DSc from Sheffield University (1970), an honorary doctorate from Lancaster University (1991), and in 1983 appointment to the order of the Golden Ark, of the Netherlands, for his 'pioneering work on the effects of pesticides on birds of prey, and his major contribution to the science of nature conservation'. 
Ratcliffe was a shy, modest, determined, scholarly, and kindly man, who corresponded by hand with hundreds of friends and associates. In retirement, he remained active in conservation, and developed a keen interest in the wildlife of northern Scandinavia, spending six to eight weeks in a dormobile each spring with his wife, Jeannette, observing wild nature; this culminated in the publication of 'Lapland: a Natural History' (2005). He died in his sleep, on 23 May 2005, at the Pembroke Caravan Park near Leeming Bar, Northallerton; he had just set out from Cambridge on his fifteenth annual expedition to Fennoscandia. The cause of death was heart failure. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 95828


Godwin, Fay Suzette (1931-2005), photographer, was born on 17 February 1931 in Berlin, the elder child of Sidney Simmonds (1899-1978), British consular official, and his first wife, Stella, 'nee' MacLean (1896-1948), an American artist. The family moved regularly to different countries. Godwin was educated first by her mother, then in a series of nine schools across the globe, the last of which was Luckley School in Berkshire, where she gained her school certificate. She was an intelligent and competitive child who excelled in most activities, sporting and academic, and had a career mapped out in the international arena using her considerable language skills. However, the loss of her mother (on Fay's seventeenth birthday) put an end to her academic aspirations as she was obliged to assist her father with his official duties. In 1952 she was able to set up base in London, but spent much of the decade working as a travel representative in mainland Europe. It was during this period that she seriously damaged her knee in a skiing accident, which affected, but did not curtail, her lifelong passion for walking. 
While working at John Murray publishers, Fay Simmonds met Anthony James Wylie (Tony) Godwin (1920-1976), publisher, who was to become an important and innovative figure in publishing, as chief editor at Penguin Books. They married in 1961 and had two sons, Nicholas and Jeremy. Throughout the 1960s she focused on her role as a mother and played hostess to her husband's career needs. Her interest in photography began as a hobby. She discovered its creative and documentary facilities while producing the family albums and entertaining her children by exploring the developing process to make negative imprints of leaves and flowers. When the marriage terminated, very abruptly, in 1969, it proved to be the catalyst for turning her hobby into a profession, as she resolved to control her own destiny. 
In the early 1970s Fay Godwin set up her own business, taking portraits of authors for publicity purposes, and exhibiting them at Swiss Cottage Library (1974). Though largely self-taught, she took some classes with Euan Duff, and it was through this connection that her work appeared in various social documentary articles, especially in the Camden area. Godwin attended, then eventually taught at, photographic workshops, and was a strong champion of the support and community they engendered. At the start of her career she was strongly drawn to photojournalism, but, needing to be home-based, she eventually combined her documentary skills in the landscape images that began to emerge in a serious form during 1974. 
Godwin's abiding interest in nature stemmed from her childhood. She joined the Ramblers' Association during the 1950s, later becoming its president (1987-90), and vice-president thereafter. A visit to the Lake District using a Wainwright guide inspired her to produce the first of a series of walkers' guidebooks: 'The Oldest Road: an Exploration of the Ridgeway' (1975), co-written with J. R. L. Anderson. Her collaboration with established authors was a formula that opened her work to widely different audiences; probably her best-known was 'Remains of Elmet' (1979), with Ted Hughes. 
Godwin received an Arts Council bursary to fund her landscape work in the British Isles in 1978, which formed a significant percentage of the images in 'Land' (1985), a reflection on the relationship between man and nature. This was the most celebrated body of her work, demonstrating her outstanding artistic and technical abilities. 'Land' was shown nationally and internationally, and accompanied by her monograph of the same name. However, it was her defence of the environment that brought forth the absolute passion and politics in Godwin. In her fourteenth book, 'Our Forbidden Land' (1990), she launched a multi-pronged offensive against the various bodies that prevented public access to a large percentage of land across the British Isles. It was dedicated to the Ramblers' Association, and won the first Green Book of the Year award. 
Godwin earned many accolades during her professional life. She was the first photographer to have an entire programme of 'The South Bank Show' feature her work, in 1986, an event that reflected not only her personal standing within the profession, but also changing attitudes of the establishment towards fine art photography. In 1987 she was the second photographer to take part in the fellowship scheme at the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television in Bradford, choosing the opportunity to experiment more formally with colour. Other awards followed, including honorary fellowships of the Royal Photographic Society and the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland, in 1990 and 1992 respectively, and an honorary doctorate from De Montfort University in 2002. 
Despite a determined move across the genres of her craft in the 1980s Godwin remained wedded to the welfare of the land. Thus in 1995 she used her award from the Erna and Victor Hasselblad Foundation to revisit Cumbria to investigate the relationship between the landscape and those who farm it. In 2001 the Barbican Centre hosted a major retrospective of her work, once again revealing the wide spectrum of subjects and equipment with which she continued to experiment throughout her professional life. Her state of health was a significant preoccupation throughout much of her life, and she was a devotee of alternative medicine and therapies. She managed to recover from two life-threatening illnesses but died at the Conquest Hospital, St Leonards, Sussex, near to her home at 6 Coastguard Cottages, Toot Rock, Pett Level, Hastings, on 27 May 2005, of heart failure, and was buried at Hastings borough cemetery, The Ridge, Hastings. She was survived by her two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 95832


Blatch, Emily May, Baroness Blatch (1937-2005), politician, was born on 24 July 1937 at the Maternity Hospital, Birkenhead, Cheshire, the only daughter of Stephen Joseph Triggs, a butcher's shop assistant and later electrician, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Carpenter. She was educated at Prenton secondary school for girls in Birkenhead and at Huntingdonshire College. At the age of eighteen she joined the Women's Royal Air Force and became an air traffic assistant. In 1959 she left the WRAF and went to work in the civilian branch of air traffic control, at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment at Boscombe Down. There she met and, on 7 September 1963, married John Richard Blatch, RAF officer and test pilot; they lived first in Wiltshire and then at Spaldwick (which until 1974 was in Huntingdonshire and thereafter in Cambridgeshire). They had four children. 
Blatch's political career did not start until 1977, when she was asked by the Conservatives to stand for Cambridgeshire county council and won, assisted by the unpopularity of the Labour government, in what was seen as a natural Labour seat, with many London 'overspill' electors. Crucially her forcefulness and ability had won her the support of the leader of the Cambridgeshire Conservatives, Robert James. In 1981 he promoted her move to the leadership of the county council. She ran a tight and effective ship in Cambridgeshire during the next four years. The county council was singled out as an example of good government by the Audit Commission when it reduced costs by 25 per cent and was chosen to take a lead in introducing local financial management for schools because of its reputation for getting things done. She was appointed CBE in 1983 and remained a councillor until 1989, but stood down as council leader in 1985 when the Conservatives lost political control. 
In 1987 Blatch was elevated to the House of Lords as Baroness Blatch, of Hinchingbrooke, Cambridgeshire, by Margaret Thatcher, who had been impressed by Blatch's leadership in Cambridgeshire. She was reportedly astounded by her elevation, and at first wondered if she was the victim of a practical joke. She made her maiden speech in a debate on primary and secondary education. There she set out what were later to be her watchwords as education minister -- that the fundamental objectives of Conservative policy were: 'The raising of standards; the retention of diversity and choice and the strengthening of the accountability of schools to parents; the recognition of good professional performance by teachers and more importantly, promotion of their standing within the community, and a more stable environment free from industrial strife, within which our children can enjoy a rich and full education. ('Hansard 5L', 488.1048, 15 July 1987)' Blatch served as a government whip from January 1990, but it was with the arrival of her friend John Major as prime minister in November 1990 that her career took off. In 1976 she got to know John Major soon after he was selected as parliamentary candidate for Huntingdonshire, and the two families became very close. Politically they, Gillian Shepherd, and other political neighbours became known as the East Anglia (or fenland) mafia. Major appointed her, in November 1990, parliamentary under-secretary at the Department of the Environment, where she took responsibility for heritage issues and piloted the 'Local Government Bill' through the Lords. In 1991 she was promoted to minister of state at the Department of the Environment, in which post in February 1992 she had the unusual duty of announcing to their lordships' cheers that the department's unloved modern building at 2 Marsham Street (known from its appearance as 'the toast rack') was to be demolished. 
In April 1992 the newly re-elected John Major appointed Blatch minister of state for education, and it was in this post that she had her most tumultuous political experience. The Conservative election manifesto had promised a bright future for grant-maintained schools. The secretary of state chosen to deliver the policy was John Patten, a former Oxford don, in his first cabinet appointment. The task was made more difficult because an entirely new administrative and financial structure was needed to manage the transfer of schools from local authority control to grant-maintained status. The education establishment, which ministers failed to cultivate, opposed such schools. This opposition, and the impression that there was no policy to look after the interests of an opted-out school where things might go wrong, meant that the ballots of parents to approve the transfer of a school often failed or did not take place, and the policy stalled. The issue of testing was another minefield: the National Association of Schoolmasters / Union of Women Teachers successfully defended a legal challenge to its right to take industrial action on the testing arrangements and the government then announced a review of the curriculum and testing to be carried out by Sir Ron Dearing. Patten's health broke down under the strain of these events and he was absent from the department until the autumn of 1993. Blatch carried on the struggle for grant-maintained status in the Lords debates, and on Patten's disappearance to recuperate she took over as acting secretary of state; in this capacity she accepted the compromises in the Dearing review. In July 1994 she was moved to become minister of state at the Home Office, her last ministerial appointment, where she largely avoided the controversies surrounding the secretary of state, Michael Howard. 
In opposition from the election of the Blair government in May 1997, Blatch was successively Conservative spokesman on home affairs (1997-8) and education (1998) in the House of Lords, and finally deputy opposition leader in the Lords until her death. In her last years in politics she supported Baroness Young (Janet Young) in her campaigns on sex education. She also had the ironic pleasure of watching the Labour government travelling the same agonizing road to freeing schools from local authority control through the construction of separately funded academies. Her commitment and willingness to fight for her convictions shone through her political speeches in this as in earlier periods, and she proved to be an authentic voice for middle Britain at the highest level. She died of complications induced by pancreatic cancer at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Westminster, on 31 May 2005, and was survived by her husband, John, two sons, and a daughter, one son having predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 95836


Smith, Leslie Charles (1918-2005), industrialist and toy manufacturer, was born on 6 March 1918 at 26 Palace Gardens, Enfield, Middlesex, the son of Edward Arthur Smith, a journeyman joiner, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Niblett. After leaving Enfield central school at the age of fourteen he worked in London for J. Raymond Wilson, a die-casting company. On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 he and his three brothers were advised by their father (who had served in the trenches in the First World War) to join the Royal Navy. Initially a signals rating, he was commissioned, commanding a torpedo boat during the Dieppe raid and a minesweeper during the D-day landings. 
Demobilized with the rank of lieutenant, Smith and a former schoolfriend and service colleague, Rodney Smith (no relation), pooled their demobilization gratuities to buy a second-hand die-casting machine in January 1947. Under the trade name of Lesney Products, an amalgam of the two founders' first names, early production, mainly in zinc, included car engine parts and components for electrical firms. Soon the Smiths were joined by Jack Odell, an expert toolmaker with a penchant for model making. On 4 September 1948 Smith married Nancy Jackson-Moore (died 1969), a 27-year-old secretary from Yorkshire, and daughter of Colin Trippett Jackson-Moore, maintenance worker. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Shortages of zinc arising from the Korean War briefly threatened the fledgling company's existence, a particular worry for Leslie Smith in view of his recent marriage. Rodney Smith was equally alarmed, withdrawing from Lesney in 1951. One delayed project was a large model of the state coach, but with zinc becoming more freely available again after the conclusion of the Korean conflict, a miniaturized version was produced as a coronation souvenir. Packed into a matchbox-style box, and offering high quality engineering at the low price of 1's'. 6died, it sold a million units by the end of 1953. 
With Odell providing the design and engineering expertise, additional miniature models were developed under the trade name Matchbox. Yet it was Leslie Smith's commercial skills as managing director responsible for sales and marketing that underpinned the astonishing success of this product range. By 1960 Matchbox accounted for 80 per cent of Lesney sales and the company's first listing on the stock exchange was oversubscribed fifteen times, making both Smith and Odell millionaires. By 1968 sales were worth $28 million worldwide, including in the United States, a market notoriously resistant to overseas penetration. In the same year 'Management Today' placed Lesney at the top of its list of Britain's 200 most profitable companies, and Smith was appointed OBE. More aware, perhaps, than many contemporary toymakers of the importance of exports, he was a ready dispenser of advice on overseas marketing and, as sometime chair and president of the British Toy Manufacturers' Association, a consistent advocate of establishing a British international toy and hobby fair. 
Smith's other major role at Lesney was in ensuring that labour relations remained harmonious, no mean achievement with a labour force that ultimately grew to some 6000, working in thirteen different factories. Always mindful of his own modest background (he never left Enfield), Smith took a close interest in the workforce, providing dedicated transport and creating a family-like working environment. Consequently he was initially reluctant to countenance offshore manufacturing as the world toy market grew progressively more competitive through the 1970s. Matchbox's success had attracted significant competition, and the first check to progress occurred in 1969 when Mattel launched its best selling Hot Wheels range in the United States. Almost overnight exports of Matchbox to America collapsed from 40 to 10 per cent of annual output. Several hundred workers were laid off and Smith took a 75 per cent pay cut to help the company regain lost ground. Although new product lines did recoup sales, earning the firm a fifth queen's award for industry in 1977, the necessary retooling was funded from substantially increased borrowing at a time of rising interest rates. A concurrent strategy of product diversification proved relatively unsuccessful. The purchase of ATM, an American plastic kit manufacturer, was particularly miscalculated. With levels of debt soaring under the impact of escalating interest rates, and strong sterling adversely affecting the overseas markets that accounted for 80 per cent of sales, Lesney ultimately found the burden unsupportable. Losses of $3.6 million were recorded in 1980 and even the temporary return of Odell, who had retired as joint managing director in 1973, failed to halt the decline. In the summer of 1982 Lesney passed into the hands of the receiver, effectively ending Leslie Smith's industrial career. 
In retirement Smith devoted himself to his three children and their families. Apart from his chairing two boards of school governors, the rest of his time was occupied with his garden and yachting. However, both the magnitude of his achievement in creating from scratch a world-leading die-cast toy company and his wider contribution to the British Toy and Hobby Manufacturers' Association were acknowledged in 1998 when he received the association's lifetime achievement award. He died at his home, 9A Broad Walk, Winchmore Hill, Enfield, on 26 May 2005, of pleomorphic liposarcoma. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95839


Wright, Sir Denis Arthur Hepworth (1911-2005), diplomatist, was born in his paternal grandparents' house, 80 Durlston Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 23 March 1911, the elder son and eldest of four children of Arthur Edgar Wright (1880-1949), assistant director of public works, Hong Kong, and his wife, Margery Hepworth 'nee' Chapman (1888-1973). He spent nine years in Hong Kong, where he attended the Peak School, before returning to England with his parents in 1921. From Brentwood School, Essex (1921-9), where, in his words, his sole distinction was a prize for 'Virtue, Learning and Manners' (Wright, 1.13), he went to St Edmund Hall, Oxford, to read modern history, with financial support from his parents, his schoolmaster, an educational trust, and Essex county council. To learn to ride, he joined the cavalry squadron of the Oxford University officer training corps. He was a founder member of the Cosmopolitans, a small society for the discussion of international issues. He left Oxford in 1932 with a second-class degree in modern history. 
Failing to win an eastern cadetship for the colonial service, Wright first took two ill-paid jobs in advertising and in 1936 joined Gallahers, the tobacco firm, at $350 a year. He became engaged in 1938 to Iona Carmen, an artist, daughter of Granville Craig, and niece of Lord Craigavon, the first prime minister of Northern Ireland. They had met through the Labour Club at Oxford (though he described himself as a 'non-political animal' Wright, 1.26). Wright travelled alone on holiday to Romania in August 1939. Reaching Constanta on the outbreak of war, he was immediately recruited by the British consulate. Iona joined him and they were married in the consulate at Galatz on the Danube on 10 November 1939. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1939-40 Constanta was a hive of covert activity, including the smuggling out of $20 million of Polish government gold, an abortive plan to block the Iron Gate gorge on the Danube, and spirited attempts to frustrate German activity. In 1940 Wright moved to the legation in Bucharest. When relations with Romania were broken in 1941, Wright was appointed vice-consul in Trebizond in north-east Turkey, a solitary post, with supplies short, communications slow, and little congenial company. The German advance into Russia raised the importance of the region and Wright made three difficult journeys into the hinterland to report on communications, earning a commendation from the embassy in Ankara. In May 1943 he became acting consul in Mersin, in south-eastern Turkey, an important port for supplies. 
Returning to London in 1945, Wright took a job with the Ottoman Bank but soon resigned and joined the foreign service. His first posting was as first secretary (commercial) in Belgrade (1946-8). His subsequent career followed a more conventional path, although he spent ten of his twenty-six years' service in one country, eight of them as ambassador, a rarity in the twentieth-century diplomatic service. In 1949 he was appointed superintending trade consul in Chicago, and in 1951 head of the economic relations department at the Foreign Office. In 1953 he was chosen to reopen the embassy in Tehran after the fall of Mossadeq, first as charge d'affaires and later as counsellor. This marked a turning point in his life. He was appointed CMG in 1954. After serving from 1955 as an assistant under-secretary in the Foreign Office, he was appointed in 1959 ambassador to Ethiopia and in 1963, after a brief spell in the Foreign Office, to Iran, where he remained until his retirement from the diplomatic service in 1971. He was appointed KCMG in 1961 and GCMG on retirement. 
Wright proved to be a model representative of his country. Completely straightforward, he displayed a gift for friendship without condescension and an ability to engender trust. A shrewd judge of character, a firm and fair disciplinarian, he won the respect and affection of his staff and of the expatriate British. He learned the local languages and spoke Farsi well. He and Iona toured widely in their various posts, by Landrover, horse, mule, or on foot, making a point everywhere of meeting the local population. He combined loyalty to his own government, albeit severely tested in 1956 by the Suez debacle, with empathy with the people of the countries in which he served. This did not blind him to their faults. In his farewell dispatch from Addis Ababa he described Ethiopians as 'elusive, evasive, secretive and obstinate' (Wright, 2.361). After demonstrations in Iran in 1963, inspired largely by the religious community and suppressed with some bloodshed, he noted in his diary that the shah's weakness of character and judgement remained, and added prophetically: 'So long as the army and security forces remain loyal (and without them the Shah is doomed)... the country will probably tag along for some time' (ibid., 2.380). 
The trust he established often enabled Wright to play a key part in furthering British interests. In Belgrade, after the break with Moscow, one Yugoslav official confided in Wright that the economic situation was desperate: if Britain valued Tito's survival, aid was essential. His report led to the reversal of British policy on aid. In Ethiopia in 1961, when the imperial guard mounted a coup, Wright's loyalist contacts turned to him to alert the emperor, who was absent in Brazil. The embassy provided a haven for the British community during the fighting. Most notably, from 1953 on, he established an unprecedentedly close but wary relationship with the shah of Iran. This contributed significantly to the success of the oil negotiations following the fall of Mossadeq in 1953. In 1959, while on holiday in Tehran, Wright was urged by an Iranian minister to see the shah to dissuade him from concluding a pact with the Soviet Union; and in 1969-70 he was instrumental in persuading the shah to drop Iran's claim to Bahrain, subject to a test of opinion there by the UN secretary-general. He failed, however, to move the shah over claims to other smaller islands. 
After his retirement from the diplomatic service Wright was approached by the British government in May 1979 to break to the shah, in exile at Nassau, that they 'could not for the moment... offer [him] asylum' (Wright, 3.40). Wright agreed on condition that his mission should be secret. Disguised and travelling on a false passport as Edward Wilson, born on 1 April, he saw the shah and brought him to 'understand and accept' the decision (ibid., 3.41). In 1980, in his last direct service to the government, Wright joined a group of observers of the Rhodesian elections that followed the Lancaster House agreement of the previous December. 
In retirement in Haddenham, Buckinghamshire, the Wrights kept open house for their many friends at their home, Duck Bottom. He became a director of several companies, including Shell, the Chartered (later Standard Chartered) Bank, and Mitchell Cotts (all 1971-81). He was elected an honorary fellow of both St Edmund Hall (1972) and St Antony's College (1975), Oxford. He was chairman of the Iran Society (1976-9; and president, 1989-95), a member of the executive committee of the British Institute for Persian Studies (1973-87; president, 1978-87), a member of the executive committee of the Anglo-Ethiopian Society (1972-7), and a governor of the Overseas Service College, Farnham Castle (1972-86). In 1990 he was awarded the Sir Percy Sykes memorial medal by the Royal Society for Asian Affairs. He was additionally chairman or committee member of some smaller societies or charities, including in 1975 a campaigning group, Haddenham into Europe. He made several lecture tours of North America and India. During this time he made serious contributions to scholarship, notably with two important and admired books, 'The English amongst the Persians' (1977) and 'The Persians amongst the English' (1985). He contributed, jointly with James Morris and Roger Wood, to 'Persia' (1969) and published a collection of essays, 'Britain and Iran, 1790-1980' (Iran Society, 2003). He died at his home in Haddenham, on 18 May 2005, of cancer of the prostate. His funeral took place on 2 June at St Mary's Church, Haddenham. He was survived by his wife, Iona. One of the most distinguished British diplomats of his generation, he remained endearingly modest about his abilities and achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 95840


Ahm, Povl Borge (1926-2005), civil and structural engineer, was born in Aarhus, Denmark, on 26 September 1926. He was educated at the Polyteknisk Laereanstalt in Copenhagen, graduating in 1949. He came to England in 1952 to join the consulting engineers Ove Arup & Partners, which had been established by a fellow Dane, Ove Arup, six years earlier. He remained with that firm for the whole of his working life, becoming a partner in 1965, a director in 1977, and chairman in 1989. 
The year before Ahm joined Arups the firm had been appointed to work with Basil Spence on the new Coventry Cathedral. Spence's winning competition design had been developed without engineering advice, so Ahm and Ove Arup were called upon to devise a structure that would preserve the integrity of his initial concept. The solution was to provide a vaulted ceiling to the nave, consisting of a network of diagonal beams infilled with slatted timbers, carried on slender cruciform columns. The ceiling and columns, which narrow towards the east end of the cathedral, are separate from the roof above, which spans between the outer walls. Other aspects of the cathedral, such as the roof over the baptistry and the main porch, express their structure more explicitly. 
Coventry Cathedral was not consecrated until 1962, by which time Ahm had worked on many other projects. Again with Spence he helped design the first buildings for the University of Sussex and also the British embassy in Rome. With his fellow Dane Arne Jacobsen he worked on St Catherine's College, Oxford (1959-64), producing a geometry of reinforced concrete walls and beams that matches the formality of the college layout. At Smithfield market in London he answered the need for a new column-free market hall by creating a domed concrete shell roof, rising 30 feet from its corners to the centre and mostly only 3 inches thick. Completed in 1963, it was one of the most daring shell structures of its time. 
Ahm married Birgit Moller, whom he had known since childhood, in 1953; they had two sons, Carsten and Peter. In 1962 he and his wife built their own house at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, designed with the help of yet another Dane, Jorn Utzon. It was largely single storey beneath a sloping copper roof, linked to the garden by terraces. Listed grade II by English Heritage, it was described by one critic as 'probably the best modern house in the world' ('Sunday Times'). At the time of its construction, work on Utzon's masterpiece, the Sydney Opera House, was progressing and Ahm was one of the Arup team working on its engineering aspects. 
The collective ethos of the Arup firm discouraged singling out the contribution of individual engineers on a project like the Sydney Opera House. However, Ahm had particular responsibility for the design of the podium on which the building stands, and for the spectacular beams of the concourse roof. The principal sail-like roofs for which the building is famous were first thought of as concrete shells: when eventually it was conceded that a simpler geometry, based on segments of a sphere built from concrete ribs, was the only sensible solution, this owed much to Ahm's work on the concourse beams. Utzon's resignation from the project in 1966 reflected the immense challenges it had posed, in politics and finance as much as design. Ahm was one of those who tried to persuade him to return. 
As an engineer Ahm was known to be a brilliant analyst, but even more a designer eager to explore alternative solutions and to experiment. 'Engineering', he said, 'is really an art, and unless an engineer is able to use his knowledge and expertise in an imaginative and creative way, the whole discipline is not of much use' ('Concrete', Jan 1970, 23). As he rose through the Arup hierarchy Ahm had to take on more administrative responsibility. When another famous cultural icon, the Centre Pompidou in Paris, came the firm's way in 1971 it was members of his team (Edmund Happold, Lennart Grut, and Peter Rice) who led on the design, while he kept an overview on the whole operation. During the same years he helped steer the firm towards bridge design and transport projects, particularly after winning the competition to design the Gateshead viaduct in 1965. His responsibilities extended beyond the firm: he was, for instance, a member of the council of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1972-5 and 1983-6) and chairman of the Association of Consulting Engineers (1992-6). He was made a CBE in 1993 and the same year received the first gold medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers. He received an honorary degree from Warwick University in 1994. 
Ahm was tall, energetic, and self-assured. Among engineers, who are not naturally rhetorical, he stood out as someone who made his presence felt. He enjoyed team sports, and played football for Corinthian Casuals, taking part in the 1956 amateur cup final at Wembley Stadium. He remained with Arups until his retirement in 1992. He died at his home, 44 West Common Way, Harpenden, on 15 May 2005, of cancer of the oesophagus. He was survived by his wife, Birgit, and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 95845


Wiles, Maurice Frank (1923-2005), theologian, was born at 24 Dingwall Gardens, Golders Green, Middlesex, on 17 October 1923, the third and youngest son of Sir Harold Herbert Wiles (1892-1965), civil servant, and his wife, Stella, daughter of the Revd J. H. Wilkinson of West Grinstead, Wiltshire. His father served as deputy secretary at the Ministry of Labour and National Service from 1946 to 1955, and was knighted KBE in 1947. Wiles was educated at Tonbridge School, then gained an open scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge, to read classics. At school he had participated in the evangelical children's special service camps and the varsities and public schools camps at Iwerne Minster in Dorset. In 1942 he was called up, learning Japanese, and working on military codes at Bletchley Park. He went to Christ's in 1945, changing to read philosophy, despite a conversation with the evangelical leader John Stott, who tried to get him to change his mind. He gained a second-class degree in moral sciences and a first in theology. At Christ's he came under the influence of the chaplain, Ian Ramsey, later bishop of Durham, who had sought to combine theology and linguistic philosophy, and he slowly moved away from his initial enthusiastic conservative evangelicalism. A long-standing friendship with C. F. D. (Charlie) Moule showed him that evangelicalism could be combined with a critical approach to the tradition. Nevertheless he remained thoroughly orthodox, moving to the evangelical theological college, Ridley Hall, in Cambridge to prepare for ordination in the Church of England. He was ordained deacon in 1950, and served a curacy at St George's, Stockport, under Wilfrid Garlick, a well-known broadcaster. On 1 April the same year he married, at All Saints' Church, Lindfield, Sussex, Patricia Margaret (Paddy) Mowll, the 22-year-old daughter of Robert James Mowll, schoolmaster. They had two sons and one daughter. 
After his curacy Wiles commenced his academic career as chaplain at Ridley Hall from 1952 to 1955. In preparation for a Cambridge prize essay he began his detailed studies of Origen and other patristic thinkers, which led to two important monographs on early Christian hermeneutics, 'The Spiritual Gospel: the Interpretation of the Fourth Gospel in the Early Church' (1960) and 'The Divine Apostle: the Interpretation of St Paul's Epistles in the Early Church' (1967). After a period as lecturer in 'New Testament' studies at the University College of Ibadan in Nigeria (1955-9), he was appointed dean of Clare College and university lecturer in divinity at Cambridge, succeeding Henry Chadwick, another long-standing friend. Still regarded as wholly orthodox, he was appointed by Geoffrey Fisher, archbishop of Canterbury, as an examining chaplain, a role he continued under Michael Ramsey. At Cambridge he published his first general work and highly regarded text-book, 'The Christian Fathers' (1966). 
Wiles was an ardent enthusiast for cricket, regularly playing for the Oxford diocese as well as the village of Stonor. It was perhaps a sense of fair play, combined with a liberal protestant approach to study, that meant that he was able to approach early Christianity in a way which refused to use the labels of orthodoxy and heresy. By the mid-1960s he was beginning to recognize that serious study of the early church 'had turned out to pose much more serious questions to the traditional understanding of the faith than I had previously realised' ('Scholarship and Faith', 145). As early as 1962 he had published an article entitled 'In defence of Arius', and the following year a highly critical discussion of Cyprian (a saint with many Anglican adherents). He developed a keen interest in the relevance of early Christian doctrine to the post-Enlightenment world, publishing what was probably his most widely read book, 'The Making of Christian Doctrine', in 1967. In this he sought to explain patristic theology in its own terms rather than in the light of later tradition: 'We ought not... to begin with any preconceived theory concerning the pattern of doctrinal development. We can only proceed by a patient study of the historical evidence' (p. 15). In the same year he became professor of Christian doctrine at King's College, London. His inaugural lecture, 'Looking into the sun', and other writings including 'Does Christology rest on a mistake?', both of which were republished in 'Working Papers in Doctrine' (1976), typified his approach to doctrine, which sought to test commonly held traditions. 
In 1970 Wiles was appointed by the crown as regius professor of divinity and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, where again he was able to combine ecclesiastical, pastoral, and preaching duties with the life of an academic. He did not appear hampered by his church position and continued to explore the boundaries of theology, publishing his Hulsean lectures, 'The Remaking of Christian Doctrine', in 1974, which noted the 'continually changing' (p. 2) character of doctrine and its restatement in terms acceptable to the modern world. He was appointed as chairman of the Church of England doctrine commission, which produced its controversial report, 'Christian Believing', in 1976; this was, he noted, 'not an easy report to write' (p. xi) since its contributors could not reach complete consensus. Afterwards Donald Coggan, archbishop of Canterbury, reorganized the commission, removing Wiles as chairman. The following year he was embroiled in the controversy over 'The Myth of God Incarnate' (edited by John Hick), to which he had contributed an essay calling for the metaphorical reinterpretation of ancient sources. He remained a loyal churchman, who understood the Christian life as 'commitment to the struggle to interpret and to live by the confused images that we are enabled to glimpse with the help of what our predecessors have seen' ('Worship and theology', in D. W. Hardy and P. H. Sedgwick, eds., 'The Weight of Glory', 1991, 77). His introductory lectures became the basis for his widely read textbook, 'What is Theology?' (1976). 
Wiles was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1981, and shortly afterwards produced a small and personal book, 'Faith and the Mystery of God' (1982), which won the Collins religious book award, and which saw mystery as a warning 'against the speciously attractive answers that could dissolve it' and as a way of encouraging 'us to continue with the looking, for we can never tell whether we have reached the limits of human understanding' (p. 129). More philosophical themes were approached in his Bampton lectures at Oxford in 1986, which were published the same year as 'God's Action in the World', and which again questioned the established orthodoxy. He was widely in demand as a lecturer, and among others gave the Kellogg lectures at the Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1977, which provided the basis for much of his collection 'Explorations in Theology 4' (1979). The breadth of his interests was shown in his judicious Ferguson lectures delivered at Manchester University and published as 'Christian Theology and Inter-Religious Dialogue' (1992). For much of his time in Oxford he also held the chair of the Oxford patristic conference, and helped to edit a number of its collections. 
After retirement in 1991 Wiles continued to edit the 'Journal of Theological Studies', which he had taken over in 1985, until its centenary in 1999, and was keen to promote the work of younger and less-established scholars. For his seventieth birthday in 1993 he was presented with an affectionately critical Festschrift ('The Making and Remaking of Christian Doctrine', edited by Sarah Coakley and David Pailin). In an active retirement he continued his research into the history of doctrine, publishing a scholarly account of the development of Arianism into modern times in 'Archetypal Heresy: Arianism through the Centuries' (1996), which was inspired by William Whiston, a predecessor at Clare who was dismissed for maintaining the 'Arian heresy' in the eighteenth century. This book adopted Wiles's customary approach to the study of history which sought to 'free us from the restrictive shackles that that history is liable to impose upon us' (p. 186). Three years later, at the suggestion of his wife, he published a popular work of apologetics, 'Reason to Believe'. His final book, 'Scholarship and Faith: a Tale of Two Grandfathers' (2003) was a fascinating account of his two clergyman grandfathers, one a Strict and Particular Baptist, and the other an Anglican, which traced the conflicts between academic study and the Christian faith. It also contained a brief autobiographical chapter. 
Although he was a naturally shy and private man most at home among his talented family, Wiles was also a gifted teacher and lecturer, as well as a respected and careful supervisor. He was immensely courteous, open-minded, and generous to people of all opinions, and had an unusual diffidence and humility. His theology was often developed in dialogue with friends, which was exemplified by a collection of articles mainly from Festschriften: 'A Shared Search: Doing Theology in Conversation with One's Friends' (1994). His life work was perhaps best summarized at the end of 'Reason to Believe': the 'faith by which a Christian lives is fully compatible with a continuing search to understand better what the content of that faith should be' (p. 119). In his final years he suffered from prostate cancer, from which he died at his home, 11 Bay Tree Close, Iffley, Oxford, on 3 June 2005. He was survived by his wife, Paddy, and their three children. His son Sir Andrew John Wiles ('b'. 1953), mathematician, was best known for proving Fermat's last theorem. 


@@@@@


doc= 95848


Keatley, Patrick Crawford (1920-2005), journalist, was born in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, on 28 October 1920, the son of William Mahaffy Keatley, and his wife, Hilda Maud, 'nee' Sinclair. His parents were from Northern Ireland. His father, a schoolteacher, was visiting Canada when the First World War broke out and fought throughout with the Canadians in Europe before returning to Canada. His mother taught gymnastics. Keatley remained a Canadian citizen throughout his life. 
Keatley was educated at Upper Canada College in Toronto and then took a degree in history and English at the University of British Columbia. He developed an interest in the Commonwealth from one of his lecturers, the English constitutional lawyer Ivor Jennings, who held a visiting professorship at the University of British Columbia in 1938-9. After graduating Keatley worked for the 'Vancouver Sun' and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Then, in 1952, he went to Britain as a Commonwealth Press Union fellow. The experience transformed his life. He was attached to the 'Manchester Guardian' and scored early journalistic fame with a story on the trade in live horses shipped from Britain for slaughter in mainland Europe. He disguised himself as an American meat trader, strapped a camera to his leg, and travelled with the animals. His articles were reprinted as a pamphlet. The prime minister, Winston Churchill, summoned him to his presence and said: 'You have caused me a lot of trouble, young man' (private information). He returned briefly to the 'Vancouver Sun', but soon went back to 'The Guardian', which posted him to London. On 10 September 1955, at Chelsea Old Church, he married (Prudence) Eve Burgess, a 23-year-old BBC producer and later press secretary to the archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie. She was the daughter of Henry Burgess, manufacturer. They had a son and two daughters. 
Keatley served for more than thirty years as Commonwealth correspondent, then diplomatic correspondent, of 'The Guardian'. All the time he remained a regular broadcaster. He was never lost for words, and his work for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, continued over forty years, soon led him to become a favourite with the BBC World Service. He took part almost daily in one programme or another, gave a weekly Commonwealth commentary on the World Service, and for thirty years broadcast for Canadian radio a newsletter about Britain. 
Keatley began his career in London at a time when independence movements were gathering pace and the empire was transforming itself into the Commonwealth. Events in southern Africa -- the front line in the struggle for black rule -- occupied the front pages almost daily. Keatley was not just an astute reporter of the diplomatic developments in London; he covered the fast moving changes on the spot. The dominance in the 1960s of African coverage meant that he came to know especially well liberation leaders like Julius Nyerere, Kenneth Kaunda, and Joshua Nkomo, as well as British ministers involved, including Iain Macleod, David Owen, Alan Lennox-Boyd, and Sir Alec Douglas-Home. He made a special study of the unfolding fiasco of the Central African Federation and in 1963 produced what became a standard book on it, 'The Politics of Partnership'. 
In early 1965, a few months after China had conducted its first nuclear weapons test, Keatley caused a stir by writing about the possibility of India's becoming a nuclear power. He described the growing anxieties in key ministries in the Pakistan government, whose foreign minister was then Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. He quoted Bhutto as saying that if India got the bomb then Pakistan would have to get, or buy, one, 'even if we have to eat grass' ('The Guardian', 11 March 1965). These were tense times. In August-September that year India and Pakistan were at war. Sometimes the danger was more personal. In the 1970s on a visit to Uganda during Idi Amin's rule Keatley stood in a crowd listening to a police band concert when the president spotted him, seized the conductor's baton, and announced: 'My friend Patrick will do the next number.' Keatley pretended a coughing fit and managed to slip away. Later that day the queen's counsel who led the Uganda bar advised him to leave the country at once. 
Keatley was a likeable and always chatty man, finding it easy to connect with people of every station. He was inquisitive, as becomes a good journalist, and engaged with prime ministers and heads of state as matter-of-factly as with junior ministers, MPs, and diplomats. Punctuality was not his strong point. He was rarely on time for an appointment. Radio producers, interviewers, and news editors often came near to despair. He would appear before them moments before he was due on air or deliver his copy for 'The Guardian' right up against the deadline. He was even late for appointments with cabinet ministers. No one knew how he got away with it, but he always did. 
Keatley was hugely energetic and throughout his career was also an activist in helping fellow journalists. More than that, he was profoundly interested in raising their professional competence and status. He was a founder and first president of the Diplomatic and Commonwealth Writers Association in 1960, and co-founder of the Commonwealth Journalists Association and the Zambia Society. In London he was a wise and committed member of the Royal Commonwealth Society's library committee, offering much support to its librarians. He also served on the society's central council for several years. He was an eager attender and speaker at academic conferences until near the end of his life. He retired from 'The Guardian' in 1985 and in 1996 moved with his wife to Somerset. He died on 9 May 2005 at his home, Manor Farm House, Lower Street, West Chinnock, Somerset, of fibrosing alveolitis and was buried on the 17th at West Chinnock. He was survived by his wife, Eve, and two of their children, Mark and Charlotte, his younger daughter, Victoria, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 95849


Page, Sir Frederick William (1917-2005), aircraft designer and industrialist, was born on 20 February 1917 in Wimbledon, Surrey, the only child of Richard Page, a chauffeur then serving in the army, and his wife, Ellen Sarah, 'nee' Potter (died 1960). His father was killed on active service in France during the First World War shortly before his birth. Brought up in humble circumstances by his widowed mother, he won a scholarship to Rutlish Grammar School at Merton, Surrey, before gaining a Surrey county major scholarship and entrance to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1935. Reading mathematics and aeronautics, he achieved the rare distinction of starred first-class honours in the mechanical sciences tripos. Ambitious from his mid-teens to design aircraft, in 1938 he joined Hawker Aircraft at Kingston upon Thames, working under Sydney Camm, designer of the famous Second World War Hurricane fighter. There he worked during the war on the Hurricane, Typhoon, and Tempest aircraft, designing structures, control systems, and high-speed aerofoil sections. On 6 July 1940 he married Kathleen Edith de Courcy (1916-1993), a 24-year-old ARP warden, and daughter of Albert Edwin de Courcy, post office official. They had three sons, Gordon, Stephen, and Alan, and a daughter, Jennifer. 
Such were Page's demonstrated abilities that in 1945 he was invited to join W. E. W. (Teddy) Petter's newly created aircraft design team at English Electric in Preston, Lancashire. Over the next thirty years Page was to play a leading role in both design and management in the very advanced military combat aircraft programmes emanating from what, largely under his inspired direction and guidance, became the most accomplished military aircraft organization in Europe. The initiating project there was a jet bomber replacement for the wartime de Havilland Mosquito, in the conception of which he was centrally involved and which was realized as the highly successful Canberra, Britain's first jet bomber. First flown in May 1949, it proceeded swiftly through development and into production. 
Now located at nearby Warton, Page was appointed assistant chief designer later in 1949 and, after the resignation of Petter, he was made chief engineer in 1950 at the age of only thirty-two, and played a major role in bringing the Canberra into operational service. Serving with the Royal Air Force from May 1951 and with fourteen overseas air forces in twenty-one variants, and capturing twenty-two world distance and altitude records, the total production of this aircraft ran to 1376 units, including licensed production in the United States and Australia, the last example continuing in service with the RAF until 2007. In parallel Page guided Petter's first studies of the P-1A twin-engined supersonic research aircraft initiated in August 1948, incorporating a 60 degree wing sweepback. The P-1A was first flown in August 1954, becoming the first British (and European) aircraft to achieve sustained supersonic speeds. His team then went on to evolve this aircraft into the Lightning supersonic fighter for the RAF. First flown in April 1957, the Lightning became the first British aircraft to exceed Mach 2 (twice the speed of sound, i.e. 1400 m.p.h.) in level flight. No other aircraft design team anywhere in the world made the transition from subsonic to bisonic flight in one leap (while also incorporating a complex weapons system). The Lightning entered operational service in June 1961, and a total of 340 were produced in six variants for the RAF and for export. Most significantly, the Lightning formed the basis of a series of major contracts in the Middle East, notably for Saudi Arabia, and the starting point for the huge exports of military equipment to that country that followed. 
In 1957 Page's team began studies to meet the RAF's general operational requirement GOR339 for a supersonic successor to the Canberra -- the bisonic tactical, strike, and reconnaissance TSR2 -- also intended as a 'golden welding flux' in facilitating the concentration of the UK's then twenty-two airframe and six engine companies into three and two large units respectively. The eventual government contract was placed in March 1959 with Vickers-Armstrongs at Weybridge, Surrey, with English Electric as a 50 per cent partner. Accordingly, when English Electric Aviation was formed that year Page was appointed chief executive. The TSR2 programme was effectively the means for the creation of the government-enforced merger of the two companies, together with Bristol Aircraft, to form the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC) in January 1960. However, this very advanced and complex programme was dogged by excessively demanding equipment changes and performance increases that also meant it was beset by corresponding delays and cost escalation that in turn greatly exacerbated its political vulnerability. Although the first example had flown successfully in September 1964, and essentially demonstrated its formidable performance capability, and Page had belatedly been given overall programme responsibility, it was precipitously cancelled by the incoming Labour government in the budget of April 1965, just as quantity production was about to begin. What would have constituted around half the forward military aircraft workload of the new joint company until well into the 1970s was thus lost at a stroke, presenting Page with the daunting management challenge of reconstructing the seriously depleted Warton workforce to maintain its nationally essential core competence. 
By mid-1965 an inter-governmental agreement with France was sealed to give the go-ahead to a joint programme with Dassault-Breguet and a management company, Sepecat, for a new supersonic fighter-bomber and advanced trainer, later named Jaguar and first flown in France in September 1968, Page was appointed co-chairman of Sepecat, with a French counterpart. A total of 200 aircraft each was produced for the RAF and for the French air force, and ninety-four for export by BAC to Ecuador, Oman, and India, where Page also played a leading part in the establishment of the licenced production of an initial batch of seventy-six Jaguars, which was subsequently augmented by further large batches. He later also became chairman of Panavia, the Anglo-German-Italian joint company formed in 1969 in Munich with Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm and Fiat to produce the supersonic, variable wing sweepback, multi-role combat Tornado. First flown by BAC in August 1974, 872 were jointly produced for the three home countries, with a further 120 exported to Saudi Arabia in the al-Yamamah programme. 
In 1967 Page had become chairman of the BAC military aircraft division. Five years later he was appointed BAC's managing director (aircraft), with the added responsibility as chairman of BAC's commercial aircraft division of rationalizing the company's then struggling commercial aircraft portfolio and rebalancing the company's overall aircraft work loading. In this, his perceptive and imaginative industrial management strategies and techniques in financial and risk management, as well as technical and multiple programme management, were a key ingredient in the run-up to the long-threatened government edict nationalizing the aircraft industry. In particular, his earlier developed 'matrix' management structure -- wherein the corporate functional control lines were meshed with the multiple programme operational lines -- proved to be consistently effective. Eventually implemented in 1977, bringing together BAC, Hawker Siddeley Aviation, and Scottish Aviation, nationalization resulted in the creation of British Aerospace, of whose aircraft group Page was appointed chairman and chief executive. His final appointment, this presented him with a further substantial managerial challenge in initiating the progressive return of the company to private ownership in 1982. 
Appointed CBE in 1961 and knighted in 1979, Page was also made a fellow of the Royal Society (1978), the Fellowship of Engineering, later the Royal Academy of Engineering (1977), an honorary fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society (1980), and received numerous other honours, including the British gold medal for aeronautics in 1962 for his 'outstanding practical contribution to aircraft design', and the gold medal of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1974. Formally retiring from the board of British Aerospace in June 1983, he then served on the councils of the Royal Society and the Royal Academy of Engineering, which included a two-and-a-half-year study of acidic emissions, and the council of the Royal Institution, before fully retiring in 1990. He died of myelodysplasia on 29 May 2005 at Avon Reach nursing home, Farm Lane, Mudeford, Dorset. He was survived by his four children, the eldest of whom, Gordon, also became an aeronautical engineer and chairman of Cobham plc, a specialist aerospace and defence equipment company. 
Of outstanding ability and integrity, Page -- affectionately known to his professional colleagues as Freddie -- was one of the most highly accomplished and highly regarded British aircraft designers and industrial leaders of his generation. Entering the industry during the extreme pressures of wartime expediency, and in the immediate post-war years becoming centrally engaged in the pioneering of the jet age and the supersonic era of military aircraft, his forty-five-year aviation career spanned some of the most demanding times and situations in British and world affairs and for the aeronautical industry in particular -- and throughout which he lived out his teenage ambition to the full. Pioneering and inspiring a generation of leading-edge aviation technologies and a progressive and innovative industrial management style and techniques that in many respects were well ahead of his contemporaries, he went on to become one of the key figures in the large-scale integration of the British aircraft industry and in international collaboration in Europe. All of this also resulted in the provision of hugely valuable high-calibre employment and commercial and export benefits for Britain and Europe. 


@@@@@


doc= 95851


May, Pamela (1917-2005), ballet dancer, was born on 30 May 1917 in San Fernando, Trinidad, the daughter of Reginald Henry May, civil engineer. She moved to England with her parents when she was four. After local schooling and some early ballet lessons, then courses at the Royal Academy of Dancing, she was admitted, aged sixteen, to the ballet school founded by Ninette de Valois as a feeder for her newly formed company at Sadler's Wells Theatre in London. De Valois was always on the lookout for new talent, and never more so than when her young company lost its prima ballerina, Alicia Markova, who left in 1935 to lead a new company with the dancer Anton Dolin. During her training May caught the eye of de Valois, who first thought to groom her as Markova's successor. That distinction was bestowed instead on Margaret Hookham, later known as Margot Fonteyn. May became Fonteyn's close associate and lifelong friend, usually alternating with her in the principal roles in the main ballet classics, and sharing accommodation with her on tour. 
May was already getting her first experience of solo roles, dancing the Prelude in 'Les sylphides' while still a student paying her course fees at the Royal Academy of Dancing. Her formal debut from the 'corps de ballet' was in the prominent 'pas de trois' in 'Swan Lake' in its first production by the Sadler's Wells Company in 1934. Up to this point she had been billed in programmes as Doris May, but de Valois, who liked her solo dancers to have mellifluous names, decreed that Doris should choose a different first name. According to Mary Clarke's history of the company, 'after weeks of indecision', Doris decided that she would call herself Angela May and went to de Valois to announce her great decision, only to be told cheerfully, 'It's too late, dear. The programmes have been printed and you are down as Pamela' (Clarke, 80). So Pamela May she became for the rest of her long professional career. In her 'Invitation to the Ballet' (1937), de Valois described her as 'beautifully made, a graceful and talented handful'. May quickly captivated audiences with her lyrical gaiety, stunning glamour, and immense charm. 
From the first May was especially admired in ballet's equivalent of theatrical soubrette roles, notably the spirited and wily Swanilda in 'Coppelia'. Indeed, Sir Peter Wright, director laureate of the Birmingham Royal Ballet, said that it was her performance in this role that motivated him to become a dancer: 'She always made dancing so exciting and such fun that I longed to be up there on the stage with her' ('The Stage', 16 June 2005). Conscious of her femininity, she projected immense vitality across the footlights. According to several reports she favoured relaxation from the stage by engaging in strip-poker with her fellow players including, on occasion, Frederick Ashton, the dancers Robert Helpmann and Michael Somes, and the music director Constant Lambert. Yet at the same time May developed a purity of classical line and style that led Mary Clarke, in her account of the Sadler's Wells Ballet, to describe her as 'the most purely classical of English dancers' (Clarke, 204). Some of this quality no doubt derived from an interlude in Paris in 1935 when Fonteyn's mother, prompted by friendship rather than potential rivalry, escorted her daughter, with May and June Brae (another prominent teenage ballerina in the company, with whom May had been paired as the Red Girls in Ashton's 'Les patineurs'), to Paris to take classes with eminent emigre Russian ballerinas from the former St Petersburg Maryinsky company, Lubov Egorova, Mathilde Kschessinskaya, and Olga Preobrazhenska. This the girls managed to do without exceeding their very limited funds. 
Another aspect of May's accomplishment was her skill in responding to new choreography. She had already shared with Fonteyn the role of the voluptuous Creole Girl in Ashton's 'A Day in a Southern Port' (1931, later called 'Rio Grande') and he featured her again in 'Le baiser de la fee' (1935) and 'Apparitions' (1936). De Valois cast her in a solo role in 'The Gods go a-Begging' (1936) and the next year gave her a created role as the warmly supportive Red Queen in her new ballet, 'Checkmate'. Also that year May was praised for her appealing account of the forlorn Violet forever pursuing the timidly elusive Ernest in Ashton's 'A Wedding Bouquet'. In his 'Horoscope' (1938) the poetry of her curving 'ports de bras' in the role of the Moon made a lasting impression. Other roles that brought her to wide attention included that of the eighteenth-century coquette Mlle Theodore in de Valois's 'The Prospect before Us' (1940), a title of some irony as the shades of the Second World War closed in. Also in 1940 Ashton created his barefoot 'Dante Sonata', where May was given a memorably anguished solo, 'rocking back and forth in frustration and grief' (Anderson, 70). This wartime ballet was successfully revived with Pamela May's help by Birmingham Royal Ballet in 2001. Meanwhile the Sadler's Wells Company had in 1937 paid one of its regular visits to the Arts Theatre, Cambridge, where the prettiest girls were often invited to stay on to attend the May balls and where that year, by coincidence, both May and June Brae met future husbands at the same party. On 25 May 1940 May married, at All Souls' Church, Marylebone, Painton Sidney Cowen (1917/18-1942), a lieutenant in the Royal Marines, and son of Walter Painton Cowen, mining engineer. After her marriage May danced the beautiful Euridice in de Valois's 'Orpheus and Euridice' (1941) and a sensuous duet, startling for its time, with Somes (a former lover) in Ashton's 'The Wanderer' (1941). May took leave from the company to have a son, also named Painton, whose father was reported killed in action three weeks after the baby was born. 
Eventually May felt again the call of the stage and returned to Sadler's Wells, first with the opera company, dancing in the circus divertissement of Smetana's 'The Bartered Bride'. She subsequently responded to an invitation from de Valois to rejoin the ballet company, but found a lack of stamina inhibited her attempt at the full-length 'Swan Lake', which she then split instead with a newly rising young star, Moira Shearer. As May regained her strength she was once more cast in ballerina roles, and when the company reopened the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in 1946 with its production of 'The Sleeping Beauty' in a run of continuous performances, May alternated night after night with Fonteyn as Aurora (as she did again during the company's groundbreaking first season in New York in 1949). Ashton too was keen to involve her in his new plans, and he took May to possibly the peak of her career when he cast her with Fonteyn and Shearer as the three ballerinas in his 'Symphonic Variations' (1946), his first new ballet after his return from war service, which many consider his greatest work. His celebrated designer, Sophie Fedorovich, took May aside during rehearsals and said to her, 'Margot is dark, Moira is red and you are... mouse!' (Anderson, 93), persuading her to become blonde for more effective contrast at the first performance, a colouring May then retained. Ashton followed up May's success in this role by creating for her the role of the Fairy Godmother in 'Cinderella' (1948), Ashton's first three-act ballet. 
On 3 August 1946 May married Charles Howard Gordon, a civil servant, the host of the Cambridge party for the dancers six years previously. They had a daughter, Caroline, and May found lasting happiness in her marriage and in family life. After her marriage she enjoyed continuing success in the Royal Ballet for several years more as she moved into mature character roles like the Princess-Mother in 'Swan Lake' and the Queen in 'The Sleeping Beauty'. To all of these she brought an impressive dignity and forceful presence, and she was highly praised for preserving the style of traditional classic mime. 
In 1954, after her retirement from the stage, May was a teacher at the Royal Ballet School until 1977. Her students respected and admired her authority and her meticulous care in the preparation of roles, which she liked to explore in depth, as well as her assurance of technique. She received the highest distinction in the British dance profession, the Queen Elizabeth II coronation award from the Royal Academy of Dancing, in 1976, and became a governor of the Royal Ballet companies and vice-president of the Royal Academy of Dancing. She was appointed OBE in 1998. She was a close and sympathetic companion to de Valois in the latter's failing health. She herself moved from London to Birmingham to be near her daughter. She died on 6 June 2005 at Selly Oak Hospital, Birmingham following a stroke. A service of thanksgiving was held at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, on 19 September 2005. She was survived by both children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95866


Whyte, James Aitken (1920-2005), Church of Scotland minister, was born at 15 Pitt Street, Leith, on 28 January 1920, the second son of Andrew Whyte, produce broker, and his wife, Barbara Janet Pittillo, 'nee' Aitken. He was educated at Daniel Stewart's College, Edinburgh, and Edinburgh University, gaining first-class honours in philosophy in 1942. On 4 July the same year, at Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh, he married Elisabeth Wilson Mill (died 1988), a 21-year-old schoolteacher, and daughter of George Scott Mill, Church of Scotland minister and missionary in India. They had two sons and one daughter. Whyte remained at Edinburgh to train for ministry in the Church of Scotland, and was ordained in 1945. He served as a chaplain to the forces until in 1948 he was called to be minister of Dunollie Road Church in Oban, where he served until 1954. From 1954 to 1958 he was minister of Mayfield North Church in Edinburgh. He was then, until his retirement in 1987, professor of practical theology and Christian ethics at the University of St Andrews, where he also served terms as dean of the faculty of divinity (1968-72) and principal of St Mary's College (1978-82). He served on many church committees, and in 1988-9 he was moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. 
As an academic Whyte built up a reputation as a dynamic teacher who was passionately committed to the Scottish tradition that the university is the proper place to educate and form ministers. He published little, even in the area of his most serious theological inquiry -- the design and ordering of church buildings according to the Reformed tradition. He published two books of sermons, 'Laughter and Tears: Thoughts on Faith in Face of Suffering' (1993) and 'The Dream and the Grace: Sermons on Healthy and Unhealthy Religion' (2001). In the former was printed the remarkable sermon he delivered in 1989 at the memorial service for the victims of the Lockerbie air disaster the previous year. Whyte was himself grieving the recent death of his first wife, Elisabeth, and was able to grapple honestly and effectively with the grief and pain and anger that those involved, and many others as well, suffered. Addressing those who sought vengeance, Whyte declared, 'Justice yes, retaliation no. For if we move in the way of retaliation we move right outside of the fellowship of Christ's sufferings, outside of the divine consolation. There is nothing that way but bitterness and the destruction of our own humanity' (p. 94). These words reverberated around the world, and may have helped to inhibit hasty armed reactions. Among the memorable sermons in Whyte's second volume was that preached at the memorial service for the sixteen pupils and their teacher who were killed by Thomas Hamilton in their primary school in Dunblane in 1996. 
As moderator Whyte presided over the general assembly when the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, addressed the assembly, claiming rather stridently that the policies of her government were based on Christian truths. She was received politely but suspiciously by the assembly, and at the end of her address the moderator distanced himself, and by implication, the church, from her message by giving her two books produced in the Scottish church -- a study of housing especially for poor people, and a study of the Christian principles that should inform the distribution of wealth, income, and benefits in a decent society. 
In an earlier general assembly, in 1984, Whyte had also played a major role. Two men who had been in prison for serious offences, embezzlement and murder, had felt a call to the ministry in the Church of Scotland, and now asked the church to test their call. This, understandably, aroused a great deal of controversy in the church, and the matter was taken to the assembly, where a vigorous debate ensued. The opponents of allowing the two men to be ordained claimed that if this were done the moral standing and the respectability of the whole church would be undermined. The debate seemed to be going strongly in the direction of denying the possibility of ordination to the two petitioners when Whyte rose and in a remarkable and moving speech declared that the real issue was whether the church really believed in the forgiveness of sins. This speech swung the assembly, and the two men were allowed to proceed to ordination. An Edinburgh prison chaplain reported that a few days after this assembly decision a prisoner who was an elder of the kirk came to him in tears and said that his wife had visited him and told him that last Sunday she had gone to church for the first time since his conviction because, she said, 'I now realise that the Church believes in the forgiveness of sins' (private information). 
James Whyte was the very epitome of the practical theologian, deeply involved simultaneously in the work of the church and the academy, and covering in his lectures a wide field of pastoral care and counselling, and a range of ethical topics, as well as liturgy and homiletics. In his theology and his practice he was strongly Presbyterian, and although he devoted much energy to inter-church issues, he became increasingly suspicious of the ecumenical movement, and in particular of any proposals for reconciliation or unity with Episcopalians. He was made an honorary LLD of Dundee University in 1981, an honorary DD of St Andrews in 1989, and an honorary DUniv of Stirling in 1994. On 26 June 1993, at St Leonard's Chapel, St Andrews, he married his second wife, Ishbel Christina Rathie, 'nee' Macaulay ('b'. 1925), a former schoolteacher, widow of William Rathie, and daughter of Alexander Macaulay, schoolteacher. He died at his home, 13 Hope Street, St Andrews, on 17 June 2005, of cancer, and was survived by his wife and the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 95873


Donaldson, (Charles) William (1935-2005), writer and impresario, was born in Sunningdale, Berkshire, on 4 January 1935, the son of Charles Glen Donaldson (1904-1956), shipowner, and his wife, Elizabeth (Betty), 'nee' Stockley (died 1955). His father was co-chairman of the Donaldson Line, a family shipping firm established as Donaldson Brothers in 1854, which owned a fleet of nineteen passenger and cargo ships. Although the company was based in Glasgow he had moved south five years after marrying Elizabeth Stockley in 1927. For complicated psychological, and less complicated comical reasons, Donaldson was later to portray his mother as an overbearing snob. The truth was rather different: she was a loving, occasionally indulgent mother to her two children, Eleanor Jane and Charles (as Donaldson was known at the time). 
From 1942 Donaldson attended Woodcote House preparatory school, where he became a boarder in 1944 at the age of nine. By the time he went to Winchester College in 1948 he had become known as William, or Willie. He was remembered by old Wykehamists with varying degrees of fondness as a restless and subversive figure who had great charm but also a well-developed talent for disruption. When Lord Wavell inspected the college corps, it was Donaldson who right-turned and quick-marched, while the rest of his house platoon turned left. He did his national service in the submarines, developing an intense friendship with a fellow old Wykehamist, Julian Mitchell, with whom he shared a passion for ballet, the arts, and intellectual discussion. Mitchell already knew that he wanted to be a writer; Donaldson's ambition was to be a ballet critic. In April 1955 the two sailors travelled to Paris vowing to lose their virginity. After a week the mission was accomplished after a fashion but, on his return to London, Donaldson was summoned to Sunningdale. There he was told that his mother had been killed in a car crash near Winchester. The tragedy was particularly devastating to Donaldson's father who effectively gave up on life, staying at home and drinking heavily. He died less than two years later. 
Now rich, Donaldson went to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where his most notable achievement was to set up and edit, with Julian Mitchell, who was at Oxford, a literary magazine called 'Gemini' whose contributors included Sylvia Plath, Ted Hughes, and Geoffrey Hill. Meanwhile his personal life was becoming complicated. While attending Ascot and smart parties in the expected way, even becoming engaged to a beautiful, tennis-playing debutante, Sonia Iris Avory (daughter of Edward Raymond Avory, stockbroker), in his last year at Cambridge, he spent increasing amounts of time in the company of the girls he was truly attracted to -- those who plied their trade around Curzon Street. 'I knew that I was a pervert when I was twenty', he said years later (Blacker, 48). He nevertheless married Sonia Avory, at Holy Trinity Church, Brompton, on 17 July 1958. She was then aged twenty. 
On leaving Cambridge, Donaldson became a theatrical producer. His first enterprise, an atom bomb satire by John Bird called 'Here Is the News', was a brave and expensive failure but Donald Langdon, agent to Peter Cook, was sufficiently impressed by Donaldson's nerve to offer him another satire, 'Beyond the Fringe' (1961), which became a huge hit in the West End and on Broadway. Characteristically, Donaldson finessed failure out of triumph, investing what money he had made in a series of original, eccentric, money-losing revues. Although he was among the first to recognize the talent of Spike Milligan, Marty Feldman, Terry Jones, and Michael Palin, he was more or less broke by 1964 and definitively bankrupt by 1966. 
Donaldson's personal life was equally eventful. For the first part of the 1960s he lived the life of a typical wealthy, fun-loving bachelor of the time. Unfortunately he was married. In 1960 Sonia gave birth to his son, Charlie. The marriage ended in divorce in 1965. For a while Donaldson lived with the actress Sarah Miles ('b'. 1941), a period interrupted when he moved out, soon becoming engaged to the young American singer Carly Simon ('b'. 1945). When Simon returned to America to prepare for marriage, he revived his relationship with Miles. The relationship was again short-lived. In 1967, broke and on the run from creditors, Donaldson travelled around the country with Claire Gordon (1941-2015), an actress. They were married on 1 September 1967. The following year, after the death of a grandmother, Donaldson received his last family bequest, which he spent on buying model agencies and throwing famously exotic, drug-fuelled, and debauched parties at the flat in Ranelagh Gardens, Chelsea, where they lived. 
After one final theatrical disaster, a production of Oscar Panizza's 'The Council of Love' (1970) that was unsuccessfully sued for blasphemy, Donaldson debunked to Ibiza, where he spent what money he had left on a glass-bottomed boat called (coincidentally) 'Capitan-Wylly'. His relationship with Gordon broke down during this period, although they were not finally divorced until 1975. In Ibiza Donaldson contacted a colonel's daughter who had become a successful call-girl. In October 1972 he returned to England to move in with the woman he called Emma Jane Crampton. Surrounded by a wealth of comic material, Donaldson began to write, reworking the events of his life in the form of semi-fiction, with himself as the fall guy and villain. 'Both the Ladies and the Gentlemen', whose first line was 'Living in a brothel isn't everything it is cracked up to be', was published in 1975 to some favourable reviews. By this time, Crampton had been replaced in Donaldson's affections by his former secretary Cherry Jane Hatrick (daughter of David Lindsay Hatrick, production engineer), with whom he lived at 139 Elm Park Mansions, off the Fulham Road in Chelsea, for several years. 
In 1980 Donaldson's most successful book, 'The Henry Root Letters', was published. Inspired by an American book, Don Novello's 'The Lazlo Letters' (1977), it took the form of a series of letters (often accompanied by a $1 note) written to politicians, policemen, and media stars by a vulgar and ferociously right-wing wet-fish merchant, many of which received gratifyingly vain and stupid replies. The book became one of the great best-sellers of the decade. Briefly fashionable, Donaldson was the first gossip columnist of the 'Mail on Sunday' and replaced Julian Barnes as restaurant critic of 'The Tatler'. There was a second book of Root letters and 'Henry Root's World of Knowledge' (1982), an application of the idea behind Flaubert's dictionary of received ideas to Thatcher's Britain. 
For the rest of his life Donaldson regularly wrote comic volumes -- 'toilet books', as he called them (Blacker, 203) -- sometimes in collaboration with other authors. A gleeful literary impersonator, he created a series of alternative personae, including the oleaginous court correspondent Talbot Church, the French intellectual Jean-Luc Legris, and the demented TV producer Liz Reed. His more directly autobiographical work, from the semi-factual novel 'Is This Allowed?' (1985) to the semi-fictional memoir 'From Winchester to This' (1997), and his memorably frank column 'William Donaldson's week' in 'The Independent', reflected with lacerating, self-immolating humour and wildly varying degrees of accuracy the downward spiral of his private life. In 1985 he became passionately involved with Melanie Soszynski, an escort agency girl with a fondness for cocaine. At the end of an exciting and destructive relationship Soszynski was in a rehabilitation clinic and Donaldson had developed a liking for crack cocaine, which he continued to take for the next fifteen years. Having confessed his infatuation to Cherry Hatrick, he married her on 5 August 1986 (after she had insisted they either marry or separate), but the relationship was already over. Hatrick moved out of Elm Park Mansions nine months later, though they never divorced. 
Although Donaldson continued to write with a brilliant, savage wit, his life in the 1990s took a melancholy turn. After another doomed affair with a call-girl, he was declared bankrupt for the third and final time in August 1994. His final years were brightened by two things: a relationship with the model Rachel Garley, and his last great triumph as a writer, 'Brewers' Rogues, Villains and Eccentrics' (2002), a 300,000 word compendium of bad behaviour. 'Willie Donaldson has never had the recognition he deserves as a comic genius', Francis Wheen wrote in the 'Mail on Sunday'. 'Perhaps this magnificent volume will do the trick' ('Mail on Sunday', 15 Dec 2002). 
Throughout his life, Donaldson acquired a reputation as a corrupting influence, but in person he was a respectable, quietly spoken, slightly frayed figure of naval bearing, beguiling company, and as funny at first hand as he was on the page. His years of recreational crack abuse finally caught up with him on 22 June 2005 when, during a heatwave, his lungs finally gave out and he died of respiratory failure, alone in his Elm Park Mansions flat. He was cremated at a sparsely attended funeral at Mortlake cemetery. A memorial reading of his work at the Lyttelton Theatre six months later was, however, a sell-out. 


@@@@@


doc= 95878


Norwood, Melita Stedman (1912-2005), spy, was born on 25 March 1912 at 402 Christchurch Road, Bournemouth, the elder daughter of (Peter) Alexander Sirnis (1881-1918), estate manager, and his wife, Gertrude Elizabeth Gurney, 'nee' Stedman (1878-1967), cobbler. An elder brother, Wilfrid, had died in infancy, and she had a half-brother, Alfred, from her mother's first marriage. Her father had been born in Lemsal, Latvia, and was a follower of the Russian writer Lev Tolstoy. After Tolstoy had been banished to his estates at Yasnaya Polyana his literary executor, Vladimir Chertkov, was exiled overseas and settled in the small Hampshire village of Tuckton. He brought with him Tolstoy's manuscripts and occupied a large Victorian mansion, Tuckton House, on behalf of the Tolstoy Fund. Chertkov initially invited Alexander Sirnis, then living in America, to Tuckton to work as a translator. On arrival he took over the duties of estate manager, and joined the Marxist British Socialist Party. During his stay at Tuckton he translated Tolstoy's diaries, several short stories by Maxim Gorky, and Lenin's 'The Collapse of the Second International', and met Melita's English mother, Gertrude, then a young widow, who worked as the community's cobbler. Her first husband, Carl Brandt, had died of influenza in Spain in 1902. Melita's parents married in 1909. Her sister Gerty was born in 1914 in Davos, where her father was undergoing treatment for tuberculosis. The family returned to England in 1915. By this time the First World War had reached a bloody stalemate and Alexander Sirnis discarded Tolstoyism for Bolshevism. He died of tuberculosis in November 1918. 
In 1923 Melita Sirnis (or Letty, as she was known to friends and family) won a scholarship to Itchen School, a mixed secondary school near Southampton, where in 1928 she became school captain. In 1930 she went to Southampton University College to study Latin and logic. She was a poor student and failed to complete her course. In 1931, accompanied by her mother and sister, she went to Heidelberg for ten months, where she became involved in anti-fascist activities. Back in England she joined the Independent Labour Party, and in 1932 started work as a secretary with the British Non-Ferrous Metals Research Association (BN-FMRA), where she became an organizer for the Association of Women Clerks and Secretaries. At the time she was living in the same house as her future husband, Hilary Nussbaum (1911-1986), and his parents, Bronislau and Dora, Russian Jews who had emigrated from Russian Poland in the 1900s. Letty and Hilary shared the same politics, and sold the 'Daily Worker' and 'Labour Leader' on Saturday mornings outside Golders Green underground station. Both were members of the Friends of the Soviet Union and in 1934, after a meeting on the shortage of tractor parts on collective farms, she was recruited to the NKVD, the forerunner of the KGB, by Andrew Rothstein. She joined the British Communist Party the following year. In November 1935 Hilary Anglicized his name to Norwood, and on 14 December the couple married, at Barnet register office. 
Norwood's spying career began in 1938 when she was involved with a spy ring operating inside the Woolwich arsenal. On the outbreak of the Second World War BN-FMRA was evacuated to Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, a fortunate choice as the Norwoods had earlier moved to Cheshunt following Hilary's employment as a mathematics teacher at Cheshunt School. In 1943 Norwood gave birth to her daughter, Anita, returning to work the following year. She was then working for the director of BN-FMRA, G. L. Bailey, who was a member of the advisory committee of Tube Alloys, Britain's atomic bomb project. In March 1945, after BN-FMRA won a contract from Tube Alloys, Norwood (codenamed Hola, or Tina) gained access to documents that Moscow Centre described as being 'of great interest and a valuable contribution to the development of the work in this field' ('The Times', 11 Sept 1999). Arguably the information she supplied on the behaviour of uranium metal at high temperatures permitted the Soviet Union to test an atomic bomb four years earlier than British and American intelligence thought possible. 
At the end of the war the Norwoods moved to the London borough of Bexley and Bexleyheath. In 1958 she joined the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, and was awarded the order of the Red Banner by the KGB. In 1960 the KGB offered her a pension of $20 a month which she declined. In 1967 she recruited a civil servant codenamed Hunt, who for fourteen years provided extensive scientific, technical, and other intelligence on British arms sales. She retired from both the BN-FMRA and the KGB in 1973, and became involved in local politics. In 1986, following her husband's death, Bexley Trades Union Council established the Hilary Norwood trophy, to be awarded for the best piece of writing on trade-union history in local schools. She was exposed as a spy by 'The Times' newspaper on 11 September 1999, shortly before the publication by Christopher Andrew and Vasily Mitrokhin of 'The Mitrokhin Archive', based on KGB documents smuggled out of Russia by Mitrokhin. She remained utterly unrepentant. The home secretary, Jack Straw, claimed that the information she had provided could only have been of marginal significance for the Russian atomic weapons programme, though the documents in the Mitrokhin archive suggested otherwise; in the event she was never prosecuted. She died of cancer and heart disease at New Cross Hospital, Wolverhampton, on 2 June 2005, having moved in 2003 to Wombourne, Staffordshire to be near her daughter, who survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 95886


Fry, Christopher (1907-2005), playwright, was born at 65 Sussex Place, Bristol, on 18 December 1907, the second son of a former builder and Anglican lay preacher, Charles John Harris ('b'. 1869), and his wife, Emma Marguerite, 'nee' Hammond ('b'. 1871/2). He was originally named Arthur Hammond Harris. His father died when he was still young, and at some point in his childhood he adopted the surname Fry from his maternal grandmother, Emma Louisa Fry, on the unproven assumption that she may have been part of the prominent Quaker family. Although he was known legally as Arthur Hammond Fry into his late twenties he always wrote, and became known, as Christopher Fry. 
Educated at Bedford Modern School, Fry wrote his first play at eleven and his first verse drama at eighteen and also taught himself to play the piano and to compose songs. After a brief spell as an actor in Bath and a schoolteacher in Surrey, in 1934 he became director of a repertory theatre in Tunbridge Wells, where he staged the first English production of G. B. Shaw's 'Village Wooing'. He developed his interest in theatre by becoming a composer-lyricist, and writing several songs, including 'I'll Snatch the Man from the Moon', for a 1935 London revue, 'She Shall Have Music'. A year later he directed a tour of Ivor Novello's 'How Do, Princess!' that ended ignominiously after the producer spent the investment-money playing strip poker with the chorus-girls and an assistant stage manager was imprisoned for bigamy. On 3 December 1936 Fry married Phyllis Marjorie Hart (1906-1987), from Southborough, the 29-year-old daughter of Ernest Stephen Hart. They adopted one son, Tam. 
Fry's serious writing career began with an invitation from a vicar in the Sussex village of Coleman's Hatch to write a play celebrating St Cuthman who, according to local legend, pushed his mother from Cornwall to Steyning in a wheelbarrow. The resulting play, 'The Boy with a Cart' (1938), was heavily influenced by the choric style of T. S. Eliot's 'Murder in the Cathedral', as was a subsequent pageant-play, 'The Tower' (1939), on the history of Tewkesbury Abbey. Eliot's influence on Fry took a more practical turn when they first met in 1939. Fry later recalled asking Eliot what he could do in wartime that didn't mean shooting people. 'He suggested the fire service and, when I told him that I had no head for heights, he said 'You must specialise in basements'' (personal knowledge). 
After a brief spell as director of the Oxford Repertory Players in 1940 and four years as a non-combatant in the Pioneer Corps, Fry resumed his writing career in 1946 with 'A Phoenix Too Frequent', staged at London's Mercury Theatre. Taken from a story by Petronius, later adapted by Jeremy Taylor, it dealt with an Ephesian widow who is dissuaded from incarcerating herself in her husband's tomb by the arrival of a handsome young centurion. It starred a young Paul Scofield, and, with its serio-comic treatment of life's triumph over death, struck a chord with a society debilitated by war. In 1946 Fry also wrote an early version of 'The Firstborn' (later revised), describing the struggle between Moses and the pharaoh at the time of the plagues, for Oxford Playhouse. He followed this with 'Thor With Angels', written for the Canterbury festival and again combining Christian principles with verbal dexterity. 
Fry's breakthrough came with 'The Lady's not for Burning', commissioned by Alec Clunes for the Arts Theatre Club. Written in the arctic winter of 1946-7 and first performed in the spring of 1948, it became a flagship for the revival of poetic drama. Concerning an encounter between a life-hating former soldier who wants to be hanged and a suspected witch who does not wanted to be burned, the story had a tragic outline: Fry's language, however, was a cascade of puns, paradoxes, metaphors, and similes that was Elizabethan in origin and affirmatively exuberant in impact. After its initial showing at the Arts, the play enjoyed a long West End run in 1949 with John Gielgud and Pamela Brown in the central roles and a young Richard Burton and Claire Bloom in support. The play's success -- coterminous with that of T. S. Eliot's 'The Cocktail Party' -- seemed to signal a return to poetic drama. For some it was a path to the future. For others, spearheaded by Kenneth Tynan, the return to verse was a retrograde move after a half-century in which prose had been established as a valid instrument of theatrical expression. As Tynan later wrote, 'writing verse-plays, like speaking Latin, is an enjoyable intellectual exercise for a minority' (Beaton and Tynan, 45). 
In the immediate post-war decade Fry was a dominant figure in British drama. In 1950 he found himself working simultaneously on a translation of Jean Anouilh's 'L'Invitation au chateau' as 'Ring Round the Moon' for Peter Brook and a new play, 'Venus Observed', for Laurence Olivier's management at the St James. The latter play proved to be an exquisitely wrought, if sometimes overwrought, autumnal comedy about an amorous astronomer who bids three former mistresses to a solar eclipse and invites his son (typically introduced as 'my extension in time') to choose a stepmother from among them. Although Olivier's presence guaranteed the play's success, Fry seemed on surer ground in 'A Sleep of Prisoners', written for Festival of Britain year (1951) and performed in churches in Oxford and London's Regent Street. It deals with four prisoners of war who, in their dreams, re-enact 'Old Testament' stories including those of Cain and Abel and Abraham and Isaac. But without abandoning his old pun-loving self ('Amor vincit insomnia' ran one line), Fry eloquently and movingly advocated, at a time of increasing cold war tension, peace, charity, and goodness, which he saw as 'stronger than anger, wiser than strategy' (C. Fry, 'Selected Plays', 1985, 252). His Christian values, however, were always combined with a highly professional versatility. In 1953 he wrote the screenplay for a notoriously troubled film of 'The Beggar's Opera' starring Olivier and directed by Peter Brook. In 1954 he produced the third of his seasonal plays, 'The Dark is Light Enough', which, although set in an Austrian country house in 1848-9, was clearly a contemporary metaphor for the need to overcome the cyclical nature of war. In 1955 Fry's translations of Anouilh's 'L'alouette' (as 'The Lark') and Giraudoux's 'La guerre de Troie n'aura pas lieu' (as 'Tiger at the Gates') played concurrently in the West End. 
This, however, was Fry's perihelion. He became a victim of the radical changes instituted by the upsurge of realistic prose drama at the Royal Court Theatre in 1956. As his mixture of Christian charity, rhetorical richness, and high-flying verse went out of theatrical fashion, Fry turned increasingly to film-writing. In the late 1950s he was invited to Rome for six weeks to rewrite parts of William Wyler's film of 'Ben Hur'. In the event he stayed more than a year and virtually rewrote the whole movie. He returned to script-writing with 'Barabbas' (1962) and the early sections of a projected film of 'The Bible' (1966). Even during his long years in the theatrical wilderness Fry continued to write plays. 'Curtmantle' (1961) dealt with the conflict between Henry II and Thomas a Becket but was overshadowed, ironically, by a play on the same theme by Anouilh, whom Fry had done so much to promote. He also completed his quartet of seasonal plays with 'A Yard of Sun', dealing with family reunions in the aftermath of war, premiered at Nottingham Playhouse in 1970. At the age of ninety-three he was commissioned to write a play, 'A Ringing of Bells', by his old school and lived to see it revived at the National's Olivier Theatre. 
Although marginalized by the post-Osborne British theatre, Fry remained a magnanimous, cheerful figure who praised the work of such younger writers as Harold Pinter and Tom Stoppard. He also brought colour, spiritual fervour, and an irrepressible verbal elan to post-war British theatre. In 1962 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and in 1999 saw 'The Lady's not for Burning' voted one of the hundred best plays of the twentieth century in a poll organized by the National Theatre. He lived latterly at The Toft, East Dean, Chichester, Sussex. He died of septicaemia and a urinary tract infection at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, on 30 June 2005. He was survived by his son, Tam. 


@@@@@


doc= 95887


Harris, (David) Kenneth (1919-2005), journalist and broadcaster, was born at Aberaman, Glamorgan, on 11 November 1919, the only son and elder child of David Harris, a market gardener, and his wife, Kathleen. He was educated at Trowbridge boys' high school, Wiltshire, and Wadham College, Oxford. His studies were interrupted by the Second World War, and from 1940 to 1945 he served in the Royal Artillery. He returned to Oxford on demobilization in 1945 and two years later, after graduating with a second-class degree in modern history, took part in the first post-war Oxford Union debating tour of the United States, along with Tony Benn and Sir Edward Boyle. Debating became an important theme in his life. He founded the Observer Mace debating tournaments in 1953 and was chairman of the English Speaking Union's overseas debating committee from 1960 to 1995. When he died, a spokesman for the union said, 'Kenneth's importance in developing competitive debate in this country cannot be overstated' (www.britishdebate.com). 
In 1948 Harris joined the 'Sheffield Telegraph' and on 16 April 1949 he married Doris Winsmore Young-Smith (died 1970), a 37-year-old war widow, and daughter of Aubrey Lawrence Fullerton. There were no children of the marriage. In 1950 Harris moved on to 'The Observer', where David Astor had recently become editor of the family-owned newspaper. It was typical of Astor's inspired risk-taking that he should appoint the thirty-year-old Harris to the important post of Washington correspondent, largely on the strength of the book, 'Travelling Tongues' (1949), he had written about the Oxford undergraduate debating tour. He remained on 'The Observer' for thirty-two years, working on the Pendennis diary column and then as the newspaper's labour correspondent. Always assiduous at cultivating social and political contacts, he gained the trust of senior figures in the Labour Party and the trade-union movement, especially Sam Watson, the Durham miners' leader, for whom he wrote some speeches. He also succeeded where many had failed in gaining the confidence of Clement Attlee, the post-war Labour prime minister, who agreed to confide his political memories to Harris's tape-recorder. These meetings culminated, many years later, in the only official Attlee biography (1982), Harris's most successful book. He also produced books about David Owen (1987), Margaret Thatcher (1988), and Elizabeth II (1994), and several collections of his journalism. 
Harris was mainly known for his in-depth interviews, both in the newspaper and on television. Some of his journalist colleagues regarded him as over-deferential in his approach to his subjects, who were allowed to read and correct his written interviews. Astor, however, believed that Harris's courteous but well-researched method paid dividends in winning over public figures who were otherwise distrustful of the media. He persuaded a number of celebrities, from President Nixon to Sir Gordon Richards, the jockey, to confide personal secrets they had never made public before. On television he conducted a famous interview with Indira Gandhi, later the Indian prime minister, in which he provoked her to defend the principle of nepotism. He secured the first interview with Alexei Kosygin when he became Soviet premier, a scoop deemed so important that it was broadcast on both the BBC and ITV. Harris also secured the final interview with the duke of Windsor in 1972, weeks before his death. Astor believed the BBC should have made him the heir to Richard Dimbleby. 
Harris was an elegant, well-groomed man with an actor's voice and a suave, faintly old-fashioned style that some of his colleagues regarded as pompous; hence his office nickname, the Bishop. By the end of 1976 he was enjoying a comfortable, but not notably demanding, schedule -- doing two big interviews a year for 'The Observer', organizing the newspaper's debating competitions, covering the party political conferences for the BBC, working in a leisurely fashion on his books, lunching at his club, the Athenaeum, enjoying the gaming tables at night (one of his casino companions, an elderly widow, left him a painting by Edouard Vuillard in her will) -- when his life was changed by a chance meeting over dinner at Rules restaurant in Covent Garden with a visiting American friend, Douglass Cater, a former White House correspondent and presidential aide turned academic. At that meeting Cater asked Harris about 'The Observer', which was on the point of being taken over by Rupert Murdoch. He suggested calling his boss at the Aspen Institute, a think-tank funded largely by Atlantic Richfield, the giant Californian oil company. A series of telephone calls followed over the weekend between Robert O. Anderson, the chairman of Atlantic Richfield (and the biggest private landowner in the United States), and Lord Goodman, chairman of the Observer Trust. As a result the American oil company bought Britain's oldest Sunday newspaper for one pound and took over its mounting debts. 
Harris (who was made a director of The Observer Ltd in 1978) was regarded as a saviour by the paper's staff and quickly established a close personal relationship with Anderson, introducing him to the elevated contacts he had developed throughout his career. They launched an annual dinner, first at Lincoln's Inn and later at Claridge's, to celebrate the 'rescue' of 'The Observer', where the speakers included Harold Macmillan and Henry Kissinger and the guest-list read like an extract from 'Who's Who'. Harris and Cater, who was given an office at 'The Observer', started issuing memoranda on editorial policy, which were resented by the senior staff. Conor Cruise O'Brien, the Irish writer, diplomat, and politician, was drafted in as editor-in-chief to act as a buffer between 'Cater-Harris' (as the two were known) and the journalists. In his memoirs O'Brien described Harris as 'a poisonous presence in my professional life' (O'Brien, 366), and at the time wrote a withering column about sycophants ('lickspittles') in history, which was seen as a thinly veiled attack on him. 
A crisis arose in 1981 when Anderson let it be known that he wanted Harris to represent him as deputy chairman of the newspaper. The 'Observer' board, including Goodman, Astor, and O'Brien, rejected this proposal. Anderson's response was to sell the newspaper, immediately after the board meeting, to Lonrho, which owned it for the next twelve years. So Harris had the rare distinction for a working journalist of not only saving 'The Observer' from Rupert Murdoch's clutches but also being the reason why it was sold on to Tiny Rowland. In 1981 Lonrho appointed him chairman of one of its subsidiaries, George Outram & Co., later Caledonian Newspaper Publishing, publishers of the Glasgow 'Herald' and 'Evening Times'; he held this post until 1992, when he was appointed CBE. He retired as a director of The Observer Ltd in 1993. 
Harris was a keen and knowledgeable follower of horse-racing, an interest he pursued in his retirement. He listed his other recreations as walking, fishing, and reading. His first wife having died in 1970, on 13 February 1988 he married Jocelyn (Jo) Rymer, a 45-year-old secretary, divorcee, and daughter of Frederick Smithson Wilkinson, farmer; she had two daughters from a previous marriage. Having lived latterly in Mill Lane, Donington, Lincolnshire, he died of cerebrovascular disease and prostate cancer at Gosberton House Care Home, Westhorpe Road, Gosberton, Lincolnshire, on 24 June 2005. He was survived by his wife, Jo, and his two stepdaughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 95889


Pomerans, Arnold Julius (1920-2005), translator, was born in Konigsberg, Germany, on 27 April 1920, the son of William Pomerans, accountant. Antisemitism was a precipitating factor in the family's relocations during his childhood, first to Berlin and then to Yugoslavia. His father's profession meant he could practise wherever they settled. By the time Arnold was sixteen, this was South Africa. He remained there until the nationalist regime introduced apartheid (in 1948) and his militant opposition put him in direct danger. 
On arriving in Britain in 1948, Pomerans became a science teacher for seven years, first at the Hasmonean Grammar School, Hendon, and later at the New Sherwood School, a progressive school in Epsom. His subjects were primarily physics and chemistry although students recalled him as a polymath with strong interests in the arts as well as the sciences. In 1955 he turned to full-time translation and on 28 July 1956 he married his second wife (his first marriage having been dissolved), Erica Mary Aubone White ('b'. 1937), daughter of Raymond Maurice White, fire brigade official. They had met while living in Hampstead, but moved out to Polstead Heath in Suffolk the year after their marriage, where their two sons were born. A lifelong working partnership developed, whereby Erica's literary role migrated from being his 'editor' to 'co-translator' and, in some instances, finally a translator in her own right. 
Pomerans brought much more than basic translation skills to his profession. He always researched and annotated his translations in the most scholarly fashion: typically, that of Pieter Geyl's 'Orange and Stuart, 1641-72' (1969) listed his contribution to the 'preface, references at the end of each chapter, conclusion, genealogical tables, list of abbreviations, index' (abebooks.co.uk). At least one author referred to the quality as well as the quantity of his contribution. Marianne Krull's foreword to the American edition of 'Freud and his Father' (1986) opened: 'My special thanks go to Arno Pomerans, whose brilliant translation is a pleasure to the eye and to the ear. I only wish he had also been the translator of Freud's works, letters etc., in which case he would have saved us so much of the trouble we had to take in retranslating the Standard Edition. (p. xv)' That edition may, in Krull's opinion, 'have been totally incomprehensible to anyone not familiar with the German original' (ibid.). Pomerans's translated excerpts did indeed lead him to translate many more core psychoanalytic works, including Jean Piaget (from the French) on child psychology (1969), 'The Sigmund Freud-Ludwig Binswanger Correspondence, 1908-1938' (2003), and Douwe Draaisma's 'Why Life Speeds Up As You Get Older: How Memory Shapes Our Past', (from the Dutch) (2004). 
While veering consistently towards classic texts, the breadth of Pomerans's choices was phenomenal. Perhaps understandably, given his times and background, he appears to have been drawn to wars -- and to the Second World War in particular. Histories such as 'The History of Jews in the Netherlands', edited by J. C. H. Blom (2001), or 'The Great War and the French People' by Jean-Jacques Becker (1985) linked to period fiction, such as Hugo Claus's 'The Sorrow of Belgium' (1990), almost a 'War and Peace' for the Netherlands. The most daring variant was his translation of Rudi van Dantzig's 'For a Lost Soldier' (1991), the tale of a Dutch boy seduced by a Canadian soldier at the close of the Second World War. The book caused a furore, with demands for the soldier to be prosecuted for rape, thirty years on, although the subsequent film softened the tale. Women's voices were foregrounded, particularly as Erica Pomerans collaborated for the Dutch translations. Together they translated Etty Hillesum's diaries (1983) and letters (1987) and the critical edition of Anne Frank's diary (1989), the latter a long-running global best-seller that underwent numerous re-editions. Other lives include George Grosz's autobiography, 'A Small Yes and a Big No' (1982), and 'The Life and Death of Leon Trotsky' (1975) by Victor Serge and Natalya Sedova Trotsky (also the collaboration of a married couple). Memory was a recurrent theme, presumably one of particular interest to Pomerans: not only Professor Draaisma's scientific investigations but also Grosz's ruminations fed into this. Grosz's self-styled 'attempt at an autobiography' freely admits that: ('I have forgotten a great deal, but that is not necessarily a sign of a poor memory: the veil drawn over the past is kind and well suited to the face of the times' p. 9.) 
Pomerans declared his dislike for teaching, and was grateful to the publisher who recommended he put his linguistic skills to good use by getting paid 10's'. per 1000 translated words. Yet he had started by translating mathematics and chemistry textbooks and always retained an interest in the sciences. In 1971 his translation of Werner Heisenberg's 'Physics and Beyond' was published, and in 2005, the year of his death, that of Jelto Drenth's 'The Origin of the World: Science and Fiction of the Vagina'. At the time of his death he was still working on the correspondence between Anna and Sigmund Freud. In total he translated nearly 200 works spanning a wealth of genres and languages, from fiction to biography, history to psychology, principally from his native German, then Dutch, French, and Italian -- although he reckoned he could turn his hand to most European languages. Among such diverse interests it is hard to select one signature book; but few are more characteristic of his style and interest than the 'Letters of Vincent van Gogh' (1996). He died at his home in Polstead Heath, Suffolk, on 30 May 2005, of cancer, and was survived by Erica. One obituary described him as 'a prolific translator of literary and non-fiction works' ('The Times', 5 July 2005), and another raised the bar in hailing him as 'one of Britain's finest translators' ('The Independent', 16 June 2005). 


@@@@@


doc= 95892


Hobsbaum, Philip Dennis (1932-2005), poet and literary scholar, was born on 29 June 1932 at 24 Underwood Street, Whitechapel, London, the son of Joseph Hobsbaum, telephone engineer, and his wife, Rachel, 'nee' Sapera. His parents were both first-generation eastern European Jewish immigrants. In 1939 his father's job took the family to Yorkshire. They settled in 1942 in Bradford, where Hobsbaum obtained a place at Belle Vue Grammar School. Ronald Bradshaw, a perceptive English teacher, recognized ability in the bullied, physically awkward pupil, and moved him from the C to the A stream, encouraging him to try for a Cambridge scholarship. During his schooldays Hobsbaum participated in theatricals at the local Civic Theatre (at one point he toyed with the idea of becoming a professional actor) and debated at the local Jewish society. Both helped form his clear diction and well-modulated readings of verse and prose. Following school he worked for two years as a Ministry of National Insurance clerk. Poor eyesight meant that he failed the national service physical test. During this period he wrote many poems, short stories, and plays, and attended lectures given by the eminent Shakespearian critic G. Wilson Knight and others. 
In 1952 Hobsbaum gained an exhibition to Downing College, Cambridge, where his teachers included F. R. Leavis, whom he subsequently described as 'the greatest man I ever met... an amazing teacher' ('The Guardian'). At Cambridge he edited the student literary magazine 'Delta' (1954-6). As editor he displayed his acumen in recognizing talent, publishing early work by, among others, Ted Hughes and Peter Redgrove, and forming the foundations of what became important connections within the London literary establishment. Continuing to write poetry, he also created the first of many writing group meetings, at which poets read new work aloud and received criticism from their peers. He gained upper seconds in both parts of the English tripos, graduating in 1955. 
On leaving Cambridge Hobsbaum moved to London, and became a licentiate of the Royal Academy of Music in 1956 and of the Guildhall School of Music in 1957. In London he worked in television and for a theatrical agent, and taught at various schools, including Tulse Hill comprehensive, where Ken Livingstone, subsequently mayor of London, was one of his students. Livingstone later said that if Hobsbaum hadn't left, in 1958, 'I would have probably stayed on for higher education' ('Independent on Sunday', 28 Feb 1993). Meanwhile, at Brixton Synagogue on 7 August 1957, Hobsbaum had married Hannah Kelly, a nineteen-year-old dictaphone typist and poet; there were no children of the marriage. In their basement flat in Stockwell, south London, Hobsbaum convened a writing group known as the Group. Those attending included poets of the calibre of Martin Bell, George Macbeth, Peter Porter, Peter Redgrove, and Edward Lucie-Smith. Hobsbaum's own poetry also began to attract attention, being published in small magazines like 'Extra Verse', 'Gemini', the 'Oxford and Cambridge Magazine', 'Universities' Poetry', and elsewhere. 
In 1959, supported by his wife, Hobsbaum enrolled at Sheffield University for a PhD, since the poet and critic William Empson, whom he greatly admired, taught there. Hobsbaum's essays for Empson had 'very wide margins, so he could scribble abuse' on them -- a device Hobsbaum's subsequent students also found to be useful ('The Times'). Hobsbaum's relationship with Empson, his supervisor, was complex, intense, and at times hostile. His account was later published in his memoir, 'Empson as teacher: the Sheffield years', in 'William Empson: the Critical Achievement' (ed. C. Norris and N. Mapp, 1993), and partially documented in the second volume of John Haffenden's biography of Empson. Empson nevertheless supported Hobsbaum's search for an academic position and in 1962 he was appointed lecturer at Queen's University, Belfast, where he taught for four years before moving to the University of Glasgow in 1966. The professor who appointed him to the Belfast English department was Peter Herbert Butter, known for his critical and editorial work on the Anglo-Scottish poet Edwin Muir. Hobsbaum moved to Glasgow University a year after Butter's appointment to the regius chair of English there. He spent the rest of his career at the Glasgow English department, where he formed the creative writing programme and moved progressively through the academic ranks, from lecturer to senior lecturer in 1972, from 1979 to 1985 as reader, and then to a personal chair until retirement in 1997. 
Hobsbaum's PhD was eventually awarded in May 1968. Entitled 'Some reasons for the great variety of response to literature among modern literary critics', his dissertation subsequently appeared in various journal articles and as a monograph under the title 'A Theory of Communication' (1970). Reflecting the influence of both Leavis and Empson, Hobsbaum argued that words depend on their context for meaning: 'One's approach to a poem must necessarily be governed by what is available to the reader' ('A Theory of Communication', 58). During this period several volumes of Hobsbaum's poetry were published. His 'Poems in the Place's Fault, and Other Poems' (1964), in the words of Heather Clark, 'emphasize Hobsbaum's feelings of marginalization in a class-obsessed culture that makes little room for a Jewish scholarship boy from Yorkshire' (Clark, 59); 'Snapshots' appeared in 1965, a year later 'Retreat and Other Poems', and in 1969 'Coming Out Fighting', and 'Some Lovely Glorious Nothing: a Poem'. In 1972 'Women and Animals' was published. Peter Lawson observed that in such poems as 'Testimony' and 'Watching and Waiting', and 'animal poems' like 'The Sick Lion', 'together with his accomplished craft and ironic humour, Hobsbaum's quasi-Judaic faith redeems his poetic voice and saves it from disappearing into the silence of despair' (P. Lawson, 'Passionate Renewal: Jewish Poetry in Britain since 1945, an Anthology', 2001, 14). Hobsbaum's 'A Lesson in Love' was included by Philip Larkin in his selection 'The Oxford Book of Twentieth Century English Verse' (1972). 
Hobsbaum edited, with Edward Lucie-Smith, 'A Group Anthology' (1963), a collection of poetry discussed at his writing workshops, and, as sole editor, an anthology, 'Ten Elizabethan Poets' (1969), directed at sixth-formers. In his later years his publications focused on literary criticism and the clear exposition of the work of individual writers, although he continued to write poetry and dramatic sketches. 'A Reader's Guide to Charles Dickens' appeared in 1972, 'A Reader's Guide to D. H. Lawrence' in 1981, and 'A Reader's Guide to Robert Lowell' in 1988. Hobsbaum wrote forewords to S. K. Hassan's 'Philip Larkin and his Contemporaries: an Air of Authenticity' (1988) and Phil Moore's 'Alasdair Gray: Critical Appreciations and a Bibliography' (2002). Gray attended Hobsbaum's Glasgow lectures and writer's workshops, as did Liz Lochhead and James Kelman, to name but a few of the significant creative talents encouraged by him. Gray's 'Book of Prefaces' (2000) was dedicated to Hobsbaum, 'poet, critic, and servant of the servants of art'. In addition to many articles and reviews Hobsbaum's critical work included 'Tradition and Experiment in English Poetry' (1979), 'Essentials of Literary Criticism' (1983), and 'Metre Rhythm and Verse Form' (1996). His stated aim was 'to get things clear. In poetry this means being true to one's experience, whatever that experience may be. In criticism it means trying to get across to the reader a sense of the text as verbal entity' (Chapman and Jorgenson, 209). He was sceptical of the kind of critical theory fashionable in academic circles at the close of the twentieth century. He believed that 'you should master the basic works of English Literature' rather than read criticism ('Daily Telegraph'). 
Hobsbaum was perhaps most notable, to use the words of his 'Times' obituarist, as a 'servant' to the 'makers' (the poets). The impact of his workshops in London, Belfast, Glasgow, and elsewhere was acknowledged by the Nobel prizewinner Seamus Heaney, who commented that Hobsbaum 'emanated energy, generosity, belief in the community, trust in the parochial, the inept, the unprinted' (Clark, 60). Others acknowledging their indebtedness to Hobsbaum during the Belfast years included such distinguished talents as Bernard MacLaverty, Derek Mahon, and Michael Longley. Hobsbaum's prominent role in fostering talent was reflected in the pages of Heather Clark's 'The Ulster Renaissance: Poetry in Belfast, 1962-1972' (2006). 
Hobsbaum's first marriage ended in divorce in 1968, but in 1976 he married, as his second wife, Rosemary Singleton, 'nee' Phillips, a teacher. He thereby acquired two stepdaughters. In spite of suffering from increasingly severe diabetes, in his last years he travelled, especially enjoying a visit to the Galapagos Islands. He also loved Handel, Bach, and the 'EastEnders' soap opera. Bearded and heavy of stature, he was capable of great kindness and sympathy. During his final illness his satiric, puckish sense of humour did not desert him in spite of a leg amputation. Visited by an American dramatist whose work he had championed, he is reputed to have said as his last words, 'You see me' (in a broad Western drawl) 'in the Last Chance Corral' ('Daily Telegraph'). He died in Glasgow on 28 June 2005 from complications of diabetes, and was survived by his wife, Rosemary, and his two stepdaughters. Patrick Reilly in an obituary observed that 'wherever Philip went, literature flourished... To be the sponsor of three great movements of poetry -- in London, Belfast, and Glasgow... is no small achievement. To be praised by giants like Heaney and Gray is an accolade given to few' ('The Herald'). 


@@@@@


doc= 95893


Parrinder, (Edward) Geoffrey Simons (1910-2005), Methodist minister and scholar of comparative religion, was born into a Methodist family on 30 April 1910 at Walpole, Hadley Road, New Barnet, Hertfordshire, the second of three sons of William Patrick Parrinder (1877-1944), warehouseman and commercial traveller, and his wife, Florence Mary, 'nee' Bellamy (1880-1976). His father worked for glove firms in the City of London, eventually setting up his own business. Parrinder went to school in Leigh-on-Sea where his family had moved in 1919, before leaving at sixteen to work as a booking clerk at the local railway station. While working as a railway clerk he qualified as a local preacher and then trained for the Wesleyan Methodist ministry at Richmond College, London (1929-32). 
Responding to a call from the Methodist Mission House to serve in French west Africa, Parrinder left for Dahomey in 1933, after studying some theology and French in Montpellier. From that time he worked on and off in Africa for nineteen years. In 1936 he returned to England to be ordained. On 25 July 1936, at the Wesley Central Hall in Hendon, he married Esther Mary Burt (1909-2007), a nurse whom he had met some years earlier at a Methodist meeting. She was the daughter of Frank Burt, farmer. Mary and Geoffrey Parrinder were deeply devoted to each other throughout sixty-nine years of married life. They had one daughter and two sons. 
When on leave in England in 1940 the Parrinders could not return to Dahomey because it was under Vichy collaborationist rule. Parrinder then worked in the Methodist circuit in Redruth, Cornwall (1940-43) and in the French circuit in Guernsey (1946-9), with another spell in west Africa in between. During this time he first took external London BA and BD degrees, then worked for the degrees of MA, MTh, and PhD, using empirical research into the indigenous religious beliefs of west Africa. This prefigured his subsequent career as a pioneering scholar and teacher of comparative religious studies. His first book, 'West African Religion' (1949), was soon followed by more research on religion in Ibadan, published as 'Religion in an African City' (1953), which gained him the London University degree of DD. Other important publications were 'African Psychology' (1951), 'African Traditional Religion' (1954), and 'Witchcraft' (1958). 
In 1949 Parrinder was appointed to the highly innovative department of religious studies at University College, Ibadan, Nigeria, first as a lecturer (1949-50) and then as senior lecturer (1950-58), influencing many African students, including the Nigerian novelist and poet Chinua Achebe, and making lasting friendships. On a six-month sabbatical and a grant from the Carnegie Trust in 1956 he travelled to east and south Africa, India, Pakistan, Burma, and Ceylon. The resulting book, 'An Introduction to Asian Religions' (1957), helped him to obtain in 1958 the new post of reader in the comparative study of religions at King's College, London. Awarded a personal chair in 1970, he became dean of the faculty of theology (1972-4), and retired in 1977. 
Parrinder was a founding member of the British Association for the Study of Religions, its honorary secretary (1960-72) and president (1972-7), and later a life member. He was active in the London Society for the Study of Religion, of which he was president (1980-82), and in the London Society of Jews and Christians, which elected him president (1981-90) and then honorary life president (1990). Other important activities included participating in the World Congress of Faiths and the Shap Working Party on World Religions in Education, of which he was a founding member in 1969 and co-president until 1987. He served on the editorial boards of several journals and gave many prestigious lectures, among others the Charles Strong lectures in Sydney (1964), the Wilde lectures in natural and comparative religion at Oxford (1966-9), and the Westcott Teape lectures in India (1973). He was also a visiting professor at the International Christian University in Tokyo (1977-8) and a visiting lecturer at the University of Surrey (1978-82). He was made a fellow of King's College, London, in 1972 and an honorary DLitt of Lancaster University in 1975. 
Parrinder's publishing output was phenomenal, including thirty-four single-author and seven edited books, one jointly written book, and two anthologies between 1949 and 2000, as well as numerous shorter and revised works, published under new titles. His pioneering work on African religions probably ranked highest among his academic achievements, but his wide influence was largely due to his works on Indian religions, Islam, and comparative themes that appealed to a large public. The widely used textbook 'What World Religions Teach' (1963) was a best-seller, and his first work, 'West African Religion', remained in print for forty years. Among his well-known comparative works were 'Worship in the World's Religions' (1961), 'Avatar and Incarnation' (1970), 'Mysticism in the World's Religions' (1976), and 'Sex in the World's Religions' (1980), republished as 'Sexual Morality in the World's Religions' (1995). Parrinder went on writing until January 2003, producing after forty-five years his last report, 'Religion', for the 'Annual Register of World Events'. 
Through his numerous writings, lectures, radio and television talks, and his work with educational bodies and academic associations, Parrinder exercised a wide influence on the study of world religions in schools and universities in Britain and abroad. A towering academic figure with an impressive career, he always remained humble and kind, even a little shy, and never boasted about his academic achievements. A tall, gaunt figure with a mass of hair and erect bearing, he always had a welcoming gesture towards guest and stranger. Family and friends knew him as a spirited, witty raconteur with a great love for stimulating conversation, whether pursuing an intellectual or political argument, or just small talk about the latest academic affairs. He was a man of great compassion, kindness, and a large heart who flourished as a human being and made others flourish around him. He ceaselessly worked for closer collaboration between members of different faiths and cultures, and for the advancement of the study of religions as a significant subject area in all educational institutions, from schools to universities. Former students, colleagues, and friends published a Festschrift for his eightieth birthday (with a bibliography of his works), 'Turning Points in Religious Studies' (1990), for which Archbishop Desmond Tutu, once his student, wrote the foreword. 
Parrinder died of heart failure on 16 June 2005 at 31 Charterhouse Road, Orpington, Kent, where he had lived since his return from Africa. He was survived by his wife, daughter, and one son, one son having predeceased him. During a service of thanksgiving at Orpington Methodist church, where he and his wife had worshipped for more than forty years, he was fondly remembered as a distinguished scholar, a close friend, and a happy family man. 


@@@@@


doc= 95897


John Edward Nicholson (1916-1997), at St Bride's Episcopal Church, Glasgow. John Nicholson was born on 27 February 1916 at 27 Ditton Road, Surbiton, Surrey, the son of Herbert Nicholson, a general merchant's clerk, and his wife, Dorothy Frances, 'nee' Clarke. During the war Nicholson served as an engineer in the Royal Navy and on his return the couple moved to Cheltenham, where John established a light engineering business. They had two daughters and a son whom Rosemary brought up while taking an active part in local voluntary groups. During the 1960s the family moved to London. 


@@@@@


doc= 95898


Arthur Shenfield (1909-1990), barrister and economist, who lived in Portland Road, Edgbaston, coincidentally the very road in which she had lived as a student. Their civil ceremony of marriage at Kensington register office in London was witnessed by the economist Arthur Seldon, who went on to be a lifelong friend. Unlike Barbara, an Anglican, Arthur Shenfield was Jewish, but to anyone who thought an Anglo-Jewish marriage unusual Barbara was characteristically matter of fact. She and Arthur Shenfield had one son, Martin. 


@@@@@


doc= 95900


Beckett, Allan Harry (1914-2005), engineer, was born on 4 March 1914 at 294 Central Park Road, East Ham, London, the son of George William Harry Beckett, accounting clerk, and his wife, Emma Louise, 'nee' Stokes. He was originally given the first name Basil, soon changed to Allan. He was educated locally in east London and at London University, where he graduated in engineering. After serving an apprenticeship with Sanders and Foster, steel work and structural engineers, in 1936 he became an engineering assistant with A. J. Brindle, consulting engineers. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 Beckett volunteered for service. In January 1940 he was posted to no. 13 war party for training as a sapper. He was selected as a potential officer and commissioned at no. 2 Railway Training Establishment where he was greatly influenced by Lieutenant-Colonel W. T. Everall, who had gained inventive experience repairing railway bridges, destined to be invaluable in Normandy. Under Everall, Beckett produced drawings and design models for bridging companies in the field and won a reputation for getting things done. 
Planning for a return to the continent began after Dunkirk. Winston Churchill must have recalled the landings on open beaches at Gallipoli in 1915. In his historic minute of 30 May 1942 to Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, chief of combined operations, outlining the basic design of a landing dependent on a floating roadway connecting pierheads for unloading cargo vessels that would rise and fall with the tide, he urged that this problem be solved immediately, concluding his note, 'Don't argue the matter. The difficulties will argue themselves.' In September 1943 at Quebec the allied high command agreed that the assault across the Channel should take place on a Normandy beachhead not later than May or June 1944. Artificial harbours, codenamed Mulberry, would supply the armies until the great port of Cherbourg should receive troops and their weapons from across the Atlantic. 
Much experimentation on the various components was by then in progress, the floating roadway and pierhead taking shape at Wigtown, where the rise and fall of the tide was similar to that in Normandy. As a member of the War Office transportation group, Beckett kept a close eye on developments, which were a well-kept secret. (The supremacy of the Royal Air Force ensured that the Germans gained little knowledge of what was afoot.) In particular he provided technical advice for the two floating roadways known by the codename Whale. Everall was able to design a pontoon bridge able to ride a rough sea without over-stressing any of its components. Beckett was advised by him to strengthen the moorings of the British and American bridges. This led to Beckett's invention of mooring shuttles for severe weather. Known as Camel, they had trumpet-shaped restrainers (later called kite anchors). 
In the weeks before D-day the Mulberry components had to be assembled all over the country, ending up at Marchwood, near Southampton, and Richborough (once used by the Romans). On 2 June 1944 Beckett set sail with a tow from the Isle of Dogs and attached himself to 21st army group, the British invading force, as technical adviser in the field. He arrived at Arromanches, the only disturbance being attacks from German E-boats. During the early days of the landings he became concerned about the skill of the American 'seabees' who were trying to complete their floating roadways before the British. His advice to anchor them 'As tight as a lady's bodice' was ignored. When a storm began to blow on the evening of 19 June a number of caissons and an ill-conceived floating breakwater broke up the American Mulberry, rendering it useless. The British Mulberry now became the only artificial harbour for unloading stores and equipment for the allied forces in the battle area. It continued to be used until Antwerp, the nearest port to the German frontier, had been cleared of mines by 19 November 1944. 
Beckett was made a military MBE for his work on the indispensable floating roadways and received a $3000 award for his invention of the kite anchor. With this money he was able to build a house in Farnborough, Kent, where he lived until his death. After being demobilized in 1946 he became a partner with Sir Bruce White, Wolfe Barry & Partners. He now began to play an important role in port construction. He was responsible as senior partner for the development of techniques for the mini hydraulic model studies as a tool for designing new ports and their application for Brunei, Dammam in Saudi Arabia, and Tripoli in Libya. He was responsible for London's flood mitigation proposals including a feasibility study and subsequent design of lifting sector gates for the Thames Barrier. 
Beckett married Ida Gwladys James in 1949, and they had two sons, Michael and Tim, and a daughter, Sian. Tim Beckett followed in his father's footsteps as a civil engineer. When Allan Beckett retired in 1987 he became consultant to Beckett Rankine, a firm of marine consulting engineers set up by Tim Beckett with Sir Bruce White's grandson, Gordon Rankine. Allan Beckett was himself a keen yachtsman and had kept his boat afloat throughout the war. He liked to sail in the English Channel, exploring the tidal waters. At the same time he kept abreast of engineering developments. In 1977 he had built a cupro-nickel yacht. Even in his early eighties he was experimenting with new types of breakwater and lifesaving equipment. He died at his home, Thistledown, Wood Way, Farnborough Park, of peripheral vascular disease, on 19 June 2005, a year after he had been present at Arromanches for the unveiling of a memorial to the engineers and contractors who were involved in the building of Mulberry. He was buried in Oare churchyard, almost in sight of the Thames estuary where the Whale convoys sailed to the Channel. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95901


Tripp, William John Charles Spencer (1922-2005), comedian and pantomime artist, was born in Plymouth on 4 February 1922, the only son of William Tripp, baker, and his wife, Lilian. He had two sisters. His family had no theatrical connections, but they loved music hall and attended the Plymouth Palace Theatre every Monday night, where dancing acts were the young Jack's favourites. He initially had no particular comedic aspirations although at three years old he amused a party by mimicking Felix the cat. He attended tap dancing classes with his sisters and won the Espinosa award with the previously unheard of mark of 100 per cent, subsequently appearing in local clubs as 'Plymouth's Fred Astaire'. He attended school locally, at Plymouth public secondary school. 
During the Second World War Tripp served with the Royal Electrical Engineers, but claimed never to have mastered the assembling of a Bren gun. He was soon co-opted into directing his first forces revue, 'That's the Spirit', and discovered his remarkable talent for mimetic comedy -- as well as dancing -- in skits including a one-man take-off of the popular music hall act Wilson, Keppel, and Betty. He joined the Stars in Battledress unit and performed in Europe and the Middle East (in Cairo and Khartoum). 
It was while appearing in a Stars in Battledress production that Tripp was discovered by the agent of the great comedian Sid Field, whom he understudied in 'Piccadilly Hayride' (1946). He watched Field at work over 100 times and learned from him the gift of audience rapport, taking in the whole house with naive complicitous eyes. In 1947 he was booked for the celebrated 'Half Past Eight Show' in Glasgow, Edinburgh, and Ayr, alongside Beryl Reid and the Scottish comedians Dave Willis and Harry Gordon. From these shows he was chosen as principal comic for the Fol-de-Rols, the acclaimed concert party. Greatrex Newman, the producer, wrote clever sketches and lyrics: Tripp modestly said that he didn't always understand the words he was singing but Newman praised him, saying 'Jack always brings something extra' (private information). He stayed with the Fols for fourteen years, becoming a particular summer favourite on the south coast. He performed sketches by Robert Dhery, the French comedian, Dhery and Jacques Tati being special favourites. In 1955 he appeared at the Adelphi in London in the revue 'Such is Life', with Al Read and Shirley Bassey. Later, in the 1960s and 1970s, his own revue, 'Take a Tripp', appeared regularly at various south coast resorts each summer. 
Meanwhile a successful parallel career had developed, in pantomime. Tripp started as second comic to such 'Mothers' as Douglas Byng who taught him how to 'attack' a part. He was a hilarious Johnny in 'Mother Goose' at the Oxford New Theatre in 1954, performing his ballerina and rebellious recruit sketches. He first played a dame -- the part for which he became best known -- in 1959, at the Alhambra in Glasgow, subsequently playing the part thirty-five times. So popular was he with panto managements that he only worked for four -- Howard and Wyndham, Derek Salberg (for fourteen years), Duncan Weldon (for twelve years), and Paul Elliot. They always wanted him back, knowing he could save the show even if their starring television celebrity proved inadequate. Salberg called Tripp 'my insurance policy' (private information). His pantomime career culminated in outstanding appearances as Nurse Ribena in 'Babes in the Wood' (Sadlers Wells, 1994-5) and a spectacular Mother Goose (Plymouth, 1995-6). In 1996 he was made an MBE for services to pantomime. His last appearance was as Lord Brockhurst in Sandy Wilson's 1930s pastiche 'Divorce Me Darling' (Chichester, 1997). In other hands this elderly roue part could have lent itself to vulgarity: Tripp brought to it the innocent charm that pervaded all his work. 
Small and stylish, with twinkling eyes and feet, Tripp was a comic through and through. His face, with its inquiring nose and wide mouth -- changing in a flash from broad grin to purse-lipped pathos -- was an open invitation to laughter, as was his voice, a husky drawl with an inbuilt chortle. In visual comedy his timing was perfection. As dame he was dainty and demure -- as immaculately clean as his starched gingham outfits; he never relied on funny costumes for a laugh. Without a trace of effeminacy he managed to suggest a sprightly female character as well as a gentle children's playmate. His favourite pantomime foil was Roy Hudd who wrote and directed all Tripp's later Christmas shows. Hudd understood Tripp's talents perfectly, regarding him as 'the best Dame there is' ('Evening Herald' [Plymouth], 2 Jan 2004), a view shared by Tripp's peers. 
Off stage Tripp was full of 'joie de vivre' and humour, rejoicing in life's absurdities. A loyal and generous friend, he was always ready to offer shrewd professional advice. Despite his sunny temperament he could be keenly critical, especially of bad manners and conceit in fellow artistes, while never losing his sense of the ridiculous. He and his longstanding on- and off-stage partner, Allen Christie, were outstanding hosts in their sumptuous flat in Wilbury Road, Hove. He died on 10 July 2005 in the Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton, of acute pneumonia. He was survived by a nephew, Paul Andrews, Allen Christie having predeceased him. A service of celebration and thanksgiving was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 28 October 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 95907


King, John Leonard, Baron King of Wartnaby (1917-2005), businessman, discouraged enquiries about his early years and gave no birth date in his 'Who's Who' entry, but in his 'Burke's Peerage' entry he claimed to have been born in August 1917, the son of Albert John King and his wife, Kathleen. No birth certificate for a John Leonard King, son of Albert and Kathleen King, born in England in 1917, has yet been found; the only John Leonard King born in England that year was born on 21 June 1917 in Farnborough, Cropredy, near Banbury, Oxfordshire, the son of Jane King, a domestic servant, and an unnamed father. It is possible that his origins contributed to what one obituarist described as his 'deep insecurity about himself and his early life' ('The Independent', 13 July 2005). 
King's schoolmates in Dunsfold, Surrey, described him as a 'dunce' in school, but bold and lively out of it ('The Independent', 15 July 1990). He left at sixteen without qualifications and found manual employment in engineering and motor workshops locally. Noted as a 'natty dresser' (ibid.), he graduated to be a car salesman for Coombs Garage in Guildford, run by Arthur Sykes, whose daughter, Lorna Kathleen (died 1969) he married in 1941 (they had three sons and one daughter, born between 1943 and 1950). King's duties included the uncomfortable task of repossessing cars -- the beginnings of his reputation as a tough man not to be trifled with. At the age of nineteen he started his own business, Whitehouse Motors, with finance from some local builders and the help of a Ford sub-agency from Sykes. He was aggressive enough to be chosen as a Ford salesman of the year. Following the outbreak of the Second World War the motor business failed but an engineering sideline, manufacturing components for aero engines, continued and expanded. Crucially King managed to secure access to modern American machine tools provided through the lend-lease programme. These gave him a major advantage when the war ended. 
After the war King chose to switch production to Yorkshire, establishing Whitehouse Industries at Ferrybridge, in a depressed mining area, bringing skilled engineers from the midlands to train his workforce. It is not clear whether this move was because of access to scarce labour, or his friendship with the Yorkshireman James Hanson and his friend Gordon White, the founders of Hanson Trust. He later called it a social experiment; 'the Beveridge report was kicking around and the idea of doing something appealed' ('Financial Times', 7 May 1983). At first he turned out miscellaneous products, from ballpoint pens to steel ladders, but he soon moved into manufacturing ball-bearings, 'one of the most basic things you can make' (ibid.). He took over Pollards, which made self-lubricating bearings. He and his wife, Lorna, were a dedicated partnership, working twelve-hour days on tight margins. Both learned to fly and at one critical moment Lorna took their aircraft to Dublin to raise vital funds. 
King also played hard, socializing with Hanson and White. The company's move to Yorkshire began an obsession with hunting; he was master of the Badsworth foxhounds in 1949 and of the duke of Rutland's foxhounds in 1958, and chairman of the Belvoir hunt in 1972. Gordon White described him as 'the bravest fellow I have seen in the hunting field' ('The Guardian', 13 July 2005). In the 1960s business success enabled him to buy a 2000 acre estate at Wartnaby, Leicestershire, prime hunting country, and the country boy relished his place among the landed gentry. He also joined the Conservative Party. 'I wondered whether one was grand enough for the Tories', he later said. 'I was certainly too grand for the Labour party. So I had a look at the Liberal party and when I discovered it was nothing more than a convenient attitude of mind, I got on with being a Tory' ('Financial Times', 7 May 1983). He developed formidable networking skills, adept at finding ways to secure newspaper attention for his businesses. He moved further into political circles, in part with the help of the ubiquitous John Poulson, the corrupt architect and developer married to his wife's sister. 
King built Pollards into the country's third largest ball-bearing manufacturer and sought a merger with the Swedish SKF company, but Labour's Industrial Reorganization Corporation intervened in 1969 to compel a merger of the three British companies. King walked away with a personal profit of $3 million but was struck by tragedy when his wife, Lorna, died. He placed a $20,000 pearl necklace in her coffin and was furious when his private gesture was publicized in a newspaper. At his dying wife's request King tried, but failed, to rescue the Poulson business, but in the process met Reginald Maudling, deputy leader of the Conservative Party. Maudling attended King's second wedding, on 21 September 1970, to the Hon. Isabel Cynthia Monckton ('b'. 1926), the third daughter of George Vere Arundel Monckton, eighth Viscount Galway. They had met while hunting. 
King swiftly re-entered business after losing Pollards, returning to Surrey to buy into Dennis, the fire engine and dustcart manufacturer, and becoming its chairman. But it was as chairman of Babcock and Wilcox (1970-94), a prime manufacturer of power station boilers, that he really broke onto the national scene. He was an energetic chairman and began a necessary, but ultimately only partially successful, policy of diversification. His appointment brought an office in St James and a seat at the top tables of the Confederation of British Industry. By the mid-1970s he was a ubiquitous networker in his converted London taxi, with its own phone. From 1973 he chaired the Conservative Party's city and industrial liaison council; he sat on the review board for government contracts, and was knighted in 1979. He was marked out as a potential nationalized industry chairman. He was offered the British Steel Corporation but rejected it, saying he wanted 'something do-able'. 
After Margaret Thatcher's election victory in 1979 King was appointed to the National Enterprise Board, Labour's mechanism for restructuring industry, and became chairman (1980-81), delighting in his brief to run it down, dismissing it as 'a reluctant provider of funds of last resort' ('The Guardian', 13 July 2005). Cabinet ministers noted the prime minister's imprimatur. Nigel Lawson described King as a 'rugged, astute and politically aware industrialist... rightly one of Margaret's favourite businessmen' (Lawson, 227). Then in 1981 came the job he had lobbied for: chairman of British Airways. Norman Tebbit, the secretary of state for industry, acknowledged King's forcefulness. Interviewing him with John Nott as a possible candidate, he said: 'the impact was extraordinary. He is a man full of controlled, sometimes concealed, brute power with a razor-sharp brain often masked by his apparently naive and simple questions... Our conversation, far from being a gentle probing exercise... ended with King agreeing to accept the job. (Tebbit, 168)' British Airways (BA) was in need of new direction. Formed by a merger between the British Overseas Airways Corporation and British European Airways years before, it still suffered their rivalries, and customer service was dreadful; cabin staff grudged passengers even a glass of water on flights from Heathrow to Paris. The airline had plummeted into loss against a budget promising rising profits. The key to King's appointment was the brief to bring in private capital -- in essence to privatize the airline -- the kind of project that King and other Thatcher advisers had been mulling over for years. It was by no means obviously possible; one city banker commented, 'I suffer the service. Don't say I have got to buy shares as well' ('Financial Times', 7 May 1983). 
King (who was made a life peer, as Baron King of Wartnaby, in 1983) worked a revolution with the help of smart branding and advertising, a dedication to customer service, and powerful financial engineering that took early write-offs to facilitate rising profits and later privatization. He commissioned a report from the accountants Price Waterhouse on which he based much of his strategy. He cut jobs at all levels including the boardroom. Executive perks were reduced and managers had to be more modest in their choice of company car. Overall staff numbers shrank from 52,000 to 37,500 in two years. The key to his success was to appoint good subordinates -- first Gordon Dunlop as financial controller and then Colin Marshall as chief executive. Marshall's remorseless attention to detail and commitment to customer service combined well with King's determined vision and contacts. Though there were strains, it remained a winning combination. King dealt with the politicians, and negotiated some major aircraft deals. Marshall ran operations. Though never soulmates, they spoke regularly at 7:30 every morning. 
King switched BA's advertising to Saatchi and Saatchi, the Conservative Party agency. A brilliant slogan, 'The world's favourite airline' (based on research showing that while BA did not have the largest overall number of customers it had the widest international spread), was allied to an unflagging drive to put customers first. On one far-flung press trip, King was accused of letting some journalists slum it in club class while others went first class. 'Club Class in British Airways', he returned acidly, 'is not slumming it' (private information). He was demanding, basing action on careful research, but not always close to the details. At an early press conference he gave a recorded television interview. At its conclusion, a public relations assistant leant over. 'Please don't use any of the figures', he said. 'He has got them all wrong' (personal knowledge). In 1985 he hired David Burnside, a combative Ulster Unionist, who had aggressively promoted free enterprise at the Institute of Directors. Under Burnside the BA public relations machine, with a potent mixture of good staff work and free flights for journalists, won over a sceptical press and helped the successful privatization that, delayed by an airline slump, eventually came in 1987. 
During King's chairmanship of BA the airline's turnover more than doubled, from just over $2 billion in 1981 to over $5 billion in 1992. Over the same period a loss of $140 million was turned into a profit of $434 million, though profits fell back in 1993 to $185 million. The improvement was matched by a huge change in perception. BA became a symbol of the success of Thatcherite privatization, and a business school model of corporate turnaround. King saw it in patriotic terms, 'The message is the Union Jack... It's an interesting business, and it's British, and it's the best. And there's nothing wrong with that' (Corke, 136). His belligerent attitude to critics of Margaret Thatcher was typified by his resignation from the Confederation of British Industry in 1980 after its director-general, Sir Terence Beckett, threatened a 'bare-knuckle fight' with the government. But he could use strong-arm tactics with the tories too, cancelling political donations over a dispute on Heathrow landing slots. 
King's acerbic, pigeon-chested, but always immaculately suited style embroidered the myth. He could be a bully with a 'beagle stare', but employees at BA saw him as their champion and he was popular with the shop floor at Babcocks. He enjoyed a good party and relished the company of celebrities. While confrontational with some journalists, he was particularly close to the 'Daily Telegraph', where he became a director. 
Competition from other airlines was fierce and King used his links with the Conservative government remorselessly. In 1984 he was able to stop plans to hand some of BA's treasured Heathrow landing slots to British Caledonian and other airlines, and in 1987 he won an even sweeter victory when BA took over British Caledonian in spite of concerns about competition. But he was less successful internationally; key strategic aims of links with airlines in the United States and Belgium were thwarted. Competition from Richard Branson's Virgin Atlantic and its readiness to tease BA as monopolistic were persistent irritants, particularly when some of BA's routes were handed to Virgin. In 1991 rivalry broke into open warfare when Branson accused BA of a dirty tricks campaign. King, who had described Branson as 'a grinning sweater', made the mistake of publishing his reply, counter-accusing Virgin of a public relations campaign against BA. It precipitated a libel suit by Virgin in January 1993, alleging the spreading of smear stories, the poaching of passengers, and the shredding of documents. BA had to plead guilty and pay damages. In the storm that followed Burnside left and King, though probably ignorant of exactly what had gone on, agreed to bring forward his retirement, due later in the year. His consolation was to be appointed BA's president and, more strikingly, the standing ovation he received at BA's annual general meeting, when he entered the hall, from the small shareholders to whom he was a hero. 
King retired to Wartnaby and his country interests, but continued to use his BA office until 2001. He stepped down as chairman of Babcocks in 1994, again becoming president. In 1994 he briefly became chairman of the engineering group Aerostructures Hamble but this flotation was not a success and it was soon taken over. He died of heart failure on 12 July 2005 at his home, Friars Well, Wartnaby. He was survived by his second wife and the four children of his first marriage. His estate was valued for probate purposes at more than $27 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 95911


Saunders, Dame Cicely Mary Strode (1918-2005), physician and founder of the modern hospice movement, was born on 22 June 1918 at Linden Lodge, Bedford Avenue, Barnet, Hertfordshire, the daughter of (Philip) Gordon Saunders (died 1961), land surveyor, and his wife, Mary Christian, 'nee' Knight (died 1968). She had two brothers, John ('b'. 1920) and Christopher ('b'. 1926). Her supportive father became a senior partner with the estate agents John D. Wood & Co. His children enjoyed all the material comforts of a prosperous family, although Saunders later spoke of having a very distant relationship with her mother. Tall and shy, she described herself as 'sadly unpopular' at school (Saunders and Swann, 58). At the age of fourteen she was sent to Roedean School. Initially unhappy, she eventually made friends and became head of house. 
In 1938 Saunders went to St Anne's College, Oxford, to read philosophy, politics, and economics, her parents having disapproved of her earlier ambition to become a nurse. In 1940, after the outbreak of the Second World War, she interrupted her studies to begin training as a nurse at St Thomas's Hospital in London. She described that period as 'the first time in my life I felt I really belonged and fitted in' (Saunders and Swann, 58). The friendships she made with her nursing set continued for the rest of her life and it was at this time that she deepened her love of music and enjoyed singing in a choir. Four years later, to her bitter disappointment, she was forced to leave nursing following the exacerbation of spinal problems that had troubled her since childhood. She returned to Oxford, gained a war degree, and in 1945 qualified with a diploma in public and social administration. She began training as a hospital almoner at St Thomas's Hospital. 
It was while working as an almoner at London's Archway Hospital in 1947 that Saunders met the first of three Polish men who were to change the course of her life. David Tasma was a Jewish refugee from the Warsaw ghetto and she was drawn to his lonely suffering. A close relationship developed and they discussed the idea of creating a more home-like environment where those coming to the end of their lives could be offered hope and comfort. When Tasma died in 1948 he left her $500 'to be a window in your home' (Du Boulay, 58). It was Tasma who told Saunders, 'I want only what is in your mind and in your heart' (ibid., 56). Saunders quoted this in speeches throughout her life, emphasizing that good care required both scientific rigour and loving compassion. 
Saunders's life's work was now determined. Her vision to establish her own home for the dying was underpinned by her religious faith, discovered while on holiday in Cornwall with Christian friends. It was, she said, 'as if a switch had flipped' (Du Boulay, 49). In order to understand more about the needs of the dying she began work as a volunteer at St Luke's, a home for the dying in Bayswater. Norman Barrett, a surgeon, told her that if she wanted to make an impact she must study medicine: 'It's the doctors who desert the dying', he said (ibid., 63). Saunders commenced medical training in 1951; she graduated MB BS in 1957 and took up a research fellowship at St Mary's School of Medicine in 1958. 
To further her studies of pain management in the incurably ill Saunders started work at St Joseph's, a Catholic hospice for the dying poor in Hackney. She was well accepted by the nuns and began to encourage the regular use of oral opioids rather than pursue the standard hospital practice of inadequate and infrequent injections of morphine that left many patients abandoned to uncontrolled pain and ignored by doctors, who saw dying as failure. She began to formulate her concept of total pain: the need to pay attention to social, emotional, and spiritual needs, as well as delivering a systematic approach to symptom control. Her ideas were first published in 1958 in an article, 'Dying of cancer', in 'St Thomas's Hospital Gazette'. She described 'a team who work together to relieve where they cannot heal, to keep the patient's own struggle within his compass and to bring hope and consolation to the end'. This was followed by an influential series of six articles for the 'Nursing Times' in 1959, which received favourable reviews in 'The Lancet'. Saunders began to lecture widely, using personal stories of patients' suffering based on over 1000 meticulously recorded case histories. These narratives were to have a huge impact on the increasing numbers of clinicians who came to hear her speak. 
It was while she was at St Joseph's that Saunders met a second Pole, Antoni Michniewicz. They had a passionate, spiritual relationship confined to short meetings on the ward. She later said, 'I loved him very much... he taught me what it was like to be dying and to be bereaved' ('Daily Telegraph'). The deaths soon afterwards of 'Mrs G', another patient with whom Saunders had enjoyed a mutually supportive friendship for over seven years, and of her father in 1961, left Saunders prostrated by grief. None the less she continued to pour her energies into planning and fund-raising for her own hospice, to be called St Christopher's, after the patron saint of travellers. 
By the end of 1959 Saunders had drawn up a ten-page proposal for the hospice and St Christopher's was registered as a charity in 1961. In 1963 her brother Christopher found her a site on Lawrie Park Road in Sydenham and building began in 1965. Saunders worked tirelessly and discovered a remarkable talent for marshalling others to her cause, including major charitable trusts, London's merchant companies, and members of the British establishment. St Christopher's admitted its first patients in 1967, the opening ceremony being performed by Princess Alexandra, St Christopher's patron. Subsequently Saunders commented that it took '19 years to build the home around the window'. She had initially thought of creating an Anglican religious community but broadened her vision so that St Christopher's became a place that welcomed staff and patients of any faith or none, thus creating a model capable of wide adaptation. However, Saunders's strong Christian faith was a fundamental factor in her commitment to the dying and remained an anchor throughout her life. She was a long-standing opponent of the legalization of euthanasia and was an important influence on the report by the Church of England, 'On Dying Well' (1975), which rejected the argument for euthanasia, asserting that everyone should have the right 'to die well', without pain and with dignity. 
The opening of St Christopher's is widely recognized as the birth of the modern hospice movement and the next twenty years saw a surge of interest in Saunders's new approach to the care of the dying, particularly in the United States where she undertook lecture tours in 1963, 1965, and 1966. Inspired by meeting Saunders, Florence Wald, dean of the Yale University school of nursing, established the first hospice home care team in America at New Haven. Saunders was to be medical director of St Christopher's for the next eighteen years. She was primarily an outstanding bedside clinician but was determined to evaluate the new approaches to care and recruited a team of leaders in their fields to do so. The professor of pharmacology at St Mary's Hospital in London, Harold Stewart, was the chairman of St Christopher's research committee. He was supported by John Hinton, professor of psychiatry at the Middlesex, who wrote a widely influential Penguin paperback, 'Dying', in 1967, and undertook significant studies on the quality of the care that was being delivered. Robert Twycross worked as research fellow at St Christopher's and began the programme of studies on oral morphine and diamorphine which were to revolutionize the practice of the relief of chronic pain, demonstrating that morphine given orally in the right dose, at the right interval, could provide constant pain relief without addiction. 
Saunders always believed that 'hospice' referred not to a building but to a philosophy of care that needed a sound academic footing in order to become an integral part of general healthcare systems. The fifty-four in-patient beds at St Christopher's were quickly followed by the development in 1969 of the first service to deliver care to patients in their own homes, led by Mary Baines, a local GP who had helped with weekend on-call cover for the hospice. Colin Murray Parkes from the Tavistock Institute supported the development of care for family and friends and the bereavement service was launched in 1970, followed by day care. 
Saunders emphasized that the St Christopher's model should not be slavishly copied but needed adapting to local needs and cultures, as her voluminous correspondence supporting service developments across the world demonstrated. She enjoyed her increasing acclaim but was never too busy to respond to those with a genuine interest in care of the dying. She understood that hospices could never respond to the needs of all and that education would be vital in the drive to improve care of the dying in other settings. In 1973 a purpose-built study centre was opened. Gillian Ford, then deputy chief medical officer for England, was seconded to St Christopher's to oversee its development, and by the time of Saunders's death over 50,000 healthcare professionals had trained there. Ford was to be instrumental in achieving recognition of palliative medicine as a speciality by the Royal College of Physicians. Another friend from medical school days, Tom West, returned from work as a missionary doctor in Africa to become Saunders's deputy in 1973 and medical director in 1985, when Saunders retired from the role to become chairman of council. 
Throughout her life Saunders wrote and taught, enjoying international lecture tours. In the eighteen years of her medical directorship, she was the author of over eighty-five publications, some of them translated into several languages; these included the edited volumes 'Management of Terminal Malignant Disease' (1978) and 'Living with Dying' (1983). She received prizes and honours from many countries including more than twenty-five honorary degrees. In 1977 she became the first person for more than 100 years to receive an honorary doctorate of medicine from the archbishop of Canterbury, and in 1987 she was awarded the British Medical Association's gold medal for services to medicine. Other honours included the Onassis prize for services to humanity (1989) and the Franklin D. Roosevelt four freedoms medal for worship (2000). She was made a DBE in 1980 and in 1989 received the rare honour of entry into the Order of Merit. In 2001 St Christopher's was awarded the Conrad N. Hilton humanitarian prize of $1 million, which Saunders received on behalf of the hospice from Kofi Annan, secretary-general of the United Nations, in New York. 
On 31 January 1980, in the parish church of St Philip in Sydenham, Saunders married the third Pole in her life, Marian Bohusz-Szyszko (1901/2-1995). He was seventeen years her senior and the relationship was to provide the sense of personal joy and confidence she had sought all her life. Bohusz was an artist and the couple had met in 1963 when he was exhibiting in London. Saunders admired his intense religious works and bought one for the walls of the hospice. A long friendship began and Bohusz became artist in residence at St Christopher's, setting up a studio in the hospice. After the marriage his health became ever poorer and he died at St Christopher's in 1995. In Bohusz's later years Saunders became increasingly involved in his nursing care and more tied to the house they shared at 51 Lawrie Park Gardens, close to the hospice. After his death she once again began to lecture and travel. In 1998 her eightieth birthday was celebrated with a conference in her honour at the Royal College of Physicians, London. In 2000 she retired as chairman of St Christopher's to become founder-president and helped in the development of Cicely Saunders International, a new foundation to further international research in palliative care. She continued to come into her office in the hospice on most days. 
Saunders's vision of holistic care, supporting family as well as patient, caught the imagination of the public as well as professionals. She was the subject of a biography, many articles in newspapers and popular magazines, television documentaries, and films for professional audiences. She was photographed on hundreds of occasions and her husband painted her portrait several times. Two images stand out: a bronze head, which captures her unflinching determination, completed by the sculptor Nigel Boonham in 2001; and the portrait commissioned from Catherine Goodman for the National Portrait Gallery, and unveiled there in April 2005 in Saunders's presence. 
Saunders was an imposing and sometimes intimidating figure in whom personal motivation and professional aspirations combined to create a vision that changed the practice of medicine and transformed the care of the dying. People everywhere responded to Saunders's insistence that death must not be seen as failure, but as part of life and to her assertion that people should be able to live until they die. As she put it, 'You matter because you are you and you matter to the last moment of your life. We will do all we can to help you, not only to die peacefully but to live until you die' ('Nursing Times', 1976, 72.1003-5). Her energy and enthusiasm were irrepressible; she often commented, 'There is still so much more to be done.' She was an inspirational leader. She also had a wonderful sense of humour and an inclination to gossip, and took pleasure in a daily 'whisky on the rocks'. By the time of her death there were some 200 hospices in the UK and similar programmes in 115 countries across the world. She died in St Christopher's Hospice of metastatic breast cancer on 14 July 2005. She continued to see visitors up to the end and remembered, close to her own death, to ask after the dying father of one of her nurses. Following cremation at Beckenham crematorium on 29 July her ashes were buried on 2 September, with those of her husband, in the garden of St Christopher's. Over 2000 people attended the memorial service held on 8 March 2006 in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 95913


Tyndall, John Hutchyns (1934-2005), political activist, was born at Stork Nest, Topsham Road, Exeter, on 14 July 1934, the son of George Francis Tyndall, manager of an aerated water company, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Parker. His father was later employed at St George's House, a YMCA hostel at Southwark, in London. His grandfather, from co. Waterford, had served in the Royal Irish Constabulary. Educated at Beckenham and Penge grammar school, Tyndall spent his national service in the Royal Artillery in Germany. He then took a succession of jobs as bookkeeper or salesman. He was drawn to right-wing politics, and at the age of twenty-two joined A. K. Chesterton's League of Empire Loyalists. This was an alliance of right-wing Conservatives and British fascists. It generated publicity by stunts at Conservative Party conferences, but had no electoral ambitions of its own. 
In 1957 Tyndall left the League of Empire Loyalists to form the National Labour Party. In 1960 this group merged with the White Defence League, to form his first but the second British National Party (the first such party had fallen into decline at the end of the Second World War). The British National Party had a paramilitary wing, Spearhead. Tyndall was its deputy commander. In 1962 he published 'The Authoritarian State', espousing empire, the repatriation of black people and Asians from Britain, and a society in which work would be compulsory and gender roles strictly enforced. In the same year he was convicted under the 'Public Order Act' for his activities with Spearhead, and left the British National Party to form a new party, the British National Socialist Movement. He was photographed in Nazi-style paramilitary regalia, a picture that would be repeatedly reproduced to his discomfort later. In 1963 he formed yet another party, the Greater Britain Movement. In the same year he was engaged to Francoise Dior, the niece of the fashion designer Christian. She was reported as saying that she wanted 'to give birth to a little Nazi' ('The Times', 20 July 2005). The engagement was broken off, and she later married Colin Jordan, Tyndall's political colleague and rival. 
Tyndall was influenced by different elder statesmen of the British far right. He was brought into politics by A. K. Chesterton. Later, in the early 1960s, he made use of funds from the estate of the antisemitic camel doctor Arnold Leese. In his public speeches he laboured to imitate the accent and vocabulary of Oswald Mosley. He was not averse to violence, or to infringing the law. In 1966 he was convicted of illegal possession of a firearm. In 1986 he received a six-month sentence for conspiracy to incite racial hatred. In 1999 the 'Daily Mirror' published pictures of him with the bomber David Copeland. At the time of his death he was again facing trial on charges of incitement. 
In 1967 the National Front (NF) was formed, as a merger of the League of Empire Loyalists, the Greater Britain Movement, and the British National Party. Soon it was buoyed by the controversy surrounding the anti-immigration speeches of Enoch Powell. In 1972 Tyndall became party chairman. The NF enjoyed greater success than its predecessors, winning 16 per cent of the vote in a by-election at West Bromwich in 1973. It won over 100,000 votes in the London elections of 1977 and announced plans to field over 300 candidates at the general election of 1979. In 1977 the Anti-Nazi League was launched, a mass alliance of students, trade unionists, activists, and musicians, to oppose the NF. Its success had a powerful negative effect on the NF's fortunes. The league produced anti-NF literature and organized huge anti-racist carnivals. The NF's opportunities were restricted, and in the 1979 election every single NF candidate's deposit was lost. 
Tyndall resigned from the NF's leadership in 1980, going on to launch a further party, the New National Front. This group in turn adopted the name British National Party (BNP) in 1982. It enjoyed limited electoral success, with the election of a single councillor, Derek Beackon, in Tower Hamlets in 1993. Following further opposition, however, the seat was lost, and the BNP entered several years of decline. In 1996, Tyndall took the decision that would effectively bring an end to his active political career: he invited Nick Griffin to join the BNP. Griffin had until that point been a leading figure in the rump of the National Front, in which role he had enjoyed only limited success. On joining the BNP, Griffin first deposed Tyndall as leader, and then took that party into its longest sustained period of growth. Seen within the BNP increasingly as a malcontent, Tyndall retained control of his own paper, 'Spearhead', but was isolated and excluded from the party in 2003. Shortly before Tyndall's death the BNP fielded 119 candidates in the general election of 2005. Their tally of 192,750 votes was then the highest achieved by the far right at any election in British history. 
Having until then lived with his mother, on 19 November 1977 Tyndall married Valerie Dawn Olliff, a 35-year-old divorcee, a fellow right-wing activist and election candidate, and daughter of Joseph Charles Parker, engineer. They had one daughter, Marina. He died on 19 July 2005 at his home, 52 Westbourne Villas, Hove, Sussex, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 95918


Rogers, Sir Frank Jarvis (1920-2005), journalist and newspaper executive, was born on 24 February 1920 at Holly Villas, Church Lawton, Cheshire, the son of Percy Rogers (died 1960), an earthenware manufacturer, and his wife, Elsie Mary, 'nee' Jarvis (died 1956). He was educated at Wolstanton grammar school, Staffordshire, leaving at the age of seventeen to become a trainee on the sports desk of the 'Daily Mirror' in Manchester. Within three years he had become the newspaper's correspondent in Sheffield. In those first years as a journalist, as he would later recall, he stumbled across the kind of restrictive industrial practices that characterized the national press for decades, and that he would spend much of his later career attempting to control. The local chapel of the National Union of Journalists complained that, although designated a reporter, he had been carrying with him the equipment by which photographers transmitted their pictures, and so was effectively doing someone else's job. 
In 1940 Rogers was conscripted into the Royal Army Service Corps, serving in north Africa and Italy. When the war ended in 1945 he returned to the 'Mirror' and worked in several regional offices before applying in 1949 to be editor of the Nigerian 'Daily Times', recently acquired by the Mirror Group. On 23 July the same year he married Esme Elizabeth Sophia (Esma) Holland (died 1998), a 21-year-old receptionist and bookkeeper, and daughter of Arthur Edwin Holland, builder. They had two daughters. After two years in Lagos, Rogers decided that his talents were better suited to administration than journalism and he switched to being the paper's general manager. In 1952 he was sent to Melbourne to manage 'The Argus', the Mirror Group's most recent acquisition. 
By now Rogers had caught the eye of Cecil King, the Mirror Group's chairman, who recalled him to London in 1955 as his personal assistant. Three years later he was made managing director of Overseas Newspapers, the division of the company that ran its west African publications, based in London. In 1960 he was appointed to the board of the 'Daily Mirror', then at the peak of its success with a circulation approaching 5 million -- a sixfold increase in the twenty-three years since he had joined it. His particular responsibility was industrial relations, meaning that he spent many hours in negotiation with the print unions, whose power to halt production at will won them repeated concessions over pay and manning levels. Later he would characterize the employers' attitude at the time as 'a totally inexplicable syndrome of weakness and spinelessness and plain poor management', adding: 'Managements let themselves be tyrannized' (private information). He came to recognize that eventually the proprietors would have to engineer a showdown with the unions, but it would be another two decades before they were finally forced to abandon their resistance to change. 
In 1961 the Mirror Group won a takeover battle with Robert Maxwell to acquire Odhams Press, and the combined group became the International Publishing Corporation (IPC). Apart from its portfolio of profitable magazines, Odhams published two national newspapers, 'The People' and the failing 'Daily Herald'. Rogers and Hugh Cudlipp, the 'Mirror''s editorial director, were the prime movers in transforming the 'Herald' into 'The Sun' in 1964, aiming to create a hybrid between a tabloid and a serious broadsheet that would appeal to the modern generation. It failed to do so and after five loss-making years King and Cudlipp decided to sell it cheaply to Rupert Murdoch, the young Australian who had recently bought the 'News of the World'. Rogers, who had been appointed managing director of IPC in 1965, was opposed to the sale, foreseeing correctly that Murdoch would transform 'The Sun' into a powerful competitor with the 'Mirror'. He advocated closing 'The Sun' down; but Cudlipp and King feared that this would antagonize the unions and provoke industrial trouble at the group's other publications. 
In 1968 Rogers was intimately involved with Cudlipp in the palace coup by which King was ousted. The chairman, increasingly gloomy about the state of the nation, had promoted a scheme to replace Harold Wilson's Labour government with a national government led by Lord Mountbatten, in which he imagined he would play a role. The board were appalled by this and, when King refused to resign, they dismissed him and appointed Cudlipp as chairman. Later Rogers was to admit that, although King had to go, it was a mistake to choose Cudlipp as his successor: 'He had all the wrong skills', he said (Dudley Edwards, 415). King was allowed to address the company's annual general meeting and took the opportunity to denounce those who had engineered his dismissal. While he praised Rogers's handling of the print unions in his previous role, he criticized his performance as managing director. He proved right, in that IPC fared poorly after his departure and in 1970, on Rogers's initiative, it became a subsidiary of the Reed Paper Group. Very soon Rogers was dismissed by Reed's chairman, Don Ryder. 
On leaving the company where he had until then spent his entire career Rogers's first appointment was as chairman of the National Newspaper Steering Group, a committee of employers and union leaders charged with improving the industry's labour relations. It was a measure of the respect in which he was held by his peers that he was chosen to serve for many years on other industry bodies, including the Newspaper Publishers' Association and the International Press Institute. In 1971 he was appointed to the board of East Midland Allied Press, becoming chairman in 1973. He held that position for seventeen years, overseeing the company's transformation from a small regional newspaper group to a powerful publisher of national magazines. He still found himself in regular confrontation with the print unions, having to endure a six-month strike by journalists on the 'Northamptonshire Evening Telegraph' in Kettering, who were seeking to make union membership compulsory. 
In 1985 Rogers moved back into the world of national newspapers. At the suggestion of Andrew Knight, editor of 'The Economist', the Canadian entrepreneur Conrad Black had bought a minority interest in the Daily Telegraph Group and invited Rogers to serve as one of his nominated representatives on the board. Some months later Black assumed full control, appointing Knight as his chief executive and Rogers deputy chairman, in which role he used his experience in negotiating with the print unions to pave the way for the introduction of computerized technology. By now he had come to be regarded as a hard-headed elder statesman of the industry, a status endorsed when he was knighted in 1988. As chairman of the Newspaper Publishers' Association he was a key figure in the establishment of the Press Complaints Commission in 1990, replacing the Press Council as the industry's self-regulatory body. Instances of intrusion by the media had fuelled demands for privacy legislation, which Rogers and most others in the industry opposed. By enforcing its code of conduct the commission sought to show that such legislation was unnecessary. He remained on the Telegraph board until he was eighty, stepping down in 2001, shortly before Black had to dispose of his newspaper empire to face charges of financial irregularities in the United States. 
Following the death of his first wife, on 3 January 2001 Rogers married Sheena Phillips, a widowed, 52-year-old general nurse, daughter of Peter Mulvie, accountant. She nursed him through a long illness until on 19 July 2005 he died from cerebrovascular disease at his home, Greensleeves, Loudwater Drive, Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire. He was survived by his second wife and the two daughters of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 95920


Doll, Sir (William) Richard Shaboe (1912-2005), physician and epidemiologist, was born at 15 Park Road, Hampton Hill, Middlesex, on 28 October 1912, the elder son of Henry William Doll, physician and surgeon, and his wife, Amy Kathleen, 'nee' Shaboe, concert pianist. He was educated at Westminster School, where he showed a flair for mathematics and considered studying it at university. Instead he studied medicine and by chance became an epidemiologist -- an ideal vocation for a numerate doctor with a social conscience, since it permitted him to apply his talents to major public health problems around the world. 
Much of Doll's upbringing at home was by his Victorian grandmother. When he left school in 1931 he was turning away from religion and towards pacifism and socialism, influenced by the First World War and by the growing numbers of demoralized unemployed. As a medical student at St Thomas's Hospital, London (1931-7), he delivered babies in the slums of Lambeth and was appalled by the living conditions, malnutrition, and poverty. He became increasingly aware that much disease and premature death could be prevented by social change. He helped organize the St Thomas's Socialist Society, joined the Communist Party, and visited Soviet Russia (and, for different reasons, Nazi Germany). He participated in the Jarrow march in 1936, a mass protest against unemployment, providing first aid to the marchers, and energetically helped raise funds for medical aid to the republicans in the Spanish Civil War. 
Soon after Doll qualified, the Second World War began. By then he had already predicted and accepted the necessity of war with Nazi Germany and had volunteered for the Royal Army Medical Corps, with which he served throughout the war. Three days after the outbreak of hostilities he went to France as medical officer to a regular battalion, the First Loyals. He treated and helped evacuate many wounded through the chaotic retreat to Dunkirk, despite sustained shelling and air attack, taking charge when other officers were lost, and leading men to safety. In 1941 he was sent to Egypt, travelling via the Cape (with Archie Cochrane), and served as medical officer in a Cairo infectious disease ward and then on a hospital ship in the Mediterranean that was closely involved with the Salerno landings. He developed renal tuberculosis and was repatriated in 1944; the kidney was removed, and he recovered. 
He met his future wife, Joan Mary Faulkner (1913-2001), who was at the time married to Hugh Charles Faulkner, at a meeting of communist doctors. She was the formidably intelligent daughter of Charles Duncan Blatchford (a son in Blatchford and Sons, artificial limb manufacturers) and Susan Margherita, 'nee' Rota (a forceful Italian who had grown up in the Lambeth area, and eventually lived with Richard and Joan for many years). Like Doll Joan was committed to political change, only partly to improve health, and both campaigned for the establishment of a national health service in Britain, in 1948 jointly writing a pamphlet entitled 'Humanise our Hospitals'. They remained communists (although increasingly uneasily so, after the 1948 Lysenko affair) for some twenty years, but a year after the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956 and Khrushchov's secret speech describing the realities of the Stalin era they resigned, and came to accept the impracticality and undesirability of centrally planned command economies. 
Doll proposed marriage to Joan on 8 May 1945 (VE-day, when war ended in Europe). She divorced, and they eventually married on 4 October 1949, at Kensington register office, Doll thereby becoming stepfather to her son, Tim. As Joan could not have further children they wanted to adopt, but the Dolls were atheists and at that time adoption agencies required evidence of the Christian commitment of prospective adoptive parents. With advice from the British Humanist Association they set up the Agnostics' Adoption Society. It was initially based in their home, and the Dolls used their own funds to help hire its first social worker. The society grew considerably, changing its name in 1964 to the Independent Adoption Society and expanding its remit. The Dolls themselves adopted two children, Nicholas in 1954 and Catherine in 1956. Initially to help with child and grandmother care, Isabelle (Steve) Sutherland kept house for the Dolls for four decades. 
At the suggestion of Joan, by then a rising administrative star at the Medical Research Council (MRC), Doll began his research at the Central Middlesex Hospital with the eminent gastroenterologist Francis Avery Jones, studying peptic ulcer, and conducting perhaps the first factorial randomized clinical trial. Although Doll soon moved elsewhere he was considerably influenced by Avery Jones's scientific temperament, and continued to do some research and clinical work in gastroenterology at the Central Middlesex until moving to Oxford in 1969. 
Concurrently Doll (along with several other post-war doctors who wanted to help make a better world) began to study medical statistics at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine under an extraordinarily influential epidemiologist and teacher, Austin (Tony) Bradford Hill, just as Hill was introducing the medical profession to randomization. In 1947 Hill was asked by the MRC to investigate the reasons for the rising mortality from lung cancer in the UK. Hill had observed the quality of Doll's research with Avery Jones and offered him a research post, seeking new causes of lung cancer. Doll and Hill's long collaboration discovered the main hazards of smoking, helped change the ways in which causes of disease would be investigated and understood, and greatly strengthened the discipline of epidemiology. 
The mortality attributed to lung cancer in the UK (among people of a given age) had been increasing rapidly for decades. It was known by 1947 that part of this increase was an artefact, caused by the increasing ability of doctors to recognize the disease. Such artefacts should, however, have affected men and women similarly, yet the increase was far steeper in men. These lung cancer trends did not attract much attention until after the Second World War. Many then blamed increasing atmospheric pollution, perhaps from coal smoke, and Doll himself originally thought the increase might well be due chiefly to occupational factors, or to the tarring of roads, as there were known animal carcinogens in tar. 
The results of Doll and Hill's first study were, however, clear: the one consistent difference between lung cancer patients (cases) and other patients (controls) was that almost all of the lung cancer patients had smoked. Doll and Hill published their conclusion in 1950 that smoking was 'a factor, and an important factor, in the production of carcinoma of the lung' (R. Doll and A. B. Hill, 'Smoking and carcinoma of the lung: preliminary report', 'BMJ', 1950, 2.746). Four American studies also published in 1950 (including one of comparable size, by Ernst L. Wynder and Evarts A. Graham) independently found the same association, as had two smaller German studies published in 1939 and 1943 that had been largely or wholly overlooked in England and America. Doll and Hill's second report, published in 1952, cited all these American, German, and British studies as being mutually supportive (and Doll consistently cited all of them in his historical perspectives written in the 1980s and 1990s). Extraordinarily, even with such strong evidence so clearly presented from case-control studies, most of the medical and scientific community in the early 1950s, many of whom themselves smoked, still did not accept that smoking could cause lung cancer, and argued that there must be other explanations for the association. 
Although Doll and Hill understood that there was already proof beyond reasonable doubt that smoking was an important cause of lung cancer, they also understood that further research was needed, partly to help convince sceptics and partly to see whether smoking also caused other diseases. In 1951 they enrolled 40,000 British doctors into a new type of study, asking them about their smoking habits and then following them prospectively over many years to see what the doctors died of. On 26 June 1954 the 'BMJ' published the first prospective results, confirming that lung cancer rates were much higher in smokers, and increased with the amount smoked. In 1956 Doll and Hill reported that smokers also had higher death rates from heart disease, chronic lung disease, and many other conditions. In 1957 the British (because of Doll and Hill) and Dutch were the first governments to accept officially that smoking caused lung cancer; now, all governments do so. Doll succeeded Hill as director of the MRC statistics unit in 1962, and their ten-year findings appeared in 1964. By then competent scientific doubt about smoking as a cause of lung cancer was past, and a consensus was emerging that smoking also killed even more people by other diseases. 
Doll continued for fifty years to follow meticulously every British doctor he had originally recruited in 1951 who still lived in Britain. Richard Peto, statistician and (eventually) epidemiologist, joined Doll in 1967 and collaborated closely on the prospective study of doctors, and much else, until Doll's death in 2005. Over these decades the epidemic of smoking-related deaths in Britain (and elsewhere) was evolving in complex ways. On 26 June 2004 the 'BMJ' published the fifty-year follow-up, showing that persistent cigarette smokers born in the first few decades of the twentieth century died, on average, ten years earlier than otherwise similar non-smokers. Importantly, they also showed that stopping smoking was remarkably effective at reducing the risk of dying prematurely. By then the situation in Britain had been transformed. Doll lived long enough to see widespread cessation of smoking in Britain, and to see the proportion of the male population killed by tobacco before the age of seventy fall from 20 per cent at 1970 death rates (half of all male deaths in middle age) to just 5 per cent at 2005 rates. In 1970 British men had the worst rates in the world of premature death from tobacco, but over the next few decades they had the world's greatest decrease in such deaths. 
Although best known for his work on smoking, Doll made an extraordinary range of other contributions to epidemiology and public health. Before the 1950s most epidemiological studies had been of infectious diseases, often with a relatively fast-acting organism as a necessary cause. Different concepts were needed to study non-infectious causes of disease, some of which, such as smoking, took decades to have their full effect on risk. Moreover, the fact that many people could smoke yet not develop lung cancer and that a few with lung cancer were non-smokers troubled many with traditional views on how to attribute and understand causation. Hill and Doll helped introduce new guidelines for assessing causality -- based, among other things, on the presence of a dose-response relationship and the time sequence of events. By 1950 the leading causes of death in developed countries (heart disease, stroke, and cancer) were no longer the infectious diseases, and subsequent investigations into their causes relied heavily on the criteria clearly articulated by Hill and Doll. Furthermore, much of the proper understanding of the relative merits of different types of epidemiological study design can be traced to Hill and Doll's careful discussion of the implications of their various studies. Doll's influential Rock Carling lecture, published as a monograph in 1967 entitled 'Prevention of Cancer: Pointers from Epidemiology', summarized the understanding that had by then developed of the avoidability of each major type of cancer. 
In the late 1950s Doll embarked on a series of studies with Michael Court Brown of the long-term effects of medical exposures to moderate doses of X-rays (by following up people who had been treated with X-rays to alleviate spinal disease). Although heavy exposure was known to cause cancer they demonstrated that moderate doses could also cause cancer, particularly leukaemia, establishing for the first time within one study a dose-response relationship between radiation and cancer. For the rest of his life Doll collaborated extensively in several quantitative epidemiological studies of low-dose radiation of various types. 
Doll also instigated successful studies of cancer in the coal gasification, nickel refining, and asbestos industries. In 1955 he completed a study (in collaboration with the company) of the mortality of men who had worked at Turner Brothers Asbestos in Yorkshire. The striking results, with a tenfold increase of lung cancer in heavily exposed workers, led the company's lawyers to attempt to suppress the research, claiming the military importance of asbestos, the irrelevance of long-past occupational exposures, and private ownership of the employment records. Despite legal threats Doll and Hill promptly published their findings, after which the company agreed to continue indefinitely to provide Doll with current and past employment records for independent analysis, which were eventually used to demonstrate a significant continuing hazard. 
Soon after the contraceptive pill became available in 1960 reports of adverse effects, particularly venous thrombosis, began to appear. Doll immediately realized that systematic epidemiological investigations were needed to obtain reliable evidence about the effects of the pill on health and helped others initiate and interpret them. He continued until 2005 to be closely involved in studies of the effects of the pill on cancer, participating actively in worldwide meta-analyses of all relevant epidemiological studies. These eventually showed that there was only a small and transient increase in the incidence of breast cancer, which was outweighed by a lifelong decrease in that of ovarian cancer. 
Doll also showed, more clearly than anyone, that cancer arose, sometimes over a period of many decades, from a combination of nature, nurture, and luck. During the 1960s he was a key figure in bringing together evidence from cancer registries in five continents that showed that each type of cancer that was common in one population was rare in another. He argued that these differences were not chiefly genetic, so wherever one type of cancer was common, it did not have to be. In 1981 Doll and Peto set about quantifying the avoidable causes of cancer in countries such as the UK and USA, presenting their findings in a report to the American Congressional Office of Technology Assessment that was published in the 'Journal of the National Cancer Institute' (vol. 66, 1981, 1191-308). They found that the hazards of smoking were more than twice the sum of every other reliably known cancer hazard, and that man-made environmental pollutants played a relatively minor role. 
Doll made major contributions to epidemiological methodology and disease prevention for more than fifty years, and played a central role in strengthening public health institutions and supporting the careers and inspiring the work of later generations of epidemiologists and medical statisticians. He tried to help whoever sought his advice, and made a point of finding time to provide concise and constructive comments on their research plans and scientific reports. 
Doll moved to Oxford in 1969 as regius professor of medicine, the most senior medical post in the university. He quickly set about expanding the medical school and enhancing the quality of research. He made a series of new professorial appointments, broadened the scope of the medical curriculum, and helped his successors transform the faculty into one of the top medical institutions in the world. 
While regius professor Doll also managed to found Green College (since 2008 Green Templeton College). This was a difficult task, requiring considerable diplomatic skills not only to raise money but also to get Oxford medical students and the university to agree to a new graduate college that would initially specialize in one main subject, medicine. Doll took early retirement to become the first warden of Green College. He and Joan (who had by then retired, but had been the first woman with a senior MRC position) treated the students, staff, and fellows as their extended family, from which they got much interest and pleasure. 
The twenty-five years after Doll's retirement in 1979 as regius professor were extraordinarily productive. He wrote, travelled, and lectured, and collaborated with many others in new research on tobacco, alcohol, radiation, breast cancer, and vascular disease. Half a century earlier he had helped Bradford Hill to establish randomized trials, and was delighted to see the clarity with which large-scale randomized evidence could answer important questions. 
Until weeks before his death Doll continued working every day in the Cancer Epidemiology Unit (directed since 1989 by Valerie Beral) or the Clinical Trial Service Unit (co-directed since 1985 by Rory Collins and Richard Peto). In June 2005 both units moved into the newly built Richard Doll Building, devoted to large-scale population studies of the causes, prevention, and treatment of cancers, heart attacks, strokes, and other major diseases. Doll worked in the building only briefly before his death, admiring its spaciousness, but still more the large research projects that it was already facilitating. 
The importance of Doll's work was soon recognized throughout the world. He won many awards, including the United Nations award for cancer research in 1962, and was the first recipient of the General Motors cancer research prize in 1979. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1966, was its vice-president in 1970, and received the society's royal medal in 1986. He was knighted in 1971 and made a Companion of Honour in 1996. He received numerous honorary doctorates and fellowships, both in the UK and elsewhere. 
Doll's integrity, courtesy, sharp mind, and precise use of language made him an effective chairman of many committees and an impartial adviser to various government departments and industries. His strategic aims in such work were to ensure that the epidemiological evidence would be described accurately, distinguishing between established and unproven claims, and to ensure that employment records would be kept and analysed in ways that would ensure that any real hazards were discovered sooner rather than later, and that mistaken claims of hazard or safety would be minimized. He was open about his dealings with industry, received no retainers, and always gave away whatever consultancy fees or honoraria he received, usually to Green College. He also gave away some of the prizes he was awarded. He was regularly invited to deliver major lectures, and in the last year of his life he lectured in seven different countries on five different continents. 
Elegant and well-mannered, Doll thought, wrote, and spoke clearly, choosing his words carefully; his publications, although concerned with factual matters, were often a pleasure to read. Having lived through the 1930s he understood how greatly medical science in general, and epidemiology in particular, could improve people's lives. Thus motivated, he worked efficiently, and for long hours. He found good epidemiology beautiful and intellectually satisfying, considering himself to have been extraordinarily lucky professionally. 
Many found Doll's apparent severity daunting, but behind the sometimes austere exterior was a mischievous interior that enjoyed nonconformity, and his wit was delightful. He dressed immaculately, and wore vivid ties in later life that he enjoyed people noticing. He and Joan loved and depended on each other, and had similar professional values. For two years after she died in 2001 grief predominated in private, but in his last two years he had more internal peace, and retained his intellect and humour. He liked to say that old people should take risks, and in his ninety-third year he rode on a camel in the Arabian desert, flew in a glider, and climbed a jungle tree in Australia. 
Doll had a remarkable ability to interpret, assimilate, and remember population-based evidence and to put into perspective the major and minor avoidable causes of disease. This was not a theoretical exercise; he was conscious that his conclusions must not be wrong, as people's lives and livelihoods were at stake. The more closely people worked with Doll, the more they respected him. His wide experience, careful judgement, integrity, and rigour -- all obvious to those who worked with him -- meant that he was rarely wrong, and never stubbornly wrong. He was one of the most important medical scientists of the twentieth century. He died with dignity at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 24 July 2005, of heart failure, and was survived by his adopted children. 
As a result of the twentieth-century epidemiological studies of smoking, of which Doll's were among the most influential, many millions of premature deaths had already been prevented by the time he died; according to the World Health Organization, hundreds of millions of deaths from tobacco would be prevented during the twenty-first century. Doll's own words (of 1994) are engraved on his memorial stone in the Richard Doll Building: 'Death in old age is inevitable but death before old age is not. In previous centuries 70 years used to be regarded as humanity's allotted span of life and only about one in five lived to such an age. Nowadays, however, for non-smokers in Western countries, the situation is reversed; only about one in five will die before 70 and the non-smoker death rates are still decreasing, offering the promise, at least in developed countries, of a world where death before 70 is uncommon. But, for this promise to be properly realised, ways must be found to limit the vast damage now being done by tobacco and to bring home, to not only the many millions of people in developed countries but also the far larger populations elsewhere, the extent to which those who continue to smoke are shortening their expectation of life by so doing.' 



@@@@@


doc= 95921


Baldry, John William (1941-2005), singer and guitarist, was born at East Haddon Hall, East Haddon, Northamptonshire, on 12 January 1941, the first of three children of William James Baldry (1915-1990), a Metropolitan Police constable, and his wife, Margaret Louisa, 'nee' Parker (1915-1989). At the time of the registration of his birth his parents lived at 18 Frinton Road, East Ham, London. He obtained the sobriquet Long John as a baby, being remarkably long, and by his mid-teens he was six feet seven inches tall. He was raised in Queensbury, Middlesex, attended Downer County Grammar School, Edgware, and sang in the choir at St Lawrence's Church, also in Edgware. By 1953 he was listening to American blues performers and learning twelve-string guitar. He made his first public appearance as a guitarist and blues singer in 1956 and also played with the renowned guitarist Davey Graham. 
After leaving school Baldry worked for an advertising agency, but soon joined Alexis Korner and Cyril Davies in their group, Blues Incorporated. The fluid line-up included Jack Bruce, Ginger Baker, and Charlie Watts alongside such vocalists as Baldry, Mick Jagger, and Paul Jones. His commanding presence was heard on the album 'R&B from the Marquee' (1962). In 1962 Baldry toured Germany working with the vibraphonist Gunther Hampel and his quartet. He returned to find Korner and Davies at loggerheads. As Baldry later recounted, 'Both Alex and Cyril were anxious for me to join their bands, and I joined Cyril on the toss of a half-crown' (BBC Radio Merseyside, 13 July 2002). Exactly one year later Davies died of leukaemia. Baldry assumed leadership of his band but renamed it Long John Baldry and the Hoochie Coochie Men. The musicians ranged from nineteen to forty-eight, the youngest being Rod Stewart, whom Baldry had heard playing harmonica on Twickenham Railway Station. Rod Stewart later remarked, 'In those days the only music we fell in love with was the blues and John with his wonderful voice was the first white guy singing it' ('The Independent', 25 July 2005). 
In 1966 Baldry, Stewart, Brian Auger, and Julie Driscoll formed Steampacket. They toured with the Rolling Stones, but there were management problems. Baldry wanted another new band but did not want the rigmarole of forming another line-up. He recalled, 'I was at a gambling casino opposite the V&A, the Cromwellian Club. There was live music in the basement and this night it was Bluesology with Reg Dwight [later known as Elton John] playing keyboards, and I gave them the job 'en bloc'' (BBC Radio Merseyside, 13 July 2002). Baldry's rich voice was appreciated by a songwriting and production team at Pye Records, Tony Macaulay and John MacLeod. They offered him a polished pop-soul ballad, 'Let the Heartaches Begin'. Macaulay remembered, 'Long John Baldry [sang] it extraordinarily well, thanks to three-quarters of a bottle of Courvoisier' ('The Independent', 25 July 2005). The record climbed to the top of the charts and Baldry performed it at the royal variety performance in 1968. It is often assumed that he hated the song, but he said in 2002 that 'I liked doing anything in the studio and I was very happy that Pye was employing me. I was hugely flattered to be backed by a large orchestra, and it's not a bad song' (BBC Radio Merseyside, 13 July 2002). 
Baldry had further hits with 'When the Sun Comes Shinin' Thru' (written by Manfred Mann's new vocalist, Mike D'Abo), 'It's Too Late Now', and 'Mexico'. Of the latter Baldry said, 'That was done for the Olympic Games in 1968 and it was constantly on the radio. I wanted to scream every time I heard the damn thing, talk about overkill' (BBC Radio Merseyside, 13 July 2002). His albums 'Let the Heartaches Begin' (1968) and 'Wait for Me' (1969) included some excellent cover versions, including 'Stay with Me' and 'Man Without a Dream'. When Dwight told Baldry that he was leaving Bluesology to pursue a career as a singer and songwriter the band gave him a new name. They took Elton from their saxophone player, Elton Dean, and Dwight added John as a tribute to Baldry. Baldry had prevented the emotional Dwight from committing suicide, the subject of Elton John's song, 'Someone Saved my Life Tonight'. 
In 1971 Baldry released the album 'It Ain't Easy' produced by Elton John and Rod Stewart. He promoted it in North America and liked Canada so much that he moved to Vancouver and became a Canadian citizen in 1981. A witty and friendly man, he quickly became acclimatized to the Vancouver musical scene. He had a Canadian hit with 'Don't Try to Lay No Boogie Woogie on the King of Rock and Roll' and recorded several albums including 'It Still Ain't Easy' (1991), 'Right to Sing the Blues' (1996), and 'Remembering Leadbelly' (2001). His main income came from lending his deep voice to commercials and cartoons including 'Sonic the Hedgehog'. He died from a chest infection in Vancouver, British Columbia, on 21 July 2005. He was survived by a sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 95922


Daiches, David (1912-2005), literary scholar, was born at 2 Salem Hill South, Sunderland, co. Durham, on 2 September 1912, the younger son of Salis Daiches (1880-1945), rabbi and author, and his wife, Flora, 'nee' Levin (1890-1983). He and his elder brother Lionel (1911-1999), later an advocate, were the first generation to break with the rabbinical family tradition: they and their two sisters, Sylvia (1914-1996), subsequently a noted French scholar and university lecturer, and Beryl (1923-1964), were descended from a long line of rabbis going back at least 500 years. In March 1919 the family moved from Sunderland, where his father had been minister to its Jewish community, to Edinburgh, where Salis Daiches became minister at the Graham Street Synagogue and subsequently the unofficial Scottish-Jewish spiritual leader. In his first autobiography, 'Two Worlds: an Edinburgh Jewish Childhood' (1956), David Daiches wrote that the move to Edinburgh 'was the true beginning of my life as I remember it for I remember my childhood as a developing relation between family tradition and my sense of Edinburgh' (p. 17). This sense of duality, of existing in two worlds, of accommodation, pervaded Daiches's life and work. 
Educated at George Watson's College, the 'bastion of gentile Edinburgh education' ('The Times', 25 July 2005), Daiches was unable to participate in school games, sports, or the literary society which met on Friday evenings. It was at that time that he 'became acutely aware of living in two worlds, or rather of moving freely between one and the other. Bagpipe music and synagogue melody represented the two poles between which my sensibility moved. I accepted this dualism as part of the nature of things. ('Two Worlds', 60)' He was already writing poems: his first publication, a poem 'The Fountain in Moonlight', appeared in the school magazine, 'The Watsonian', in December 1923. In his final year at school, 1930, he walked away with various prizes, including a scholarship to Edinburgh University, where he graduated in 1934 with first-class honours in rhetoric and English literature. He chose English because of his passion for poetry. At Edinburgh special influences were H. J. C. Grierson, the great John Donne and Walter Scott scholar, and the Shakespearean scholar John Dover Wilson. Daiches wrote articles, reviews, poems, and letters for 'The Student' during the years 1932-4, under the pseudonym Quidam, and ran the university English Literature Society. The first book he edited belongs to this period: 'Private Business' (1933), a collection of poems by him and his contemporary student poets in the society including Sorley Maclean and Robert Garioch. 
In 1934 Daiches won an Elton exhibition to Balliol College, Oxford. In a memorial address to the English department at Aberdeen University sixty years later, with characteristic frankness he recalled that 'because I wasn't used to handling money I spent my three years' money in my first year and I had nothing left to complete my Oxford doctorate'. He 'wrote to Grierson... and I asked him if he could give me an assistant lectureship at the University for a year so that I could recoup my finances and go back to Oxford to finish my doctorate. By return of post... I got a letter of appointment' ('Memories of Grierson', 31). After a year as assistant in English at Edinburgh (1935-6) he returned to Balliol as Andrew Bradley fellow for 1936-7. In 1937 he married Isobel (Billie) Mackay (died 1977), a fellow student at Edinburgh who became a librarian. They had one son, Alan (1940-2006), later a photographer, and two daughters, Elizabeth 
(Liz; 1946-2008)
and Jennifer 
(Jenni; 'b'. 1941)
, who married the historian and literary critic Angus Calder; as Jenni Calder she became a distinguished poet and literary critic, and wrote movingly about both her parents in 'Not Nebuchadnezzar: in Search of Identities' (2005). 
Daiches received his DPhil degree in 1939 for a thesis on the development and sources of the King James version of the 'Bible' with special reference to the Hebrew tradition (published as 'The King James Version of the English Bible', 1941). In the same year he accepted an academic position in America at the University of Chicago, partly for his father's sake: Daiches's marriage to a gentile had placed his father, an orthodox rabbi, in an embarrassing situation. Following four years at Chicago, and war service in the British embassy in Washington and British information services in New York (1944-6), Daiches became a very popular and influential professor at Cornell University. He wrote of this American period in his second volume of autobiography, 'A Third World' (1971). His students included the prolific author Harold Bloom. His friendship with a colleague, the distinguished critic of Romanticism, Meyer H. Abrams, led to the influential textbook 'The Norton Anthology of English Literature'. First published in 1962, by the year 2000 it was in its seventh edition. Daiches was responsible for the twentieth-century section in the first four editions, from 1962 to 1979. During these years, in addition to producing thirty-six books, innumerable academic articles, and reviews, Daiches wrote poetry published in the 'New Yorker'. 
In 1951, making what Daiches subsequently described as an unfortunate career move, he and his family returned to Britain. His real motive was to obtain a chair at a Scottish university. He spent the years 1951-61 as a university lecturer in English at Cambridge (he was a fellow of Jesus College from 1957), and writing prolifically. His 'Critical Approaches to Literature' (1956; 2nd edn, 1981) and his scholarly and analytical multi-volume 'A Critical History of English Literature' (1960; 2nd rev. edn, 1994), as so much of his work, anticipated future literary fashions and concerns, recognizing the crucial role played by literary criticism and theory in literary study. Alastair Fowler, the eminent Renaissance literary scholar, viewed Daiches's extensive treatment of Milton in the critical history as anticipating subsequent work by Stanley Fish and others. Milton had already been the subject of a book-length study by Daiches (1957; new rev. edn, 1969) and various individual essays. His earlier books, 'Virginia Woolf' (1942; rev. edn, 1963) and 'Willa Cather: a Critical Introduction' (1951; new edn, 1962), anticipated later feminist interests. 'The Novel and the Modern World' (1939; rev. edn, 1960) and 'Poetry and the Modern World: a Study of Poetry in England between 1900 and 1939' (1940) prefigured many of the concerns of later historians of modernism, while his earlier 'Literature and Society' (1938) had explored the complex relationship between the production of literature and the social conditions in which the writer lives, a central concern of academics in the field of cultural studies at the end of the twentieth century. 
At Cambridge Daiches continued his reviewing activities in the 'Manchester Guardian', 'Times Literary Supplement', 'New Republic', 'New Statesman', 'New York Times Book Review', 'Commentary', and similar newspapers and journals on both sides of the Atlantic. He also began broadcasting frequently on the radio: his appearances on the 'Brains Trust' made him a national celebrity and radio voice. 
Recruited by Asa Briggs in 1961, Daiches was one of the founding fathers of the University of Sussex. 'The Idea of a New University: an Experiment in Sussex' (1964; 2nd edn, 1970), edited by Daiches, explained the ideas behind the university and its foundation. In his essay 'The place of English studies in the Sussex scheme' he described his differing experiences of the academic study of English and his conception of a new school of English and American studies. Janet Burroway described him at this time as 'large-hearted, witty, erudite, and vain. He expected to be the centre of attention, but he had no tinge of the little-man's Napoleonic meanness. His natural state of being was delight: delight in language, family, history, babies, rhyme schemes, verbal trickery, anybody's happiness, unblended whisky, high discourse, repartee and praise. (Baker and Lister, 31-2)' Daiches's lectures were replete with brilliant insights. His explication of Shakespeare's sonnets emphasized the relationships in them between personal affection and money contained in a word such as 'dear'. Comments on Yeats's 'Byzantium' poems contained an overwhelming sense of mutability, the line 'Of what is past, or passing, or to come' having all the tenses subsumed. He also drew attention to the illusion of all time conquered in Keats's 'Ode to Autumn', and the brilliant observation in Wallace Stevens's 'Sunday Morning' that in a secular world the pigeon replaces the dove. 
The first of Daiches's 100 or so books, 'The Place of Meaning in Poetry', was published in 1935. The last, 'A Weekly Scotsman and Other Poems', containing seventy-five of his poems spanning six decades, appeared in 1994. Aside from a mass of journalism and academic articles, he was also the editor of general series including 'Studies in English Literature', published by Arnold from 1961 to 1985, to which he contributed what was regarded by many as the best short critical analysis of George Eliot's 'Middlemarch' (1963). He published extensively on Walter Scott's achievement as a novelist, and advocated Scott's cause as a consummate artist in the years in which Scott was out of critical fashion. In 1984 he became the vice-chairman of the advisory board of the Edinburgh edition of the 'Waverley' novels; indeed he was described as the godfather of this edition. Hugh MacDiarmid, whose 'At the Sign of the Thistle' Daiches favourably reviewed in 'Life and Letters' in 1934, referred to Daiches as the 'foremost living authority on [Scottish] literature' (MacDiarmid, 97). Daiches also served as the chair of the advisory board for the edition of 'The Collected Works of James Hogg'. A pioneer of American studies in Britain, Daiches made significant contributions to many areas of literary studies, including the modern novel, as well as English, biblical, and eighteenth- and nineteenth-century studies. But poetry was his first love. As well as writing poetry, he produced powerful new critical explications of passages from writers as diverse as Marlowe, Shakespeare, Milton, Yeats, and Dylan Thomas. In addition to his frequent broadcasts on the radio and appearances on television, his sound recordings included a memorable discussion with the critic Barbara Hardy on George Eliot and Jane Austen, and readings with L. C. Knights from 'Hamlet' and 'The Tempest'. 
Daiches's contributions to Scottish literature and culture may perhaps be regarded as his most significant. All his writing was pervaded with the sense of duality that he experienced growing up in Edinburgh. He saw dualities in the work of many Scottish writers, including Stevenson, Allan Ramsay, MacDiarmid, and James Thomson. The range and depth of his knowledge of Scottish literature was extensive: from Henryson and Dunbar to Fergusson and Burns, through to the late twentieth century. As his daughter Jenni observed, 'There is no one who has done more than he has to regenerate engagement with Scottish literature and the wider Scottish cultural context' (Calder, 'Reading, Writing and Reverberations', 11). 
Daiches's non-literary works extended from his evocation of the history and topography of Scotland's two first cities, 'Glasgow' (1977) and 'Edinburgh' (1978), to 'Literary Landscapes of the British Isles: a Narrative Atlas' (written with John Flower, 1979), 'Charles Edward Stuart: the Life and Times of Bonnie Prince Charlie' (1973), and 'Scotland and the Union' (1977). His father had been a connoisseur of Havana cigars; Daiches became known for his expertise in the national drink. His 'Scotch Whisky: its Past and Present' (1969, 3rd rev. edn, 1978) was something of a best-seller, especially in Japan, and remained long in print. His enthusiasm could be infectious. Joel Sayre recalled that at Cornell Daiches had mentioned that Mortlach single malt was sold in New York, at Macy's: 'On his next trip to Manhattan he dropped in at Macy's to stock up his Mortlach supply. 'Sorry, but some damn fool prof up at Ithaca recommended it to his students, and we're all out'' (Sayre, 6). 
Following his retirement in 1977 Daiches moved back to Edinburgh, where he became actively involved in the cultural and intellectual life of Scotland. From 1980 until 1986 he was director of the Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities at Edinburgh University, and he played an active role in the university's summer programme and its creation. His last years were spent in his Belgrave Crescent flat, whose study was lined with books towering upwards to the high ceiling, threatening to collapse upon the frail bald dome beneath. One of the last polymaths, he was a self-confessed eclectic. The publication at eighty-one of his poems gave him great pleasure, as did the increasing recognition of his role in the rediscovery of Scottish literature. In 1981 he became a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and in 1991 he was appointed CBE. 
Daiches did not lack his share of personal and professional disappointments. These included his rejection by Scottish universities when he applied for positions in the post-war years, his failure to get the chair at Edinburgh he was so evidently qualified for, or a knighthood, and the death of his first wife Billie within days of their return to Edinburgh. In 1978 he married his second wife, Hazel Neville, 'nee' Newman. She died in 1986. Daiches himself died in Edinburgh on 15 July 2005. He was buried in the Jewish section of the Piershill cemetery in Edinburgh on 18 July. A well-attended celebration of his life was held on 2 October 2005 at the Playfair Library of the University of Edinburgh. He was survived by his three children, though two of them died soon after. 


@@@@@


doc= 95924


Fry, Jeremy Joseph (1924-2005), inventor and businessman, was born on 19 May 1924 at Grove House, Frenchay, Winterbourne, Gloucestershire, the youngest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Cecil Roderick Fry (1890-1952), chairman of J. S. Fry & Sons Ltd, chocolate manufacturers, and his wife, Olave Kate (died 1949), daughter of W. C. Anderson of Keston, Kent. He was educated at Gordonstoun School in north-east Scotland, which was evacuated to Llandinam in Montgomeryshire in 1940: before the evacuation he overlapped briefly with Prince Philip of Greece, later duke of Edinburgh. Already interested in cars, he managed to avoid playing games at school in return for keeping the headmaster's car running, and was captain of the engineering guild. 
After leaving school in 1942 Fry joined the RAF, serving as air crew, and later trained as a pilot in North America. When the Second World War ended he studied at the Architectural Association School of Architecture, but left without qualifying to join his brother at the Frenchay Products Company, which they set up to manufacture components for the aviation industry. He also founded the Parsenn Car Company, and designed, built, and raced the Parsenn car (named after his favourite ski-run). On 20 March 1954 he married Camilla (died 2000), the twenty-year-old daughter of Geoffrey Norman Grinling, landscape painter; their family consisted of two sons and two daughters. After his marriage he bought Widcombe Manor, a Georgian manor house near Bath. In 1960 Antony Armstrong-Jones (later earl of Snowdon), one of his closest friends, asked him to be best man at his wedding to Princess Margaret, but a month before the wedding Fry stood down, ostensibly on the grounds of ill health. Rumours abounded at the time and later as to the real reason for his withdrawal (later it emerged not only that he had in 1952 been found guilty of importuning men for sex, but also that Armstrong-Jones was the biological father of Camilla's daughter, Polly Fry), but he remained a close friend of the Snowdons. 
Frenchay Products had acquired Rotork, a small electrical and mechanical engineering company in Frenchay, after the war, and Fry re-formed it as a separate company. He began work on the design of motorized valve actuators for pipelines, and in 1957 the Rotork Engineering Co. Ltd workshop moved to Widcombe Manor. A major innovation was the flameproof actuator, and by 1958 Rotork was supplying actuators for the BP, Esso, and Shell oil refineries in Britain, Europe, and the Middle East. In 1960 Fry introduced O ring sealing, which made the electrical actuator waterproof as well as explosion-proof. While the manufacture of the actuators had originally been contracted out, in 1960 Fry converted an old mill into a factory, and in 1962 built a new factory in Brassmill Lane, Bath, which became the company's headquarters. One of Rotork's main customers in these early years was the French atomic energy authority, which placed an order in 1962 for more than 1000 actuators for a new uranium enrichment plant. In 1968 Rotork became a public company, Rotork Controls Ltd, with Fry as majority shareholder. He opened a manufacturing plant in Maryland in the United States in 1970, to supply American oil companies and the American nuclear power industry, and continued to expand and innovate throughout the 1970s. By the time Fry retired in 1984 Rotork was the leading valve actuation company in the world, with subsidiaries in nine countries and revenues of $21 million a year. 
Fry was an inventor, not a trained engineer, teaching himself what he needed to know as he went along, and trying different methods until he found one that worked, rather than sitting at a desk making calculations. According to his protege James Dyson 'he had no regard for experts from other fields... and he was an engineer interested in building things that derived not only excellence from their design, but elegance as well' (Dyson, 49). He also liked to nurture talented young people with ideas, and this had led Dyson, a student at the Royal College of Art, to approach Fry in 1968 with an idea for an aluminium, mushroom-shaped theatre. Although Fry did not offer to finance this project, he offered him a different one, to help him to design the auditorium for the Roundhouse theatre in London, which was being converted from a former locomotive turning house. Then Fry asked Dyson to help with the design of the Sea Truck, a high-speed, flat-bottomed landing craft: in 1970 Fry set up Rotork Marine to make and sell it, with Dyson in charge. When Bangladesh was devastated by floods in 1972 Fry sold 100 Sea Trucks to the Bangladeshi government to help in landing supplies for the victims, and spent several months there managing the service depot. Fry and Dyson set up Prototypes Ltd to develop new products and produce working prototypes which would then be manufactured elsewhere: joint projects included the Squirrel, an outdoor wheelchair with four-wheel drive and power steering, manufactured in collaboration with Lord Snowdon, which was never a commercial success, and a bagless vacuum cleaner. Dyson later bought Fry out of Prototypes Ltd and set up his own company, the Air Power Vacuum Cleaner Company (later Dyson Ltd), which very successfully developed the upright dual cyclone vacuum cleaner. 
In 1958 Fry bought Le Grand Banc, an uninhabited hamlet on the northern slopes of the Luberon valley in Provence, and restored the derelict houses, intending it as a holiday home and a base for engineers and artists to work together. He also bought a seventeenth-century castle in Malta. He loved travel, and went on expeditions to India, Sri Lanka, Japan, and Guatemala, often in the company of his friend the film director Tony Richardson. He travelled across the 'empty quarter' of Saudi Arabia with his disabled friend the writer Quentin Crewe (whom he housed in Le Grand Banc for a decade). After his divorce in 1967, and the sale of Widcombe Manor, he moved to the Royal Crescent, Bath, and later to The Brewery, Freshford. After restoring the brewery, he financed a number of other restoration projects: in 1979 he bought the dilapidated Theatre Royal in Bath, restored it, and formed a charitable trust, endowing it in perpetuity for the people of Bath. It reopened in 1982. In 1985 he became chairman of the Arnolfini gallery, an arts centre in Bristol, and engaged the architect David Chipperfield to restore it. A ballet lover, Fry became chairman of the Northern Ballet Company in 1989, and with Christopher Gable as artistic director it became one of the most successful ballet companies in the country. He was also the first chairman of the Michael Clark Dance Company, formed in 1984. Always willing to give young and inexperienced people a chance, he was an important figure in the Eaton Hall Design Workshops, started by Sally, duchess of Westminster, to help young engineering designers. He met the young Canadian Robert Carsen ('b'. 1955), later a well-known opera director, in 1975, and they were devoted companions for the rest of Fry's life. 
In 1994 Fry moved to Kerala in southern India. He bought the wooden former palace of the raja of Travancore, dismantled it, moved it up the mountain to a tea and cardamom plantation, restored it, and then, after years of difficulties with officials and neighbours, dismantled it again and moved it over the mountains to Tamil Nadu, where he spent the rest of his life. Described by his close friends as charismatic, magnetic, original, unconventional, charming, clever, and good-looking, Jeremy Fry died on 18 July 2005 in Madurai, Tamil Nadu, and his body was cremated there on a funeral pyre. The Jeremy Fry memorial scholarship at the University of Bath was set up after his death by the James Dyson Foundation, to be awarded annually to the engineering student who demonstrated the most inventive flair. As Dyson said when announcing the award: 'Jeremy was the most charismatic and inventive of engineering designers... He was such a great inventor, and was very keen to encourage invention and creativity. His real brilliance was to nurture and help young engineers, to whom he showed huge generosity. ('Bath Chronicle', 17 Nov 2005)' 



@@@@@


doc= 95930


Betty Astell (1912-2005). Born Betty Julia Hymans at 54 Cranhurst Road, Willesden, London, on 23 May 1912, she was the daughter of Herbert Hymans, drug merchant, and his wife, Estella, 'nee' Oppenheimer. Trained as a dancer, she first sang on BBC radio at the age of twelve, and four years later made her West End stage debut in John Galsworthy's 'Escape' at the Ambassadors Theatre. She took part in John Logie Baird's early '30-line' television experiments from his studio in Long Acre from 1931, and in the BBC's first 30-line transmission in 1932. After the BBC launched its regular television service from Alexandra Palace in 1936 she appeared frequently until the closure of the service during the Second World War. She also appeared in some two dozen films before the war, including 'A Tight Corner' (1932) with Frank Pettingell, 'This Is the Life' (1933) with Gordon Harker and Binnie Hale, 'Jack of All Trades' (1936) with Jack Hulbert, and 'The Mind of Mr Reeder' (1939) with Will Fyffe. At the time she met Cyril Fletcher she was undoubtedly better known than he was. They first appeared together in a Home Guard concert and married within a year at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 18 May 1941. They would often work together on radio in such comedy series as 'Fletcher's Fare' (1952) and 'Mixed Doubles' (1957), both written by Bob Monkhouse and Denis Goodwin. They had one daughter, Jill Fletcher, also an actress and comedian. 


@@@@@


doc= 95931


Trapp, Joseph Burney (1925-2005), librarian, historian, and literary scholar, was born at Carterton in the southern part of North Island, New Zealand, on 16 July 1925, the son of (Henry Mansfield) Burney Trapp and his wife, Frances Melanie, 'nee' Wolters. His maternal grandfather had founded the agency for distributing and registering land tenure, which his father had joined. As a boy he went to Dannevirke high school, a small state boarding-school further north of Carterton, where his elder sister was head of English. From there he went with a national scholarship to Victoria University College, Wellington, in 1943. Already fascinated by the classics and with a good grounding in Latin, he now added Greek, its rudiments firmly implanted by his elder sister, Phyllis, but afterwards largely self-taught. 
Trapp graduated BA in English and Greek from Victoria in 1945, adding an MA in English and English literature with honours (there was then no doctoral system) in 1946. In the following year he started work at the Alexander Turnbull Library in Wellington, an independent institution with an outstandingly good collection, notably of Milton. The four years that he spent there taught him a lot about libraries and the way they work, but he was still thinking of an academic career, and was glad to return to Victoria as a junior lecturer in 1950. There he had to teach a wide range of subjects, including a course on the classical background for English students. He might have remained at Victoria, but for an unexpected chance. Donald Gordon, professor of English at Reading University, decided to advertise in New Zealand a new short-term post as an assistant lecturer in his own department. Trapp saw the advertisement, applied for the post, and was appointed. 
Trapp arrived at Reading for the new academic year in 1951. He was one of a number of notable immigrants from New Zealand who arrived in Britain, still in the grip of post-war austerity, at this time, including Robert Burchfield and Donald McKenzie. The colleagues he met at Reading, among them John Wain and Frank Kermode, remained friends. To Gordon he remained more than grateful, gratitude reciprocated in the dedication of Gordon's 'The Renaissance Imagination' (1976). While at Reading he married, at the parish church in Mapledurham on 9 June 1953, Elayne Margaret Falla, the daughter of Sir Robert Alexander Falla, ornithologist and director of the Dominion Museum, Wellington. They had two sons. 
Before Trapp's contract at Reading expired, another post, as assistant librarian at the Warburg Institute, came up. Gordon, who had greatly admired its director, Fritz Saxl, urged him to apply: 'it's just your sort of place', he said. So Trapp left Reading, not without regret. He arrived in London in 1953, becoming librarian in 1966, a post he held for ten more years. They were, perhaps, the happiest working years of his life. He took easily to the Warburg's eclectic system of arranging its books (he became an expert, perhaps the last surviving, on the 'Prussian instructions' of 1899 on which it was based), and through it to the institute itself. 
Over these years Trapp became the guide, philosopher, and friend of all who used the library, not least the staff. His knowledge of its books was encyclopaedic, due not least to the fact that he handled most of them when the institute moved from South Kensington to Woburn Square in 1958. He opened the parcels of new acquisitions, as well as cataloguing them. He made a point of introducing himself to readers, in turn introducing them to books they had never heard of. He and his wife kept open house for the staff, taking in Leopold Ettlinger, head of the photographic collection, when he was bereft of his wife in 1956. Others, graduating from pupil to the staff, found that he continued to look after their interests, in and outside the institute. To all he offered the same courtesy and help, unawed by the great but especially tender to the tyro. 
Trapp also took to the Warburg's equally eclectic scholarly objectives, linking the sources of imagery and literature. He was joint editor of the 'Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes' from 1956 to 1976. His first major article (published in C. A. Patrides, ed., 'Approaches to 'Paradise Lost'', 1958) was 'The iconography of the fall of man'. He had an abiding interest in poetic garlands, the portraits and tombs of classical authors, and their counterparts in modern literature. 'Ovid's tomb: the growth of a legend from Eusebius to Laurence Sterne, Chateaubriand and George Richmond' (published in the 'Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes' in 1973) artfully linked Renaissance and Enlightenment. He developed a special interest in the English followers of the Italian Renaissance, and was early associated with the Yale edition of the complete works of Thomas More. He undertook the volume devoted to 'The Apology of Sir Thomas More'. It was not completed until 1979 but it remains a model of its kind, as sound on More's English as on the classical and biblical allusions, pursued with patient care. This led to a visiting professorship at the University of Toronto in 1969, and a hectic but enjoyable visit to Dartmouth College, where the American 'Oxford Anthology of English Literature' (he was responsible for the medieval volume, published in 1973) was planned. 
To succeed Ernst Gombrich as director of the institute in 1979 was a surprise to Trapp, as also to some others. The sequence of continental predecessors, Saxl, Henri Frankfort, Gertrud Bing, and Gombrich himself, seemed to predicate another in that mould. But Gombrich and others in the institute had had time to observe not only how efficiently the library ran, how seamlessly new acquisitions had added to its original strength and amplified its scope, but also the real scholarship in Trapp's work, his articles, short or long, carefully and imaginatively expressed. More important than all these, they recognized one on whom they could rely to maintain the old Warburg tradition, but lead it into closer connection with the University of London. This was not an easy task. It needed all Trapp's patience and diplomacy, suffering long meetings (which he could not bear) in a good cause, overcoming obstacles laid in the path by acquisitive or disapproving forces in the surrounding university, rallying the very varied troops on his own side, to bring this off. But he did it. The Warburg's staff and work were as richly diverse as they had been when he took over, but both were deployed in a way that fused gently with the rest of the university, by now hardly less various. The staff held positions within the university (Trapp was himself professor of the history of the classical tradition). 
Trapp was never one to be overwhelmed by mere administration; if he knew that time could be better spent (and that prompted the odd outburst, more endearing than alarming), he always found time for what mattered, whether his own or other people's work. They benefited immediately; he read their manuscripts, invited them to lecture, and introduced them to audience or colleagues with equal sympathy. His own work was collected in 'Essays on the Renaissance and the Classical Tradition' (1990) and 'Studies of Petrarch and his Influence' (2003). The rise of 'the portrait of the author' became his Gray lectures at Cambridge in 1990, and as Lyell reader at Oxford (1994) he dealt as vividly with the illustration of Petrarch. This was followed by his Panizzi lectures at the British Library, published as 'Erasmus, Colet and More' (1991). With Lotte Hellinga he edited the 'Cambridge History of the Book in Britain, 1400-1557' (1999). 'Illustrations of Petrarch: an iconographic survey' (with Elizabeth McGrath) was in preparation at the time of his death. 
Trapp also found time for other public duties. He was on the advisory boards of the Victoria and Albert Museum (1977-83) and the British Library (1980-87), and on the council of the British School at Rome (1984-95); he was chairman and trustee of Lambeth Palace Library (1987-98). Elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1980, he was its vice-president (1983-5) and foreign secretary (1988-95). He was a visiting professor at the University of Melbourne in 1980, and at Iowa State and Princeton universities in 1984. To all these institutions he gave the same degree of care and thought as he had to the Warburg. On his retirement in 1990 he was appointed CBE. 
Retirement, however, was only the signal for more work, happily free of other entanglements. Although he was increasingly lame from arthritis, most days saw Trapp's little car parked outside the Warburg; he never intruded on his successor, but welcomed the many who called to ask for advice and help. He was always glad to see them, even if they interrupted his work. They always got more than they asked for: facts unknown, drawn from his vast reading, advice on organizing work, sympathy and encouragement. Humanity came naturally to one to whom the humanities were second nature. 
He died at Ravenscourt Park Hospital, Hammersmith, on 13 July 2005; he was survived by his wife and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 95935


Ingrams, Leonard Victor (1941-2005), banker and opera impresario, was born on 1 September 1941 at Stoneycrest Nursing Home, Hindhead, Surrey, the fourth and youngest son of Leonard St Clair Ingrams (1900-1953), banker, and his second wife, Victoria Susan Beatrice, 'nee' Reid (1908-1997). His father served in the Ministry of Economic Warfare during the Second World War, and was managing director of Continental Assets Realization Trust Ltd thereafter. Richard Ingrams ('b'. 1937), editor of 'Private Eye' and 'The Oldie', was an elder brother. Wartime took the brothers to live with their grandmother, Lady Reid, in Ellon, Aberdeenshire. She had been a lady-in-waiting to Queen Victoria and had married the queen's doctor, Sir James Reid of Ellon, first baronet. Ingrams's mother encouraged her sons to play music: he learned the violin and met Vaughan Williams, Benjamin Britten, and Charles Munch, and played in the British Youth Orchestra under Sir Malcolm Sargent. 
Ingrams went to Stonyhurst College and in 1959 won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford. In 1961 he met Rosalind Anne Moore, the daughter of a diplomat, Antony Ross Moore, who was about to go to Oxford. They married on 19 September 1964 when she was twenty-one, and later had four children, three daughters, Lucy Sarah ('b'. 1965), Elizabeth ('b'. 1971), and Catherine ('b'. 1976), and a son, Rupert Antony ('b'. 1967). Meanwhile, with firsts from Oxford in classical moderations (1961) and 'literae humaniores' (1963), a Derby scholarship (1963), and a senior scholarship (1964), in 1964 Ingrams took up a post as assistant lecturer in classics at Queen Mary College, London, but after two years gave up teaching and decided to enter Barings, the family bank. He and his family were then sent on a number of successful postings in Paris, Cologne, Hamburg, and Vienna between 1968 and 1969. 
In 1974 Barings sent Ingrams as British adviser to the newly created Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency in Jiddah, together with David Mulford, later American ambassador in New Delhi. The agency required external expertise to manage the increasing assets generated by the kingdom's sudden oil wealth and Ingrams with his team implemented major government investment programmes. There he also pioneered the Jiddah (and later Riyadh) concert committee that by courtesy of the British embassy invited international professionals to sing or play in concerts. In 1980 he was appointed OBE for 'services to the British community' in Saudi Arabia. Meanwhile he served simultaneously as a managing director (one of a large number) of Baring Bros (1975-81). A series of employments followed: as chief financial adviser to the Saudi government (1981-4), a director of Robert Fleming Holdings (1985-96), and senior vice-president of the Arab Banking Corporation (1996-8). He was also a director of the Deutschland Investment Corporation (1990-99; chairman, 1990-96), and of the Czech and Slovak Investment Corporation (1992-2005; chairman, 1992-6). In 1998 he set up his own financial enterprise, L. V. Ingrams & Co. Ltd. 
In 1982 Ingrams bought Garsington Manor, near Oxford, celebrated for the literati invited there by Lady Ottoline and Philip Morrell between 1915 and 1927. In 1988 an excellent acoustic was discovered from the loggia and in 1989 two nights of 'The Marriage of Figaro' (in aid of the reopening of the Oxford Playhouse) brought in scores of fan letters. The following year Garsington Opera Ltd was formed. For six weeks each year the loggia became the stage, an orchestra pit held sixty, and a temporary auditorium held an audience of 500. 
Ingrams immediately began to explore little-known repertory, beginning with Haydn's 'Orlando Paladino', a British premiere, in 1990. He introduced seven Haydn operas to the stage between 1990 and 1997. He pursued known and little-known works by Rossini (nine in total) and Richard Strauss (eight in total), as well as the entire Mozart repertory, including the little-known 'Philosopher's Stone'. Only a fraction of Rossini's and Strauss's work was familiar to the British opera public: Ingrams's introduction of these forgotten works brought a new understanding to audiences and conductors alike and, eventually, also to the critics. Other 'discoveries' included Schumann's 'Genoveva', Strauss's 'Die Agyptische Helena' and 'Die Liebe der Danae', Tchaikovsky's 'Cherevichki', Janacek's 'Sarka', and Rimsky-Korsakov's 'Mayskaya Noch' -- whose first British professional productions were all at Garsington. During the first ten years the opera company suffered various prosecutions and refusals of planning permission until in 1995 an appeal by Ingrams at Oxford crown court found in his favour, and eventually, after a public inquiry, planning permission was granted. 
In September 2000 Leonard and Rosalind Ingrams received from the queen of Denmark the European Culture Project award for performing arts on behalf of Garsington Opera, for their 'innovative and successful initiative in the performing arts and their exemplary nurturing of young talent'. Ingrams always sought and encouraged rising young artists, attending end-of-term performances at the music academies, and many of those he cast went on to take major roles. In his search for voices, character, and musicianship he explored widely: among other venues he travelled to Drottningholm in Sweden, le Theatre de la Monnaie in Brussels, Pesaro and Palermo in Italy, as well as extensively in Britain. Orla Boylan, Juanita Lascarro, Melanie Diener, and Johannes Manov all made their British debuts in Garsington. The London Barbican's 'Mostly Mozart' summer series invited four semi-staged Garsington Mozart productions, 'Don Giovanni' (2002), 'La finta giardiniera' (2003), 'Cosi fan tutte' (2004), and 'Le nozze di Figaro' (2005). 
On 27 July 2005, while driving back from Glyndebourne, Ingrams died of a heart attack at the wheel, with his wife beside him. He was pronounced dead on arrival at Ashford Hospital, Stanwell, Surrey. His four children survived him. Two years later, the Metropolitan Opera House, New York, re-produced the director-designer David Fielding's 1997 Garsington production of Strauss's 'Die Agyptische Helena' (starring Deborah Voigt), a fitting tribute to Ingrams and his creation, Garsington Opera. 


@@@@@


doc= 95937


Ridley, Dame (Mildred) Betty (1909-2005), church administrator, was born on 10 September 1909 at the rectory, Newby Place, Poplar, London, the daughter of Henry Mosley (1868-1948), rector of Poplar, later bishop of Stepney and then bishop of Southwell, and his wife, Mildred, 'nee' Willis (died 1963). She was educated at the North London Collegiate School and Cheltenham Ladies' College. She won a place at the Royal College of Music (her love of music never left her and she sang with the Bach Choir for many years) but, aged nineteen, she fell in love with her father's chaplain, Michael Ridley (1899/1900-1953), and married him on 3 September 1929. After a brief spell in Hampshire (to which she returned in retirement) they moved to London where he became incumbent of St Gabriel's, Pimlico, and then rector of Finchley. She was an active vice-chairman of St Hilda's Settlement in Bethnal Green. Before her husband's untimely death in 1953 they had four children: Clare ('b'. 1930), Simon ('b'. 1933), Adam ('b'. 1937), and Giles ('b'. 1946). 
Widowed at forty-four and with her three elder children moving into adult life, Betty Ridley directed her full energies toward the central councils of the Church of England, in which she had been moving with increasing confidence. She had been elected to the church assembly in 1945 and became vice-president of the British Council of Churches in 1954-6. She served on the central board of finance of the church assembly (from 1970 the general synod) for twenty-two years (1955-79). It was a mark of her rapidly won reputation that she was invited to assume the chairmanship of an important committee set up to rationalize the convoluted, politicized, and overlapping internal committee structure of the assembly. The committee had originally been chaired by Sir Peter Agnew MP, but he had found it impossible to combine the workload with his parliamentary duties. The Ridley report, which she introduced in a two-hour speech, carried the house and established a revised structure which lasted for many years both in assembly and general synod. She was made an honorary MA (Lambeth) in 1958. 
Ridley served as a church commissioner from 1959 to 1981. She became the first chairman of the newly established redundant churches committee in 1968 and then, in 1972, was appointed by Archbishop Ramsey to be third church estates commissioner, the first woman to hold that post. In parallel she became, when the assembly metamorphosed into the general synod, a member of its highly influential (and highly political) standing and business committees, serving from 1971 to 1981. This decade, in which she held leading positions in both church commission and synod, saw her at the height of her reputation and powers. She was appointed DBE in 1975 and, upon retirement in 1982, was asked to chair the appointments committee that made recommendations leading to the appointment of John Habgood as archbishop of York. 
Ridley's continuous and growing influence in the central structures of the Church of England sprang from a number of sources. Her personal qualities were many and formidable: maternal instincts, expressed through a warm and responsive manner, which attracted wide confidence; complete self-assurance and social ease; a good brain; common sense; keen perception and sound political judgement; and, although sometimes hidden, determination of purpose. Her energies were unflagging. Also of crucial importance was her familiarity with (by birth, education, and marriage), and her acceptance of, the prevailing customs, manners, and inherent assumptions of her (still largely male) colleagues in the assembly, synod, and commission at that time. By friends and opponents alike her gender was perceived as a source of strength (indeed comfort), never as a threat. It was no surprise that when the Reform Club elected women she should become the first woman to sit on its general committee. 
These attributes informed Ridley's handling of her lifelong belief in and support for the ordination of women to the priesthood. Aged twenty she had expressed this view to the Council for Women's Church Work, of which her father was chairman. She was promptly invited to join them. When in 1950 the Lambeth conference of bishops reiterated the view that it was impossible for a woman to be ordained priest, she became a founder member of the influential Anglican Group for the Ordination of Women. The cause prospered and in 1992 when the general synod voted that there were no 'fundamental objections' to the principle of women's ordination, she heard the news, in retirement, 'with tears of joy' ('The Times', 5 Aug 2005). Earlier, in 1975, her political judgement (characterized by some as too warm an attachment to the establishment) led her to urge some delay in the process; nevertheless, in 1979 she readily joined with other (more vociferous) colleagues in the foundation of the Movement for the Ordination of Women. 
Her work as a leading church commissioner brought her, especially through her chairmanship of the houses and redundant churches committees, into close contact with the practicalities of dealing with much loved churches, often of historic and architectural value. They no longer had the congregations or patrons able to maintain them, to the distress of faithful parishioners faced with their 'redundancy'. Her understanding and personal experience of the economic realities of clerical family life made her uniquely effective in dealing with the commissioners' financial assistance for rectories and vicarages, and for their administration of the diocesan bishops' houses for which they were directly responsible. It was such qualities that marked her work as a leading figure in the life of the Church of England for over thirty years. 
After her retirement in 1982 Ridley moved to St Swithun Street, Winchester. She was made an honorary DSC of Southampton University and served as a governor of King Alfred's College, Winchester (later Winchester University), and as chairman of the Hampshire Churches Preservation Trust. Her final years were spent at Brendon Nursing Home, Park Road, Winchester. She died at the Royal Hampshire County Hospital, Winchester, on 1 August 2005. She was survived by her four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95948


Munchhausen, Philipp Adolf von, Baron Munchhausen in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1694-1762), politician and administrator, was born on 7 July 1694 NS at Steinburg, Saxony, the son of Gerlach Heino von Munchhausen (1652-1710) and Katharina Sophie von Selmnitz (1665-1734); his elder brother -- the couple's third son -- was Gerlach Adolf von Munchhausen, politician and diplomat. The estate where Philipp was born had come to the family through his mother, Katharina. She was the heir of Ernst Freidemann von Selmnitz, who had been in Saxon service. Katharina had inherited the properties of Steinburg, near Merseburg, and Straussfurt, near Erfurt. It was to these estates, along with his own property of Wendlinghausen, that Philipp's father had retired in 1689. Ill health had forced him to give up his office as a Brandenburg courtier and master of horse. 
Munchhausen followed his older brother to the universities of Jena and Halle and almost certainly studied law. He also spent some time on the grand tour before entering the service of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel in 1717. He was appointed a gentleman of the chamber and counsellor to the duke and remained in Wolfenbuttel until 1724. In that year he transferred to the Saxon court in Dresden as a counsellor to the Saxon appeal court. He married Charlotte Louise von Leitzkau (1705-1730) at Leitzkau Castle on 2 July 1724. Munchhausen's time in Saxon service was relatively short. In 1725 he moved to become a privy councillor in the bishopric of Osnabruck, which had been the subject of an unusual arrangement at the treaty of Westphalia (1648). It had been agreed that the bishopric would alternate between a Roman Catholic and a protestant, nominated by the ruling dukes of Brunswick-Luneburg. George I's father, Ernest Augustus (Ernst August), had been the first protestant bishop and, following a Catholic interlude when the see had been held by the archbishop-elector of Trier, the title had devolved on George I's brother, another Ernest Augustus, in 1715. Munchhausen had, in effect, entered Hanoverian service and he was to remain in it for the rest of his career. Following Ernest Augustus's death in 1728 and the reversion of Osnabruck to Catholic rule, Munchhausen began to work directly for the ministry of the electorate of Hanover. He became president of the authorities in Stade, a town in the north of the electorate, close to the Elbe, in 1730. 
Munchhausen's first wife died in 1730. The marriage had produced three children, two daughters and a son. Both Sophie Dorothea (1725-1787) and Wilhelmine Christiane (1728-1769) were able to marry well within the Hanoverian nobility. Friedrich Otto (1727-1797) followed his father into state service and was both a counsellor in the war chancery and deputy master of horse. Munchhausen was married again in October 1738, to Sophie Charlotte von der Schulenburg (1714-1789), with whom he had another three children, two sons and a daughter: Gerlach Adolf (1739-1778), named after his uncle, Georg (1754-1800), and Amalia (1757-1844). 
Munchhausen was granted the title of privy councillor in 1741 but did not begin active participation in the deliberations of the Hanoverian ministry until 1746. In 1748 Munchhausen succeeded Ernst von Steinberg as head of the German chancery in London. The position of being the chief Hanoverian minister in London was a somewhat ambiguous one. The German chancery occupied a suite of rooms in St James's Palace and, theoretically, most decisions concerning the government of the electorate had to be channelled through it for the king to make a final ruling. In practice the monarch usually followed the advice of the ministers based in Hanover, so the opportunities for the minister in London to influence the direction of policy were limited. The role of the London ministry had been of vital importance only during the early Hanoverian period when the most important ministers, notably Andreas Gottlieb von Bernstorff and Hans Kaspar von Bothmer, had also been resident in the capital (although Count Munster-Ledenburg was also to exploit the chancery to its full potential in the early nineteenth century). However, Munchhausen benefited from the fact that his older brother was the key figure within the ministry in Hanover, and because Philipp was also an important conduit in the correspondence that developed between the duke of Newcastle and Gerlach von Munchhausen in the aftermath of Newcastle's visit to Hanover in 1748. 
Philipp von Munchhausen also enjoyed an important, if somewhat minor, role as a channel of communication between members of the British government and the royal household in the 1750s. Newcastle was made aware of the extent to which Henry Fox involved Munchhausen as an intermediary in his attempts to court the influential royal mistress the countess of Yarmouth in September 1754. Munchhausen also kept George II appraised of the tortuous negotiations between the Pelhamite party and Henry Fox in the autumn of 1755, as well as maintaining useful contacts with the princess of Wales. Munchhausen was also able to put his legal skills to good use and was consulted closely by the earl of Hardwicke when he considered the legal implications of the conversion of George II's son-in-law, Frederick, hereditary prince of Hesse-Cassel, to Catholicism and how best to protect the interests of George's daughter, Mary. Given the closeness of his contacts with the Pelhamite grouping and with the king, it is unsurprising that by July 1754 Munchhausen had become the recipient of largesse from the secret service fund. He received $1000 per annum, and this was continued by the third earl of Bute after George III's accession to the throne in 1760. 
In the run-up to the outbreak of the Seven Years' War Munchhausen was an important source of intelligence for the Hanoverian ministry. He was able to pass on the latest diplomatic gossip to his brother and to give guidance as to the direction of British strategic thinking, particularly as it might affect the electorate. Munchhausen was also George II's chosen messenger in the difficult task of trying to persuade British ministers that the duke of Cumberland had exceeded his authority in signing the convention of Kloster-Zeven in 1757 ('Correspondence of John, fourth duke of Bedford', ed. J. Russell, 3 vols., 1842-6, 2.277). Munchhausen had previously been used by George II to suggest to the Danes that he had no quarrel with the French as elector of Hanover and to propose that a separate accommodation could be reached to preserve Hanover. Given the threat that Hanover was under during the French occupation it is unsurprising that in September 1757 Philipp raised with his brother the possibility of ending the dual monarchy. The elder Munchhausen's response was simple: the union should only be preserved so long as the British wanted it to continue. 
Philipp von Munchhausen remained in London until 1762, when he returned to Hanover to become head of the war chancery. His tenure of his final appointment was short lived. He died at Hanover on 11 December 1762, having successfully negotiated the complex pathways of the British-Hanoverian dual monarchy for over a decade and protected the electorate from neglect by the king-elector's British ministers. He was buried in the Gartenkirche, Hanover. The most infamous member of the family, Hieronymus Karl Friedrich von Munchhausen (1720-1797), whose stories were popularized by Rudolf Erich Raspe, was the first cousin of Philipp and Gerlach von Munchhausen. 


@@@@@


doc= 95949


Munchhausen, Gerlach Adolf von, Baron Munchhausen in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1688-1770), politician and diplomat, was born on 5 October 1688 NS in Berlin. He was the third son of Gerlach Heino von Munchhausen (1652-1710), who had been a courtier in Berlin, rising to the rank of master of horse before his retirement in 1689, and Katharina Sophie (1665-1734), the daughter of Ernst Freidemann von Selmnitz and his wife, Anna Elisabeth von Werthern. Munchhausen's parents were married in 1683; they had six sons and five daughters, including Gerlach Adolf's younger brother, Philipp Adolf von Munchhausen, a member of the Hanoverian ministry in London. Little is known of Munchhausen's early education. He studied law at university, almost certainly with the intention of entering public service in one of the German states. He began his legal studies at the University of Jena in 1707 and three years later proceeded to Halle in a move that was then almost obligatory for a young protestant nobleman with ambitions for state service. Munchhausen also concluded his studies in typical fashion, studying at a Dutch university -- Utrecht -- during 1711 and then travelling through the Netherlands and France. 
Munchhausen entered the legal service of the electorate of Saxony in 1714 but his stay in Dresden was brief. In May 1716 he was sworn as a councillor at the Hanoverian appeal court in Celle and remained in Hanoverian service for the rest of his career. In the previous year he had married Wilhelmine Sophie von Wangenheim (1701-1750) at Straussfurt, near Erfurt, one of his family's estates; the couple had two sons who did not survive beyond infancy. Munchhausen spent the early 1720s engaged in legal affairs but his broader political ambitions were emerging. In December 1724 he wrote to George I asking to replace Rudolf Johann, Baron von Wrisberg, as the Hanoverian representative at the imperial diet at Regensburg, Wrisberg's aggressively protestant outlook being increasingly regarded as a liability by the ministry in Hanover. Munchhausen eventually replaced Wrisberg as Hanover's envoy in Regensburg in 1726. Tensions between Hanover and Austria were high at this point. Munchhausen had to deal with the fallout from George I's failed attempt to influence the German princes by sending the British diplomat Isaac Le Heup to Regensburg. Le Heup, and his colleague in Vienna, Francois Louis de Pesme de Saint-Saphorin, were expelled in April 1727. The general crisis eased somewhat with George I's death in June 1727. 
Munchhausen's rise through the Hanoverian ministry continued under George II. He was appointed a privy councillor in January 1728. In 1732 he became 'Grossvogt' in Celle -- the title was a legal one that brought more status than actual power. His initial area of responsibility within the Hanoverian ministry was for educational and ecclesiastical affairs, but he was ultimately to become the king's chief minister in his German lands. Munchhausen's educational interests were visible in his determination to push forward the idea of founding a new university within the electoral territory of Hanover. The possession of a fully fledged university was seen as an important mark of status among the German princes, and Munchhausen was therefore keen when the idea was mooted in 1732. The first lectures were held at the new institution in Gottingen two years later. Divided into the four faculties of law, medicine, philosophy, and theology, the university was intended to promote enlightened principles; for example, the theological faculty had no right of censorship, although the state did retain that authority. Munchhausen's hope was that the Georgia Augusta, dedicated to and named after his royal master, would replace Halle as the favoured institution for the nobility throughout the Holy Roman empire who sought preparation for state service. Consequently legal studies were strongly encouraged and Gottingen rapidly acquired a reputation as an important centre for the study of international law. Munchhausen was present for the formal inauguration of the university in 1737 and remained closely involved with it throughout his life, encouraging the formation of an academy of sciences in Gottingen in 1751. Contemporaries noted that the initials in the university's name might just as easily stand for Gerlaco Adolphina as Georgia Augusta. 
Munchhausen's other domestic policies also yielded positive results. He was credited with improving agricultural productivity and thus tax revenues within Hanover. He also supported the foundation in 1735 of the state stud farm at Celle, which has continued to produce internationally renowned horses to the present day. 
Munchhausen's growing political importance can be seen from his various diplomatic missions from 1740. In June of that year he was sent by George II to Berlin to negotiate with the new Prussian monarch, Frederick II. After the frosty relations that had characterized Prusso-Hanoverian (and by extension Anglo-Prussian) relations during the reign of Frederick William I, George II's brother-in-law, George hoped that his nephew would be more amenable to co-operation. Munchhausen found Frederick to be cultured and rather Francophile. He sought to warn Frederick of the dangers that excessive French power posed to the German states, a theme characteristic of both Munchhausen and the Hanoverian ministry's general approach to foreign affairs. Munchhausen was also the Hanoverian ambassador at two imperial elections, that of 1742, which selected the elector of Bavaria as Charles VII, and 1745, when Maria Theresa's husband, Francis Stephen of Lorraine, was elected Francis I. 
The War of the Austrian Succession had reminded Munchhausen of Hanover's vulnerability in the face of French aggression and how the connection with Britain might place Hanoverian territory at risk. The period after the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) saw a blossoming of Munchhausen's connections with British ministers. His younger brother Philipp had become head of the German chancery in London. The duke of Newcastle accompanied George II on his summer sojourn in the Hanoverian electorate for the first time in 1748. Munchhausen won Newcastle's confidence and became a regular correspondent of the British minister. Munchhausen was sceptical about Newcastle's attempts to secure a continuing alliance with Austria through the imperial election scheme, although he hoped that Newcastle might be able to persuade the Austrians to settle some of the protestant complaints that had built up in the imperial courts. 
In 1753 Munchhausen became president of the chamber and effective head of the ministry in Hanover. As relations between France and Britain deteriorated during the 1750s, Munchhausen and his Hanoverian colleagues hoped that Hanover might be able to remain neutral. These hopes were dashed and Munchhausen found himself having to negotiate with French occupiers after the defeat of allied forces at Hastenbeck in July 1757. The Hanoverian ministry retreated to Stade, although Munchhausen remained in the city of Hanover long enough to ensure that he was not directly involved in the talks that led to the convention of Kloster-Zeven. Hanoverian fortunes revived in late 1757. The appointment of Ferdinand of Brunswick as commander of allied forces in Germany and Frederick II's victory at Rossbach revitalized hopes of active British and Hanoverian participation in the conflict. Munchhausen was reluctant for Hanover to resume the fight. His relations with Ferdinand of Brunswick remained formal and he did not enjoy the intimacy with William Pitt that he had with Newcastle. He talked frequently about the need to secure peace, particularly after George II's death in 1760. The new king, George III, continued to place his faith in Munchhausen, and in 1765 he was granted the title of premier minister, with the right to preside in all councils, except the legal chancery. Munchhausen's first wife having died in October 1750, he married again on 10 January 1755 in Hanover. His second wife, Christiane Lucie von der Schulenburg (1718-1787), was the daughter of a Prussian general, Achaz von der Schulenburg, and of Sophie Magdalena von Munchhausen; she appears to have been Munchhausen's niece. Gerlach Adolf von Munchhausen died on 26 November 1770 and was buried in the Neustadter church, Hanover. Although he died childless, the University of Gottingen ensured that his name was not forgotten. The most infamous member of the family, Hieronymus Karl Friedrich von Munchhausen (1720-1797), fictionalized by Rudolf Erich Raspe, was the son of Gerlach Adolf and Philipp Adolf's first cousin. 


@@@@@


doc= 95950


Frederica, Princess (1848-1926), was born Frederica Sophia Marie Henrietta Amelia Theresa in Hanover on 9 January 1848, the eldest daughter of George, crown prince of Hanover -- from 1851 king of Hanover as George V -- and Princess Mary Alexandrina (Marie) (1818-1907) of Saxe-Altenburg. Her great-grandfather in the male line was George III of Great Britain and Ireland, and she was thus a princess of Great Britain and Ireland as well as of Hanover. Passionate and outspoken, Lily, as she was known to her family, became her father's favourite child. She was educated at home together with her younger sister Mary (1849-1904). Around her sixteenth birthday rumours about potential marriages to members of the protestant houses of Denmark or Prussia circulated in dynastic circles, but none materialized. 
The war between Prussia and the majority of German sovereigns in June and July 1866 changed Frederica's life dramatically. After Prussia's victory the chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, and King Wilhelm I decided to annex the kingdom of Hanover to Prussia. While the deposed King George and Crown Prince Ernest Augustus left for Austria, Frederica, her mother, and her younger sister remained in Hanover for a further twelve months. During this period Frederica only saw her father during a brief visit to the residence of her grandfather, the duke of Saxe-Altenburg. Under increasing pressure from the Prussian authorities, the queen and the two princesses left the royal palace of Marienburg and the Hanoverian royal family was reunited in exile in Austria during the summer of 1867. 
The experiences of defeat and exile shaped Frederica's political views and made her a strong opponent of Prussia with an extreme dislike for Bismarck. She supported her father in his campaign for the restoration of Hanover and shared his legalistic views about dynastic sovereignty. A potential political marriage with the Italian prince Umberto failed in 1867. In early 1868 George V purchased two family residences at Penzing near Vienna and Gmunden close to Lake Traunsee. Life in exile proved financially difficult as the largest part of the family's income and fortune had been sequestrated by the Prussian authorities in March 1868. From 1873 King George's assets on the British stock market provided Frederica with a regular income, the so-called princess's fund. However, the king's sudden death in June 1878 again threatened her financial and personal independence. Her brother Ernest Augustus succeeded as head of the family, and demanded that Frederica contribute to the family's expenses with a regular sum. He also pressed his sister to agree to a pension offered by the Prussian authorities, which she refused. 
Frederica now turned to her relatives in Britain. She was particularly close to her aunt Augusta, duchess of Cambridge, but also corresponded with her father's cousin Queen Victoria. On Augusta's invitation she had visited Britain in 1876, and decided to stay when she returned there in 1878. In a letter to Ernest Augustus she asserted her independence and informed him that she had Victoria's support. In spite of the protests of her mother and brother, Frederica settled at Hampton Court, where she took up the Prussian pension. The conflict between Frederica and her family gained a further dimension when the princess wrote from Britain to her mother and brother that she was to marry Alfons von Pawel-Rammingen (1843-1932), a former member of the Hanoverian royal household who was naturalized as a British subject, in March 1880. The conflict was resolved only through Queen Victoria's intervention. 
Frederica married Pawel-Rammingen at a private chapel in Windsor Castle on 24 April 1880 and the couple moved into apartments at Hampton Court. She wrote annually to thank the queen for her help and protection regarding the marriage. Frederica gave birth to a daughter, Victoria Georgina Beatrice Maude Anne, in March 1881, but the child died three weeks after her birth. Frederica's life in Britain was subsequently characterized by her engagement in charity work in memory of her daughter, and in 1882 she founded a home for poor women recovering from childbirth at East Molesey, Surrey. She supported other institutions but repeatedly ran into debt over 'lush' ideas and on several occasions appealed to Queen Victoria for financial assistance. 
The loss of her daughter and the birth of Ernest Augustus's children following his marriage to Princess Thyra of Denmark helped Frederica overcome the conflict with her family. She and her brother regularly corresponded during the latter period of the princess's life. Frederica and Alfons moved to Biarritz in 1898, where she died at their home there, Villa Mouriscot, on 16 October 1926; she was survived by her husband. Her obituary in 'The Times' was entitled 'A link with the old royal family' (18 October 1926), and a funeral was held at Biarritz on 21 October, followed by a funeral and committal service at St George's Chapel, Windsor, on 18 November. Her dynastic identity as a member of the house of Hanover, effectively expelled from the British royal family following the First World War, weakened her place in the popular memory of the Victorian royal family as much as had her move to France in 1898. But by settling at Hampton Court and participating in the charitable activities pursued by the British royal family in the late nineteenth century Frederica actively emphasized British royal identity at a time when the Hanoverian royal family was expected to maintain a distance from Queen Victoria and her descendants, and provided a reminder of the multi-national character of the British royal house throughout the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 95975


Mowlam, Marjorie (1949-2005), politician, was born on 18 September 1949 at 43 King Street, Watford, Hertfordshire, the second of three children of Frank William Mowlam, Post Office worker, and his wife, Bettina Mary (Tina), 'nee' Rogers, telephonist. She described her parents as 'classic lower-middle class' (personal knowledge). When she was eleven the family moved to Coventry, where her father became an assistant postmaster. He was an alcoholic, and his behaviour at home was a constant trial for her. Her mother, however, was very different, and a source of strength and friendship. 
After a short spell at Chiswick Girls' Grammar School in London Mowlam went to Coundon Court comprehensive school, Coventry, where she excelled. She went on to become head girl, as well as being an outstanding netball player and winning a duke of Edinburgh's award. In 1968 she progressed to Durham University, where she read social anthropology. She became a student leader and had a number of boyfriends, including one whom she followed to Iowa University in 1973. While there she gained her PhD (on referenda in Switzerland.) She then went to Florida State University in 1977. Two years later she returned to Britain and became a politics lecturer at Newcastle University. Shortly afterwards, her former boyfriend, from whom she had parted in 1976, died in a drowning accident. 
In Newcastle Mowlam became very politically active, chairing Tyne Bridge constituency Labour Party, joining the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, and playing a part in getting Neil Kinnock elected as Labour Party leader. She left Newcastle University in 1983 and took an administrative job at Northern College, Barnsley. She was unsuccessful in finding a parliamentary seat to fight at that time. Shortly before the general election of 1987, however, James Tinn, MP for Redcar, announced, at the last minute, that he was not going to seek re-election. From a shortlist of four Mowlam was chosen to contest the seat for Labour, beating the strong local candidate, Richard Lewis, by the narrow margin of seven votes in the selection process. Lewis and his wife, Ruth, remained steadfast friends of Mowlam for the rest of her life. 
Mowlam was thirty-eight when she entered the House of Commons. In her maiden speech she paid special tribute to Ellen Wilkinson, the Labour MP of the 1920s, and made particular mention of the problem of low-paid women. She was soon a member of the influential public accounts committee, before Neil Kinnock made her a junior spokesperson on Northern Ireland, only ten months after her entry to the house. Her new job gave her an initial insight into the complicated politics of Northern Ireland. In 1989 she moved to become Labour's spokesperson on the City of London and corporate affairs, working with Gordon Brown. Their relationship was not a warm one. She was elevated to the shadow cabinet in 1992, becoming the party's spokesperson on women and the 'citizens' charter', a post she neither wanted nor enjoyed. She was elected a member of Labour's national executive committee, pleasing some party members with her decidedly republican views. 
On John Smith's death Mowlam took a major role in the election of Tony Blair as the party's new leader. She would have liked to have been Blair's campaign manager, but the job went to Jack Straw. Blair made her shadow secretary of state for Northern Ireland, which she felt was a demotion. It proved to be nothing of the sort. The Labour Party's position on Northern Ireland needed an overhaul, if there was to be a settlement under a Labour government, changing from one that was seen to be very 'pro-green' to one of consensus and even-handedness. Mowlam soon got to know all of the main players in Northern Ireland, drawing on her previous experience as a shadow Northern Ireland minister. 
In 1995 Mowlam's personal life changed dramatically when on 24 June she married Jonathan Paul (Jon) Norton (died 2009), a forty-year-old Labour-supporting merchant banker whom she had met when she had been Labour's City spokesperson. She acquired two stepchildren, Henrietta and Freddie, as well as a new home in Islington. In 1997 her life was transformed in a very different way. She was diagnosed with a brain tumour and had to undergo difficult radiotherapy treatment. She kept this news very much to herself and a close circle around her, including her able adviser Nigel Warner, the speaker Betty Boothroyd, and Tony Blair. When newspapers started to comment unfavourably on her increased weight and new wig, she felt she had to make her condition public. As a result she received tremendous public support for her courage. In meetings, she would often astound people by taking her wig off and continuing as if nothing had happened. 
After the general election of 1997 Mowlam became the first woman secretary of state for Northern Ireland. She immediately went to Belfast to meet people in the street. Her style was a complete contrast to that of any previous secretary of state. She was very much a 'people person' -- 'touchy feely' was a phrase often used about her -- and also used robust language and was very plain-speaking. With her attractive and charismatic personality she had no difficulty in relating to ordinary people, especially women. She carried little religious or political 'baggage', believing that the 'principle of consent' was the only way ahead for Northern Ireland. Her style did not appeal to all. Many Unionists, in particular, did not quite know what to make of her. Relations between her and David Trimble, the Ulster Unionist Party leader, were never good. 
Mowlam's immediate task in Northern Ireland was to revive a flagging peace process. Working closely with the senior American politician Senator George Mitchell, the chairman of the talks, and prime ministers Blair and Ahern, she started her job by overseeing a new ceasefire by the Irish Republican Army, which was necessary before inclusive negotiations could start. This succeeded, and Sinn Fein re-entered the process; but Ian Paisley and his Democratic Unionist Party left it. During the autumn of 1997 little progress was made, and by the winter it looked as if the peace process was nearing collapse. In January 1998 Mowlam spectacularly and controversially visited loyalist prisoners in the Maze. This kept loyalism on board, and helped revive the process. 
Although, inevitably, 10 Downing Street took the lead on Northern Ireland issues, with Tony Blair playing a very important role, the day-to-day business of the process was handled by the indefatigable Mowlam. The Belfast, or 'Good Friday', agreement of April 1998 led eventually to the establishment of a power-sharing executive, an elected assembly, the release of prisoners, major changes to human rights and policing, and, especially significantly, an agreed and settled status for Northern Ireland. Properly, Mowlam was given much credit for the outcome of the talks. By contrast, it was sometimes also said that Mowlam was marginalized in the process, especially during the final negotiations. This was not the case -- she played a vital part, along with the two prime ministers and the Northern Ireland politicians. She was, however, the first to say that the politicians and people of Ireland, north and south, were the real creators of the new arrangements. It would take a decade before the agreement was implemented in full, but the Good Friday agreement was the key to the success of the peace process. 
Mowlam had, many argued, become the most popular politician in Britain. Indeed, a Gallup poll for the 'Daily Telegraph' revealed that she was the most popular member of the cabinet. During the Labour Party conference of 1998, in the middle of Tony Blair's speech, the prime minister's reference to 'our one and only Mo' resulted in a unique and heartfelt standing ovation. It has been claimed that this was to work to her disadvantage, and that her eventual departure from Northern Ireland to a lower-profile cabinet job stemmed from this occasion. Certainly, her future was now to be controversial. She refused the offer of standing as the Labour candidate for the London mayoralty (the eventual winner, the then independent Ken Livingstone, later said that she would have won had she stood), and the job of secretary of state for health. She would have preferred to become foreign secretary or defence secretary, but in the end she was appointed minister for the cabinet office and chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, in October 1999. She was replaced in Northern Ireland by Peter Mandelson. She did not much like her new job, although she worked particularly hard on issues relating to the international drugs trade. She became increasingly disaffected with the direction of the government and was not in favour of the invasion of Iraq. 
Mowlam retired from the government and from the Commons in 2001, publishing her autobiography, 'Momentum', the following year. She took part in television programmes, toured the country in 'An audience with Mo Mowlam', and was still very much the darling of the Labour Party, gaining recognition and admiration wherever she went. She and her husband retired to a farmhouse in Sittingbourne, Kent, where she worked on a book about drugs policy. Her health problems, however, continued. She died on 19 August 2005, in the Pilgrim's Hospice, 56 London Road, Canterbury, of bronchopneumonia and astrocitoma of the brain. She was survived by her husband, Jon, and her two stepchildren. 
Mowlam's name will always be associated primarily with Northern Ireland and the Good Friday agreement -- rightly so, since the impetus she gave to a flagging peace process was very real. She was seen as someone who was genuinely different from previous Northern Ireland secretaries. She was inevitably overshadowed by Tony Blair, and she could antagonize people, especially Unionists. But her achievements were genuine, her bravery unquestioned, and her popularity in the country, among people of all political persuasions, unrivalled. 


@@@@@


doc= 95983


Lane, Geoffrey Dawson, Baron Lane (1918-2005), judge, was born on 17 July 1918, at Crantock, Farley Road, Derby, the only son and youngest of the four children of Percy Albert Lane (1880-1964), manager of Smith's Bank in Lincoln, and his wife, Polly, 'nee' Dawson (1880-1961), who had graduated in classics from Royal Holloway College, London. 
Lane was educated at Shrewsbury School, where he was head of school and a keen cricketer. He was awarded a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he achieved a first in part one of the classical tripos, when his education was interrupted by the Second World War. He joined the Royal Air Force and served throughout the war, initially as a pilot in Bomber Command, flying Wellington aircraft. His experiences were varied and highly dangerous. Apart from missions over Germany and occupied France his skills as a pilot were recognized when he was chosen to set up the RAF's first dedicated air postal services, using first the notoriously unstable Albermarle aircraft, and later the C47 Dakota. The purpose of the service was to ensure that British soldiers serving under General Montgomery in north Africa would receive their mail from home, an important contribution to morale. In February 1943, as a young squadron leader, he was entrusted by Winston Churchill with correspondence to be taken and flown south-west out over the Atlantic and then south-east, via Gibraltar, to Montgomery in north Africa. After Montgomery had read the documents he explained to Lane that the German army would attack the following morning at a specific time and place. It was only many years later that Lane realized that this intelligence must have been gathered through allied code-breaking achievements at Bletchley Park. Next morning Lane flew out of north Africa carrying Montgomery's hand-written response to Churchill, which Lane duly delivered, personally, to 10 Downing Street. For his work in Transport Command flying long-range aircraft to north Africa he was awarded the Air Force Cross in 1943. 
On D-day and subsequent operations in 1944 Lane flew paratroops and supplies behind enemy lines, and once the bridgehead was established he flew supplies into and serious casualties out of France and back to England for treatment at the Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford. In September 1944 he towed gliders on the Arnhem expedition and thereafter flew supplies in to support that doomed force. By 1945 he was stationed in India as part of the RAF contingent preparing for the invasion of Japan. He never spoke about his wartime experiences but those who served with him remembered him as an inspirational leader. His experiences were later put to good use when, as a QC, he led the investigation into the Vanguard crash at Heathrow in 1965 and, as a High Court judge, he was the chairman of the public inquiry into the Trident crash at Staines in 1972. 
On 25 January 1944 Lane married, at North Wraxall church, Wiltshire, Jessie (Jan) Macdonald (1914-2006), daughter of Donald Macdonald, farmer, of Tulloch, Aviemore. They had met in 1942 when Lane was a patient in an RAF hospital in Buckinghamshire and she was a nurse responsible for his care. Thus began a wartime romance that, for both of them, lasted a lifetime. They had one son. 
After demobilization Lane returned to Cambridge, again taking firsts, this time in parts one and two of the law tripos. He was called to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1946, became a pupil to Richard Elwes, and joined the midland circuit. Before his practice developed he supplemented his income by giving tutorials at Cambridge. However, his skills as an advocate, allied to his robust common sense, were immediately and obviously attractive, and he developed a huge and varied junior practice. A little unusually at that time he believed that however busy he was, the service to solicitors should be rapid. As his handwriting was always legible and tidy he dealt with relatively routine papers almost immediately, in handwriting, by return of post whenever possible. 
One of Lane's last cases before he took silk in 1962 was the notorious trial of James Hanratty at Bedford assizes. Lane was junior counsel to the crown. After many years of controversy and passionate contention that Hanratty had suffered the supreme penalty when he was innocent it was a relief to Lane that in 2002 the development of DNA demonstrated beyond question that Hanratty was indeed guilty and rightly convicted of murder. In 1965 he acted for the Metropolitan Police in the inquiry conducted by Sir Daniel Brabin into the conviction and execution of Timothy Evans for a murder committed by the main prosecution witness against him, John Christie. These two cases reinforced Lane's strongly held views about capital punishment, to which he was opposed. 
In 1965 Lane addressed a constitution of five judges on the vexed and complicated problem of joint enterprise by defendants resulting in death. His encapsulation of authorities from 1830 onwards was summarized in a single sentence, and his analysis of the principle was adopted virtually verbatim in the judgment of the court given by the lord chief justice, Hubert Parker, Baron Parker of Waddington. What is more, over forty years later this principle remained the source to which the courts dealing with the problem of joint enterprise returned time and again when doubt and uncertainty appeared to have crept into the law ('R. v. Rahman', 2008). 
Those who knew Lane as a barrister remembered in particular his generosity with his own limited time. Advice and help were always available. He was not prone to indulge younger barristers, or to allow them to be self-indulgent. His advice was always clear, and the language never left any doubt about his meaning. He then expected his interlocutors to consider what he had said, wished them luck, and left them to make up their own minds. Thereafter, throughout his judicial career, Lane was always tolerant of the young and the inexperienced, but he had no time for the idle and those who failed to prepare their cases properly. They were failing both their clients and their responsibility to the court. He had huge faith in the jury system, and confidence in the ability of the jury to decide when it was appropriate to convict and when to acquit. This loyal adherence to the constitutional primacy of the jury in criminal matters was later to expose him to vituperative and often ill-informed criticism. 
Lane's first judicial appointment was as deputy chairman of Bedfordshire quarter sessions, in 1960. He was later deputy chairman of Lindsey quarter sessions and Rutland quarter sessions (becoming chairman of the latter when the previous incumbent stood down), and recorder of Bedford (1963-6). After a glittering career at the bar, and only four short years in silk, and no doubt in part because of the extraordinary quality of his submission to Lord Parker in 1965, he was appointed as a judge of the High Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Division, in 1966. He was knighted the same year. 
One memorable observation by Lane when, as a judge of the Queen's Bench Division, holding that quite considerable force was justified to prevent an obstruction of the highway by a violent and abusive driver, was that 'one did not use jewellers' scales to measure reasonable force' ('Reed v. Wastie', 1972). This provided an early demonstration that his capacity as an advocate to capture the essence of a complicated legal problem in a few short words was undiminished by the assumption of his new office. 
In 1974 Lane was promoted to the Court of Appeal and sworn of the privy council. Within a few months he identified the principle that applied when drunkenness and its possible effect on the defendant's state of mind was in issue: 'A drunken intent is nevertheless an intent' ('R. v. Sheehan and Moore', 1975). More than thirty years later this simple, unequivocal direction continued to be used to direct juries whenever this issue arose. 
Five years later, in 1979, Lane was appointed a lord of appeal in ordinary, taking the title Baron Lane, of St Ippollitts in the county of Hertford. In 1980, after only six months as a law lord, he was appointed lord chief justice. Many had thought that his elevation to the House of Lords might preclude this appointment, and his return to the Court of Appeal was enthusiastically welcomed. One wit summed up the general mood, 'Geoffrey Dawson, Baron Lane, nice to have you back again' (personal knowledge). 
Lane had not sought office as lord chief justice. He and his wife were a private couple, hugely happy with each other and content with the company of friends. Neither wished for limelight. They realized that he was exchanging the low-key, intellectually stimulating, but essentially peaceful life of a law lord for a high-profile office. It was only his sense of public duty that led him to accept the appointment. He was, and for the rest of his life remained, modest, unpretentious, and unassuming. In a speech to his old circuit, at a dinner when his appointment was honoured, he explained that he had discovered that the first holder of the office of chief justiciar was Odo. With his marvellous ability to explode pomposity and bring his audience down to earth he continued, 'now you have got Thicko!' (personal knowledge). With his characteristic moral courage he went on to declare that the bar could not shuffle off responsibility for the inefficiencies of the criminal justice system, which he, as lord chief justice, would now have to address. 
Lane was lord chief justice for twelve years. Two principles guided his own approach to the extra-judicial problems of his office. The maintenance of the independence of the judiciary was an absolute. In a speech in Malta in February 1990 he spoke of judicial independence as the 'foundation stone of freedom' and 'something which it is never prudent to take for granted'. He spoke of the judge as a 'vital part of the constitutional jigsaw puzzle'. He continued: 'And what is the nature of that puzzle? It is surely this: how best to balance the rights and duties of the individual against the powers which the State must necessarily have if it is going effectively to govern... the duty of upholding the balance, in civilised communities passed on the judges, is of no value unless the judge is in a position to act according to his conscience without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.' In his speech he made clear that he was 'truly', indeed 'avidly', non-political, 'both by reason of my profession and by reason of my own inclination' ('Sunday Times of Malta', 11 Feb 1990). By then he had expressed himself in trenchant terms on the separate but equally critical principle of individual liberty for which so many of his generation had fought and died. He once said that 'loss of freedom seldom happens over night... oppression does not stand on the doorstep with a toothbrush moustache and a swastika armband. It creeps up step by step, and all of a sudden the unfortunate citizen realises that freedom has gone. ('The Guardian', 23 Aug 2005)' This particular observation, reflective of his own deeply held personal commitment to the principle of individual freedom, was made in response to proposals to reform the legal profession advanced by the then lord chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern. Treated as a reaction to intended legislation this was, and at the time was regarded as, intemperate and over-blown language. As a warning against the insidious effect of what appear at first to be only small encroachments on individual freedom it was salutary. 
Lane's commitment to these overarching principles had some important practical consequences. He limited his contacts with politicians to the absolute minimum necessary to enable the business of the courts to be done. Shortly after his appointment he rejected attempts by the Home Office to involve the judiciary in the administrative aspect of sentencing policy and strategy on the basis that, in the long term, it would undermine the independence of the sentencing judge. In his last speech as lord chief justice, at the lord mayor's banquet on 9 July 1991, he drew attention to the vast increase in applications for judicial review which had taken place during his period of office and which, he suggested, demonstrated the need for an independent judiciary to resolve disputes between the individual citizen and the increasingly mighty executive. Without an independent judiciary the rights of the citizen would evaporate. 
Within three months of his appointment Lane addressed the problem of dangerously overcrowded prisons and identified the principles that were subsequently repeated and continued throughout a plethora of statutes which addressed sentencing issues. His very first suggestion, in the context of dangerously overcrowded prisons, attempted 'to ensure, if an immediate custodial sentence is necessary, that the sentence is as short as possible, consistent only with the duty to protect the interests of the public and to punish and deter the criminal' ('R. v. Bibi', 1980). This principle was repeated by successive lord chief justices. The decision in 'R. v. Bibi' (1980) foreshadowed another of Lane's reforms of the sentencing process. 'We are not aiming at uniformity of sentence; that would be impossible. We are aiming at uniformity of approach' (ibid.). The sentencing decision was for the trial judge, but in Lane's view an endeavour to achieve a coherent approach to sentencing did not constitute an interference with judicial independence. This led to a series of new 'guideline' cases, designed to address sentencing problems whenever what Lane described as a 'divergence' of judicial approach had become apparent. Such cases included cases involving breach of trust, drugs, death by dangerous driving, incest, and rape. It became commonplace for the Court of Appeal criminal division to provide guidance to sentencers, and in 2003 the 'Criminal Justice Act' created the Sentencing Guidelines Council, which represented the logical conclusion of Lane's belief that there should be a consistency of approach to similar sentencing problems throughout the country. The 'Criminal Justice Act' 1988 granted the attorney-general the power to refer 'unduly lenient' sentences to the Court of Appeal. Subsequent legislation significantly increased the types of case to which these powers applied. Again it was Lane who identified the applicable principles and commented: 'that mercy should season justice is a proposition as soundly based in law as it is in literature' ('Attorney-general's reference no. 4 of 1989'). 
In short, from the beginning to the end of his period in office one of Lane's continuing concerns and major achievements within the criminal justice system was to keep the hugely complex issue of sentencing in individual cases constantly in mind, and to achieve a cohesive series of guiding principles which remained the foundation for subsequent legislative changes and judicial decision. 
Another troublesome feature when Lane took office was that a number of serving judges did not appear to understand the difference between acting robustly and behaving discourteously and unfairly. Lane's sense of fairness was innate, and he well understood the importance of ensuring that the trial process should not only be fair, but should be perceived by the defendant, the jury, and anyone who happened to be in court, to be fair. He was quick to criticize judges who were unfair to defendants: 'however distasteful the offence, however repulsive the defendant, however laughable his defence, he was entitled to have his case fairly presented both by counsel and by the judge. Where the cards seemed to be stacked most heavily against a defendant, the judge should be most scrupulous to ensure that nothing untoward occurred. ('R. v. Marr', 1989)' Not least because Lane made clear that judicial misconduct taking the form of bullying and unfairness would not be tolerated it became very rare indeed. 
A more intractable problem that Lane sought to address was the problem of unprepared, discursive summings up that confused rather than elucidated the issues. This type of summing up was described by him as 'hornswoggle'. No judge hearing a summing up of his own described in this way would have regarded it as a compliment. Subsequent developments of the criminal law after his retirement meant that the lengthy summing up was not eradicated, but Lane's objective, that the summing up should be as short as possible consistent with the judge's duty, was universally understood. 
It was in relation to the substantive criminal law that the brilliance of Lane's mind can best be appreciated. When dealing with appeals against conviction said to have arisen from errors of law his technique was to gather together all the relevant statutes and decided cases and to reduce huge and often difficult, sometimes irreconcilable, judicial statements into a sentence or two that encapsulated the essence of the principle. The technique that had served him so well as a QC in 1965 was revived time and again. Examples of these landmark judgments abound. They include dishonesty throughout the criminal law, duress, and mistake, where Lane expressed 'the utmost sympathy' for the 'unfortunate recorder' because the case 'raised issues of law which have been the subject of debate for more years than one likes to think and the subject of more learned academic articles than one would care to read' ('Gladstone Williams', 1984). Typically, Lane's judgment covered a few brief pages. As a result of his determination to establish principle in easily understood English innumerable summings up were made more understandable and more readily understood. 
Perhaps the most remarkable judgment produced by Lane involved the examination and discarding of the fiction that a husband who had sexual intercourse with his wife without her consent could not be guilty of rape: 'The idea that a wife by marriage consents in advance to her husband having sexual intercourse with her whatever her state of health and however proper her objections... is no longer acceptable. It can never have been other than a fiction, and fiction is a poor basis for the criminal law... where the common law rule no longer even remotely represents what is the true position of a wife in present day society, the duty of the court is to take steps to alter the rule if it can legitimately do so... the time has now arrived when the law should declare that a rapist remains a rapist subject to the criminal law, irrespective of his relationship with his victim... this is not the creation of a new offence, it is the removal of a common law fiction which has become anachronistic and offensive. ('R. v. R.', 1992)' Lane was distinctly media-unfriendly. In his view communication skills outside the terms of the judgment in court were unnecessary. Everything appropriate for a judge to say should be said in court. He would not accept that a less rigid (he would have contended, a less principled) approach would not have undermined the independence of the judiciary but rather would have produced a better understanding of what judicial independence means and why it matters. One consequence of his rigid self-denying ordinance never at any time, even after his retirement, to answer personal criticism was that he came to be known most widely as one of the three judges who, in January 1988, dismissed the appeals of the six men convicted of a terrorist bombing attack in Birmingham in 1975. 
The judgment in this notorious case was massive, running to well over 150 pages of typescript. At the very end the judgment observed that, 'as with many cases referred by the Home Secretary to the Court of Appeal, the longer this case has gone on, the more convinced this court has become that the verdict of the jury was correct' ('R. v. Callaghan and others', 28 Jan 1988). An analysis of the judgment shows that the court dismissed the appeals on the basis of the evidence available to it during the course of the lengthy hearing in late 1987, disregarding the campaigning and out-of-court comments by supporters and opponents of the appellants. The observation at the end of the judgment was no doubt intended to address and bring the controversy the case had generated to a conclusion. It was an uncharacteristic mistake for Lane to make, not least because one of the constant refrains throughout his judicial career was that allowance should always be made for the unforeseen and the unforeseeable. When, in 1991, the case returned to the Court of Appeal, although the issues before that court were not the same as those before the court in the first appeal, attention naturally focused on the last sentence in the judgment, which had attracted much attention at the time when it was spoken. The decision of the court in the second appeal demonstrated that the convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory, and accordingly they were quashed. The criticism of Lane was immediate and personal. A hundred and forty MPs signed an early day motion, in effect urging that the lord chief justice should resign immediately. The royal commission on criminal justice, chaired by Viscount Runciman, was appointed, not least because public confidence in the administration of criminal justice was inevitably undermined by concern that six men had been imprisoned for so many years before their convictions were eventually quashed. Lane was the focal point for these criticisms and concerns, and in the immediate aftermath he was treated as if he were the embodiment of all the perceived deficiencies in the criminal justice system. History will lend a kinder perspective, and Lane's many remarkable achievements as lord chief justice will come to be more widely appreciated. 
It was later suggested that, as a result of the second Birmingham six appeal, Lane retired early. He did not. Despite the hostility of the personal criticism directed against him he remained in office, continuing to provide judgments of the highest quality and offering encouragement and support to his colleagues. In one of his very last judgments, Stefan Kiszko's appeal against his conviction for murdering a young girl, after he had served many years in prison, was quashed. Later scientific advances led to the conviction of another man for this murder. Lane's fortitude during this difficult period reinforced the warm admiration and respect of his judicial colleagues. When, at his valedictory, in April 1992, Lord Donaldson, the master of the rolls, spoke of giving voice 'to the anger and disgust which we have felt at the campaign of calumny waged against you in recent months' (personal knowledge), he was accurately reflecting the views of the judicial bench as a whole that an outstanding lord chief justice had been unfairly traduced. 
Lane was made an honorary bencher of the Inner Temple in 1980 and an honorary fellow of his old college in 1981, and was made an honorary LLD of Cambridge in 1984. After his retirement to Hitchin, Hertfordshire, he became a trustee of the Prison Reform Trust, and chaired the committee on the penalty for homicide, which in 1993 urged the abolition of the mandatory life sentence for murder. He died at the Lister Hospital, Stevenage, on 21 August 2005, of heart failure, and was survived by his wife and son. After his death Sir Louis Blom-Cooper QC, who in his time represented many clients associated with unpopular causes, observed that 'by common consent of the legal profession, Lane was a very great Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales' ('The Guardian', 23 Aug 2005). Perhaps in Lane's case truth may indeed be the daughter of time. 


@@@@@


doc= 95984


Frend, William Hugh Clifford (1916-2005), church historian, was born on 11 January 1916 at the Vicarage, Shottermill, Haslemere, Surrey, the youngest of four children, a late child and second son, of Edwin George Clifford Frend (1871-1937), a high-church Anglican vicar, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Bacon (1877-1966). He was baptized by his father in St Stephen's parish church, Shottermill, on 2 March 1916. An uncle, John Palliser Frend, was also a clergyman. The cleric William Frend (1757-1841), controversialist in politics and theology, was a great-great-uncle. 
After Fernden School and Haileybury College, Frend went to Keble College, Oxford, to read modern history, a curriculum that enabled his participation in the Augustine seminar of the professor of divinity, F. L. Cross. He graduated with a first-class degree in 1937, and won a Craven fellowship for graduate research in classical antiquity. This enabled him to study at the Humboldt University, Berlin, which exposed him to challenging standards. After the iconic figures of Adolf von Harnack and Karl Holl, Hans Lietzmann carried the torch of thesis history rather than conviction history. Frend attended his 'Oberseminar'. Lietzmann's influence was formative. He endorsed the interweaving of literary and material sources and pointed to models. He helped Frend shape as his project the socio-economic context of Donatist religious dissent in north Africa, and supported his trip to Tunisia to study early Christian archaeological sites. Frend's thesis (for which he was awarded an Oxford DPhil in 1940) was co-supervised externally by the London Byzantinist and official translator of Hitler's speeches, Norman H. Baynes. The thesis evolved into a groundbreaking book, 'The Donatist Church' (1952), which concentrated on non-theological dimensions. 
During the Second World War Frend worked successively in the War Office, the Cabinet Office, and the Foreign Office, in political intelligence, and in the latter part of the war was posted to north Africa, Italy, and Austria. He was decorated by the Polish government-in-exile. He remained with the Foreign Office until 1947, when he became an army officer, and for the next four years he helped analyse seized German foreign ministry documents. He was proud of his war effort, not sharing early Christian dissent on matters of military service. On 2 June 1951 he married Mary Grace Crook (1928-2002), daughter of Eric Ashley Crook, surgeon. They had a son, Simon, and a daughter, Sally. Frend's wife's family had historical Quaker associations (as indeed the Frend family had too) so that even his marriage was perhaps a symptom of his fondness for dissent. 
After a brief spell as research fellow at Nottingham University (1951-2), from 1952 to 1969 Frend's seminal work on the frontiers between archaeology, church history, and theology was done at Cambridge, based at Gonville and Caius College, of which he was a bye-fellow from 1952 and fellow from 1956. He also lectured in the divinity faculty. He published 'Martyrdom and Persecution in the Early Church' (1965), valuable for source orientation, and 'The Early Church' (1965), a textbook for students that was popular. In 1966 he was made an Oxford DD. In 1967-8 he gave the Birbeck lectures at Trinity College, Cambridge, later published as 'The Rise of the Monophysite Movement' (1972). This further exemplified his interest in alternative or submerged Christian traditions. 
From 1969 until 1984 Frend was professor of ecclesiastical history at Glasgow in the faculty of divinity, which also incorporated Trinity College (which trained candidates for Church of Scotland ministry, and where his office was located until 1976). The cultural challenge was mutual. His background of English 'home counties', Oxbridge, the Church of England, and civil religion did not fit comfortably into a Scottish university divinity faculty, orientated partly to the Presbyterian ministry, and located in declining industrial Glasgow. Frend remained unreconstructed. Some staff perceived quasi-proconsular attitudes. However, his scholarship excelled -- acknowledged by an Edinburgh DD in 1974 -- and he delighted undergraduates. His service as dean of the divinity faculty from 1972 to 1975 and as (an apparently unlikely) chairman of the Association of University Teachers (Scotland) from 1976 to 1978 was idiosyncratic. Involvement in university politics did not help his discipline, as his chair was suppressed on his retirement. He was and remained incandescent, although he magnanimously made a bequest to Glasgow University in his will. His earlier foray into Liberal Party politics at Cambridge took a different turn in Glasgow, where he canvassed for a Conservative and Unionist candidate against Roy Jenkins in 1982. He found Glasgow tenement politics chastening. Moreover, he had security anxieties due to the IRA shadow, since he had a Territorial Decoration and a son on military service in Northern Ireland. He was reassured when told he might only qualify for a 'knee job'. Glasgow, however, was the workshop of Frend's magnum opus, 'The Rise of Christianity' (1984), a huge tome unmatched by any modern English-speaking scholar in the field. It followed his tardy election as a fellow of the British Academy (1983). 
On his retirement and return to England in 1984 Frend remained active in research and in church ministry. Ambivalent towards the church and having a reductionist concept of Christianity, his colours were 'low church' and 'liberal'. He served variously. He had edited the 'Modern Churchman' (1963-82). A Church of England lay reader since 1956, he later became a deacon (1983) and minister (1984) of the Scottish Episcopal Church, serving in Aberfoyle parish. He then became priest-in-charge of the linked parishes of Barnwell with Thurning and Luddington in Peterborough diocese until 1990. Thereafter he officiated intermittently as assistant priest in the Fulbourn group of parishes in the diocese of Ely. Mildly Trollopian, he focused more on pastoral work than on order, liturgy, or preaching, but a humane spirit made him effective in that role. 
Other marks of esteem were Frend's fellowships of the Society of Antiquaries (a society for which he later endowed the Frend medal for archaeology), the Royal Historical Society, and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He served on committees of national and international learned societies. As president of the International Commission for Comparative Ecclesiastical History (1980) he refused the affiliation of a South African society on the grounds of its failure to reflect ethnic and denominational diversity. He was nevertheless a guest lecturer in South Africa as well as in the USA. One such lecture-set became his attractive 'Saints and Sinners in the Early Church' (1985). He was on the editorial board of 'The Coptic Encylopedia'. 
Frend's self-appraisal appeared in 'From Dogma to History' (2003) and in an essay published in 'The American Scholar' in 1985 on his 'The Rise of Christianity'. He was a new broom in early church studies. That he was an amusing lecturer and a fluent writer helped. His descent into uncensored history contrasted with the flight from history of many British theological historians. His attention to history's losers or rejects was significant. However, the bifurcation of the subject remained. The interdisciplinary and empirical approaches that he inherited, albeit imperfectly, from Berlin (and ultimately Ranke) were viewed with scepticism. Respected at home, lauded abroad, he did not establish a research school. Paradoxically his last years saw much that he stood for become a new orthodoxy -- interdisciplinarity, national and international collaborative projects, research council commitment, and diversified public dissemination. 
Burly, mentally agile, charming, prone to seeing red mist, gregarious, and complex, William Frend died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 1 August 2005, of heart failure, having lived latterly at Clerk's Cottage, 31 Rectory Farm Road, in Little Wilbraham, Cambridgeshire. His funeral service took place at St John's Church, Little Wilbraham, on 12 August. After the committal at Cambridge crematorium his ashes were interred alongside those of his wife in the churchyard at Barnwell, Northamptonshire. He was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 95992


Winskill, Sir Archibald Little (1917-2005), air force officer, was born on 24 January 1917 at 3 Middlegate, Penrith, Cumberland, the son of James Winskill, a motor mechanic then serving in the navy, later a car dealer, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Little. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Penrith, and Carlisle grammar school; then, having shown a decided mechanical bent, from 1934 to 1939 was a trainee for a traffic apprenticeship at the London and North Eastern Railway works in Edinburgh. In 1937, in a move which was to determine the whole course of his future career, he joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve as a trainee pilot and was given basic flying training. 
Like hundreds of other reservists Winskill was mobilized on the outbreak of the Second World War. On 24 August 1940 he was commissioned as a pilot officer in the RAF, and his first posting was to no. 8 bombing and gunnery school; then he was sent to an operational training unit -- no. 7 at Harwarden -- and from there to 54 squadron, a Spitfire squadron at Hornchurch. He then served briefly with 72 and 603 squadrons before being posted to 41 squadron, where he was appointed a flight commander. 
On 14 August 1941 Winskill was reported missing. As part of the Tangmere wing he had been escorting Blenheims in an attack on a target near Lille when they were intercepted by Messerschmitt Bf 109s, one of which he shot down. His Spitfire was then hit and set on fire, forcing him to bale out. A French farmer took him to a cornfield, where he hid until nightfall; then the farmer's son took him into the farmhouse, where he was fed, and subsequently provided him with food daily until he could be sent to a 'safe house'. After two weeks his escape odyssey began -- by bicycle, dressed as a farm worker, to a series of other houses until he was put on a train for Paris. There he was taken over by the Pat O'Leary escape line, which had a very successful record of escorting allied airmen and soldiers through occupied France into Spain. He went by train to Marseilles, then to Aix-les-Thermes in the Pyrenean foothills. With two other evaders he was guided over the mountains by an Andorran with local knowledge; they reached Barcelona, where the British consul-general arranged for them to be sent to Gibraltar via Madrid. Three months after being shot down Winskill was safely back in the UK, though forbidden to fly over Europe again because of his knowledge of escape routes. He was subsequently awarded the DFC. 
From December 1941 Winskill served in three fighter squadrons -- 145, 611, and 165 -- before being given his first commands as squadron leader, briefly of 72 and 222 squadrons and finally of 232 squadron, eastern air command, Africa. This squadron provided close air support for the British First Army in Algeria and Tunisia. On 18 January 1943 he was shot down off the Tunisian coast and forced to bale out for the second time, coming down in the sea. He swam ashore, behind enemy lines, evaded capture, and rejoined his squadron. From April 1943 he was back on operations, shooting down a Stuka dive-bomber, sharing in the destruction of another, and ground strafing retreating axis forces. His north African tour ended in June 1943, when he was awarded a bar to his DFC. He served for the rest of the war at the Central Gunnery School, Sutton Bridge; he was promoted wing commander in March 1944. On 3 May 1947, at Hampstead register office, he married Christiane Amelie Pauline van het Kaar, formerly Kerbiriou, the former wife of Cornelius van het Kaar, and daughter of Emillieu Bailleux, of Calais. They had one son and one daughter. 
In August 1947 Winskill was posted to Japan, with 17 squadron, part of the British component, Air Japan, serving there until April 1948 when sent to air headquarters, Malta. He then held a special appointment as air adviser to the Belgian government from December 1949, before returning to a series of UK postings at the Flying College, Manby, Stradishall, and Turnhouse. From June 1957 he was at the headquarters of the 2nd Tactical Air Force and in 1958 went to visit Felix Carron, the French farmboy who had helped him to evade capture -- a meeting he described as a 'very emotional moment' ('Daily Telegraph'). By now a group captain, he was appointed to the staff of the air secretary then, promoted air commodore, served as air attache in Paris. From August 1967 he was director of RAF public relations, a post held then by an officer with a distinctive and inspiring war record. 
In February 1968 Winskill was appointed captain of the queen's flight, following the death of group captain J. H. L. Blount in a Whirlwind helicopter accident. He had the task of restoring confidence, helped by the acquisition of Wessex helicopters and Andovers, and was well liked by the royal family -- especially the queen mother -- for his charm and courtesy. Having been appointed CBE in 1960, he was appointed an extra equerry to the queen in 1968, CVO in 1973, and KCVO in 1980. He retired in 1982, and pursued his recreations of golf and bridge. Having lived latterly in Henley-on-Thames, he died in the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, on 9 August 2005, of pneumonia and pulmonary fibrosis. He was survived by his wife, Christiane, and their daughter, his son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 95994


Fitt, Gerard Martin, Baron Fitt (1926-2005), politician, was born in the Union Workhouse, 51 Lisburn Road, Belfast, on 9 April 1926, the son of Rose Martin, a thirty-year-old unmarried servant, and an unidentified father. Only the birth of an unnamed male infant was civilly registered by the master of the workhouse but the day after his birth he was baptized a Catholic there and given the name Gerald (later he preferred Gerard) by his natural mother before being handed over for adoption by George Patrick Fitt (1899-1935) and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Murphy (1901-1989), who brought him up as a member of their own family. At that time they already had a daughter and a son. Later another son and two daughters were born. He had no more contact with his natural mother. 
The Fitt family lived in grinding poverty in a spartan end-of-terrace house at 1 Welbeck Street, in the New Lodge area of Belfast. After his adoptive father, a council labourer, lost a leg in a work accident and died in 1935, Gerry Fitt toiled before and after school earning money by delivering groceries and selling newspapers to help the family make ends meet. Although his teachers at St Patrick's Christian Brothers School identified his ability, especially the fact that he was highly articulate for his age, an uninterested Fitt persuaded his adoptive mother to let him leave school at the earliest opportunity, which he did, in 1940. He intended to follow his elder brother, George, to sea when he was old enough and in the meantime drifted through a number of menial jobs, ending up as a soap-boy in a barber-shop in Donegall Street, Belfast. 
One morning, in March 1942, while Gerry Fitt was lathering a customer for shaving, George arrived to say he had found him a job as a fireman on a coaster carrying coal from Salford to Belfast. Fitt promptly abandoned the customer in the chair and headed for the docks, but after a couple of return voyages the captain discovered that his crewman was under age and sacked him. Fitt then overstated his age by a year and volunteered for the merchant navy and, over the remaining wartime years, as a fireman shovelling coal deep in the ships' boiler rooms, he made a number of hazardous transatlantic crossings and trips to Russia in convoys under constant threat of attack. One return from Murmansk was especially perilous, when his ship suffered engine trouble and was forced to limp home without escort. Fitt saw many friends perish in vessels torpedoed by U-boats or sunk from the air, and he lost his adopted brother, George, who had gone on to join the Irish Guards and was killed in northern France in July 1944, shortly after the D-day landings. 
Fitt's first-hand experience of war and the austere years immediately afterwards, when he travelled by sea to every continent and saw at first hand the ravages of conflict and the destruction and poverty left in its wake, were defining influences. During the long voyages he read avidly, once fighting for access to the officers' library on board ship because he wanted to read Hemingway rather than the cowboy novels favoured by his crewmates. He also developed a deep interest in Irish history and adopted as his lifelong inspiration James Connolly, the Scottish-born trade unionist who was executed by the British administration for his part in the 1916 Easter rising in Dublin. 
On 5 November 1947, at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Crossgar, Fitt married Susan Gertrude (Ann) Doherty (1922-1996), daughter of William Doherty, a tailor from Castlederg, co. Tyrone. They had six daughters, affectionately known as the Miss Fitts. With his growing family to support, Fitt gave up the sea in 1953 and settled permanently in Belfast, where between voyages he had already been tentatively drawn into local politics. 
In 1958 Fitt was elected to Belfast corporation as a councillor for Dock ward and four years later won the Dock seat in the Northern Ireland parliament at Stormont, which he retained until Stormont was prorogued in 1972. His energetic representational activities on behalf of Unionist as well as nationalist electors undoubtedly helped in creating for him a unique cross-community political power-base transcending the traditional sectarian and political divides. Although he was publicly committed to the eventual and peaceful reunification of Ireland, the cornerstone of Fitt's political philosophy, which he described as 'Republican Labour', was to champion working-class rights, and he enhanced his reputation by successfully fighting cases against bureaucrats and in tribunals for his constituents regardless of their political or religious allegiance. Such was his reputation as an advocate that once, after he had collapsed at Stormont, an ambulance-man conveying him to hospital lobbied him about a problem and thrust a note with his address into Fitt's breast-pocket for attention when he recovered. 
Fitt's political success was also very much attributable to his mastery of the black arts of Irish electioneering. Outplaying his Unionist rivals at their own game, he built up a small but formidable team of 'markers', who monitored newspaper death notices, house moves in every street, and apathetic sympathizers, to identify voters on the electoral roll who could be impersonated by 'pluggers' on election days. These were men and women, kitted out from jumble sales, who changed their clothing and travelled from polling station to polling station stealing often crucial votes in close-run contests. Fitt was privately embarrassed by such activities but felt compelled to participate to deny any advantage to his opponents. 
Fitt's real political breakthrough came in 1966 when he was returned to Westminster as MP for West Belfast. Becoming an MP provided him with personal financial security for the first time. Beforehand he mainly existed on state benefits or the proceeds of casual work and had to rely on donations from sympathizers and even borrow from family members and moneylenders to raise the cash deposits necessary to stand for election. 
Fitt's victory sundered the long-standing Unionist grip on the turbulent West Belfast constituency, where sectarian differences counted far more than conventional political issues despite appallingly poor housing and serious social deprivation. Fitt's political priority therefore was not to campaign for a united Ireland, but instead to persuade the British government of the need to overrule the unchanging Unionist administration at Stormont and introduce a wide-ranging reform programme to improve social and economic conditions for all in Northern Ireland, and to bring to an end general discrimination against Catholics, notably in housing and public service employment. An equally fundamental demand was for an end to the rigging of electoral boundaries to maintain Unionist political control and for a universal franchise, later encapsulated in the slogan 'one man, one vote'. In a widely acclaimed maiden speech at Westminster on 25 April 1966 Fitt said: 'I am not asking for preferential treatment, or making an outlandish request on behalf of my constituency; I am asking for exactly what British constituents have' ('Hansard 5C', 727.442, 25 April 1966). 
Fitt quickly proved to be a skilled propagandist adept at using the newspapers, radio, and television to promote his causes and, as an epic drinker, he found it easy to forge influential alliances with other politicians in the bars at Westminster. This contributed to his most lasting achievement at this time, which was to lead sympathetic Labour MPs, with the firm but private encouragement of the prime minister, Harold Wilson, in breaking the long-standing convention that internal Northern Ireland affairs were never scrutinized by the London parliament. As a result, for the first time since the partitioning of Ireland in the early 1920s, Fitt succeeded in focusing national attention on the activities and shortcomings of the Unionist administration in Belfast. Back home, as his reputation as a formidable constituency worker grew, people seeking assistance queued in the rooms and even along the stairs of his Belfast house at 85 Antrim Road, often round the clock. In his frequent absence his wife and daughters patiently served endless cups of tea until he returned. 
At this time Fitt was significantly inspired by the ongoing campaign for civil rights by the black community in the United States, and he soon emerged at the vanguard of similar groups dedicated to highlighting injustice and discrimination in Northern Ireland. He became an even more widely recognized political figurehead after he was batoned by officers of the Royal Ulster Constabulary while leading a banned civil rights march in Londonderry on 5 October 1968. His picture, with blood streaming from a head wound, symbolized the outbreak of what became known as 'the troubles'. As the growing violence propelled the problems of Northern Ireland to the forefront of the international news agenda Fitt was a much sought after proponent of the case for long overdue reform. 
As civil disorder escalated and widespread terrorism engulfed Northern Ireland in the early 1970s Fitt was a central figure in the valiant but vain efforts to head off bloodshed and create a durable political solution. In 1970 he joined with other nationalists elected to Stormont on a civil rights ticket to form the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), becoming its founding leader, but it was always an uneasy coalition, not least because he was an instinctive political loner. At an earlier stage of his career, when he formed what proved to be a short-lived alliance with a like-minded contemporary, a supporter remarked that two one-man parties had become one two-man party. 
In 1973 the SDLP entered into the Sunningdale agreement, with Fitt, as deputy chief minister, joining the moderate Unionist, Brian Faulkner, in forming an unprecedented power-sharing executive. He was the first Catholic politician to occupy such a senior office at Stormont. But in May 1974, after scarcely five months in power, hardline Ulster loyalists mounted a general strike in protest at plans for a council of all Ireland. Some of Fitt's colleagues, most notably the forceful John Hume, would not compromise on the timescale for achieving this and, with the newly elected British Labour government unwilling to confront the strikers, to Fitt's lasting dismay, the bold experiment in political co-operation promptly collapsed. At the height of the crisis Fitt refused to join Faulkner in resigning and later liked to boast that for the succeeding seventeen hours until he was sacked by the British government he was effectively prime minister of Northern Ireland. 
The episode nourished the estrangement between Fitt and the SDLP and he eventually left the party in 1979, because of his distaste for its uncompromising Irish nationalism and the ambivalence on the part of many party members towards the violence of the Irish Republican Army (IRA), which he found repugnant. At a time when considerable courage was required to do so, Fitt unreservedly condemned all violence. He had much first-hand experience of it. The first rioter to be shot dead by the British army was killed close to the front door of his home, and the first soldier to be murdered by the IRA was also shot close by. In 1973 Paddy Wilson, then his closest political ally, was abducted and murdered by loyalist killers. One troubled night in 1976 Fitt was forced to spring from bed to defend his family at gunpoint when a mob of IRA sympathizers broke into his home. As a result bullet-proof windows, reinforced doors, and other security measures were built into his home, which thereafter was always known as Fortress Fitt. 
Fitt never forgave the British Labour Party, which he had staunchly supported since 1966, for failing to confront the 1974 loyalist workers' strike and on 28 March 1979 this lingering resentment heavily contributed to his refusal to support James Callaghan's Labour government in a confidence motion, which it lost by a single vote, and which paved the way for the Conservatives, led by Margaret Thatcher, to come to power. 
Towards the end of 1980 a group of Provisional IRA prisoners at the Maze prison, near Belfast, began a hunger strike to the death, escalating their campaign to be classified as prisoners of war. What they wanted was a recognition by the British government that their offences -- murder, bombing, and shooting, the most serious in the criminal law -- were politically, not criminally, motivated. With his acute understanding of Irish history Fitt recognized from the very outset the strong emotional impact a hunger strike would have on the Catholic community throughout Ireland. 'If I was a shrewd politician', he told his family, 'I would keep my head down and say nothing. If I was a dishonest politician, I would support the prisoners and lead the inevitable protest marches through my West Belfast constituency to ensure my permanent popularity' (Ryder, 353). But Fitt decided he could not live with his principles or his conscience by following either of these courses. 
Fully conscious of the consequences, that it might provoke the IRA into trying to shoot him or could lead to his political defeat at the ballot box, Fitt decided to make a speech in the House of Commons in London on 10 November 1980 condemning the Provisional IRA and the hunger strike, and advising the British government to make no concessions whatever to the prisoners. 'I had walked behind the coffins of far too many victims of the Provisional IRA and other terrorists to do anything else', he later explained (Ryder, 353). The speech provoked immediate hostility, and one evening soon afterwards there was an eerie demonstration outside Fitt's Belfast home. With stones glancing off the brickwork and paint tins squelching against the fortifications around the front door, he listened to the steady thump of tramping feet, shouts, and the intermittent beating of a drum. 'I put the room lights out and slipped open the curtain. Outside in the darkness there was a large crowd, some holding flaming torches. In the flickering torchlight I could pick out some familiar faces, people who had been among my staunchest political supporters, until then. That demonstration was a decisive turning point in my life as a politician and marked the beginning of the end of my career in the House of Commons. (Ryder, 354)' Fitt continued to oppose the ongoing IRA hunger strikes at the Maze prison, and within a year he lost his seat on Belfast city council as Sinn Fein, the political front for the Provisional IRA, capitalized on the emotions raised by the deaths of ten hunger strikers and steadily emerged as a significant political force on the Catholic side. In June 1983, when a British general election was called, Fitt's uncompromising stand against the IRA, as he expected, cost him the West Belfast seat at Westminster. He was, though, especially embittered that the SDLP, now led by John Hume, helped to undermine his remaining support by running against him, and that so many of his erstwhile supporters voted to eject him from parliament in favour of Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, whose methods and activities so revolted him that he had come to hate the word 'republican'. 
Altogether over three stormy decades Fitt had fought nineteen elections and lost only three: his first Belfast council poll in 1956; and his final contests, for the Belfast council in 1981 and Westminster in 1983. At one time he held an unparalleled triple mandate, simultaneously serving as a Belfast councillor and member of both the Stormont and Westminster parliaments. He was a uniquely colourful, unorthodox political character once described as having the back-slapping style of a minor American senator. Public or parliamentary speeches were always delivered off-the-cuff, reflecting his shrewd political instincts and highly retentive memory. He rarely wrote letters, usually conducting his business on the telephone or, more often, holding court in public houses where he was an unrivalled raconteur. He once said that his filing cabinets were the inside pockets of his jackets and his desk the nearest window ledge in Belfast city hall, Stormont, or Westminster. 
Fitt's growing unpopularity had led to more sustained attacks on his house, and immediately after the election, while he and his wife were absent in London, Republican sympathizers succeeded in breaking in and setting it alight, this time causing destruction on such a scale that he had to move out permanently. Soon afterwards he bought a flat at 25 Vincent Square in London. Fitt then defied nationalist convention by accepting, in the same year, a life peerage. He really wanted to be known as Lord Fitt of Dock but because of the rules he was created Baron Fitt, of Bell's Hill, from the co. Down townland where his adopted mother had lived after being evacuated from Belfast during the Second World War. 
In the House of Lords, as he had done throughout his political career, Fitt maintained a non-sectarian political stance and, from the crossbenches, earned widespread admiration for his courage in promoting reconciliation and speaking out trenchantly against the ongoing violence in Northern Ireland. As the 1990s 'peace process' developed Fitt was appalled that so many former terrorists were being elected to public office, and he especially resented the very public emergence of John White, who had murdered Paddy Wilson, as a prominent advocate of the Ulster loyalist cause. Fitt doubted that the ascendant hardliners on both sides had any appetite for the great compromises that would be necessary to create lasting peace and stability, and feared that the long-standing political intransigence would prevail 'until God sees Fitt' and beyond. Thus he remained cynical about the prospects for agreement in Northern Ireland until the end of his life. 
In 2005 Fitt suffered declining health and when he developed serious heart trouble in July that year his daughters moved him to Ashford in Kent, where three of them lived. He died at 58 Lower Queens Road, Ashford, on 26 August 2005, of heart failure, and, after requiem masses at Westminster Cathedral and St Joseph's Church, Crossgar, on 31 August, was buried beside his wife in the churchyard of St Lawrence's at Godmersham, Kent. He was survived by five daughters, one daughter having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 95996


Tomlinson, John Race Godfrey (1932-2005), educationist, was born at the nursing home, Sandiway Road, Ashton upon Mersey, Cheshire, on 24 April 1932, the only son and eldest of five children of John Angell Tomlinson, a man of independent means, and his wife, Beatrice Elizabeth Race, 'nee' Godfrey. The family lived at 120 Urmston Lane, Stretford, a town then famous for growing rhubarb. He attended Moss Park primary school and Stretford Boys' Grammar School. From his childhood he loved history, which he studied at Manchester University. There he was influenced by Sir Lewis Namier, who was to become a close friend and who inspired Tomlinson to enrol on a graduate course at the Institute of Historical Research, London University, where he worked on the history of parliament. His collection of the Grenville papers was published in 1962. On 27 March 1954, while still a student, he married Audrey Maria Barrett ('b'. 1933), whom he had first met at a ballroom dancing class in 1947. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Tomlinson was commissioned in the RAF in 1955 and took charge of education at a fighter squadron station. The experience of these three years undoubtedly influenced his decision to devote his career to education. After his national service he taught history for two years at Longton high school, simultaneously working as an evening lecturer for the Workers' Educational Association. But his ambition drew him towards a career in educational administration. In 1960 he became administrative assistant with responsibility for further education in Shropshire county council. During this time the family lived in Bayston Hill, near Shrewsbury. Having served three years in a rural county, he then successfully applied for the post of assistant education officer in Lancashire. There he gained valuable experience of urban education and was responsible for implementing comprehensive schooling -- a move he welcomed, appreciating the enhanced opportunity it provided for all pupils. During this time the family lived in New Longton, just outside Preston. Four years later he was appointed deputy director of education for Cheshire. His new responsibilities included teacher supply and teacher training. The family took up residence at Bromborough, a small historic town which was then part of Cheshire. 
In 1972, at a remarkably young age, Tomlinson was appointed director of education for Cheshire. Such was his standing with the county council that he was appointed following unanimous acclamation by the education committee. Over the next twelve years he established himself as one of the most outstanding of his generation of education administrators (he served as president of the Society of Education Officers in 1982). He was also involved with national activities such as the Committee on Child Health Services, chaired by Donald Court; he contributed to the Gulbenkian enquiries into drama, dance, and music, and chaired the Schools Council (1978-81), a body supported by the teachers' trades unions but increasingly distrusted by the Conservative government. 
Even before the passing of the 1988 'Education Reform Act' Tomlinson perceived that local government was likely to lose its ability to plan and manage all aspects of schooling. He opted for a change of occupation and a return to the realm of scholarship. His application for a chair at Warwick, with no background in university teaching and no research record since his study of the history of parliament, was unusual. It is a tribute both to his reputation and to the perspicacity of the appointment panel that his potential value to the university was recognized. He was duly appointed professor of education and director of the Warwick Institute of Education. The family set up home in the village of Allesley, near Coventry, in 1985. In making this move Tomlinson hoped to free up his time for thinking and writing, but government changes in the training of teachers stymied this. The new developments ensured that his deft skills and extensive experience of reorganizing posts were put to good use. 
Outside the university Tomlinson enjoyed many education-related activities. He was a governor of both the Chetham's and the Menuhin music schools. He chaired the inner London education authority's inquiry into freedom of information and produced an excellent report in 1987, but to no avail as the authority was closed down by the Thatcher government. He later chaired a three-year inquiry into disability and learning difficulties in further education that culminated in the report 'Inclusive Learning' (1996). He also played a vital role in the Royal Society of Arts, being in turn a member of council, vice-president, and from 1989 to 1991 chairman of council. In all these different ways, he demonstrated his eagerness to serve the public good. 
Leaving Warwick as an emeritus professor in 1996, Tomlinson accepted a part-time post as academic secretary of the University Council for the Education of Teachers, a body that co-ordinated university-based teacher education. From 1997 to 2000 he played a crucial role in delicate negotiations over teacher training. After his retirement he was appointed vice-chairman of the General Teaching Council, which he had persuaded David Blunkett to establish in 2000. He also chaired the National Forum for Learners with Learning Difficulties and Disabilities (2001-5). He received many honours: a clutch of honorary degrees and fellowships, a CBE in 1983, and in 1989 freedom of the City of London followed by appointment as a liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company. These honours recognized not just his capacity for hard work but his integrity and regard for others, especially for those with any kind of disability. 
Tomlinson was a complex man: a confirmed member of the Church of England yet a free thinker; a leader, whom people wanted to follow; a skilled teacher and a persevering learner; a member of the Athenaeum yet (perhaps influenced by his four sisters) a champion of women's rights; devoted to his wife and family yet utterly committed to public service. He died of prostate cancer in Walsgrave Hospital, Coventry, on 6 August 2005. He was cremated on 17 August. He was survived by his wife, Audrey, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96004


Rotblat, Sir Joseph (1908-2005), scientist and peace activist, was born Josef Rotblat on 4 November 1908 in Warsaw, the eldest of five surviving children (two others died in infancy) of Zygmunt, otherwise Zelman, Rotblat, the owner of a haulage company specializing in the paper trade, and his wife, Sonia, otherwise Schaindl, 'nee' Krajtman. Both parents were of Jewish descent. His earliest years were spent in some comfort, but the First World War brought ruin to his father's firm, as business slumped and horses were requisitioned for the armed forces, and the family slipped suddenly into poverty. Rotblat later recalled that at one point they were reduced to distilling and selling illegal vodka to get by. 
Rotblat's childhood, he would later say, was 'a very unhappy one' (David Krieger, 'Joseph Rotblat and peace', in Braun and others, 43). At the age of twelve he was apprenticed to an electrician. One early job had him tearing up cobbles in Warsaw streets in the depths of winter to lay electrical cables. Though his parents had hopes that their thoughtful, intellectual eldest son would eventually become a rabbi he had other plans and, by studying at night, won a scholarship to the Free University of Poland to take a degree in physics. 
After graduating with a master's degree in 1932 Rotblat landed a post as research assistant at the Radiological Laboratory of Warsaw, working under Ludwik Wertenstein. These were exciting times in physics, with a rush of discoveries about the nature of the atomic nucleus, and Rotblat was able to play a part. Though Wertenstein was a scientist of international reputation his laboratory was poorly resourced, and Rotblat's publications in the 1930s, mostly studies of nuclear bombardment, were a triumph over slender circumstances. One experiment involved a Geiger counter that he had to share with another scientist who worked on a different floor, so that at fixed intervals Rotblat would have to fling himself down two flights of stairs so as to take timely readings. In a paper from this period there was also a hint of the persuasiveness that was to become his hallmark, as he thanked the Bank of Poland for the loan of almost a kilogram of gold for use in an experiment. 
Rotblat gained his PhD in 1938, by which time he was married to Tola Gryn, a young woman from Lublin whom he had met in 1930, when she was a student of Polish literature. He also had a new ambition: he wanted the Warsaw laboratory to have what was then the ultimate research tool in his field, a cyclotron, 'so we could start a proper school of nuclear physics' (Landau, 48). Cyclotrons accelerate subatomic particles to high speeds for use in experiments breaking down atomic nuclei. To gain the necessary experience Rotblat accepted an invitation to join a team that was building a cyclotron at Liverpool University, under James Chadwick. (He turned down an offer to work in Paris with Frederic Joliot-Curie, Marie Curie's son-in-law.) His Polish government bursary, however, would not support two people, so he left for England alone in early 1939, intending that Tola should join him as soon as he could afford it. Sure enough, his circumstances in Liverpool swiftly improved -- an impressed Chadwick found him a second bursary -- so that summer Rotblat returned to Warsaw to collect his wife. Just as they were to leave, however, she fell ill with appendicitis and again he left alone, expecting her to follow in days. Before she recovered the Germans invaded. All Rotblat's desperate efforts to get her out of Poland over the months that followed came to nothing. 
These events in 1939 coincided with important developments in nuclear physics. First came the discovery of fission, a process by which very heavy radioactive elements can split when penetrated by neutrons, releasing large quantities of energy. Then came evidence (which Rotblat was one of the first to investigate) that each episode of fission was accompanied by the expulsion of stray neutrons. This raised the possibility of a fission chain reaction. While most physicists soon decided that a bomb exploiting this process remained impractical a few (again including Rotblat) were concerned enough to look further. It was two refugees working at Birmingham University, Rudolf Peierls and Otto Frisch, who first identified a way of making such a bomb and alerted the British government. The result was a secret feasibility study under the codename Maud, followed by the launch of a research and development programme, codenamed Tube Alloys ['see 'Tube Alloys directorate]. Rotblat, who by now was also lecturing at Liverpool, played an important role. Rated by Chadwick as 'an extremely able man, one of the best I have come across in years' (Brown, 187), he took effective charge of the Liverpool cyclotron, which was much in demand for Tube Alloys work. From the outset he had reservations about working on an atomic weapon, which he shared with Wertenstein in the summer of 1939, but such feelings were outweighed in his mind by the fear that Nazi Germany might develop such a bomb first. 
During 1942 and 1943 the Manhattan project, the American nuclear weapon enterprise, grew so vast that Britain's Tube Alloys became little more than a junior partner with the task of supplying any expertise that could help. Thus in March 1944 Rotblat was sent to Los Alamos, the secret weapons laboratory in the New Mexico mountains -- though before going he displayed another of his lifelong characteristics, stubbornness, by refusing to swap his Polish nationality for British to please his American hosts. Los Alamos left a profound mark on him, even though, unlike some of his British colleagues, he made no important contribution to the weapon. He befriended Niels Bohr, the Danish philosopher-physicist who was an adviser at Los Alamos, and their conversations stirred in him an anxiety about a future world with atomic weapons, and the risks of an arms race with the Soviet Union and wholesale destruction. Such fears deepened, he wrote much later, when he heard a senior American military official say: 'You realise, of course, that the real purpose of making the bomb is to subdue our chief enemy, the Russians' (Szasz, 57). 
A pivotal moment in Rotblat's life came in the autumn of 1944 when the allies learned that Germany had made only rudimentary progress in nuclear research and did not have a bomb. With this news, he wrote forty years later, 'the whole purpose of my being in Los Alamos ceased to be, and I asked for permission to leave and return to Britain' ('Leaving the bomb project', 18). He concluded, in other words, that since neither Germany nor Japan posed a credible nuclear threat there was no moral justification for continuing work on the atomic bomb. No other scientist at Los Alamos took this stance, and the British authorities were embarrassed by his request, but he insisted on leaving. A moment of black farce ensued when American security staff suddenly produced a dossier of evidence suggesting that Rotblat wanted to return to Europe so that he could deliver atomic secrets to Moscow. This was founded on some lurid gossip related to unauthorized visits he had made to an Englishwoman who lived near Los Alamos. Rotblat was able to show that many details in the dossier were wrong, and explained that he had visited the woman at the request of a mutual friend in Britain because she was becoming deaf and needed support. With this the last objections to his leaving were withdrawn, though he was told that the record would show that the grounds for his departure were that he wished to return to Europe to look for his family. This factor, indeed, must have been in his mind: he had heard nothing from his wife or the rest of his relatives since 1939. 
News of the atomic attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 reached Rotblat at Liverpool, where he had resumed his post. He was shocked: he had retained a hope that the weapon would not work, or that the Americans and British would scruple to use it against civilians. Free, finally, to make public his private anxieties, he joined the earliest calls in Britain for action to ensure that atomic weapons would never be used again. He urged fellow scientists to lead the way, favouring for a short time a moratorium on nuclear research. He joined efforts to harness scientific opinion through the Association of Scientific Workers but found the trade union's left-wing leanings divisive. Instead, in March 1946 he, along with Nevill Mott, Rudolf Peierls, Harrie Massey, and others set up the Atomic Scientists' Association (ASA), with the aims of informing the public about nuclear matters, advancing the case for international control of atomic energy, and influencing public policy. From the outset Rotblat was among its most dynamic activists and he took the lead in what proved to be its most notable public success, the Atom Train. This travelling exhibition toured Britain in 1947-8, putting before the public an engaging scientific account of the economic and military potential of atomic energy. Many thousands visited it, attended the supporting talks and debates, and bought the literature, and it was no less notable as a triumph both of organization, in what were economically hard times, and of diplomacy, for the Labour government was suspicious of the venture. 
Although the ASA would survive another decade, events soon pushed it to the margin as the attempt to create United Nations control of atomic energy failed, the cold war set in, Britain pressed ahead with its own nuclear weapons programme, and the Soviet Union tested its first atomic bomb, in 1949. Rotblat remained active in the group, becoming its executive vice-president, and for all its frustrations the experience was to exert a strong influence on him. Through the ASA he forged international connections, not least with American counterparts at the 'Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists', based in Chicago. He also learned some of the hazards of attempting to be publicly active in the sphere of policy and politically neutral at the same time, and he gained experience both in motivating scientists and keeping a voluntary group afloat. These lessons would prove useful. 
Rotblat's personal and professional life underwent upheaval in these post-war years. Soon after his return to Liverpool from Los Alamos he heard from his family in Poland. Remarkably, his mother, two sisters, and one brother had survived, having gone into hiding in the countryside. (His father had died before the war.) His wife, Tola, however, was dead -- though there was no official record his family had learned that she died in Majdanek concentration camp, probably in 1942. Rotblat (who did not remarry) arranged for his surviving relatives to join him in Liverpool, in itself a feat of willpower, and in the process he finally abandoned Polish nationality and became a British subject. A few years later his remaining brother also made contact. He had fought the Germans as a partisan in Russia and remained in the Soviet Union after the war. Soon he too moved to England. 
In 1949 Rotblat altered the direction of his scientific career by accepting the post of professor of medical physics at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. This was a controversial move: some physicists, including Chadwick, felt he was abandoning a brilliant, important career for one of doubtful scientific value, while some senior hospital staff were horrified at the appointment of an outsider with no medical track record. Rotblat, as ever fully knowing his own mind, was undeterred, and from his perspective the move had clear ethical advantages. Experience had shown that it was impossible to anticipate the future uses of research of the kind he had pursued since 1932, but in health physics he felt certain he could do lasting good. Moving to London, he bought the house at 8 Asmara Road in West Hampstead which was to be his home for the rest of his life, as well as a hub for the wider Rotblat family and the depository for an ever-growing personal archive of papers. 
Rotblat remained at Bart's until retirement in 1976, a talented teacher fondly remembered by generations of students, a gifted manager of research groups, and a dynamic administrator. From 1960 to 1972 he was editor-in-chief of the journal 'Physics in Medicine and Biology', whose reputation he did much to establish, and he conducted sustained research of his own in the use of radiotherapy in cancer treatment. His principal scientific achievements in these years, however, arose from a programme of experiments conducted in partnership with Patricia Lindop on the effects of radiation on healthy mice, which shed important light on the risks of human exposure to radiation. 
It was Rotblat's unusual mix of talents, experiences, and interests that placed him, in 1954-5, in the position to make a set of deductions that caused international uproar. In 1954 Japanese fishermen on a boat called the 'Lucky Dragon 5' were showered with fallout from an American thermonuclear test. Several became ill and one died six months later. Rotblat, through a Japanese contact, learned details of the contamination, which led him to the conclusion that this had been a new, three-stage, fission-fusion-fission weapon, and he saw that this design must multiply many times the amount of radioactivity produced. After some hesitation he published his findings, prompting public alarm and official fury in London and Washington. This, and the focus it placed on the radiation hazards of nuclear weapons tests, eventually led to the break-up of the ASA. 
About this time Rotblat was approached by Bertrand Russell, who was alarmed at the nuclear arms race and at the dangers of fallout from tests, and conceived the idea of issuing an international appeal for action. Rotblat lent his support, guidance, and, it seems, organizational flair. The result was the 'Russell-Einstein manifesto' of July 1955, which bore the signatures of Russell, Albert Einstein, eight other Nobel prizewinners, and Rotblat. Mentioning the fate of the 'Lucky Dragon', it declared that the human race was in peril and called for an international congress of scientists to review the options and make recommendations. The initiative won widespread support and led to the birth, two years later (once the crises of Suez and Hungary had passed), of the Pugwash conferences on science and world affairs, named for the small town in Nova Scotia where the first meeting was held. 
Pugwash became the great work of Rotblat's life. In 1997 he presided over a fortieth anniversary gathering at Lillehammer in Norway. By then there had been 229 meetings and workshops in forty countries, attended by 3360 people of more than 100 nationalities. Pugwash had a ruling council, offices, thirty-eight national groups, and an international student branch. Its reports were widely read, and had influence in the world's most important capitals. Yet it was hard to pin down -- a movement rather than an organization -- and almost unknown to the general public. The paradox was deliberate, owing something to Russell's inspiration and a great deal to Rotblat's vision and experience. He co-chaired the first meeting in Canada and served successively over those forty years as secretary-general (1957-73), chairman of British Pugwash (1978-88), and then president of Pugwash worldwide (1988-97). He attended the great majority of meetings, often taking the chair, and by common consent was the guiding light and dynamo of the operation. 
The mission of Pugwash was to bring together experts to seek ways of reducing the dangers to the world, initially from weapons of mass destruction and war but as time passed from such other threats as food and energy shortage and economic imbalance. Those who attended did so by invitation, and spoke only in a personal capacity. The spirit was of 'rational analysis and objective inquiry', and 'mutual trust and friendship' (Moore, 41-2). Conclusions and recommendations were often communicated personally to those intended to receive them, without public declaration. On this basis Pugwash was consistently able to bring together leading experts from many countries, notably from both sides of the iron curtain, even in the coldest periods of the cold war. Inevitably this excited suspicion, and Pugwash was sometimes denounced as a puppet of one side or another, but the dialogue continued. 
The influence of such a process is difficult to measure, but Pugwash has been credited with contributing ideas and impetus to the partial test ban treaty of 1963, the nuclear non-proliferation treaty of 1968, the anti-ballistic missile treaty of 1972, the biological weapons convention of 1972, and the chemical weapons convention of 1993, as well as to longer-term East-West nuclear arms reduction processes and European confidence-building measures. In addition it had other impacts, notably in providing East-West channels of communication during the Cuban missile crisis and the Vietnam war. Mikhail Gorbachov, the last leader of the Soviet Union, said of Pugwash in 1990 that 'Through its activities, due to scientific and moral authority, Pugwash has contributed in a unique way to averting the military danger, has helped to stop the 'Cold War' and to achieve profound positive changes in the development of the world' (J. Harris, 'Joseph Rotblat and Pugwash', in Braun and others, 11). 
Rotblat was never alone in this work, but it was his extraordinary dynamism, charm, and single-mindedness that made it happen. A slim, handsome figure with old-world manners and a gentle, Polish accent even in old age, he had the gift of communicating easily with people of all kinds, and particularly with the young. He was also a brilliant, steely eyed committeeman and master of procedure, and he could be ruthless in the cause of peace. When an Israeli scientist late with a contribution to a Pugwash publication paid a social visit to Rotblat's office he found himself locked in a cellar until he finished the piece, with only the occasional bowl of soup passed in to sustain him. Rotblat's own energy was phenomenal. He wrote more than 300 books and articles and edited countless more, and he continued to write, lecture, and travel tirelessly even in his tenth decade. The story was told that some young men saw him rush past them at a London underground station and called out: 'What's the hurry, you're an old man!'. He answered: 'Don't you see? It's because I'm an old man that I'm in a hurry' (T. Milne, 'Joseph Rotblat', in Braun and others, 209). 
Behind Rotblat's frenetic activity lay a very powerful moral sense, the sense that caused him to walk out of Los Alamos in 1944, and that perhaps led his parents, years before that, to think that he had the makings of a rabbi. In adulthood he had no religion besides the cause of peace (he described himself as an agnostic rather than an atheist, since he could not be certain that God did not exist), and he saw his particular mission as one of reaching out to scientists and engaging them in that cause. Scientists, he felt, must accept responsibility for their discoveries and must participate fully in the debates about their use, because they were human beings first and scientists second. He liked to quote a phrase from the Russell-Einstein manifesto: 'Remember your humanity'. 
For most of his post-war life Rotblat was a respected figure though not a well-known one, even in his adopted country; but recognition, honours, and a certain fame came in a rush in his final years. In 1995, the fiftieth anniversary of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, he and Pugwash were jointly awarded the Nobel prize for peace (he donated every penny of his prize money to Pugwash) and in the same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1998 he was knighted and -- a different sort of honour, but one he also relished -- invited to appear on BBC Radio 4's 'Desert Island Discs' programme. In 2004 he suffered a minor stroke, which finally put a stop to his travels, and his health declined from then until his death at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, on 31 August 2005, of septicaemia. He outlived his siblings but two nieces survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96005


Donaldson, John Francis, Baron Donaldson of Lymington (1920-2005), judge, was born on 6 October 1920 at 6 King Street, St Marylebone, London, the son of Malcolm Donaldson (1884-1973), consultant gynaecologist, and his first wife, Evelyn Helen Marguerite, 'nee' Gilroy. He was educated at Charterhouse School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a lower second-class degree in law. He became secretary of debates in the Cambridge Union and acted as chairman of the Federation of University Conservative and Unionist Associations. Called up in 1941, he served with the Royal Signals and the guards armoured divisional signals for the remainder of the Second World War, rising to the rank of captain. It was during the war that he met (Dorothy) Mary Warwick ['see 'Donaldson, Dame (Dorothy) Mary, Lady Donaldson of Lymington (1921-2003)], who was then working as a nurse. She later became the first woman to be lord mayor of London, in 1983. They had two daughters, Margaret-Ann ('b'. 1946) and Jennifer Mary ('b'. 1948), and a son, Michael ('b'. 1950). In 1945-6 Donaldson worked in the allied military government of Schleswig-Holstein before being demobilized with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
Donaldson was called to the bar in 1946 as a Harmsworth scholar at Middle Temple. He joined the chambers of Henry Willink at 3 Essex Court, which specialized in shipping, marine insurance, and banking. There he built up a thriving commercial practice and initiated his lifelong enthusiasm for maritime law, perhaps arising from his love of sailing. He was a joint editor of 'Lowndes and Rudolf on General Average' for the eighth, ninth, and tenth editions (1955-75). He found time to take an active part in local politics and was an Independent Ratepayer councillor in Croydon between 1949 and 1953. He was also a member of the Bar Council from 1956 to 1961. He took silk in 1961 and was appointed a judge of the queen's bench division in 1966, on the recommendation of Lord Gardiner. One of his early decisions was 'Baker v. Willoughby' (1969), on the allocation of damages between successive tortfeasors. 
Donaldson had taken an early interest in the reform of industrial relations, contributing to the influential 'A Giant's Strength', published in 1958 by the Inns of Court Conservative Association. Edward Heath's Conservative government, elected in 1970, was pledged to take action against trade-union power. This included restraints on the right to strike and a legal framework for settling disputes over unfair dismissal. Donaldson assisted in drafting the 'Industrial Relations Act' 1971. This complex legislation established a National Industrial Relations Court, and Donaldson became its first (and only) president. His vision was strongly managerial. The court would be informal, with no wigs or gowns, and would welcome an early opportunity of involvement in the hope it could nip disputes in the bud. As he used to boast, it was 'the fastest court in the west'. In characteristic fashion he issued a 'Presidential Statement' (1972) to mark the opening of the court: 'Once the court and each party knows what the essence of the dispute is about, arrangements will be made for a speedy investigation of the dispute. At this stage procedures will differ according to circumstances, but a common procedure will be to invite the parties to an informal meeting with the court at which the best method of hearing and determining the issues can be selected. At such a meeting it will be possible to find out what are the real issues -- what the case is really about -- and to do so much more quickly, cheaply and effectively than by a lengthy exchange of formal documents.' Donaldson cherished the independence of his presidency. Years later he told the House of Lords about an encounter with Robert Carr, Edward Heath's employment secretary: '[Carr] asked me, 'To whom are you responsible as President?' I understood him to be referring to the National Industrial Relations Court. He said, 'I take it that you are responsible to the Lord Chief Justice'. I said, 'Certainly not'. He said, 'Then, to the Lord Chancellor'. I said, 'Certainly not. I am responsible solely to my conscience and to the law'. ('Hansard 5L', 596.1149, 28 Jan 1999)' As the court's president, Donaldson was exposed to attack as the government's personal instrument in curbing trade unionism. Matters quickly came to a head with a series of disputes over containerization in the docks. In 'Heatons Transport (St Helens) Ltd v. T&GWU' (1972) Donaldson's court fined the union for the 'unofficial' action of its shop stewards in blacking container depots. That decision was overturned on appeal, Lord Denning holding that the stewards' actions were not the union's responsibility since they had not been authorized by the national executive. Donaldson immediately told the lord chief justice, Lord Widgery, that he could not continue as president if the Denning decision was allowed to stand since it would create individual martyrs. Before the matter could be resolved, five London dockers refused to obey an injunction to cease unlawful picketing at a depot. Donaldson felt he had no option but to gaol them for contempt. Predictably, London dockers and print workers went on strike in support of the 'Pentonville five'. Within days the House of Lords had overturned the Court of Appeal decision in 'Heatons', clearing the way for the intervention of the official solicitor and the dockers' release. Donaldson was embroiled in fresh controversy in 1973, when he ordered sequestration of the funds of the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers for refusing to call off a strike at a small Surrey engineering factory. An early day motion was signed by 182 Labour MPs calling Donaldson's action 'an act of political prejudice and partiality' and urging that he be sacked ('The Times', 4 Dec 1973). 
The Labour government elected in 1974 made repeal of the 1971 act a priority. His presidency abolished, Donaldson returned to the High Court. He officiated in some prominent criminal trials, notably those of the 'Guildford four' in 1975 and the 'Maguire seven' in 1976. These were high-profile miscarriages of justice, in which police witnesses had lied and forensic evidence favourable to the defence had been suppressed, though it was more than a decade before the miscarriages were acknowledged; Sir John May, appointed by the government to inquire into the Maguire trial, found in 1990 that Donaldson had misunderstood and mishandled critical evidence. 
When Margaret Thatcher came to office in 1979 she promoted Donaldson to lord justice almost immediately, and in 1982 he succeeded Lord Denning as master of the rolls. He soon showed himself to be a champion of reform of civil procedure in the interests of closer case management and greater efficiency. He introduced skeleton arguments in civil appeals, and the practice of handing down judgments, which had until then routinely been read out in open court. He initiated the publication of an annual report on the work of the Court of Appeal. In 1988 he was made a life peer, as Baron Donaldson of Lymington. 
It was characteristic that, given the opportunity, Donaldson favoured the extension of judicial review jurisdiction to cover a wide range of regulatory bodies. In 'R v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, ex parte Datafin Plc' (1987) the Court of Appeal extended the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court to any body exercising what were in effect public powers judicially when the source of its power was not purely contractual. His ruling in 'Sutcliffe v. Pressdram Ltd' (1991) set the trend towards limiting jury awards in libel cases, regarded as a considerable fetter on press freedom. In 'M v. Home Office' (1992), where the Conservative home secretary, Kenneth Baker, ignored an order to return a man deported to Zaire in defiance of an undertaking given to the Divisional Court, Donaldson held him personally in contempt. Donaldson held that ministers and civil servants were accountable to the law and to the courts for their personal actions and could be proceeded against for contempt of court. 'It would be a black day for the rule of law and the liberty of the subject if ministers were not accountable to the courts for their personal actions', he said ('Daily Telegraph', 2 Sept 2005). It demonstrated his boldness as a constitutional innovator and his reluctance to see the court's powers in its own sphere fettered or diminished. He displayed a similar boldness in 'X v. Morgan-Grampian' (1991), where the appellant journalist was defying a court order to name the source of his story. Donaldson refused to hear the appellant while he was in contempt of court. The decision was subsequently reversed by the House of Lords, which found that the contemner was entitled to challenge the court's jurisdiction to make the order. 
Donaldson retired as master of the rolls in 1992. He was called in to undertake a number of important marine inquiries, writing 'Safer Ships: Cleaner Seas' (1994), a report on the prevention of maritime pollution, examining the sinking of the oil tanker MV 'Braer' in 1993 and the loss of the 'Aegean Sea' the previous year. In 1995 he was asked to investigate the disappearance of the bulk carrier MV 'Derbyshire' off the Japanese coast in 1980. It was his firm advocacy of an expedition to find the wreckage of the carrier and discover why it had sunk that eventually, in 2000, resolved what had been a great mystery for some twenty years. Donaldson's review of salvage and intervention following the 'Sea Empress' disaster in 1996 uncovered serious deficiencies in the provision for dealing with oil spillages at sea and led to important changes in the supervision of oil rigs and tankers. 
After 1997, with a Labour majority in the Commons apparently bent on abolishing hunting with dogs, Donaldson became exercised about the role of the House of Lords. In 2000 he introduced the 'Parliament Acts (Amendment) Bill' in the Lords on the premise that the 'Parliament Act' of 1949 was of doubtful validity. He worried that the House of Commons might use the 'Parliament Acts' to extend the life of a parliament beyond five years. One of his last speeches, in February 2004, was a trenchant critique of proposals to abolish the office of lord chancellor and replace the judicial committee of the House of Lords with a supreme court. 
Standing more than six feet tall, and bespectacled, Donaldson was known for sucking boiled sweets in court and wearing his judicial wig at an angle. His hobbies were sailing and do-it-yourself: 'He's a dreadful embarrassment in people's houses', his wife said. 'He fishes out his penknife and tightens loose screws' ('Daily Telegraph', 2 Sept 2005). He died suddenly on 31 August 2005 at his home, 5 Kingsfield, Lymington, Hampshire, after a heart attack. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96009


Bolton, Sir Frederic Bernard (1921-2005), shipowner, was born on 9 March 1921 at 1 Lower Terrace, Hampstead, London, the only son among the four children of Louis Hamilton Bolton (1884-1953), shipowner, and his wife, Beryl (died 1977), daughter of Bernard Dyer. Usually known as Tim, he was educated at Rugby School, where his main achievements were sporting rather than academic. After leaving school he worked for six months on the broking side of his family firm, before enlisting for war service in July 1940. He was commissioned into the Welsh Guards, and from 1942 saw active service in the north African and Italian campaigns. He proved 'fearless and indefatigable' according to the citation for the Military Cross awarded to him in 1945. After demobilization in 1946 he rejoined the family business, and on 19 April 1950 he married Valerie Margaret Barwick (died 1970), daughter of George Short Barwick, company director. They had two sons. 
In 1953 Bolton succeeded his father as chairman of the family business. Originally known as the Bolton Steam Shipping Company, the business had been established by his grandfather, Sir Frederic Bolton, who had started as a Lloyd's underwriter in 1874. The company specialized in small cargo vessels, all named after artists whose names began with R, such as 'Raphael' and 'Rubens'. Initially successful in trade with the Mediterranean, after 1945 it became an operator of tramp steamers and ore carriers and diversified into such other areas as broking, underwriting, and agency work, becoming the Bolton Group. Not all Bolton's attempts to broaden the business were successful, however; the acquisition of a stake in Transglobe Airways in 1966, for instance, which went into liquidation two years later. Bolton himself became a director of the Atlantic Steam Navigation Company in 1960, of BP's tanker division in 1968, and of British Rail's shipping operations (later Sealink) in 1970. The Bolton Group's core business of shipping dwindled steadily, however, as Britain's share of world trade declined and the industry was transformed by containerization, and the last two Bolton ships were sold to an American company in 1982. Bolton carried on as chairman of the group's remaining interests until his retirement in 1991. 
Bolton achieved greater prominence through his role as a leading representative of the British shipping industry. He joined the general committee of Lloyds Register of Shipping in 1961, and by 1964 was a member of the Port of London Authority and also a very active chairman of the Chamber of Shipping's research committee. By 1965 he was vice-president of the chamber, and in 1966 became its second-youngest ever president. His impact was felt when he delivered 'a whirlwind speech which helped to knock half an hour off the usually sluggish ritual of the chamber's annual meeting', in which he posed searching questions about the performance of the industry, including 'are our management as efficient as they could be?', and 'have we too many small and family-dominated companies?' ('The Times', 25 Feb 1966). When the Geddes report on the future of British shipbuilding was published in the following month, Bolton was quoted as saying that 'surely the problems of British shipping are the problems of Britain', and posed the question, 'why is this country not working any longer?' ('Daily Telegraph', 25 Aug 2005). This gave a hint of his hostility to the strength of trade unionism in his industry, further demonstrated during the strike of the National Union of Seamen in May 1966, which he declared would be 'disastrous for the nation' ('The Times', 3 May 1966). 
From 1972 to 1975 Bolton was president of the British Shipping Federation, and he became president of the General Council of British Shipping (created through the amalgamation of the Chamber of Shipping and the British Shipping Federation) in 1975-6. In this post he was vociferous in the campaign to prevent the extension of the national dock labour scheme to non-scheme ports and to all freight-handling services within 5 miles of the coast. The scheme dated from 1947 and had been a significant step in decasualizing dock labour, providing a minimum guarantee of earnings for dockers and safeguards against dismissal. Its proposed extension sought to prevent undercutting of the scheme by ports outside it that could recruit labour on a casual basis, and equally to stop inland container bases taking work away from scheme ports. Bolton instead argued that 'the crying need is for efficient, reliable and trouble-free ports' ('Port of London News', Sept-Oct 2005, 4). After intensive lobbying the extension bill was wrecked by amendments in the Lords. Bolton (who was knighted in 1976) was also president of the International Shipping Federation between 1973 and 1982. His last major posts were as chairman of the Dover Harbour Board (1982-8) and chairman of the British Ports Association (1985-8), in which posts he campaigned for the abolition of the national dock labour scheme, finally enacted by the Conservative government in 1989. 
Tim Bolton was an enthusiastic and forceful figure with a 'deep sense of fun and cheerfulness' ('Lloyd's List', 14 Sept 2005), much respected in the shipping industry. He was perhaps an example of a 'third generation' entrepreneur who accepted the 'aristocratic embrace', for despite his thoroughly industrial and urban origins he moved to a large farm at Pudlicote, near Charlbury in Oxfordshire, listed his recreations in 'Who's Who' as 'country sports', and for many years was joint master and chairman of the Grafton hunt. Between 1991 and 1995 he was treasurer of the West Oxfordshire Conservative Association. After his first wife's death he married, on 4 February 1971, Vanessa Mary Ann Robarts, a 31-year-old sales assistant and daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Anthony Vere Cyprian Robarts. With her he had a further two sons and two daughters. He died in his sleep while holidaying in the French Alps on 27 July 2005. His funeral took place in Chadlington, Oxfordshire. The service was preceded by a medley of Gilbert and Sullivan songs, and at the end the coffin was borne out to the theme tune of 'The Archers'. 


@@@@@


doc= 96017


Fitter, Richard Sidney Richmond (1913-2005), naturalist, was born on 1 March 1913 at 14 Mount Nod Road, Streatham, London, the only son of Sidney Harry Fitter, produce broker, and his wife, Dorothy Isacke, 'nee' Pound. He was educated at Eastbourne College (1926-9), where his enthusiasm for natural history was encouraged by his headmaster, E. C. Arnold, and at the London School of Economics (1929-32), where he graduated in economics and became research assistant to Ivor Jennings. He was recruited in 1936 to the think-tank Political and Economic Planning (PEP) by its general secretary, Max Nicholson, whom he had met the year before through their common interest in ornithology. On 19 April 1938 he married Alice Mary (Maisie) Stewart Park, the 25-year-old daughter of Robert Stewart Park, medical doctor. They had two sons and a daughter. In 1940 Fitter moved from PEP to Mass-Observation (led by another ornithologist, Tom Harrisson), to investigate civilian morale for the Ministry of Information. He was then recruited to the operational research section of Coastal Command in 1942, as assistant editor of 'Coastal Command Review', in which post he spent the remainder of the Second World War. These posts developed his ability to write technical reports in the brief but lucid style that became the bedrock of his later career. 
Fitter had become active in the London Natural History Society about 1934, assisting with surveys, sitting on committees, serving as 'recorder' for various sorts of animals, editing journals, and writing reports, with papers in 'Nature' on the colonization of England by the black redstart and on the effects of the war on birds. Like many of his contemporaries he took the war as an opportunity to plan for a better world. He was a member of the Post War Aims Group, which within a month of the outbreak of war published a statement on war aims, and later he was invited to become secretary of the Wildlife Conservation Special Committee, chaired by Julian Huxley (another ornithological contact). Fitter's main role was to draw up lists of potential nature reserves, making many site visits in his spare time. The committee's report, 'Conservation of Nature in England and Wales' (Cmd 7122, 1947), led to the establishment of national parks and the Nature Conservancy. 
Fitter's first book, 'London's Natural History' (1945), was a masterly synthesis in urban ecology, showing how the interaction of man and wildlife had developed over the centuries. It established him as a writer and was followed by 'London's Birds' (1949) and several other contributions to urban natural history. In 1946 he left London for Burford, Oxfordshire, having been appointed assistant editor of 'The Countryman', a position he held for thirteen years while his own writing career blossomed. In 1952 he published the first modern 'field guide', the Collins 'Pocket Guide to British Birds', illustrated by R. A. Richardson. Designed to allow even the inexperienced to identify birds, it unusually (but helpfully) arranged the species by habitat and size. It was hugely successful and he produced about a dozen other field guides, including the 'Pocket Guide to Nests and Eggs' (1955, also superbly illustrated by Richardson) and the 'Collins Guide to Bird Watching' (1963). The 'Pocket Guide to Wild Flowers' (1956, co-written with David McClintock) and 'Birds of Britain and Europe with North Africa and the Middle East' (1972, with illustrations by Herman Heinzel and maps by John Parslow) were again innovative: the former abandoned the traditional dry keys and focused on the colour, form, and size of flowers to guide the inexperienced to an identification, while the new bird book had the pictures of each species opposite the relevant text rather than in separate blocks. With his wife, Maisie, he also wrote the 'Penguin Dictionary of British Natural History' (1967). 
Fitter became the most influential natural history author of the second half of the twentieth century in Britain, through his field guides, his approximately twenty other books, and his articles, especially his notes, 'Fitter's rural rides', in 'The Observer' newspaper. The 'Ark in Our Midst' (1959) was a masterly compilation of the attempts to introduce alien vertebrate species into Britain, and 'Penitent Butchers' (1978) a useful history of the Fauna Preservation Society, later the Fauna and Flora Preservation Society. 
Fitter was also a pioneer of the post-war nature conservation movement, largely in a voluntary capacity. He served as director of the intelligence unit of the Council for Nature (1959-63); on the species survival commission of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (1963-88, chairman from 1975); and as honorary secretary (1964-71), and later chairman (1983-7) and vice-president (1988-2005) of the Fauna and Flora Preservation Society, at one point its British business being effectively run by him and his wife. He was much involved in the Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire Naturalists' Trust and served the World Wildlife Fund, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, the British Trust for Ornithology, and many other bodies in honorary positions. His contributions were based on his deep knowledge of the facts and issues, his capacity for organization, and the easy warmth of his modest personality. He was appointed an officer of the order of the Golden Ark, in the Netherlands (1978), and awarded the Christopher Cadbury medal of the Royal Society for Nature Conservation (1998) and the Peter Scott medal of the British Naturalists' Association (also 1998). 
Fitter remained active until the end of his life. In 2000 his presidential address to the London Natural History Society was about the likely impacts of global warming on wildlife, and two years later he wrote, with his son Alastair (professor of biology at the University of York), a paper in the journal 'Science' on changes in flowering time of British plants, based on forty-seven years' observation of 385 species around his home in Chinnor in the Chilterns. At the time of his death he was revising his book 'Finding Wild Flowers', first published in 1971, preparing a flora of France, and working on an unusual autobiography, based on the influences that the places he had visited had had on him. Having lived latterly in Great Shelford, Cambridge, he died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 3 September 2005, of complications of prostatic cancer. He was survived by his three children, his wife, Maisie, having predeceased him in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 96022


Bondi, Sir Hermann (1919-2005), applied mathematician and scientific administrator, was born on 1 November 1919 in Vienna, Austria, the son of Samuel Bondi (died 1959), a doctor and heart specialist with a deep interest in science, and his wife, Helene, 'nee' Hirsch (died 1960). His parents were distant relatives, his paternal grandmother also being a member of the wider Hirsch family. The family was Jewish but non-observant. 
Bondi showed an early aptitude for mathematics; by the time he was nine he was helping his sister, Gabriele, who was five years his senior, with her school homework, and taught himself calculus from a book he found on a visit to his uncle Joseph. His interest in mathematics was further encouraged by a distant relative, Abraham Frankel, who was a professor at the University of Kiel. In 1936 he met Sir Arthur Eddington, who advised him to apply to Trinity College, Cambridge. He was accepted and arrived in England in September 1937, going straight into the second year of the maths tripos. By the following Easter he was convinced that he wanted to pursue a career as a mathematician and his success in the June examinations led the college to award him a senior scholarship. These were troubled times: Bondi was deeply worried at the rising power of Nazi Germany, and when the Austrian referendum on union with Germany was announced, he telegrammed his parents saying they must immediately leave Austria. They heeded his advice, taking the train to Budapest on the morning of 11 March 1938; Hitler marched into Austria the next day. 
On 10 May 1940 Hitler invaded France, Belgium, and the Netherlands, and two days later, as an Austrian citizen, Bondi was interned in an army barracks in Bury St Edmunds. There he met a fellow 'alien', Thomas (Tommy) Gold; the two became lifelong friends and colleagues. He was transported to Camp L in Canada where, under the leadership of Max Perutz, the internees set up a camp 'university', in which several subsequently distinguished scientists participated. Bondi gave lectures on mathematics without the aid of notes or books. This moulded his lecturing style, and with few exceptions he subsequently gave lectures, radio, and television broadcasts without notes. 
In June 1941 Bondi was released and returned to Cambridge as a research student under the supervision of Harold Jeffreys, but in April 1942 he joined the radar research team in the Admiralty Signals Establishment. There he formed a theory group with Fred Hoyle and Tommy Gold. During this period he worked out the theory of the magnetron used to produce high-powered radar beams, and developed the first comprehensive study of wave clutter. Such spare time as he had in the evenings was spent working on astronomy with Hoyle and Gold in the cottage they had rented; in 1943 he was awarded a fellowship at Trinity College on the basis of his research on accretion on stars. 
Bondi returned to Cambridge to take up his fellowship in the summer of 1945 and was also appointed to an assistant lectureship, and from 1948 to a lectureship, in mathematics. His rooms in Trinity became the meeting place for renewed research collaboration with Gold and Hoyle. In 1947 he met Christine Mary Stockman, a fellow mathematician four years his junior who was one of Hoyle's research students, and daughter of Henry Watson Stockman, civil servant. They married on 1 November 1947 at Cambridge register office, with Gold among the witnesses. They had three daughters, Alison, Elizabeth, and Deborah, and two sons, Jonathan and David. 
Bondi's research interests included waves on compressible liquids, the structure of the solar corona and chromosphere, the rotation of the earth, gravitation, and cosmology. A major paper at this time was 'Spherically symmetric models in general relativity', published in the 'Monthly Notes of the Royal Astronomical Society' in 1947. This clarified and extended earlier work by Georges Lemaitre and Richard C. Tolman, giving a physical interpretation to the co-ordinates, evaluating the properties of the model, and showing that rapidly collapsing matter might force a light ray passing through it to travel inwards, thus anticipating future results on black hole formation. This paper became a classic and was still frequently referred to more than fifty years later. 
One of the major problems of cosmology, much discussed by Bondi, Gold, and Hoyle, was the time-scale problem: the time constant of the 'Hubble expansion' of the universe was estimated by Edwin Hubble to be 1.8 billion years, very short compared with contemporary estimates of 4 billion years for the ages of the oldest rocks of the earth, of meteorites, and of the sun. The Bondi-Gold-Hoyle trio struggled to reconcile these apparently contradictory data until, in late 1947, Gold came up with the thought that if matter were being continually created perhaps it was possible to solve the age problem. The three of them worked out the idea, leading to the 'steady state' theory of cosmology, which envisaged new matter being created as the universe expanded, so that on the large scale the universe was unchanging, since it had always existed and always would. Some astronomers were attracted by the theory, others hated it. It made the names of Bondi, Gold, and Hoyle widely known to the general public and to numerous students of science, and was admirably described in Bondi's book 'Cosmology' (1952). One of the strengths of the steady state theory was that it gave specific predictions that could be tested but, over the following decades, mounting observational evidence on radio source counts and cosmic background radiation were not in agreement with the theoretical predictions, and almost all astronomers abandoned the theory. 
When Bondi met his wife, Christine, she was working on stellar structure and they combined their talents to develop techniques for solving the structure equations, introducing the 'Bondi homology variables' to minimize the numerical calculations required to obtain a stellar model. This was before the age of computers at a time when developing efficient algorithms was a prime consideration, and their work was a fine example of the British applied mathematical approach to problems of theoretical physics. 
Bondi's work on accretion began while he was collaborating with Hoyle during the war; it was his detailed analysis of accretion on stars as they moved through the interstellar medium that gained him his research fellowship at Trinity. In 1951 Bondi asked himself what would happen if the star were stationary and embedded in a cloud. This was a relatively straightforward problem, which he completed in a few days, deriving the rate of accretion in terms of the mass of the star and the density and speed of sound in the cloud. He regarded this as a simple piece of work and did not plan to publish it, but Ray Lyttleton persuaded him to do so and the paper, 'On spherically symmetric accretion', published in the 'Monthly Notes of the Royal Astronomical Society' in 1952, became another widely cited classic. 
In 1954 Bondi moved to King's College, London, as professor of applied mathematics. There he established a major international research centre in general relativity. The work of Bondi and his team led to an influential series of papers, 'Gravitational waves in general relativity', published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' from 1958 to 2004. Two of these papers deserve special mention. In the mid-1950s there was debate as to whether general relativity predicted the existence of gravitational waves, and in a paper of 1959, 'Exact plane waves', by Bondi, F. A. E. Pirani, and Ivor Robinson, the first exact solution was given, thus finally demonstrating that general relativity did indeed predict gravitational waves. In a paper of 1962, 'Waves from axi-symmetric isolated systems', by Bondi, M. G. J. van der Burg, and A. W. K. Metzner, the authors conveyed a clear understanding of the transport and reception of energy in such waves, introducing the 'Bondi radiation co-ordinates', the 'Bondi mass', the 'news function', and the 'Bondi-Metzner-Sachs group', thereby laying the foundation for much future work on the subject. Bondi considered this his most important scientific paper. He continued working in this field throughout his subsequent career in scientific administration, and his last paper in the series, 'Standing waves', was published in 2004. 
During his period at King's Bondi became increasingly involved in public education about science, giving series of talks on radio and television, always lucid and inspirational. He wrote several popular books, including 'The Universe at Large' (1961), 'Relativity and Common Sense' (1964), and 'Assumption and Myth in Physical Theory' (1968), which were translated into many languages. It was also during this period that he became friends with the playwright and poet Ronald Duncan, visiting the Duncans' farm in Welcombe on the north Devon-Cornwall border, and having long discussions about science that culminated in Duncan's epic poem 'Man' (1970-4), which he dedicated to Bondi. 
At King's College Bondi was increasingly drawn into administration, advising new universities in the West Indies, Nigeria, and Ghana, planning the rebuilding of King's College, serving as secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society, advising on the Anglo-Australian telescope, and serving as a member, then chairman of the Meteorological Research Committee. He was invited to join the Defence Scientific Committee, and to chair a committee to look at British defence interests in space. Then came a request to produce a one-man report on a proposed Thames barrier to protect London in times of floods. His report of 1967 recommending the building of a barrier near Woolwich was subsequently acted on and the Thames barrier was officially opened on 8 May 1984. Bondi regarded this as one of his major achievements. 
In 1967, while remaining professor of mathematics at King's, Bondi accepted the post of director-general of the European Space Research Organization (ESRO). At this time the organization was in deep financial crisis and there had been no successful satellite launches since its foundation in 1964. Due in major part to Bondi's leadership almost all problems had been resolved by the end of 1968; ESRO I and II and HEOS A had been launched, political difficulties overcome, and a sound budget agreed. New projects were also approved: ESRO Ib was launched in 1969, and HEOS A2 and ESRO IV in 1972. 
Bondi's three-year contract was extended but other events intervened; in 1971 he accepted an invitation from Lord Carrington, the secretary of state, to become the full-time chief scientific adviser to the Ministry of Defence, working with successive ministers, Lord Carrington, Ian Gilmour, Roy Mason, and Fred Mulley. After six years in this post he moved in 1977 to be chief scientific adviser at the Ministry of Energy; during his tenure he led the UK delegation to the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation, and chaired the Severn Barrage Committee. It is a tribute to his chairmanship skills that this very heterogeneous committee, with representatives of water authorities, ecologists, and parliamentarians, reached a unanimous report which recommended that a 16 km barrage be built between Brean Down and Lavernock Point that would generate 7200 MW. The committee's recommendations were not acted upon but remained as the basis of subsequent studies and proposals. Following civil service rules, Bondi retired from the Ministry of Energy at the end of September 1980 but was then appointed chairman and chief executive of the Natural Environment Research Council; during his term of office remote-sensing blossomed, the modern British Geological Survey was born, the council joined the new International Ocean Drilling Program, the RSS 'Charles Darwin' was built, and the council's budget for Antarctic research increased. 
In 1983 Bondi accepted the position of master of Churchill College, Cambridge, moving into residence in 1984. His chairmanship skills, honed over the years with ESRO and in numerous government scientific bodies, were much appreciated by the fellows. A charismatic, warm, and inspiring person, he got on easily and informally with both students and fellows, engaging them in discussions on a wide range of subjects and telling jokes, of which he had a large repertoire, sustaining a vigorous intellectual environment and communal life. Under his leadership the college received a munificent donation from the Danish Maersk Foundation. 
Bondi was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1959 and knighted KCB in 1973. He was awarded the gold medal of the Einstein Society in 1983, the gold medal of the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications in 1988, the Austrian decoration of honour for science and art in 1999, and the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 2001. He served as secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society (1956-64), president of the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications (1974-6), president of the Hydrographic Society (1985-7), and chairman of the International Federation of Institutes of Advanced Study (1982-90). He was awarded honorary doctorates by the universities of Bath, Birmingham, Plymouth, St Andrews, Salford, Southampton, Surrey, Sussex, York, and Vienna. 
Both Hermann and Christine Bondi were very active in the British Humanist Association from the 1950s onwards, and he served as president from 1982 to 1999 and as president of the Rationalist Press Association over the same years. In 1990 he was awarded the G. Birla international award for humanism. He was similarly active in education and the public understanding of science, serving as president of the Association of British Science Writers (1981-3), president of the Association for Science Education (1982-4), and president of the Society for Research into Higher Education (1981-97). 
Following his retirement from Churchill College in 1990 Bondi and his wife moved to a house in Impington, outside Cambridge, from where he continued to pursue his research on gravitational waves. He also remained a tireless worker for Save the Children, delivering envelopes and collecting funds in his home village for as long as he was mobile. In his final years he developed Parkinson's disease, and he died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 10 September 2005, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his wife, Christine, and their five children. He will be remembered for his foundational work in science, particularly for his fundamental contribution to our understanding of gravitational radiation, and for his work on accretion and cosmology. He will also be remembered for his many major contributions to government science and administration, especially on the Thames barrier, and his leadership of ESRO, and for his outstanding communication skills and contributions to the public understanding of science. 


@@@@@


doc= 96028


Green, Guy Mervin Charles (1913-2005), cinematographer and film director, was born on 5 November 1913 at 4 Portway, Frome, Somerset, the son of Charles Frederick Green, chauffeur, and his wife, Violet Annie, 'nee' Smith. An enthusiastic filmgoer as a child, he gained his first technical experience operating his school's new film projector, and later used a contact at the film distributor to gain a job as assistant projectionist on cruise ships. Back in London he briefly ran a portrait studio with a friend before entering film production as a clapper boy at Sound City studios, Shepperton, on the film 'Song of the Plough' (1934), directed by John Baxter. 
Green methodically worked his way up through the camera departments of various production companies, working with experienced cinematographers like Claude Friese-Green and Otto Kanturek, and being particularly influenced by the German cameraman Gunther Krampf. At British International Pictures, Elstree, from the mid-1930s, he graduated to camera operator. He moved over to Denham studios during the Second World War and became operator for the accomplished British cameraman Ronald Neame, shooting exteriors on 'A Yank in the RAF' (1941) and operating on Michael Powell's 'One of our Aircraft is Missing' (1942). Of particular importance was his participation on David Lean's 'In Which We Serve' (1942) and 'This Happy Breed' (1944), for the director recommended Green to Carol Reed as director of photography on 'The Way Ahead' (1944), a commission he successfully completed. On 17 July 1943 he had married Ellen Mary Coleman, the 39-year-old daughter of Frank Edgar Coleman, salesman. She later died in childbirth. 
When the difficult and perfectionist Lean clashed with Robert Krasker, his cinematographer on 'Great Expectations' (1946), he chose Green to replace him and the result was a triumph for all concerned. Widely regarded as the most distinguished of all film adaptations of Dickens and reckoned by some to be the greatest ever achievement in black and white cinematography, it won Green an Oscar, the first British film to win the award in this category. Green was the natural choice to photograph Lean's 'Oliver Twist' (1948), also for the Cineguild company, and once again he turned in a masterful treatment of light and shade and a wonderful evocation of mid-nineteenth-century London. Both of these films are celebrated for the visual force of their striking opening sequences: the terror of Pip in the eerie graveyard as he confronts Magwitch, and the pain and desperation of the heavily pregnant woman struggling through the stormy night to reach the workhouse. The two films were largely shot in the studio, which suited Green as it gave him maximum control: 'Outside you're at the mercy of the weather and the time of day, and other terrible problems. I love to be in the studio, there's a set with people on it, and it's pitch black. Then I turn it into a picture by turning light on where I think it should be. That's marvellous fun' ('Exposure', 32). While working on 'Oliver Twist' Green met (Celia) Josephine Smith, an actress with the stage name Josephine Stuart, and daughter of Nathaniel Smith, businessman. They married on 24 April 1948, when she was aged twenty-one, and had two children, Michael and Marilyn. After his marriage Green worked with Lean on two further films: 'The Passionate Friends' (1949) and 'Madeleine' (1950), pleasing his director with his sensitive lighting of the star Ann Todd. 
In 1947 Green had photographed the costume melodrama 'Blanche Fury' for Cineguild, his first film in Technicolor. Against the prevailing orthodoxy he approached the subject dramatically, explaining: 'Photography for dramatic subjects... must reflect the emotional content of the scene... It must not be a glorious spectacle all on its own. Therefore in some way it must be suppressed and made to lend itself to the subject dramatically... Monochrome or colour, it is light that sets the scene. (Petrie, 99-100)' Nevertheless, despite this understanding of the cinematographer's art, the films with Lean and Cineguild marked the high point of Green's career as a cinematographer. His other work in the early 1950s was more routine: a couple of Disney adventure stories in 'The Story of Robin Hood and his Merrie Men' (1952) and 'Rob Roy the Highland Rogue' (1953), and such undistinguished British films as 'For Better, for Worse' (1954) and 'The Dark Avenger' (1955). The challenge was not up to that posed by Lean, and Green moved over to directing, the last film he photographed being 'I Am a Camera' (1955), an uncertain treatment of the Christopher Isherwood stories. 
Green commenced directing on the feature 'River Beat' (1954) and followed it with other routine thrillers and genre pictures, the most successful being 'Sea of Sand' (1958), a war film shot largely on location in Libya. This collaboration with the actors Richard Attenborough and Michael Craig led to 'The Angry Silence' (1960), a controversial story of industrial relations and Green's best-regarded film, which won the international film critics' prize at the Berlin film festival. The film was produced by Allied Film Makers, a consortium of film personnel that included Green and gave an unusual measure of control. Another controversial subject -- child molestation -- was tackled in 'The Mark' (1961). Green then went to Hollywood to direct some big-budget social problem films, including 'Light in the Piazza' (1962), 'Diamond Head' (1963), and 'A Patch of Blue' (1965), for which he also wrote the script. He lost his way in the later 1960s with an ill-considered adaptation of John Fowles's 'The Magus' (1968) and a series of forgettable films including the ludicrous 'Jacqueline Susann's Once Is not Enough' (1975). He then worked out his career in the production mill of American made-for-TV movies, an unsatisfying experience for him as director. His final production was an adaptation of Arthur Hailey's novel 'Strong Medicine' (1986). In later years he stayed in touch with the industry in his role as a committee member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, helping to nominate the candidates for best foreign language film. He was appointed OBE in 2004. He died at his Beverly Hills home on 15 September 2005, of kidney and heart failure, and was survived by his wife, Josephine, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96042


Knatchbull, John Ulick, seventh Baron Brabourne of Brabourne (1924-2005), film and television producer, was born on 9 November 1924 at 7 Upper Belgrave Street, London, the younger son of Michael Herbert Rudolf Knatchbull, formerly Knatchbull-Hugessen, fifth Baron Brabourne of Brabourne (1895-1939), and his wife, Lady Doreen Geraldine, 'nee' Browne (died 1979), third daughter of George Ulick Browne, sixth marquess of Sligo. Part of his childhood was spent in India, where his father was governor successively of Bombay (1933-7) and of Bengal (1937-9). He was sent to Eton College, which he did not enjoy, before going to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he passed his military exam after nine months and immediately joined the Coldstream Guards. He became seventh baron, and sixteenth baronet, in September 1943, when his elder brother, Norton ('b'. 1922), an officer in the Grenadier Guards, was shot by the Germans after his escape from a train in northern Italy. Brabourne was wounded himself in combat near Brussels, and later became aide-de-camp successively to General Sir William Slim and Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, when supreme allied commander south-east Asia. He was demobilized with the rank of captain in 1946. On 26 October that year, at Romsey Abbey, Hampshire, with princesses Elizabeth and Margaret acting as bridesmaids, he married Mountbatten's elder daughter, Lady Patricia Edwina Victoria Mountbatten ('b'. 1924). The marriage was happy, and they had five sons and two daughters. 
Brabourne was fascinated by cinema. At Oxford he had visited the cinema twice a day, and three times on Sunday. With Mountbatten's assistance he obtained an introduction to the producer Ian Dalrymple, who employed him as a production assistant under the name John Brabourne. During the next seven years Brabourne worked his way up the production ladder, principally under Herbert Wilcox and Daniel Angel. Well aware that Brabourne's father-in-law was now the first sea lord, Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger employed Brabourne as production manager on 'The Battle of the River Plate' (1956), for which the Royal Navy's Mediterranean Fleet agreed to recreate the movement of ships off wartime Uruguay. 
Brabourne's debut production was 'Harry Black' (1958). Backed by Twentieth Century Fox, it starred Stewart Granger as a professional hunter who tracks down a Bengal tiger that has been menacing an Indian village. Brabourne's next two films, both directed by Lewis Gilbert, had naval themes: 'Sink the Bismarck!' (1960), starring Kenneth More and Dana Wynter, and 'HMS Defiant' (1962), starring Alec Guinness and Dirk Bogarde. 
In 1960, together with Anthony Havelock-Allan, Brabourne formed British Home Entertainment, a cable television service that, as a partner in 'pay-TV', offered quality productions to discerning audiences on a pay-per-view basis, starting in 1966. Brabourne produced film versions of Laurence Olivier's National Theatre productions of Shakespeare's 'Othello' (1965) and Strindberg's 'Dance of Death' (1968). Other productions included 'The Mikado' (1967). British Home Entertainment's biggest success, however, was its live transmission of the heavyweight boxing match between Cassius Clay and Henry Cooper, when subscribers sold their neighbours ringside seats in their sitting rooms. This early venture into cable television closed in 1968 when, under pressure from the BBC, the government refused to allow the 'pay-TV' experiment to expand. Brabourne's and Havelock-Allan's next venture was a Paramount-backed production of 'Up the Junction' (1967), Nell Dunn's tale of a Chelsea girl's discovery of the gritty realities of working-class life across the river in Battersea. Starring Suzy Kendall and Denis Waterman, it was the top money-maker for 1968 in British cinemas. Brabourne and Havelock-Allan went on to produce Shakespeare's 'Romeo and Juliet' (1968), in which the director Franco Zeffirelli infused Shakespeare's verse with the teenage lovers' physical passion. Starring the newcomers Leonard Whiting and Olivia Hussey, it was backed by Paramount and the Italian public service broadcaster RAI. Financially it was very successful, grossing over $14.5 million in North America alone. 
For several years Brabourne had enjoyed a close working relationship with his production manager, Richard Goodwin. In 1971 he acted as executive producer on 'Tales of Beatrix Potter', a musical starring members of the Royal Ballet, which Goodwin produced and scripted from an idea by his wife, Christine Edzard. The same team produced a follow-up in 1979: 'Stories from a Flying Trunk', based on the fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen. Brabourne and Goodwin turned to fairy tales of another genre with their adaptations of four Agatha Christie mysteries: 'Murder on the Orient Express' (1974), 'Death on the Nile' (1978), 'The Mirror Crack'd' (1980), and 'Evil under the Sun' (1982). They distanced the narratives of all four films from Christie's original stories by adding period elements to her formal plot structures, and camp sensibilities to her sparse characterization. Three featured the Belgian detective Hercule Poirot, while 'The Mirror Crack'd' was a Miss Marple story. For 'Murder on the Orient Express' Brabourne carefully packaged a Hollywood director, Sidney Lumet, with a raft of British and Hollywood stars, and for twenty years it held the record as the British film industry's most profitable film. The other three were less successful, however. During the 1970s Brabourne also turned to children's films, acting as executive producer on three projects backed by the Children's Film Foundation: 'Smokey Joe's Revenge' (1974), 'The Copter Kids' (1976), and 'Seal Island' (1977). 
In 1979 one of Brabourne's sons, Nicholas, was murdered by the Provisional IRA, along with Brabourne's mother, the dowager Lady Brabourne, and father-in-law, Lord Mountbatten, and their Irish boat boy, Paul Maxwell, when it blew up their fishing boat off the west coast of Ireland. Brabourne, his wife (who became Countess Mountbatten of Burma by special remainder on the death of her father), and Nicholas's twin brother, Timothy, were all seriously wounded. Brabourne courageously returned to film production, and scored a success with 'A Passage to India' (1984), which was scripted and directed by David Lean, after Brabourne's long struggle to persuade the fellows of King's College, Cambridge (the author's literary executors), to allow him to film E. M. Forster's book. His final film for the cinema was a third collaboration with Goodwin and Edzard, 'Little Dorrit' (1987), which ran for nearly six hours. As a producer Brabourne's main interests lay in the story, the script, and the editing. Although the director was in charge on the studio floor, for Brabourne it was the producer who chose the story and ensured that the film actually reached the screen. His films were well regarded by his colleagues, and he received two Oscar nominations, as the co-producer of 'Romeo and Juliet' and 'A Passage to India'. 
As cinema audiences declined Brabourne became increasingly involved in television. In 1969 Mountbatten refused to allow Associated Rediffusion to make the 'Life and Times of Lord Mountbatten' unless Brabourne became the associate producer for the series. Brabourne also used his contacts with the royal family to persuade the queen to donate the substantial fee that she received from the BBC documentary 'The Royal Family' (1969) to the embryonic British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA), which he and others were attempting to establish with suitable west London premises. He produced three television series, 'Romantic versus Classic Art' (1973), 'The National Gallery: a Private View' (1974), and 'Leontyne' (1987), as well as 'A Much-Maligned Monarch' (1976), a television programme about George III, in which Alistair Cooke interviewed Prince Charles. 
From the mid-1970s Brabourne became more widely involved in industry matters. He was a director of the Copyright Promotions Group, Euston Films, Thorn EMI, and Thames Television (becoming chairman of the latter in 1991-3), and a governor of the British Film Institute (of which he was also made a fellow), the National Film School, the British Screen Advisory Council, and the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television. In 1975 Harold Wilson appointed him a member of his working party on the British film industry, and its successor, the interim action committee; and in the same year Brabourne became a trustee of BAFTA. He also served on many committees in the fields of education, science, charitable work, and Kentish matters, some of which he also chaired. He was particularly attached to the Caldecott Foundation, a therapeutic community for disturbed children, of which he was chairman from 1961 to 1992. His chairmanship was always scrupulously fair and his interventions were few, but always incisive, and finely calibrated. He was appointed CBE in 1993. 
Brabourne was almost universally liked, although his polite and diffident manner masked a steely mind that understood the values of discretion and, on occasion, silence. He died on 22 September 2005 at his home, Newhouse, Mersham, Ashford, Kent, of heart and kidney failure. He was survived by his wife, Countess Mountbatten of Burma, four sons, and two daughters, and was succeeded as eighth baron by his son Norton ('b'. 1947). 


@@@@@


doc= 96053


Marshall, Sybil Mary (1913-2005), educationist and author, was born on 26 November 1913 at Lotting Fen, Ramsey, Huntingdonshire, the daughter of William Henry Edwards, farmer, and his wife, Kate Mary, 'nee' Papworth. She grew up in the black fens of Huntingdonshire in Lotting Fen, a village three feet below sea level, without electricity or running water, in one of the poorest parts of the country. She was educated at Ramsey Heights elementary school (1919-23) and Ramsey grammar school (1924-32). She left at the height of the agricultural depression to become an unqualified, uncertificated teacher, first at South Woodham Ferrers, Essex (1933-6), then in Huntingdon (1936-9). On 27 August 1939 she married Francis Charles (Frank) Marshall, a 26-year-old local farmer then serving in the RAF. A son ('b'. 1940) died in childbirth, but the following year she gave birth to a daughter, Prue. In 1942 she became headteacher of Kingston county primary school, Cambridgeshire, a one-room, single-teacher school containing some twenty-six pupils aged between four and eleven. In 1948-9 she attended Exhall Grange Emergency Training College, Coventry, before returning to Kingston county primary school, now as a qualified teacher. There she developed what she called her 'symphonic method', whereby subjects were integrated rather than being taught separately -- so that lessons, for instance, on the Romans might combine elements of literature, art, music, and home economics, as well as history. Meanwhile Frank Marshall found it difficult to keep up with such a brilliant wife, and eventually left her for another woman. They divorced in 1948. 
When Kingston county primary school was closed by the government in 1960 Sybil Marshall won a bursary to New Hall, Cambridge, to read English as a mature student. (She had already, while still a teacher, attended a Cambridge University extramural class in English at Bassingbourn Village College.) She completed her degree in two years, graduating in 1962. She was immediately appointed a lecturer in primary education at Sheffield University under Boris Ford, who had heard her speak on the arts in education at a residential course for primary school teachers. While at Sheffield she published 'An Experiment in Education' (1963), a highly influential account of her teaching methods at Kingston, which became known as 'the teacher's bible', and which clearly influenced the 'child-centred' approach of the Plowden report, 'Children and their primary schools', of 1967. Also while at Sheffield, in 1963 she met a dapper little man, Ewart Oakeshott (1916-2002), an accomplished commercial artist and an international authority on arms and armour, with whom she formed a close and loving relationship. They married in 1995 after the death of his first wife. 
In 1967 Sybil Marshall had followed Boris Ford to the University of Sussex, where she was reader in primary education until her retirement in 1976. Among her publications on education during this period was 'Adventure in Creative Education' (1968), a hilarious account of headteachers learning the Sybil Marshall method in a disused Rotherham warehouse. She was also educational adviser to the successful Granada Television series for children 'Picture Box', from 1965 to 1978. A short, round, jolly woman with a strong fenland accent, she was much loved by those who trained under her, or who worked with her. 
In 1967 Sybil Marshall had published an engaging account of her fenland upbringing, and of local history and folklore, 'Fenland Chronicle'. In retirement this was followed by 'Everyman's Book of English Folk Tales' (1981), for which she won the Angel prize for literature in 1982, and 'Once upon a Village' (1979), 'The Silver New Nothing' (1987), and 'A Pride of Tigers' (1992), containing further stories of fenland life. She published her first novel, 'A Nest of Magpies', in 1993. This and its sequels, 'Sharp through the Hawthorn' (1994), 'Strip the Willow' (1996), 'A Late Lark Singing' (1997), and 'Ring the Bell Backwards' (1999), was thinly disguised autobiography, the characters Fran and William being based on Sybil and Ewart Oakeshott (the latter providing the illustrations). She also published a collection of short stories, 'The Chequer Board' (1995). She died of cerebrovascular disease on 29 August 2005 at her home, 40 St Mary's Street, Ely, and was survived by her daughter, Prue Atmore, a headmistress. 


@@@@@


doc= 96057


Rayner, John Desmond (1924-2005), rabbi and liturgist, was born Hans Sigismund Rahmer, in Berlin, Germany, on 30 May 1924, the only son and younger child of Ferdinand Josef Adolf Rahmer (1887-1942?), chief French correspondent at Deutsche Bank, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Landshut (1897-1942?). The Rahmers, entirely unobservant Jews, lived in the lower-middle-class Berlin suburb of Lindenhof, where Hans was the only Jewish child at the local school. After 1933, as antisemitism grew in Germany, his parents sent him to the Zionist Theodor Herzl Schule, where he learned excellent English, but his education was cruelly interrupted by the events of Kristallnacht, on 9 November 1938, after which his father was arrested by the SS. At that point the Rahmers hoped to emigrate. Hans's uncle, Kurt Landshut, was already in Uruguay, and promised to get them visas. The family was forced to leave its home in Lindenhof, which had been declared 'Judenrein' (Jew free), and moved to a cramped shared apartment in Berlin's west end. It was to that home that Ferdinand Rahmer returned seven weeks after his arrest, with Hans unable to recognize as his father the man 'standing on the doorstep like a skeleton, with filthy clothes hanging loosely from him -- he looked like a scarecrow' ('Before I Forget', 19). Shortly afterwards the family heard that Kurt Landshut had been swindled over the visas, so the Rahmers made every effort to get their children out of Germany. Hans came to England to board at Durham School, arriving, on 11 August 1939, on one of the last 'kindertransports' that brought some 10,000 Jewish children to the UK. 
Hans Rahmer went to live with the family of Robert William Stannard, rector of Bishopwearmouth, co. Durham, who soon became his family -- Uncle Will and Aunt Muriel. They succeeded in getting a nursing place for his sister Erica at Sunderland Royal Infirmary, and she arrived on 25 August 1939. Hans attended Durham School, and, later, with restrictions in place for German refugees in case they were Nazi agents, was transferred to Giggleswick School, from which he won an open scholarship in modern languages to Emmanuel College, Cambridge. He took that up in 1947, after four years in the Durham light infantry, during which he changed his name from Rahmer to Rayner. 
At some point in 1946 his hope against hope that his parents might have survived was finally dashed -- he had received a last Red Cross note from them early in 1943, sending their love and asking him to 'pray to beloved God'. They had apparently been arrested on 13 December 1942 and deported the following day, by cattle-truck, with about 800 people, of whom none survived, to Auschwitz. 
While staying with the Stannards and the Wilkinsons, another clergy family, John Rayner became increasingly attracted by their liberal, open-minded brand of Anglicanism. He began to think seriously about religion, and discovered Liberal Judaism, first in Liverpool and then in London, so that the young man whose parents had practised nothing, and who had had a bar mitzvah at his own request in the little synagogue of a Jewish old people's home in Berlin, became convinced that he wanted to be a religious leader. He changed from modern languages at Cambridge to moral sciences (gaining a first) and then to Oriental languages, specializing in Hebrew. He became president of the Cambridge University Jewish Society and founded the Cambridge Progressive Jewish group. From then on, his service to the Jewish community was in no doubt. 
Rayner was ordained into the Liberal Jewish ministry by Rabbi Israel Mattuck in June 1953, and served the South London Liberal Synagogue in Streatham as their first full-time paid minister until 1957, when he received the 'call', as he described it, to the Liberal Jewish Synagogue in St John's Wood, to be associate minister to Rabbi Leslie Edgar. The south London years were happy times. On 19 June 1955 he married Jane Priscilla Heilbronn ('b'. 1931), a secretary, and daughter of Lionel Heilbronn, manufacturer's agent, and his wife, Pauline; they had two sons and one daughter. In the early years of their marriage they lived penuriously -- the salary was minuscule -- in Upper Norwood, and made many friends. Rayner was particularly remembered in the congregation not only for his brilliant sermons and his unfailing devotion to pastoral care, but for his car, which, due to his lack of money, was an old, failing Austin Seven named Gomer after the prophet Hosea's wife, who had been unfaithful but whom he loved just the same. The Liberal Jewish Synagogue, with its place at the heart of the Liberal Jewish movement at the time, suited John Rayner perfectly. All three Rayner children were born in the first few years of his time there (Jeremy in 1957, Benjamin in 1959, Susan in 1962), and, following Leslie Edgar's retirement on health grounds in 1961, he became senior minister, only agreeing to do so if the congregation would give him two years' absence to study for rabbinic ordination at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, in Cincinnati. He was ordained there privately in 1965. 
Upon his return from America, Rayner's life's work in liturgy and teaching began. He produced, together with his great friend the American rabbi Chaim Stern, the sabbath, festival, and high holy day prayer books for the Liberal movement (in 1967, 1995, and 1973 respectively). He produced one passover 'Haggadah' for the Liberal movement in 1962, with John Rich, and then in 1981 edited a wholly new 'Haggadah', with new material and detailed notes, as well as writing pamphlets, lectures, and articles. Among his books were 'Judaism for Today' (1978) with Bernard Hooker, 'The Jewish People' (1987) with David Goldberg, and three collections of sermons and lectures. 
Rayner's sermons were beautifully crafted, often very moving, and always passionately felt. People often did not agree with him, but he was recognized as one of the country's greatest preachers, 'inter alia' by 'Harpers and Queen' magazine in 1976. He was also the foremost Jewish liturgist of the twentieth century. His knowledge and expertise were unparalleled, and his capacity to find words from the early versions of traditional prayers that fitted with modern Liberal Jewish theology was truly astonishing, such that his notes to each prayer book were consulted by scholars the world over. To add to that, though he was never fully acknowledged for it, his prayer books became the basis of modern American Reform liturgy as well. His collaboration with Chaim Stern was a felicitous one. Though Rayner wrote elegant prose, Stern had more of the poet in him; the combination of Rayner's learning and scholarship with Stern's own compositions created an excellent contemporary liturgy. Their prayer books received widespread approval, even from those not wholly sympathetic to their universalistic theology. Rayner used to quote with embarrassed amusement the letter he received from another great scholar, Jakob Petuchowski, after 'Service of the Heart' was published (in 1967), that ended with 'all good wishes to you, your family, and all mankind' (Rayner, 'The liturgy of Liberal Judaism', lecture at Northwood and Pinner Liberal Synagogue, 17 Feb 2002, privately printed, 8). He also piloted the use of gender inclusive language, particularly in relation to God, and introduced a radical change when he substituted 'you' in addressing God for the 'Thou' of the old Liberal liturgy. 
Rayner taught at Leo Baeck College, becoming honorary director of studies on his return from the United States. He lectured in rabbinic literature, codes, and liturgy for some thirty-five years, inspiring his students with his knowledge, and, perhaps even more, his devotion to the texts. All this, with his unrelenting schedule of pastoral and congregational duties, led to ill health. He underwent coronary bypass surgery in 1980 and again in 1995, and the after-effects of an aneurysm operation in November 2003 left him confined to a wheelchair. Yet he never stopped. He was life president of Liberal Judaism, a vice-president of Leo Baeck College, and president of the London Society of Jews and Christians. He was appointed CBE in 1993 for his inter-faith work. But, all the honours he received in his lifetime notwithstanding, it was his courage and integrity that marked him out. He never flinched when being attacked by fellow Jews for his views on the state of Israel, and his assertion that many of its policies were unethical and indefensible; and he was fearless in his sermons encouraging his congregation to strive for a truly ethical, socially aware, prophetically inspired Judaism. For him, Liberal Judaism was no easy way to be Jewish -- it was harder than traditional Judaism. It required the informed and enlightened conscience, and it required enormous effort. 
Rayner's courage and integrity were leavened with a playful sense of the absurd. He produced pastiche Shakespeare speeches on the burning Jewish issues of the day, wrote words to Christmas carol tunes to tease confirmation class students, and told joke after joke at dinner or at the end of a class. But he was a deeply serious scholar and religious leader, who truly believed that Judaism could be 'a major force for good and therefore for the survival of humanity' ('Before I Forget', 185). He died of cancer of the liver and colon at his home, 37 Walmington Fold, Woodside Park, Barnet, London, on 19 September 2005, optimistic to the end, still working on a book, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium four days later. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96059


Cresswell, (Elizabeth) Helen (1934-2005), children's author, was born on 11 July 1934 at Orchard House nursing home, Kirkby in Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, the second of three children of Joseph Edward Cresswell and his wife, Annie Edna, 'nee' Clarke. She was originally named Edna Helen Cresswell, but throughout her life was known, and published, as Helen Cresswell. At the time of her birth her father, the son of a miner, had his own business as a wholesale fruit merchant. The family lived in West Bridgford, a comfortable suburb of Nottingham, but were unhappy. Her father, who bore the physical and mental scars of the First World War, was frequently drunk and violent, and bullied his wife who would, but for her children, she told them, 'leave him tomorrow' ('Something about the Author', 106). His eventual bankruptcy was a shameful secret long kept from his children. Annie Cresswell came from a better-off Nottinghamshire family: she had been to grammar school, was well-read and a good pianist. She encouraged her children to read widely, and taught other children so as to afford fee-paying schools for her own. In Cresswell's account of her childhood in 'Something about the Author' (1995) she wrote that when she first read D. H. Lawrence's 'Sons and Lovers' 'it was as though the writer had lifted the roof of our own house to find his characters' (ibid., 115). 
Cresswell enjoyed school ('a world of calm and order, a predictable world with its own framework'; 'Something about the Author', 110) and at the age of ten won a scholarship to Nottingham Girls' High School. Her parents were Christian Scientists, not consistently, but enough to pass on to their children the belief that illness was one's 'own fault for not thinking the right thoughts' (ibid., 103). At the age of twelve she suffered a back problem which, neglected, led to her being hospitalized, and missing school for most of a year. Back at school she felt she was two people: 'the popular class clown, one of the top clique. But my real, secret self is the one who sits up into the early hours to finish poems... constantly aware of a mystery beyond the banalities of everyday life' (ibid., 114). She had been writing poems from the age of six and regarded her early writing in the style of Keats, Wordsworth, and de la Mare as her apprenticeship, 'my five finger exercise, my scales' ('Author Zone', 42). Encouraged by her mother to enter competitions, she won a Poetry Society prize when she was sixteen and assumed that she would be a poet when she grew up. 
Cresswell went to King's College, London, and took a degree in English in 1955. She then did a variety of jobs, including fashion buying, secretarial work, and teaching at a Nottingham school, and on 14 April 1962 she married (Leslie) Brian Rowe (1934-2000), the son of Leslie Baker Rowe, a Nottingham lace manufacturer. At the time of their marriage he was marketing director for the family factory but lost his job after a takeover, and then ran a corner shop. They had two daughters, Caroline ('b'. 1963) and Candida ('b'. 1971). Her husband was even-tempered, and a successful foil for Cresswell while the children grew up, but they then separated without acrimony. The marriage was dissolved in 1995. 
Cresswell's first published book was 'Sonya-by-the-Shore' (1960), about a girl who lives by a lake with her grandparents, thinking that is the whole world until she hears about a big city full of people across the lake. In 1963 she started on a completely different tack -- a series of stories about Jumbo Spencer, an eleven-year-old boy with no intention of being like anyone else his age. The second book, 'Jumbo Back to Nature' (1965), introduced one of her enduring themes -- a tramp or wanderer who represents freedom and living for what's round the corner. 
Cresswell tried various settings and styles until she made her name with 'The Piemakers' (1967), about Gravella Roller, daughter of one of the hereditary piemaking families of Danby Dale. For this book she received the first of her four nominations for the Library Association's Carnegie medal. The others were for 'The Night Watchmen' (1969), 'Up the Pier' (1971), and 'The Bongleweed' (1973). 'The Night Watchmen' (which won the Children's Literature Association's phoenix award in 1989) was perhaps her most personal fantasy, seamless and poetic, full of hard-to-catch meaning. In it a boy meets two tramps, 'Do-as-you-pleasers', who tell him, 'You've got Here... and you've got There. We're from There' ('The Night Watchmen', 50). Her other favourite among her books was 'The Winter of the Birds' (1975). 
Cresswell also became an expert and enthusiastic writer for children's television, starting with the BBC's 'Jackanory' programme. She sometimes wrote for book publication and television simultaneously, with specified locations, as in 'Moondial' (1987), set at Belton House, Grantham. Her 'Lizzie Dripping' series (1973 onwards) was filmed around her home, and the television series and books made Lizzie Dripping perhaps her most enduring character. (Her 'Bagthorpe Saga', also televised, was her most sustained series of books.) She was also a good adapter of other authors, with a particular affinity for Edith Nesbit. She liked the collaboration and teamwork inherent in television. The medium rewarded her: in 2000 she was joint winner of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) children's writer's award. 
Cresswell was equally at home with high humour and deep mystery, fantasy, pastoral and fairy story, slapstick and menace, the numinous and the anarchic. Her books celebrated the singular and eccentric, timeless craft, ceremony and community, and the natural world. She wrote over 100 children's books for a variety of publishers and said of them, 'Whatever the outward settings of my stories, the adventures they chart are essentially inner ones' ('Author Zone', 42). She wrote early in the morning, sitting on the floor, and drafted stories at speed, without prior plotting, in bound blank books, changing very little thereafter. While writing she was happy, but she suffered from depression (for which she had a variety of treatments) and sometimes couldn't write for months. When elated she spent money on antiques and on statues for her garden. 
Five feet ten inches tall, with long blonde hair, Cresswell cared how she looked. In middle age, with still-long hair, and stylish but unusual clothes, her appearance was particularly striking. She was independent-minded but easy to work with, ambitious, practical, and businesslike, but averse to the metropolitan literary scene. Despite her shyness she was good at talking to audiences of all ages. She listed her recreations as watercolour painting, collecting pictures, books, antiques and coincidences, and sundial watching. She was married in an Anglican church, and considered herself Christian, but not conventionally. She believed in ghosts. Her politics were Labour, veering later to Liberal Democrat. She remained attached to her family and her Nottinghamshire roots and bought a Georgian farmhouse, Old Church Farm, in the small village of Eakring, near Rufford Abbey, where she set another of her books ('The Secret World of Polly Flint', 1982). She died at her home in Eakring on 26 September 2005, of cancer, and was cremated at Mansfield crematorium. Her memorial service was at Southwell Minster on 25 November 2005. She was survived by her two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 96062


Swan, (Richard) Kenneth (1919-2005), tour operator, was born on 3 April 1919 at 175 High Street, Guildford, Surrey, the only child of William Frederic Swan, founder of Swan's Travel Bureau, and his wife, Gladys, 'nee' Lumley. He was educated at the City of London School, before leaving in 1935 to join his father's travel agency, where he worked until the outbreak of the Second World War. During the war he organized troop movements, mainly in the Middle East, ending the war with the rank of major. He was married twice: his first marriage, on 6 June 1942, to Lesley Muriel Parker, a twenty-year-old shorthand typist, and daughter of Basil Mason Parker, bank clerk, ended in divorce. After the war he rejoined his father's business, which was renamed W. F. and R. K. Swan Travel Ltd. On 21 November 1951 he married Marion Ethel Knight, a 28-year-old secretary, daughter of Reginald Herbert Balls, grocer's assistant, and former wife of Jack Coldham Knight; they had one son and one daughter. 
Before the First World War Swan's father had been private secretary to Sir Henry Lunn, the travel agent and organizer of the first Hellenic Cruise to Troy and the Greek islands in 1908, and founder of the Hellenic Travellers' Club. When in 1951 Swan was asked by the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies to arrange a tour to Greece for its members, he decided to organize it as a cruise. This led the Swans to revive the old Hellenic cruises, and the first cruise was advertised in 1955. From the start the Swans set high academic standards for the guest lecturers on the cruises, who included the archaeologist Sir Mortimer Wheeler, who was also television personality of the year in 1954 as a result of his appearances on 'Animal, Vegetable or Mineral'. Wheeler was on the first cruise, and became a director of the company and subsequently chairman of the Hellenic Cruise division. He was in charge of choosing the lecturers, and wrote the detailed handbook to the sites. The lecturers gave talks on board ship, and helped to guide the passengers around the historical sites. Most of the passengers were retired members of the upper and professional classes, and many were as learned as the lecturers, including university dons, headmasters, bishops, judges, and diplomats, all intent on improving their knowledge of the ancient Mediterranean world: dinner-table conversation was at a high intellectual level. The cruises lasted two weeks, and there were usually eight a year, following a varied itinerary, concentrating on classical sites in the Aegean, but also visiting sites in the eastern Mediterranean and on the coast of north Africa. The ships chartered by the company were small -- the first, the 'Ankara', took 300 passengers -- and this helped to create an intimate atmosphere. Various traditions soon developed: one guest lecturer would be designated chaplain, and read the 'Acts of the Apostles' in the theatre at Ephesus, and cast a wreath as the ship passed Gallipoli. Swan's wartime experience in the logistics of troop movements was the key to his success: everything was meticulously planned, and not only was he there to see the passengers off and welcome them back, but he would, if necessary, fly in during a cruise to deal with any crisis. Thus, for example, in August 1968, when the 'Ankara' was in the Black Sea at the time of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, Swan flew in and directed the cruise to continue as planned to Odessa. 
In 1961 Swan succeeded his father as managing director of W. K. and R. K. Swan Travel Ltd. He widened the scope of the cruises, including a 600 mile trip up the Nile, and introduced art treasures tours, including one to India and Ceylon. But in the 1960s other travel companies were developing the idea of cultural cruises, and competition became more intense. In 1968 Swan sold Swan Hellenic to Trust House Forte, remaining as managing director of Swan Hellenic, and also becoming managing director of THF Travel. When Forte decided to sell his travel companies Swan did not buy back Swan Hellenic, and in 1983 it was sold to P&O. His retirement party, Swan's last cruise, was organized by the archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie, and the president of the British Academy, Owen Chadwick, both former Swan Hellenic lecturers: the party was held on the Thames, and the guests included over 100 past and present lecturers. Swan became president of Swan Hellenic, and concerned himself with chartering new ships, 'Minerva' in 1996, and the much larger 'Minerva II' in 2003. Although many regulars disliked the new large ship, Swan and his wife loved it, and went on several cruises in it. 
Swan also helped to create the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) in 1950, and played an active part on its councils and committees. He was appointed OBE in 1996 for services to the travel industry. Having lived for many years at Rathmore, Horsell Vale, Woking, Surrey, he died on 21 August 2005 in St Peter's Hospital, Chertsey, Surrey, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife, Marion, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96063


Caulfield, Patrick Joseph (1936-2005), painter, was born on 29 January 1936 at 17 All Saints Road, Acton, London, the son of Patrick Caulfield, plate layer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Gill. During the Second World War the family lived in Bolton, Lancashire, where Caulfield's father worked for the De Havilland aircraft factory; in later years Caulfield took elocution lessons to lose the accent he had picked up there. The family moved back to Acton with the return of peace. 
At the age of fifteen Caulfield left Acton secondary modern school and worked drilling gas rings in a factory before moving to the advertising department of Crosse and Blackwell, where his duties included varnishing chocolates for display purposes. At seventeen he enlisted in the RAF, pre-empting call-up for national service, and, while stationed at RAF Northwood, in his free time began going to evening classes at Harrow School of Art. Having admitted in his interview with William Coldstream at the Slade School of Fine Art that he did not know the name of any important British artist, Caulfield won a place at Chelsea School of Art in 1956. It was at Chelsea that he met (Anna) Pauline Jacobs, a fellow student eight years his junior (later a fabric designer), and daughter of Christopher Gage Jacobs, architect. They eventually married at the Sacred Heart Church, Lambourn, Berkshire, on 22 June 1968, and had three sons. 
Caulfield had a particular aversion to Walter Sickert, and the dark and damp, seedy atmospheres of the paintings of the Camden Town Group. At Chelsea one of his tutors was Jack Smith, well known then as a 'kitchen sink' realist, a style that Caulfield may be thought to have simultaneously flooded with colour and stripped of emotion. He started out in the 1960s painting black-outlined objects against plain colour fields. The paint surface was 'dumb' and uninflected, like a poster or a page in a magazine. Almost from the beginning the pictures were pleasant, clean, and bright, although Caulfield's detractors saw them as bland, even blank, and devoid of conventional 'humanist' content. 'I didn't like misty brush-strokes and atmospheric painting', Caulfield later said. 'This was my reaction against the Englishness of English painting which so greatly valued a slightly understated, tentative figuration' (personal knowledge). 
A turning point was Caulfield's first trip abroad in 1960, shortly before taking his place at the Royal College of Art (1960-63). He was in Athens, 'en route' to Crete, and, having grown accustomed to the drabness of austerity Britain, was unprepared for the pre-war American Cadillacs and Fleetwoods cruising the ancient streets looking for fares. The combination of the chromed and finned petal-pink Cadillacs against the backdrop of the Acropolis -- the conjunction of the Old World with the New -- became one of the characteristic ideas of his work. While many of his contemporaries and near-contemporaries -- David Hockney, Derek Boshier, and Richard Smith among them -- emigrated to America both actually and in the temper and content of what they produced, Caulfield, always resistant to any kind of mid-Atlanticism and no convert to the notion of 'hip', triumphantly combined European manners and conceptually complex, intellectually challenging, cutting-edge art. 
Because they were students together at the Royal College of Art, Caulfield was often aligned with the 'third wave' of British pop artists, which included Hockney, R. B. Kitaj, Peter Phillips, and Allen Jones. Caulfield always resisted the association. As late as the Royal Academy's big survey exhibition of pop art in 1991, in which his work featured prominently, he defined pop art dismissively as 'social realism without the realism' ('The Times', 1 Oct 2005). But among the things Caulfield had in common with his contemporaries was a rejection of the gestural painting favoured by the 'abstract expressionists' and other abstract painters, and the personal agonizing associated with Frank Auerbach, Francis Bacon, and what would come to be known as the School of London. He wished to exclude himself as far as possible from his art, making it as apparently objective, dispassionate, and anonymous as the work of the twentieth-century artists whom he most admired, such as Fernand Leger and Juan Gris. His 'Portrait of Juan Gris', painted while he was still at the Royal College of Art, was one of the last of his paintings to include a human figure, in line with his belief that 'Picasso had pulled the plug on interpreting the human form' ('Daily Telegraph', 30 Sept 2005). 
Caulfield's main subject as a painter was the blissful, occasionally transcending melancholy of human absence and solitude. The bars and restaurants and other social spaces he painted were devoid of people. The 'exit' sign that is the focus of one of his later paintings, 'Happy Hour' (1996), is the direction in which his fellow drinkers have all already headed. The figure reflected in the single filled glass at the centre of the canvas is the painter pursuing his solitary practice. Indeed, it was characteristic of Caulfield that even a visit to the theatre could become a way of experiencing his separateness and enveloping aloneness, even (indeed especially) in the teeth of what, for others, was a convivial social occasion. 'The trouble with the theatre', he liked to say, 'is that it so interferes with one's evening' (private information, J. Hoyland). Nobody who went to the theatre with him, whether it was to see something in the West End or at Covent Garden (where he created a long talked-about set for Michael Corder's ballet 'Party Game', for the Royal Ballet in 1984, based on big, billboard-sized versions of the burgundy-shaded boudoir lights that cast their dim glow over the stalls) ever expected to see him back in his seat after the interval. The reverie going on in his head was the one he invariably wanted to stay with. 
Caulfield was an urbanite, with no taste for the pastoral in art or in life, or for the trappings of country living. He delighted in referring to the country as 'the mud museum' (personal knowledge). When he was invited to choose from works in the National Gallery for the 'Artist's Eye' series in 1986, he ruled out religious pictures ('I didn't want paintings of angels') and concentrated on paintings that reflected his interest in urban imagery. Half of his selection was drawn from the gallery's basement, the repository of paintings that were, on the whole, considered less remarkable than the ones in the grand rooms. The still lives of drink and food, and scenes set in music halls and taverns, tended to be equally modest. 'Lunch-time' (1985), the painting of his own that Caulfield chose to include, was typical of his sense of humour in that there is no food to be found in it. It shows the nicotined corner of a City pub decorated with a pot of geraniums and generic bric-a-brac, and crowded with deep, all-too-solid shadows. If, as Grey Gowrie once maintained, Francis Bacon was unique in the twentieth century 'in his ability to render the indoor, overfed, alcohol and tobacco-lined flesh of the average urban male' ('Mail on Sunday', 11 April 1993), then this surely is a portrait of his comfily recessed, button-backed set and lair. 
Caulfield was constantly alert to the everyday excitements of living in a major city. It is unlikely that he ever read Virginia Woolf ('seemed to deal with a middle-to-upper-class society that I didn't know anything about and it meant nothing to me', he once said of the mid-century English novel) (B. Robertson, 'Patrick Caulfield: prints', Waddington Gallery, 1981), but he shared with Woolf a love of urban experience, seen quite vividly in a novel like 'Mrs Dalloway', for example, in all its hallucinatory particulars. And yet for the forty years of his career Caulfield painted places that offered respite from the noise and sheer teeming variety of city life. These included restaurants, cafes, hotel foyers, and other public places, as well as bars. For several years his first call of the day after leaving his home in Belsize Park in north London was at his local pub, a few minutes after the bolts had been drawn in the morning. He liked to breathe in the opening-time cellar smells and observe the shapes the slanting light cut through the fixtures and fittings; he liked to stare into the distance and listen to London. Early paintings such as 'View of the Rooftops' (1965) and 'Lit Window' (1969), and later ones such as 'Trou Normand' (1997), 'Rust Never Sleeps' (1996), and 'Terrace' (2002), are proof that this was time well spent. The arrival of fellow customers he took as a sign that it was time for him to be on his way. 
Caulfield's place on the fault-line of European and American experience was occasionally alluded to directly in his work. From the 1980s on, he started squeezing acrylic paint straight out of the bottle to recreate the textures of anaglypta and lincrusta and other serviceable, lodging-house surfaces that were begining to disappear. Above and alongside them Caulfield would introduce passages of photorealist painting that conveyed the luridly patterned, wype-cleen Vymura wallpapers that had been imported from America and, for a time, enjoyed a fleeting popularity. A sly gap at floor level betrayed the fact that a regency or art deco column had been encased in formica or a cheap plastic veneer. He mixed in Victorian ceiling sconces and Tiffany-style lamps with affectless contemporary prints. A single Caulfield painting, the critic Marco Livingstone noted, could be an inventory of 'the full range of everything imaginable that painting can encompass -- 'trompe l'oeil' realism set against geometric abstraction, careful delineation abutting freely brushed areas, forceful sensations of three-dimensionality adjacent to surfaces of the most extreme flatness' (Livingstone, 158). 
Caulfield started off using decorator's gloss paint on hardboard because he liked the impersonal surface it produced. By the time of his major work, he had moved on to acrylic (and occasionally oil) on canvas. Where he never wavered was in his commitment to impure, industrial, non-art colour; colours that were more the colours of things than atmospheres; that referred, directly or indirectly, to the experience of modernity. The post-war period was the period of the digitalization of colour in art. This, the British artist David Batchelor argued, 'was an entirely new conception of colour... More urban colours than the colours of nature. Artificial colours, city colours, industrial colours. Colours that are consistent with the images, materials and forms of an urban, industrial art' (D. Batchelor, 'Chromophobia', 2000, 98, 106). It was Caulfield's unabashed fondness for impure colours and sharp finishes, his determination to deal head-on with modern kitsch and artificiality, that made him an artist's artist. It seems likely, however, that it was these same qualities that throughout his life denied him the interest of collectors, and so the material rewards, that so many of his contemporaries enjoyed. 
Caulfield was a Royal Academician (1993); a senior fellow of the Royal College of Art (1993); an honorary fellow of the London Institute (1996); winner of the Jerwood prize (in 1995, with Maggi Hambling); and nominee for the 1987 Turner prize. He was appointed CBE in 1996, and enjoyed major retrospectives at the Tate Gallery (1981), the Serpentine Gallery (1992), and the Hayward Gallery (1999). Unusually for a modern-minded visual artist, he was a voracious reader of books. He was introduced to the poems of Jules Laforgue as a student and in 1972 produced a series of twenty-two prints based on Laforgue's work. In the 1980s he started reading Raymond Carver's short stories, which also appealed to him for their refusal of floridity and long-windedness, and for the unflinching way they addressed the problem of drink. When Carver visited England before his own premature death, Caulfield, who was unwell at the time, made a heroic effort to cross London to see him read. 
Caulfield was found to be suffering from cancer of the mouth and tongue in November 1992, a condition that, with characteristic candour and courage, he didn't hesitate to attribute to his love of whisky. He never recovered his health after the operation that followed. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 17 November 1999, at Burgh House, Hampstead, he married his fellow artist Janet Nathan, the 61-year-old daughter of Harold Poster, industrialist. He died of squamous cell cancer on 29 September 2005 at his home, 19 Belsize Square, Belsize Park, London, and was survived by his wife and the three sons of his first marriage. 'The most inexplicable thing about Patrick was his work', Caulfield's lifelong friend the painter John Hoyland said at his funeral. 'It was and remains an enigma. Patrick was charming, graceful and seemingly impassive; he rarely showed his inner passions. He concealed everything that mattered to him from all but a few' (private information, J. Hoyland). He was nevertheless recognized as one of the great British painters of the late twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 96066


Mander, Noel Percy (1912-2005), organ builder and restorer, was born on 19 May 1912 at The Laurels, Crouch, near Wrotham, Kent, the son of Percy Mander, who worked in publishing, and his wife, Constance Emmie (Emily), 'nee' Pike. With the onset of the First World War the family moved to Brockley, south London, where Mander was introduced to the stimulus of music (he sang in the local choir at St Peter's, Brockley) and to organ-playing, his mother receiving lessons from Frederick Bridge, organist at Westminster Abbey. In 1925 the family moved to East Sheen and Mander attended Haberdashers' Aske's School, Hatcham, but found the classroom constricting and left as soon as he could. 
Mander's first employment was with the publishers A and C Black, where he delighted in the books; but office life was not to his taste and he quickly looked elsewhere, to find his life's devotion: organs, especially organs in Anglican churches. After a period working with a self-employed organ restorer (Ivor R. Davies), Mander set up his own business, N. P. Mander Ltd, in 1936 by renting a nave at Christ Church, Jamaica Street, Stepney, from where he carried out repair work, notably at St Peter's, Bethnal Green, and, because of closure or upgrading, also oversaw the relocation of several organs for use elsewhere. But the first bombing raid of the Second World War on London destroyed the church and his workshop, and in October 1940 he joined the Royal Artillery, serving in north Africa (where he repaired an organ in Algiers) and southern Italy. An injury and some later illness took him out of active service, but during recuperation at Naples he wrote to every clergyman in the London diocese to solicit work on his return to England. It was an initiative that in both employment opportunities and professional standing was to be richly rewarded. 
Indeed, when Mander returned to London (having been regularly consulted throughout his absence by officials of the diocese about the worth of organs in many war-damaged churches) he assisted the London Re-organisation Committee by identifying organs at churches across the diocese that merited storing, ready for later repair and reconditioning, and, it was hoped, later use in fresh venues. This commitment provided Mander with an unrivalled knowledge of needs and opportunities, and from a works that he established in 1946 in the former St Peter's School at Bethnal Green he was soon ruffling feathers at several firms of standing. In part this can be attributed to his establishing new methods of working for his staff -- by, for instance, providing tuners with vans which enabled them to move from job to job much more easily and efficiently than if restricted to public transport. There was also a certain resentment that Mander was unwilling to adhere to the 'rules of the trade'; although invited, he refused to join the Federation of Master Organbuilders. A good example of his stance arose in connection with a historic seventeenth-century organ at Adlington Hall in Cheshire. Defunct for a century and more, it had been inspected and judged as beyond repair, but for Mander, influenced in part by knowing that a maternal ancestor, George Pyke England (1765?-1815), was an organ builder, the task was a challenge not to be ducked. Although many of the pipes were crushed and soundboards split Mander was able to restore them, in 1958-9, and an instrument, for its size, rated as one of the earliest unaltered organs in Britain and one on which Handel played, was rescued for later generations. Meanwhile, on 2 June 1948, at St Peter's, Bethnal Green, he married Enid Watson ('b'. 1921), daughter of James Watson, education officer; they had three sons and two daughters. 
Mander restored many other historic instruments, including those at St Mary's, Rotherhithe; St John's, Upper Norwood; St Mary's, Finedon; and St Philip's, Salford, and undertook major reconstructions, as well as the creation of entirely new instruments. Especially notable was the work done at St Pancras, Euston Road; St Michael's, Croydon; St Lawrence Jewry; St Vedast, Foster Lane; Peterhouse, Cambridge; the Livery Hall of the Worshipful Company of Merchant Taylors; St Giles, Cripplegate; Corpus Christi, Cambridge; Sheffield Cathedral; St Paul's School; Canterbury Cathedral; and the Ulster Hall, Belfast. He also restored an instrument from the bombed Wren church, St Mary Aldermanbury, which was transported stone by stone from London to Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri, to form part of a memorial (dedicated in 1969) to Winston Churchill, his 'iron curtain' speech having been delivered there in 1946. 
If a single instrument had to be chosen to demonstrate the pinnacle of Mander's career, it was that at St Paul's Cathedral. He was approached in 1970 to rebuild (and provide a new case for) an 1881 organ known as the 'Willis-on-wheels', and his success ensured he was a natural candidate to modernize Henry Willis's 1872 chancel organ. The instrument, originally of fifty-two stops, had grown over the years to a 'ninety-sixer', and owing to somewhat piecemeal repairs and additions had lost its musical integrity. Much debate ensued, but Mander was able to begin work in 1972. The task was immensely complicated and the finished instrument sported 107 stops, grouped in a chancel section (great, north choir, pedal, swell, south choir, and solo organs), a dome section (fifth manual, and a pedal organ), and, on Mander's initiative, an entirely new west section incorporating a diapason chorus (to lead congregational singing) and three reed trumpets for ceremonial use. Work was completed in time for the queen's jubilee service of thanksgiving on 7 June 1977, Mander himself being recognized by his being made an MBE in 1979. 
Within a few years of this triumph Mander judged his professional contribution was complete, and in 1983 he passed the firm to his eldest son, John Pike Mander, and promptly retired to Hawthorns, The Street, Earl Soham, Woodbridge, Suffolk, a house purchased in the early 1960s. There, as well as maintaining friendships at Westminster College, Fulton, from whom he received an honorary doctorate in 1984, and pursuing much neglected reading (except about organs), he became sensitive to the needs of the rural community. He relished the opportunity to help elderly villagers with the mundane tasks of life, such as carrying coal buckets, or helping with shopping, much in the spirit of his wife who, as well as being the resident nurse at the family business, had extended her firm gaiety and compassion to children in Bethnal Green by taking them on educational trips across the city. 
In a volume of essays published to mark his achievements, 'Fanfare for an Organ-builder' (1996), Mander's principal contributions were described as his initiative in saving and restoring many historic British organs, his insistence on high-quality materials and workmanship, and his promotion (where possible) of tracker action (that is, a mechanical, rather than electronic or pneumatic, linkage between organ key and organ pipe). But his interests were wider than that summary suggests: he was active in the Council of Christians and Jews (in several churches he worked happily alongside the muralist Hans Feibusch); was master of the Worshipful Company of Parish Clerks (1970); a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1974); and a loyal supporter of many causes in the East End of London. He remained active into his nineties, and died on 18 September 2005 at his home in Earl Soham, of heart disease. He was survived by his wife, Enid, and their five children. He was accorded a full set of obituary notices in the national press, as well as a fulsome notice in the 'New York Times', which was the first to be published. 


@@@@@


doc= 96070


Warren, Eleanor Catherine Rutherford (1919-2005), cellist, was born at 65 Addison Road, Kensington, London, on 5 June 1919, the daughter of William Rutherford Warren, a retired army captain, and his wife, Elsa Julia, 'nee' Seligman. Her German-born mother was a serious amateur cellist, and at the age of five Warren became the youngest ever student at the London Cello School in Nottingham Place, where her contemporaries included Zara Nelsova and Olga Hegedus. She soon began to win prizes at competitions and festivals and in 1933 played for Gregor Piatigorsky, who gave her regular help and encouragement on his London visits. She gained further experience through work in London chamber orchestras and freelance orchestral engagements. Piatigorsky introduced her to the agent Harold Holt, who arranged her Wigmore Hall debut concert in 1935, just after her sixteenth birthday. She received excellent reviews and was soon appearing at Holt celebrity concerts with such artists as John McCormack, Richard Tauber, and Paul Robeson. Solo and concerto dates soon followed, in England, Holland, Belgium, and Canada. 
During the Second World War, like many other artists, Warren played for the armed services, factory workers, and hospitals in extremely arduous and sometimes dangerous conditions. Concerts were also given in the underground, where crowds congregated at night to escape the blitz. In 1942 Warren attended a concert at the Czech embassy, where she was struck by the musicianship of the Czech emigre (Jan) Walter Susskind (1913-1980), then pianist of the Czech Trio and already a noted conductor. He was the son of Bruno Susskind, accountant. They married on 22 December 1943 and her life took a new direction. The birth of their son, Peter, in 1944 meant a challenging mix of motherhood, practice, and engagements. 
Walter Susskind became chief conductor of the Scottish Orchestra, from 1946 to 1952, and life was divided between Glasgow and London. After the war it was at last possible to travel abroad, and Warren studied with Pierre Fournier in Paris and Switzerland and, in 1949, with Pablo Casals in Prades. Susskind left Britain in 1953 for the Victorian Symphony Orchestra in Melbourne. Their marriage ended at this time and Warren plunged headlong into the London scene, working with the English Chamber Orchestra, the London Mozart Players, the Zorian Quartet, and the English Baroque Ensemble, as well as undertaking regular film sessions with Malcolm Arnold, Richard Rodney Bennett, and Jacques Loussier. 
A back injury forced Warren to abandon the cello, and in 1964 her second career began when she joined the BBC as a music assistant, soon broadcasting and devising programmes and series (including 'This Week's Composer'), for which she proved to have immense flair. In the 1970s she devised a new series of live recitals from the concert hall in Broadcasting House, featuring artists of the younger generation. Graham Johnson discovered, long after the fact, that she had secured his first BBC broadcasts. 
After wartime bomb damage the church of St John's, Smith Square, had been rebuilt in 1969 as a concert hall. Warren realized the potential of the building and created the highly successful BBC Monday lunchtime concerts, which mixed some of the great performers and ensembles with emerging artists, from whom she had an uncanny knack of picking winners. It was, for example, Warren's suggestion that led to the creation of the Pauk-Kirshbaum-Frankl Piano Trio. She was promoted to chief producer in 1971 and became closely involved with the Leeds piano competition. Four years later she was appointed head of music programmes, BBC Radio. Sir Nicholas Kenyon, one of her staff at that time, later fondly recalled her interest in the most junior members, nurturing and guiding their progress with care and affection. It was in some respects a fulfilling role for her, but she frequently felt frustrated by BBC bureaucracy. 
In 1977 a tempting offer from John Manduell led Warren to accept the post of head of strings at the newly created Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester. Her innate interest in young performers made the role perfect for her, and she quickly placed chamber music at the heart of the department. She established a tradition of recitals and master classes from the greatest musicians, including Pierre Fournier, the Vermeer Quartet, Julian Bream, and John Williams. As ever, her principal concern was for the students, and she inevitably became involved in the BBC young musician of the year competition when it began in 1978 at the college. 
In 1984 Warren decided to return to London and was asked by John Hosier, principal of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, to establish a system for embedding chamber music in the school. The following year Michael Gough Matthews, director of the Royal College of Music, asked her to become chamber music director. She continued in both posts for the next ten years. In 1911 she was appointed MBE. After her retirement in 1996 she remained constantly in demand as adjudicator, adviser, and mentor, and was delighted when Ralph Kirshbaum, one of the many cellists whom she befriended, created the Manchester International Cello Festival at the Royal Northern College of Music. 
As cellist, broadcaster, and teacher, Eleanor Warren successfully fulfilled three careers in her long life and touched the lives of countless musicians, who appreciated her passion for music, her razor-sharp mind, and her wicked sense of humour. She died at the BUPA Hospital, Gartree Road, Oadby, Leicestershire, on 25 August 2005, of cancer, and was survived by her son. 


@@@@@


doc= 96076


Loveday, Emily Mary (b. 1799), Roman Catholic convert, was born on 28 December 1799 and baptized at St Paul's, Hammersmith, Middlesex, on 24 February 1800, the eldest daughter of Douglas Charles Loveday (1786/7-1843) and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Sharp (1775/6-1861). Her father was admitted at the Middle Temple in 1812 and was called to the bar in 1830. In 1816, following the restoration of the French monarchy, he bought property in Auteuil, a fashionable town on the outskirts of Paris. A protestant Englishman, he was granted full civil rights as a Frenchman by royal decree on 3 December 1817. 
In July 1819 Emily Loveday, then aged nineteen, and her sister Matilda Susan, then eighteen, were placed by their father, who was returning to England, in a Parisian boarding school run by Ernestine Reboul. Douglas also entrusted the school with his niece Mary, the eldest daughter of his brother, the governor of Benares and a major-general in the British army. Two years later, in October 1821, he returned to France to find that his daughters had converted to Catholicism, and on 3 November he removed them from the school; they were followed by his niece after her announcement that she too had entered the Catholic communion. He succeeded in persuading his younger daughter to renounce her new faith, but Emily Loveday resisted his pressure and on 10 November she fled to the Couvent des Enfans Trouves (foundlings), from where she moved to the home of a Mr Jerningham, a British Catholic resident in Paris. Her father discovered her there early in December 1821 and persuaded her to return to his house in Paris. On 14 December, fearing that her father was determined to take her back to England, she fled and sought refuge in the convent of the Sisters of Notre Dame in the rue de Sevres in Paris, where the gendarmes were called to preserve the peace when her father tried to force his way in. 
These events created a brief sensation in both France and England in December 1821, when Douglas Loveday, who had appealed to the French police and to the English ambassador to intervene on his behalf, presented a petition to the French chamber of peers and deputies, dated 28 December 1821 (Emily Loveday's twenty-second birthday), protesting against her conversion and accusing the headmistress of the crime of 'rapt de seduction', or kidnapping by seduction, a charge normally reserved for the circumstances of an amorous elopement. This would usually have been a matter for the law courts, since it centred on a legal custody dispute and the civil rights of a foreign subject in France, but Emily Loveday had reached an age of majority (twenty-one), as defined by France's civil code. 
The Loveday affair caused consternation in England, where both pervasive anti-Catholicism and calls for Catholic emancipation were highly contested. Reprinting Douglas Loveday's petition, 'The Times' described it as providing evidence of 'the seduction to Popery of an English gentleman's daughters and niece, by arts of the most horrible kind' (9 Jan 1822). The allegation that the girls were terrified into conversion by the thirteenth-century legend of the Jew and the miraculous host prompted the radical publisher William Hone to publish, together with Douglas Loveday's petition, a translation of the version of the legend originally drawn up for Louis XIV, to demonstrate the 'pious frauds through which the crafty devotees at Paris seduced the female branches of Mr Loveday's family' under the 'priest-ridden' Bourbon regime ('The Miraculous Host', 16-17). Emily Loveday's reply to her father's petition, published in January 1822, in which she insisted that her conversion was inspired by the piety of her school companions and her own reading of the theologian Bossuet, was dismissed as the work of another hand, and 'an insult to a parent's feelings by a hired scribbler, at the instigation of a fanatical daughter' ('The Times', 23 Jan 1822). 
In France, where twelve thousand copies of Douglas Loveday's petition were printed in pamphlet form in January 1822, the affair pitted ultra-royalists intent on restoring the authority of the Catholic church and a newly established restoration monarchy against an anti-clerical liberal opposition. While both the right and the left upheld the principle of paternal authority, which was enshrined in Napoleonic law, they found themselves contradicting their most revered principles. Ultra-royalists ironically defended Emily Loveday's individual rights and relinquished the principle when the interests of the Catholic church were at stake. Anti-clerical liberals, on the other hand, abandoned the claim to individual rights and embraced Douglas Loveday's cause. 
Ultimately the chamber of deputies dismissed Loveday's claims, as did their counterparts in the chamber of peers, despite protests from liberals like Benjamin Constant. Douglas Loveday's request for the custody of his daughter was denied, and Emily Loveday was allowed to stay in the convent of the Sisters of Notre Dame in Paris. 
The commentary on the affair in both England and France revealed the power of national stereotyping that fuelled religious and political debates on both sides of the channel. It also called into question the rights of women in France in the domain of religious expression and conscience following the promulgation of the Napoleonic civil code. While Emily Loveday disappeared from the public record after 1822, her father became the centre of considerable attention in Paris once again, sixteen years later (1838), when the celebrated musician Nicolo Paganini threatened to sue him for his failure to pay for the piano lessons that Paganini had given to another of Douglas Loveday's daughters, Clara, whose talents some compared to Chopin and Liszt. 


@@@@@


doc= 96087


Gearing, Harold William George (1912-2005), statistician and computer manager, was born on 6 February 1912 at 3 Felix Road, Ealing, London, the fourth child of Charles William Edward Gearing, watchmaker, and his wife, Florence Eleanor, 'nee' Foster. He won a scholarship to Ealing grammar school, but left at the age of sixteen to start work as an audit clerk in an accountancy firm. He continued his studies in evening classes at Regent Street Polytechnic, and completed his chartered secretary examinations in 1931. He won an evening student exhibition to the London School of Economics in 1931 and graduated BSc (Econ) in 1935, having won the Farr prize for statistics. After graduation he continued his part-time studies at the London School of Economics towards a master's degree, which was awarded in 1939. His first employment after graduation was as a statistician with the Co-operative Building Society, but in 1939 he joined the Metal Box Company in Acton, London, as a financial and cost accountant. He remained with Metal Box all his working life. 
The manufacture of tin cans, one of Metal Box's primary products, was a protected industry during the Second World War, so Gearing was not called up, but instead joined the ARP as a night watchman. In 1941 he moved to Metal Box's Perry Wood offices in Worcester to manage their machine-accounting division, which was using automated accounting systems, in particular punched-card systems from Powers-Samas. During a short period at the Metal Box factory in Aintree, Liverpool, he met his future wife, Florence Grace (1908-1990), daughter of Herbert John Parsons, branch manager. They married in Ealing on 17 January 1942, and had a son and a daughter. 
After the war Gearing moved back to London as Metal Box's head of budgets and financial accounts. His academic interests remained, and in 1951 he was a founder member of the Institute of Statistics. In July 1954 he attended a course at Northampton Polytechnic, in Northampton Square, London, on 'Computers with cost accounting and management control'. These courses, which were organized by a group of individuals who would shortly go on to found the London Computer Group, were the first to look at commercial applications for the new electronic computers that would replace the electro-mechanical systems already in use. In 1956 he was asked to head a new division at Metal Box to investigate applications of the new technology and the potential benefits to the company. After much research, including the preparation of test programs on Northampton Polytechnic's Pegasus computer and a visit to IBM in the USA in 1956, an intention to order a Pegasus II was placed with Ferranti in 1961. In fact Metal Box subsequently took delivery in 1964 of a Ferranti Orion computer, which was installed in the Worcester office. This was one of the first computers to be used by a commercial company in the UK. Although Gearing used the new Ferranti language, NEBULA, provided by the manufacturer, he went on to extend the system using his own machine-code programmes. He reported on this increasingly sophisticated system at a conference organized by the International Federation for Information Processing in 1968, and presented a flexible report generator that provided Metal Box's management with accurate and timely financial reports, and which had the ability to respond quickly to changes in their requirements. 
Gearing was a founder member of the British Computer Society (BCS). On 20 May 1957 representatives of the London Computer Group (in which he was now active) and the National Research and Development Corporation met at Metal Box's London offices and agreed to form the BCS. The BCS was incorporated in October 1957 and granted charitable status in 1966. Throughout the early years Gearing served on the BCS council and was joint founder editor with Eric Mutch of the 'Computer Journal' and the 'Computer Bulletin'. He was made an honorary fellow of the society in 1969. By the time of his death the society had more than 60,000 members. 
Gearing retired from Metal Box in 1973, but continued to provide advice and expertise to a number of small companies, including one run by his son. He remained an active member of the BCS, and in 1991 became the first archivist of the Computer Conservation Society ('a specialist group' within the BCS) and put in much dedicated work collecting important documentation and artefacts from early British computing that were at risk of being lost. He remained a member of the committee of the Computer Conservation Society until his death. 
Gearing was highly regarded by those who worked with him, and he provided support and encouragement both to new statisticians in the form of a series of lectures at Wolsey Hall starting in 1951, and also to the programmers and technicians who supported the systems at Metal Box. During one period he made the machine over to the manufacturer each night to test new programmes and was particularly concerned to see the programmers were properly looked after and well fed. In his spare time his interests included photography and music. Having lived latterly at 14 Croft Way, Steeple Morden, near Royston, Hertfordshire, he died on 4 September 2005 at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, from pneumonia and bowel cancer. A service of remembrance was held at St Peter and St Paul's Church, Steeple Morden, on 16 September 2005. He was survived by his son and daughter, his wife, Florence, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96091


Curran, Agnes (1920-2005), prison governor, was born on 12 February 1920 at 25 Lyle Street, Greenock, Renfrewshire, the eldest of nine children of Mark Brennan, shoemaker, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Hendry. Her first career was as a registered mental nurse and she rose to be deputy matron of Ravenscraig Hospital. She later studied at the Royal College, Edinburgh, for a nursing administrative certificate. She was married first to John Reynolds, a mechanical engineer, but the marriage ended in divorce. On 3 October 1952 she married, second, Edward Curran (died 2005), a fellow registered mental nurse. She had three children, Mark, John, and Angela. She also cared for some of her siblings while bringing up her own family, after her father died at the early age of forty-six. 
After twenty-two years in nursing Curran changed the direction of her career. She began to work for the prison service, having previously undertaken voluntary work in prisons for a number of years. In 1969 she was appointed assistant governor at Gateside prison for women and remained there until its closure in 1975, when she was transferred as deputy governor to Cornton Vale, a new prison for women. She nevertheless retained an interest in nursing and was chairwoman of the Greenock branch of the Royal College of Nursing. 
In 1979 Curran became the first female governor of a male prison when she was appointed governor of Dungavel prison, near Strathaven. Her achievement was marked that year at a women of the year luncheon. In a television interview in 1982 she said that she was 'taken aback' by her appointment ('Women of Today'). She had thought that she might be appointed deputy governor but was surprised that the government had been courageous enough to appoint a woman governor to a male prison. She believed that there were differences between managing men's and women's prisons. The relationships between women prisoners and between prisoners and staff were well developed and nuanced. For example, women were not afraid to tell her that she had been missed if she had been away from the prison or to tell her if they liked the dress she was wearing. When she arrived at Dungavel she found the all-male environment hostile and men (both staff and prisoners) adopting either 'hunter' (aggressive or seductive) or 'filial' (protective) attitudes towards her. In her time at Dungavel she managed to change this culture into one more closely resembling 'normality' (ibid.). 
Curran's time as governor was a success and she was appointed MBE in 1984. She explained her success by saying 'I don't see them as murderers, rapists and robbers. I see them as men and I expect them to behave like men.' She claimed that she was annoyed when she had to punish a man -- 'annoyed that he could be so stupid' -- and acknowledged that she ran the institution by courtesy of the prisoners, recognizing that if they chose to be 'nasty and aggressive', the tables could turn very quickly. She challenged the public to think about what prisons were expected to do with men serving long sentences, arguing that it was not enough 'to give him a bed and three square meals and see that the workshops conform to the 'Factory Acts'' ('The Herald', 11 Oct 2005). She introduced an innovative regime at the medium security prison, where long-term prisoners were preparing for release. Up to 20 of the 100 prisoners worked outside the prison every day, undertaking unpaid work in the community. At a time when the attention of Scottish penal reformers was on the high-profile Barlinnie special unit, Agnes Curran was quietly developing a similar regime for equally serious offenders as they progressed through the prison system from high to medium security. She also encouraged contact between prisoners and members of the public by inviting the latter into the prison twice a year for sales of prisoners' work in aid of charities. 
Curran set up In-work Ltd, a programme that offered work to those with mental health problems. She retained an interest in mental health after she retired and was always actively involved with various local charities. She was a member of the Scottish Association for Mental Health, chairwoman of the Inverclyde association, and a member of the community care forum. She was also a district organizer for the Women's Royal Voluntary Service in Inverclyde. A gifted communicator, she was in great demand as a speaker, invariably on the themes of caring for less fortunate people and not dismissing them because they were in prison or had a disability. 
Curran's achievement as the first female governor of a male prison became embedded in the history of women's achievements. When asked by a television interviewer in 1982 what other career she might have chosen if she had her life to live again, she replied 'I always wanted to be a surgeon. I knew I had a sensitivity to people but I came to realise that my sensitivity was perhaps not so geared to the flesh as to the mind' ('Women of Today'). Her husband Edward died in September 2005. She herself died a fortnight later, on 29 September, at the Inverclyde Royal Hospital, Greenock. The causes of death were given as bronchopneumonia, immobility, general frailty, and depression secondary to her husband's death. She was survived by all three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96094


Seldon, Arthur (1916-2005), economist, was born on 29 May 1916 in London's East End, the son of Pinchas Margolis, merchant, and his wife, Masha. He was orphaned at the age of two when his parents, Russian Jewish immigrants, both died in the outbreak of Spanish flu in 1918. He was adopted by a cobbler and his wife, Mark and Eva Slabadain (later Anglicized to Seldon), also Russian Jewish immigrants. He was educated at Dempsey Street elementary school, Stepney, and Raines Foundation Grammar School. In 1934 he won a scholarship to the London School of Economics to read economics. Following a brief flirtation with the Fabian side of the school, he came under the influence of the classical liberal economists Lionel Robbins and F. A. Hayek. Small, slightly built, and cursed with a stammer, the young Seldon threw himself into his studies. He graduated with a first in 1937 and then became a research assistant to the economist Arnold Plant. Under the influence of these mentors he was converted to the merits of competitive markets, the rule of law, secure property rights, personal independence, and limited government. These values guided him for the rest of his life. He joined with others to found a student Liberal society. Following war service with the army in Africa and Italy, between 1942 and 1945, he became a tutor for the University of London Commerce Degree Bureau (1946-56), editor of 'Store' (1946-9), and an economic adviser to the brewing industry. On 23 February 1948 he married the widowed (Audrey) Marjorie Perrott (1919-2014), journalist, and daughter of Lieutenant Wilford Willett, an officer in the London rifle brigade. They had three sons. 
In January 1957 Seldon first met Ralph Harris, then director and sole employee of the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA). Antony Fisher, a farmer, had established the IEA in 1955 from the profits of his Buxted Chicken Company. It was founded as 'a research and educational trust'; later it would be described as a think-tank. Seldon co-wrote the first IEA pamphlet, 'Pensions and a Free Society' (1957), arguing the case for personal private pensions. The two men soon began a remarkable thirty-year collaboration. Harris was the public face of the IEA, a skilful networker and fund-raiser. Seldon, retiring but blessed with a fluent writing style, great energy, and tenacity, was soon made editorial director, a post he held until 1981, when he became consultant director until 1988. The two men challenged the post-1948 collectivist Keynesian assumptions about economic policy shared by leading politicians in both the Labour and Conservative parties. Seldon sought out authors, suggesting topics and badgering them to develop early drafts and to push inchoate ideas to a bold conclusion. He was fond of urging them to ignore warnings that their conclusions might be thought administratively impracticable or 'politically impossible'. His watchword was 'think the unthinkable'. 
The IEA emphasized the importance of the pricing mechanism as a means of allocating resources, discovering alternative ways of providing services, and making comparisons between different goods and producers. It therefore opposed the state provision of 'free' public services, notably in health and education. It also promoted ideas from abroad (including a public choice school based in the University of Virginia, which argued that interest groups often shaped government policy and that interventions by vote-seeking politicians were often against the public interest) and the monetarist views of Milton Friedman and Hayek; the last two, both Nobel laureates, were IEA authors. It organized lectures and seminars and provided a congenial base for Friedman and Hayek's visits to the UK. Seldon's talent, apart from finding and marrying authors and topics, was in getting people to write in an accessible and jargon-free style and in using IEA media contacts to promote their ideas. 
In contrast to some think-tanks, the IEA was more concerned to address the public than politicians. Seldon and Harris believed it was more effective to work indirectly, shaping the climate of opinion, which in turn would influence politicians. Although they provided encouragement for Margaret Thatcher's brand of Conservatism, Seldon in particular was concerned that the IEA should keep its distance from any political party. The IEA's publications successfully urged the case for privatization, the contracting out of services, deregulation, greater autonomy for schools (though it failed with school vouchers), trade-union reforms, an independent university, and student loans. The policy suggestions were designed to empower people, particularly the less well-off; why should the power to choose be confined to the wealthy? Producers and bureaucrats dominated the welfare state. Greater competition and consumer choice, and charging for services, were means of making public services more responsive to the public. The open market could be even more democratic than elections. The cash register operated as a referendum all day and every day. 
Seldon was a prolific writer, although his skills were perhaps best demonstrated as a probing and sympathetic editor. Several of his twenty-eight books and over 200 articles were co-written or edited. The books, pamphlets, and collections of essays restated his commitment to the free society, the benefits of free markets and personal choice, and the negative effects of government intervention. They included 'Corrigible Capitalism, Incorrigible Socialism' (1980), 'Wither the Welfare State' (1981), 'Socialism Explained' (1983), 'The New Right Enlightenment' (1985), and 'The Riddle of the Voucher' (1986). In retirement he also wrote 'Capitalism' (1990), 'The Dilemma of Democracy' (1998), and 'The Retreat of the State' (1998). Colin Robinson, his successor as the IEA's editor, edited his collected works in seven volumes which were published by the Liberty Fund in 2004-5. Seldon was made a founder president of the IEA in 1990. He was also a founder trustee of the Social Affairs Unit, a vice-president of the Mont Pelerin Society, and an honorary fellow of the London School of Economics. He was appointed CBE in 1983. He died of cancer of the prostate at his home, Thatched Cottage, Godden Green, Sevenoaks, Kent, on 11 October 2005. His wife and their three sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96095


Manton, Sir Edwin Alfred Grenville (1909-2005), insurance underwriter, art collector, and philanthropist, was born on 22 January 1909 at Burrows Road, Earls Colne, Essex, the eldest of three children of John Horace Manton, bank clerk, later bank manager, and his wife, Emily Clara, 'nee' Denton. His father was descended from a miller in Grantham, Lincolnshire, two of whose brothers were the celebrated gunsmiths John and Joseph Manton. At the time of Manton's birth his parents lived in Stoke Newington, but a few months later the family moved to Westcliff-on-Sea, at the mouth of the Thames estuary, a location that gave him a lifelong affection for expanses of water and sky. Eight years later, while his father was temporarily serving in the army in Egypt, his uncle Edwin, alarmed by the number of German air raids on the Thames, moved the family including his younger sister, Phyllis, and brother, Paul, to the safety of Shaftesbury, Dorset. On his father's demobilization the family moved again to Hampstead, London, but Manton was by then enrolled at Shaftesbury grammar school and stayed on as a boarder. At school he excelled at languages, and being a tall and athletic figure played for the school in both the cricket and football teams. 
In 1926 Manton won a scholarship to Cambridge University, but decided in favour of adventure and financial security and followed his uncle's introduction to B. W. Noble, the Paris agent of the Caledonian Insurance Company. Years later, in his late eighties, Manton would continue to astonish young executives with his command of idiomatic French. By 1933 he had been spotted by George Moskowski and the legendary Cornelius Vander Starr and had been invited to join the small American International Underwriters Corporation, then employing thirteen staff, as a casualty underwriter. In rapid succession he gained an American wife, Florence Vivian (Gretchen) Brewer (1911-2003), whom he married on 20 January 1936, a daughter, Diana Harborough ('b'. 1938), and a swift series of promotions within the company. He became a vice-president in 1938 and served as president (1942-69), chairman (1969-75), and finally as a senior adviser to the parent group, American International Group Inc. (AIG), until his death. During his most influential years the company grew to a force of 50,000 people and Manton became a leading figure in the American insurance business. He was devoted to the 'firm', as he called it, and to its employees, frequently declining invitations to society events so that he could attend company retirement parties or the annual company picnic. He continued to work well into his nineties and was still walking to the office every day until shortly before his death. His tall, spare frame made him an impressive figure, even at an advanced age, but his acute mind and deep curiosity coupled with a twinkling smile won the affection of generations of his colleagues. 
Although Manton had moved to New York in 1933, he retained his British citizenship until his death and throughout his life he retained a strong affection for the country and in particular the county of his birth. In 1939 he had returned to London and volunteered for service but was rejected on medical grounds, having suffered from Stokes-Adams disease. He was unable to return for a further eight years, but during the war he developed an interest in the paintings of John Constable and in 1949 he acquired at auction in New York his first 'Constable', 'View on the Stour'. Over the next twenty years he slowly assembled one of the best collections of early nineteenth-century British paintings and drawings in private hands, buying in New York and on regular visits to London, but facing stiff competition from the dominant buyer in the market at that time, Paul Mellon. Shortly after the 1976 bicentenary Constable exhibition in London, Manton was introduced to Leslie Parris, deputy keeper of the British collection of the Tate Gallery. During the 1970s Constable scholars had begun to distinguish between the works of John Constable, his son Lionel, and followers, and when Parris informed Manton that many of his works, including his first purchase, were not by the master himself Manton characteristically accepted that this had been a small price to pay for the pleasure and education that his collection had brought him, and he renamed his 'mistakes' as 'Constabiles'. 
In 1987 his growing friendship with Parris encouraged Manton to make a generous contribution to an appeal for funds to acquire Constable's 'The Opening of Waterloo Bridge' for the Tate Gallery. Shortly afterwards he made a gift of AIG shares that established the American Fund for the Tate Gallery with an endowment of $6.5 million in 1988. In creating a fund that would respond to the Tate's wish to strengthen its collection of American art, he was giving expression both to his affection for his birthplace and to his enthusiasm for the culture and values of his adopted country. By the time of his death the fund had grown to nearly $30 million and with his encouragement had broadened its remit to acquire major works by three generations of American artists and had laid the ground for a serious collection of Latin American art in London. Manton's further gifts to the Tate in 1992 and 1997 were the cornerstones for the centenary development which opened on Millbank in 2001 with a new entrance, named the Manton Entrance in his honour. Taken together, Manton's benefactions were by far the most generous gift in the history of the Tate. Manton (known by his friends in England as Jim and in America as Jimmy) was knighted for his services to art and to the Tate Gallery in the new year's honours of 1994. 
Following Manton's death in New York on 1 October 2005 the majority of his considerable wealth, estimated by the press as $260 million in 2004, passed to the Manton Foundation, which he and Gretchen had established in 1991 in order to support institutions and causes in the church, medicine, and the arts that were the preoccupations of the Mantons in their lifetime. The Manton collection of early nineteenth-century British art was given by his family to the Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute, Williamstown, Massachusetts, in June 2007. 


@@@@@


doc= 96098


Simmons, John Simon Gabriel (1915-2005), librarian and Slavonic scholar, was born on 8 July 1915 at 2 Duchess Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the second of three children and elder son of Bernard Rintel Simmons (1868-1956), manufacturing jeweller, and his wife, Johanna, 'nee' Selig (1886-1940), the latter originally from Frankfurt am Main. He was educated in Birmingham, at West House School and at King Edward's School. At the age of seventeen he became a student-librarian at Birmingham University Library before beginning, in 1934, his BA in Russian and Spanish, awarded in 1937. Almost one-to-one tuition from the professor of Russian, Sergey Konovalov, made him fluent in the language, and his unofficial role as Konovalov's research assistant honed his research skills. After graduation, while working as an assistant librarian, he began a doctoral dissertation on the history of printing in Russia, cut short by the outbreak of the Second World War. 
During the war Simmons served in the Royal Warwickshire regiment as an infantry regimental officer and as a staff officer in England and, from 1944, in France, Belgium, and Germany on the staff of Field Marshal Montgomery's twenty-first army group. In 1945 he was responsible for organizing the retrieval, cataloguing, and evacuation of the regimental war diaries of the German high command. He was mentioned in dispatches for 'gallant and distinguished services in North West Europe', and made a military OBE in October 1945. On 14 November 1944 he had married Fanny Elizabeth Lily Craven, otherwise Krebsman (died 1999), a private secretary and personal assistant seven years his senior, and daughter of Joseph Krebsman, master hairdresser. 
After demobilization Simmons returned to Birmingham University Library until 1949, when he moved to Oxford to take up the post of librarian-lecturer in charge of Slavonic books, created specially for him by Konovalov (by then professor of Russian at Oxford). His duties -- building up the retrospective Slavonic (principally Russian) collections of the Taylorian and Bodleian libraries and giving thirty-six lectures a year -- and his status as a member of the faculty of modern languages answerable principally to Konovalov, who gave him a relatively free rein, suited ideally his erudite, but deeply practical, inventive, and sometimes unorthodox approach. In 1953, when relations with the USSR were constrained by rigid bureaucracy and protocol, he made a private visit to Moscow, and, turning up unannounced at the Lenin State Library, armed with lists of Oxford University Press publications and Oxford desiderata, instigated a pioneering book exchange. Exchanges with other libraries in Moscow and Leningrad ensued, fed by his hundreds of lists of desiderata, drawn mainly from footnotes in scholarly publications. He considered, with justification, that the resulting comprehensive research collections, combined with the remarkable academic teachers recruited by Konovalov, Maurice Bowra, and Isaiah Berlin, led to Oxford's pre-eminence as a centre for Slavonic studies. His acquisitions also fed into seminars designed to enlighten 'bibliographically innocent' graduate students, on the basis of which he established in 1966 the Bodleian Library's unique Slavonic reading room, and published 'Russian Bibliography, Libraries and Archives' (1973). 
Although his first decade at Oxford was devoted principally to library activities, Simmons assisted with the editing of 'Oxford Slavonic Papers' (becoming general editor in 1968), played an active role in Oxford bibliophile circles, and continued his own research. He compiled for 'Oxford Slavonic Papers' a bibliography of British theses in Slavonic and east European studies, updated quinquennially. Over the years he published some 500 articles, reviews, translations, and collaborative works (listed in his 'Autobibliography' of 1975, with supplements in 1985 and 1995). They reflected the wide scope of his interests -- bibliography, Russian printing history, the dissemination of information about the book in Eastern Europe, paper and watermark history, heraldry and genealogy, and Anglo-Russian relations -- and exemplified his 'conviction that the mere intermediary, informant, and bibliographical recorder has an important part to play in the process whereby learning advances' ('Autobibliography', 1975, viii). His 1974 Sandars lectures in Cambridge, 'Russian printing to 1917: a view from the West', drew on his uncompleted doctoral dissertation. A lifelong mission was the registration and description of all extant copies of early printed Cyrillic books. His groundwork, exhortations, and encouragement finally bore fruit in the publication of the 'Union Catalogue of Cyrillic Books Printed before 1701 in British and Irish Collections' (2000) and international union catalogues by his Russian colleagues. 
For many years Simmons acted as an information conduit through the iron curtain, exchanging letters, offprints, and books with scholars in the Soviet Union, many of whom became friends. He drew attention to their scholarship on the pages of professional journals, and celebrated their achievements in his self-published 'memorials' (obituaries with lists of publications). In 1985 he formalized this international brotherhood, founding the characteristically serio-comic 4Cs Club, presenting to scholars whom he deemed to share his attitude club ties bearing the interlocking 4Cs emblem, representing his four 'categoricals' -- Conserve, Consider, Contribute, Co-operate. A world authority on the study of paper, he was general secretary of the Paper Publications Society from 1965 to 1994, and translated and edited the Russian classic watermark albums, culminating in 'Likhachev's Watermarks' (1994). His professional achievements were recognized with the award of a civilian OBE in 1981 and the honorary degree of DLitt from Birmingham University in 1987. 
All Souls College, Oxford, was an important part of Simmons's life, initially through his friendships with its warden, John Sparrow, and with Isaiah Berlin. As early as 1961 he was accorded the rare privilege of being made a member of the common room, and he was elected a fellow in 1965. Between 1970 and 1982 he was senior research fellow and Codrington librarian. After his retirement in 1982 and appointment as deputy archivist, he lectured and published on the history of the college, collaborating with Howard Colvin on a series of Chichele lectures which led to 'All Souls: an Oxford College and its Buildings' (1989). 
On retirement, with characteristic lack of sentimentality and regard for the useful, Simmons was at pains to ensure that his considerable working library was distributed among suitable libraries and individuals. After the death of his beloved wife, Fanny, in 1999, the Codrington Library became a second home. He died at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford on 22 September 2005 after a heart attack. He left his body to science and stipulated that there should be no funeral or memorial service. A celebration of his life took place in the Codrington Library on 28 January 2006. He left part of his estate (valued at around $880,000) to All Souls College on condition that it move its sundial, designed by Sir Christopher Wren, from the wall of the Codrington Library to the south front of the college chapel (where it had originally been placed); the college declined the bequest. 


@@@@@


doc= 96107


King, Lady Isabella Lettice (1772-1845), philanthropist, was born in September 1772 at the family's town house, 15-16 Henrietta Street, Dublin, the third daughter and sixth of the seven children of Edward King, first earl of Kingston (1726-1797), before his elevation to the peerage MP for Boyle and subsequently co. Sligo, and his wife, Jane (1737-1784), illegitimate daughter but heir of Thomas Caulfeild of Donamon Castle, co. Roscommon, and Peggy Jordan. From a protestant (Church of Ireland) family, Isabella was twelve years old when her mother died and although her father has been portrayed by family biographers as an ambitious man who greatly improved the wealth and status of the family by his dogmatic persistence in acquiring an earldom and by securing good marriages for his eldest son, Robert King, Viscount Kingsborough, and his eldest daughter, Jane, Isabella saw only his 'high notions of integrity and honour' (Lady Isabella King to James King, 1813, Flintshire RO, CD/GW/B/1054) and his 'generous and disinterested' (ibid.) disposition. 
At Kingston Lodge, the family home on the Rockingham estate near Boyle, co. Roscommon, Isabella's early life is likely to have included a regular social round of balls and visits both to Dublin and to Mitchelstown, the home of her brother Robert, eighteen years her senior, and his wife, Caroline ('nee' FitzGerald). At Mitchelstown it is possible that she met Mary Wollstonecraft, the radical thinker and campaigner for women's educational equality, who was employed by the Kingsboroughs as tutor to their three eldest daughters. She left Kingston Lodge after her father's death in 1797. 
By 1803, aged thirty, she was living at 7 Great Bedford Street, Bath, a fashionable area behind the Royal Crescent, and socializing with the elite of the city. At an evening party held at her home in January 1805 a discussion arose about what could best be done for the benefit of Bath. This led to her collaboration with leading male philanthropic figures in the city to establish the Bath Society for the Suppression of Vagrants, Street Beggars and Impostors, Relief of Occasional Distress, and Encouragement of Industry. Later renamed the Monmouth Street Society, it began as an innovative experiment to rid the city's streets of vagrants and beggars, a problem that had plagued Bath throughout the eighteenth century. The society also aimed to provide assistance to the needy through discriminate charitable enterprise. Isabella's integral role demonstrated her propensity and desire to address, with others, contemporary social problems in pioneering ways and led to the emergence of similar charities in other cities throughout the country. In 1805 she also established a ladies' committee connected to the society and was the leading figure in the foundation of the House of Protection, a female-led charity established to educate and shelter orphan girls in the city. Acting as both patroness and governess, she participated on a practical and an administrative level. 
Isabella's most ambitious and personal project and one that would occupy her thoughts and time for much of the remainder of her life was the Ladies Association. Its inception can be dated back as far as 1813, when in a letter to her sister she wrote of a 'plan' still 'vague and undefined' (Lady Isabella King to Lady Jane King, 1813, Doncaster Archives, DD/DC/H7/7/13) that aimed to provide a conventual home for gentlewomen who were, by the death of their parents, left with no fortune or income. These unacknowledged, impoverished women, Isabella believed, were often forced into prostitution in order to survive. As a single woman she was impassioned to act, not just for the benefit of society itself but from a personal desire to 'promote the improvement and happiness' of her own sex (Lady Isabella King to Hon. Miss Wodehouse, 1817, Doncaster Archives, DD/DC/H7/7/15). Both radical and innovative, her idea emanated from reading Sarah Scott's novel 'Millenium Hall', which described the establishment of a female community, one of many ideas, both fictional and real, proposed but never realized since the beginning of the seventeenth century. Although Isabella's vision embraced the foundation of institutions throughout England and Ireland, her doubts as to their practicalities and her insecurities surrounding her own ability to organize such an undertaking shaped her decision to form a primary, experimental establishment, which was opened at Bailbrook House near Bath in June 1816. 
Isabella's wealth and her single status enabled her to devote her time to this endeavour, and her aristocratic connections provided access to the powerful and influential members of society whom she believed were essential to the success of her project. From the outset the Ladies Association commanded an impressive list of supporters. The society was honoured by the sanction of Queen Charlotte, who visited Isabella at Bailbrook House in 1817. The visiting party was reported to be 'highly gratified with their visit to this association of ladies' ('Bath Chronicle', 3 Dec 1817), which the queen called 'a blessed asylum' (ibid.). Patrons and patronesses of the institution included eight high-ranking noblewomen and four bishops, and a prominent evangelical presence reflected Lady Isabella's own religious views. Hannah More, a regular visitor to Bath, supported the undertaking; guardians of the society included William Wilberforce and Thomas Babington; and in September 1829 the institution was noticed in the evangelical journal the 'Christian Observer'. Information regarding the establishment was widespread and reached other female philanthropists, including Catherine Cappe and Elizabeth Fry. Nevertheless Isabella faced harsh criticism both nationally and locally. Reacting to the unfamiliar nature of the institution, critics perceived it as anything from a 'mere almshouse' (notes by Lady Isabella King, Doncaster Archives, DD/DC/H7/7/3) to a 'transient resting place for young ladies speculating on their advancement in life' (ibid.), and Isabella stoically bore discourteous treatment from many. 
The sale of Bailbrook House in 1821 enforced a move to Cornwallis House in Clifton, Bristol. Although initially the institution flourished there, Isabella felt alienated from her friends and the support network in Bath. By 1833 dwindling numbers of residents saw the society in decline. Isabella attributed its failure to a lack of internal cohesion among residents and a want of support from friends and others of her class. With her health, strength, and spirits failing, and feeling ever more oppressed by the demanding responsibilities of the institution that had almost exclusively occupied her attention for seventeen years, she made the decision to withdraw, but admitted that it was the place in which she had hoped to end her days. 
With no successor willing to step forward, Cornwallis House was sold in 1837; consistent with Isabella's wishes the funds were devoted to religious and charitable endeavours in Bristol. But she refused to give up hope that the institution she had called 'this child of my own brain' (Lady Isabella King to Lady Wilton, 1813, Doncaster Archives, DD/DC/H7/7/15) would be re-established. She wrote to the poet Robert Southey, a zealous supporter of hers to whom the idea for the later Anglican sisterhoods has been attributed, imparting the wisdom of her seventeen years' experience in the hope that with this information in his hands some other lady might take up the challenge. 
Lady Isabella King's philanthropic endeavours have remained substantially unrecognized. There is no doubt that her strength of character, her belief in her cause, and her preparedness to challenge conventional ideals regarding women's role in the philanthropic arena establish her as an extraordinary woman. At the time it seems that her reputation only extended locally and as far as her friends, who acknowledged her 'indefatiguable zeal' and her 'devotion of herself to purposes of the most important kind' (Lady Carysfort to Lady Isabella King, draft, 1816, Doncaster Archives, DD/DC/H7/7/15). The 'Bath Guide' between 1813 and 1820 proclaimed her 'the truly benevolent Lady Isabella King'. 
She died a spinster, aged seventy-two, on 20 April 1845 at the Royal Rockferry Hotel, Rockferry, in the parish of Bebbington, near Birkenhead, Cheshire, and was buried five days later at St Peter's Church, Rockferry. 


@@@@@


doc= 96113


Pitt, Sir Harry Raymond (1914-2005), mathematician and university administrator, was born on 3 June 1914 at 212 Oldbury Road, West Bromwich, Staffordshire, the only son of Harry Pitt, iron turner, and his wife, (Florence) Harriet, 'nee' Draper. His father, who had left school at thirteen, later became an engineer in the motor industry; his ancestors were small farmers and craftsmen. Pitt received an excellent education at King Edward VI School, Stourbridge, and went as a state scholar to Peterhouse, Cambridge (1932-5), where he took first-class honours in parts one and two of the mathematics tripos, and a distinction in part three. His undergraduate tutor was J. C. Burkill. He went on to do research at Peterhouse under the supervision of G. H. Hardy, becoming a bye-fellow (1936-9) and spending the year 1937-8 as a Choate memorial fellow at Harvard University. 
At Hardy's suggestion Pitt made a deep study of the then new general Tauberian theory of the pre-eminent American mathematician Norbert Wiener. Tauberian theorems (which stem from the work of the Slovak mathematician Alfred Tauber, published in 1897) deal with the passage from the average, or some other smoothed version, of a function or sequence, back to the function or sequence itself. Taking an average typically improves mathematical properties, and so the reverse operation typically makes them worse, but this may not happen under suitable auxiliary conditions, known as Tauberian conditions. Such results had been studied in special cases by Hardy and his collaborator J. E. Littlewood -- the term Tauberian theorem is due to Hardy and Littlewood -- but it was Wiener's work, and powerful new methods based on the Fourier transform, that changed the whole area by making it possible to work generally. Pitt wrote two papers in collaboration with Wiener during his year at Harvard; he wrote eight papers altogether in 1938, including much of his best work. 
Pitt was a lecturer at Aberdeen University from 1939 to 1942, before being seconded to the Air Ministry to work with RAF Coastal Command on the then new area of operational research. His war work concerned the most efficient use of RAF resources, including fuel. On 5 April 1940 he married (Clemency) Catherine Jacoby (died 2004), a 21-year-old secretary, and daughter of Henry Charles Edward Jacoby, engineer. They had four sons. 
Pitt was appointed professor of mathematics at Queen's University, Belfast, in 1945, at the age of thirty-one. He moved in 1950 to be professor of pure mathematics at Nottingham University. During this time he continued his work on Tauberian theory, and other areas of mathematical analysis such as Fourier analysis. He worked on the connection between Tauberian theory and number theory, in particular the then newly discovered elementary proof of the prime number theorem (which says that the number of primes up to a large number x is approximately x/log x, where log x is the natural logarithm of x). He summarized his work on Tauberian theory in his book 'Tauberian Theorems' (1958). He also developed new interests, in probability theory, statistics, and ergodic theory. At Nottingham he supervised the doctorate of Clive Granger, later a Nobel laureate in econometrics. He also performed a number of senior administrative duties, including those of deputy vice-chancellor (1959-62). 
In 1964 Pitt made a career switch from academic mathematics to academic administration, and became vice-chancellor of Reading University, a post he held until his retirement in 1978. During this time Reading University expanded from a small institution in the centre of the town to a much larger one on the parkland campus of Whiteknights. Pitt's time as vice-chancellor included the student disturbances of the 1960s. His strategy for dealing with these was one of masterly inactivity, and forethought: at one time he and his registrar were locked in by protesting students, but escaped by using a spare key. 
As a mathematician Pitt is best remembered for a result of his from 1938, Pitt's form of Wiener's Tauberian theorem (still the basis of textbook accounts), and as the author of the first book on Tauberian theorems. As a vice-chancellor he was notable for his leadership of Reading University for fourteen years during a period of expansion, and for his consensual style of leadership. He was a kind and a religious man, and was described as a 'communicator extraordinaire'. He combined great intelligence with personal humility; it was said of him that 'his power was only equalled by his modesty' (private information). He was widely honoured. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1957, and received several honorary doctorates. He was knighted on retirement as vice-chancellor of Reading in 1978. He died on 8 October 2005 at St Mary's Nursing Home, Ednaston, near Brailsford, Derbyshire, of vascular dementia and atrial fibrillation. He was survived by his four sons, his wife, Catherine, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96115


Haynes, John Norman (1934-2005), footballer and businessman, was born on 17 October 1934 at the Middlesex Hospital Annexe, St Pancras, London, the son of Edward Robert Haynes, printer's packer, later Post Office clerical assistant, of 3 Grafton Terrace, St Pancras, and his wife, Rose Clara, 'nee' Newton, Post Office telephonist. Brought up in Edmonton, north London, he was an outstanding schoolboy football player who quickly brought himself to the attention of a wider audience when he starred for England schoolboys against Scotland at Wembley on 15 April 1950. The match was shown on live television, a rare event in those days, and England won 8-2. His progress was noted by Tottenham Hotspur and Arsenal, the latter of which he supported. He visited Arsenal with his father but decided that to go to a club with so many good players might hinder his progress. He later wrote that Highbury seemed more like the stock exchange than a football club. A fellow north London schoolboy had already signed for Fulham and that may have influenced Haynes to do the same. Fulham were a mid-table second division club, but Haynes would be a key factor in elevating them into one of the most fashionable in the capital; their followers included many of the west London entertainment set. His first two seasons were largely spent on loan to the non-league clubs Feltham, Wimbledon, and Woodford Town, before he made his debut in the football league against Southampton on Boxing day 1952. Between then and January 1970 he made a further 593 league appearances, scoring 146 league goals, 9 more in 44 FA cup games, and 2 in 20 football league cup matches. 
Though right-footed, Haynes had a fine left foot and was a regular goalscorer, but it was his passing that marked him out as exceptional. He probably gave the right pass at the right moment more often than any of his contemporaries, mostly from a central midfield position. He was a master of all the distances but it was the cross-field pass from left to right, setting the wing-forward free, or the long through ball to a forward roaming clear of the centre of the opposition's defence, that were his specialities. He was a very hard worker, both on and off the field, and a supporter of coaching and a more thoughtful approach to the playing of the game, attitudes not always welcomed by his contemporaries. He was also very self-critical and could easily become frustrated not only by his own failings but by those of his colleagues. 
Two defeats by Hungary and a disappointing performance in the 1954 world cup persuaded progressives at the FA to set up an under-twenty-three team to aid the process of developing a more successful national side. The England manager, Walter Winterbottom, was given more time to prepare the England team for international fixtures, and results improved. Haynes became a key player, appearing in thirteen of the sixteen unbeaten matches between November 1955 and November 1957. The death of eight Manchester United players in the Munich air crash in February 1958 disrupted the progress of the England team and thereafter they were exciting and frustrating in turn, and somewhat unlucky in the world cups of 1958 and 1962. By then Haynes had been the captain in twenty-two successive internationals and no one could have been more upset by this failure of potential. 
If success at international level proved elusive Haynes was a major beneficiary of the agreement between the Football League and the Professional Footballers' Association to remove the maximum wage in 1961. The chairman of Fulham, the comedian Tommy Trinder, had occasionally joked that Haynes was worth one hundred pounds a week, and after the abolition of the maximum wage Haynes became the first English player to earn that sum, although it was only half of what he would have received if Fulham had allowed him to move to Milan. He was probably one of the first professional footballers to employ an agent and he had begun to take advantage of other commercial opportunities, replacing Denis Compton as the centrepiece of the Brylcreem advertising campaign. 
Haynes's football career was severely undermined by a car accident on Blackpool promenade in 1962. He broke bones in both feet and badly injured a knee, causing him to miss most of the 1962-3 season. He was probably never quite the same player again although he regained sufficient fitness to turn out for Fulham a further 236 times. Tottenham Hotspur were apparently keen to sign him in 1963 as a replacement for John White, but Fulham refused to allow him to leave. He was not chosen for England after 1962 and it is tempting to conclude that had he not suffered serious injury he would have been the captain of the England team in the 1966 world cup, when he would still have been only thirty-one. 
Haynes's later years at Fulham coincided with a decline in performance before falling crowds. He retired in 1970 and moved to South Africa, playing for Durban City and other clubs, and twice being a member of a championship-winning side for the only times in his career. He later ran a bookmaking business. He was married three times: first, on 28 December 1972, to Elizabeth Ellen (Libby) Tucker, an American actress, and later businesswoman, daughter of Allen Marshall Tucker, real estate broker; second, in South Africa in 1976, to Marjorie (Marge) Green; and third (on 8 October 2004, after a partnership lasting almost two decades) to Avril Cassidy, otherwise MacKinley, 'nee' Carnie ('b'. 1939), daughter of Alexander Carnie, accountant. In 1985 he returned to Britain and lived with Avril in Edinburgh, where they had a dry-cleaning and office cleaning business. On 17 October 2005 he was driving along Dalry Road in Edinburgh when he suffered a brain haemorrhage. The car veered into incoming traffic and hit a light goods vehicle. He was kept on a ventilator at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary for some thirty hours, until it was switched off, on 18 October. His wife, Avril, injured in the accident, survived him. A month after his death it was announced that Fulham's Stevenage Road stand would be renamed the Johnny Haynes stand. In October 2008 a statue of Haynes was unveiled in front of the Craven Cottage gates. 


@@@@@


doc= 96116


Johnston, Sir John Baines (1918-2005), civil servant and diplomatist, was born on 13 May 1918 at 8 The Ghyll, Ellenborough, Maryport, Cumberland, the son of Andrew Smith Johnston, Baptist clergyman, and his wife, Nora Agnes, 'nee' Baines, schoolteacher, and daughter of a blacksmith. When he was two the family moved to Derby; later they moved to Banbury in Oxfordshire. They were poor and family life revolved around the church. The First World War made his father a pacifist and he brought up his son in the same way. Johnston was educated at Banbury grammar school, where he was captain of cricket and rugby, and then, thanks to two scholarships, at Queen's College, Oxford, where he read modern history. When the Second World War began he was accepted as a conscientious objector and, after graduating with a second-class degree in 1940, was posted to the Pioneer Corps, a non-combatant unit, in Devon. There his views about the war changed and later in 1940 he enlisted. He joined the infantry and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Oxford and Buckinghamshire light infantry. He took part in the D-day landings and was then attached, as adjutant, to the Gordon Highlanders during the British advance into Holland. He was demobilized in 1946 with the rank of major. 
In 1947 Johnston joined the Colonial Office. He was in Ghana in 1950-51 as assistant secretary to the West African Council and was then, until 1956, principal private secretary to Oliver Lyttelton and Alan Lennox-Boyd, two Conservative secretaries of state for the colonies. He was assistant secretary and head of the Far Eastern department at the Colonial Office when Malaya became independent in 1957. Transferred to the Commonwealth Relations Office the same year, from 1959 to 1961 he was in South Africa as deputy high commissioner, a formative period from which he emerged with a strong distaste for apartheid. He was there in February 1960 when the prime minister, Harold Macmillan, addressed both houses of the South African parliament at Cape Town during his African tour. No one assumed Macmillan's 'wind of change' speech would change South African minds and South Africa left the Commonwealth a year later. But it was still hailed as a success, because it was a statement of British policy about accommodating African nationalism within a Commonwealth context made in the heartland of apartheid. A number of individuals were involved in drafting the speech, among them Johnston, who was consulted by Sir John Maud, the high commissioner. After South Africa Johnston was high commissioner to Sierra Leone, 1961-3, during which time he was appointed CMG, in 1962. 
In 1963 Johnston became high commissioner to the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. When he arrived in Salisbury, the capital of Southern Rhodesia and seat of the federal government, the federation was on the point of breaking up. Britain's efforts to reconcile the conflicting aspirations of the minority white populations in Northern and Southern Rhodesia with those of the black majorities in all three territories ended in failure. The Central African Federation, as it was known, was dissolved in December 1963. Nyasaland and Northern Rhodesia were set on course for separate independence which they achieved in July and October 1964 respectively, as Malawi and Zambia. This left Southern Rhodesia, internally self-governing under white rule since 1923, to which territory Johnston was now high commissioner alone. One of Johnston's earliest observations was that the Europeans in Rhodesia lived 'in a state of mental insulation from the outside world only surpassed by South Africa'. Persuaded there were no 'good solutions' to the Rhodesian problem, only 'difficulties and dangers', the high commissioner was clear there could be no long-term future for the Europeans in Southern Rhodesia 'through a policy of white supremacy and African suppression' (Hyam and Louis, 2.525). 
In April 1964 the ruling Rhodesian Front in Rhodesia split. Winston Field was ousted as leader and replaced by Ian Smith. Johnston was one of the first to realize that Smith was a prisoner of the right wing of the party, which had engineered Field's downfall. In June 1964 he described Smith as dour and reserved, giving the impression of 'stubbornness of will and purpose, not entirely offset by his boyish appearance'. He believed Smith led a government with which there was no prospect of a negotiated settlement, so determined was it to maintain white supremacy and 'so impregnably armoured in self-righteousness' (Murphy, 2.382). But it was not in Johnston's view irrevocably set on a course of rebellion. However bleak the prospects, he argued that Britain had little option but to 'sit out the present situation', in the hope ultimately that Smith's government would alienate its own followers. 
Two resounding by-election victories for the Rhodesian Front in October 1964 strengthened Smith's position. Considering Smith's intentions, Johnston now thought he was set on either 'independence at all costs', or exploiting his poll success to acquire additional leverage to find an acceptable way out because he still feared the consequences of an illegal declaration. The first hypothesis appeared to Johnston nearer the truth. 'We shall know very soon', was his verdict (Murphy, 2.400). He also wondered if pressure could be applied through Rhodesia's neighbours, South Africa and colonial Portugal, but officials in London thought this would make matters worse. Prime Minister Harold Wilson's personal intervention during a visit to Rhodesia in November 1965 failed to resolve the impasse. Smith made his unilateral declaration of independence on 11 November 1965. Johnston was withdrawn the next day. 
In 1966 Johnston was knighted KCMG and for the next two years he was in London as assistant under-secretary of state at the Commonwealth Office. His areas of responsibility covered the Indian subcontinent and Nigeria at the time of the civil war. When the Commonwealth Office merged with the Foreign Office in October 1968 he was appointed deputy under-secretary of state in charge of the Far Eastern group of departments. On 17 May 1969 he married Elizabeth Mary Crace (died 2004), a 37-year-old teacher, daughter of John Foster Crace, and niece of Lord Redcliffe-Maud, who as Sir John Maud had been high commissioner in South Africa when Johnston was his deputy. They had one son, John ('b'. 1970). Johnston's diplomatic career ended with two senior Commonwealth postings, as high commissioner to Malaysia (1971-4), and to Canada (1974-8). He was made KCVO in 1972 and GCMG in 1978. 
Johnston was professional to a fault. His dispatches, especially from Salisbury, were eloquent and perceptive. Unassuming in character, he was instantly recognizable by a trademark rose in his buttonhole. The empire during his career became the modern Commonwealth. Influenced by his experiences in South Africa and Rhodesia, he believed that the Commonwealth played an invaluable role in promoting international co-operation and fostering interracial harmony. The creation of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in 1968 was an uncomfortable period for those, like Johnston, who came from the Commonwealth side of the new department. They feared the merger might become a takeover by the Foreign Office. Their concerns were not without foundation. 
In retirement Johnston settled in Oxford. He was a governor of the BBC (1978-85), chairman of the ARELS (Association of Recognised English Language Schools) Examinations Trust (1982-94), and a member of the Disasters Emergency Committee (1985-92). His wife died in December 2004 after a long illness during which Johnston nursed her. He died of lung cancer at 5 Victoria Road, Oxford, on 16 October 2005. His son survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96119


Mobbs, Sir (Gerald) Nigel (1937-2005), property developer and businessman, was born on 22 September 1937 at 38 Wake Green Road, Moseley, Birmingham, the only son of Lieutenant-Colonel Gerald Aubrey Mobbs (1911-1976), property developer, and his wife, Elizabeth, younger daughter of Frank Lanchester, of Kenilworth, Warwickshire. He was born into considerable wealth, the family fortunes being based on the 600 acre Slough trading estate to the west of London, which had been founded by his grandfather Sir (Arthur) Noel Mobbs (1880-1959), a Northamptonshire businessman who had amassed his first fortune in the motor trade. His father, Gerald Mobbs, served with the airborne division during the Second World War, and was wounded and taken prisoner at Arnhem in 1944. (He became managing director of Slough Estates in 1956 and chairman in 1971.) Mobbs's great-uncle, Edgar Mobbs, was a legendary rugby player, killed at Passchendaele in 1917. 
Mobbs was educated at Marlborough College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he failed to obtain a degree in his chosen subject, engineering. He attributed this failure to engineering being 'extremely boring', and to being himself no more than 'academically average' ('The Times', 29 Sept 1990). On leaving college he was given a job at Hillier Parker, the Mayfair estate agents, to learn the ropes of the property business, and after nine months was brought into the family firm, in 1960. That was the year his grandfather died, and he inherited his grandfather's secretary, an experience he later described as 'very frightening' (ibid.). He was always destined to reach the top, despite starting, as he admitted, 'with no qualifications whatsoever' (ibid.). In 1963 he was made a director, and in 1971 he became managing director. Five years later, on the death of his father, he became both chief executive and chairman, and continued in both roles for the next twenty years, and as chairman until shortly before his death. 
The Mobbs family combined hard business with a country lifestyle, and a year after starting at Slough Estates, on 14 September 1961, Mobbs married (Pamela) Jane Marguerite Berry ('b'. 1937), the second of four daughters of (Geoffrey) Lionel Berry, second Viscount Kemsley, the newspaper baron whose family at that time owned both the 'Daily Telegraph' and the 'Sunday Times'. The two had met at a hunt. They had a son, Christopher, and twin daughters, Virginia and Penelope. 
The origins of the Mobbs family's fortune lay in an area of some 600 acres of land, originally farmland, which had been used by the War Office as a depot for repairing and ultimately dumping government vehicles used during the First World War. In 1920 it was put up for sale and was bought for $7 million by a group of motor trade entrepreneurs headed by Sir Percival Perry (who later set up Ford's UK operations) and Mobbs's grandfather Noel, who initially invested just $20,000 in the venture. The former government vehicles were gradually repaired and sold off, releasing land and funds to begin developing the huge buildings on the estate for letting to various manufacturers. By 1960 the Slough estate was one of Britain's first and largest industrial parks, with some 240 manufacturers represented. It even boasted its own power station. 
Mobbs was said to show more of the entrepreneurial spirit of his grandfather than his father, and when he took control of the company in 1976 he pursued a policy of direct and active management of the Slough estate alongside the acquisition of other property in order to diversify the group's assets outside the Slough area, which had by then become known as the popular 'M4 corridor'. By the time he stepped down as chief executive, Slough Estates' properties were worth an estimated $1.8 billion. He was a man of robust opinions and convictions, straightforward and decisive, who did not take kindly to being either crossed or criticized. He managed down to matters of detail that in most other companies of the size of Slough Estates would have been delegated. Few, however, questioned his undoubted 'feel' for business, and he became sought after to fill non-executive roles in other major boardrooms. He had a thirty-year association with Barclays Bank, of which he became a director in 1979 and served as chairman for two years. He was chairman of Charterhouse Banking Group from 1977 to 1983 and deputy chairman of the retailer Kingfisher (owner of Woolworths, Superdrug, and B&Q) from 1990 to 1995, in the latter year playing the leading role in demoting the then chairman Geoff Mulcahy, who had fallen out with his chief executive, and (after an interim period in which he himself served as chairman) bringing in a replacement. He was chairman of Bovis Homes for nine years until the year of his death. At various times he was a director of Cookson, the electronics group, and of the Howard de Walden estate, one of London's largest commercial and residential landowners. 
A convinced free-marketeer, Mobbs served Margaret Thatcher's government as an adviser on property affairs from 1980 to 1986. He was chairman of the libertarian pressure group Aims of Industry from 1985 until 2002, and a member of the advisory panel on deregulation at the Department of Trade and Industry from 1988 to 1994. He was variously chairman of the Conservative Party (1993-6), vice-president of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce (1976-90), and lord lieutenant of Buckinghamshire (1997-2005). He was chairman of the Historic Royal Palaces from 2003. He was knighted in 1986. 
Despite all his public commitments, Mobbs maintained a determined grip on the management and affairs of Slough Estates, and this led to a split in 1996 with Roger Carey, who had been Slough's managing director for eighteen years, and who resigned in protest at Mobbs's controlling manner. Under pressure from investors Mobbs reluctantly agreed to split the roles of chairman and chief executive, but continued as executive chairman until he was forced, through ill health, to retire in August 2005. 
Although Mobbs's skills as a businessman were widely sought after in industry and the City, and he accepted boardroom posts at several other substantial businesses, he was said to be happiest when at what he described as his 'modest' Buckinghamshire estate near Princes Risborough, surrounded by his family, horses, dogs, and sheep. He was an imposing man, more than 6 feet tall, an accomplished fox-hunter, skier, and golfer. He was once compared by a City journalist to 'a slightly lumbering but affectionate and appealing Great Dane' ('The Times', 29 Sept 1990). He died of cancer of the kidney at his home, Widmer Lodge, Pink Road, Parslows Hillock, Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire, on 21 October 2005. A memorial service held on 16 February 2006 at the chapel of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, of which he was a commissioner, was attended by numerous representatives of government, the royal family, and business. He was survived by his wife, Pamela, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96127


Morgan, Philip (1930-2005), United Reformed minister and promoter of Christian unity, was born on 22 June 1930 at 64 Curzon Street, Maryport, Cumbria, the son of David Lewis Morgan, a Welsh minister of the Churches of Christ, and his wife, Pamela, 'nee' Hutchinson. The Churches of Christ (Disciples of Christ in the USA) was a group of congregational churches with a strong emphasis on the baptism of believers and the weekly celebration of the eucharist. Thomas Campbell, one of the founding fathers of the denomination, voiced his deep conviction in 1809 that 'the Church of God is essentially, intentionally and constitutionally one' (T. Campbell, 'Declaration and Address of the Christian Association of Washington', 1809, 16), a conviction Morgan was to make richly his own. 
Morgan went for training as a Churches of Christ minister to Overdale College, part of the Selly Oak Colleges federation, and received the degree of BA in theology from Birmingham University. In 1952 he was sent to a post in the south Wales valleys and he was ordained there in 1953, serving a group of churches around Merthyr Tudful (which included Aberfan, whose sufferings in 1966 were to move him deeply). On 17 July 1954 he married Greta Mary Hanson, a 25-year-old grammar-school teacher, and daughter of Frederick Oliver Hanson, drapery shop superintendent. They had two children, Ghislaine and Jonathan. Morgan often later spoke of his five years in the valleys, along with subsequent ministries in Avery Hill, south-east London (1958-62) and twin churches in Saffron Lane and South Wigston, Leicester (1962-6), as very happy and rewarding. 
In 1967 Morgan was appointed assistant general secretary of the Association of the Churches of Christ, and a year later became its general secretary. This post he held in Birmingham, combining his national responsibilities until 1980 with ministry in a joint church experiment with a parish of the Church of England in Balsall Heath, a somewhat run-down area not far from the city centre. His travelling ministry took him throughout the British Isles. Already in 1958 he had been chosen to represent the Churches of Christ on the assembly of the British Council of Churches (BCC), so he was a long-respected participant in its life when he became chairman of its division of ecumenical affairs in 1978 and then general secretary in 1980, serving until 1990. 
Following the definition of unity in Christ reached by the New Delhi assembly of the World Council of Churches in 1961, a senior pastor in the Churches of Christ, James Gray, had published an article challenging his fellow members to take active steps to unite with at least one other denomination. That stirred Morgan to discuss with his friends and colleagues a far-reaching plan to work in this direction, strongly encouraged both by the 1964 British Faith and Order Conference's call to the churches to achieve unity by Easter day 1980, and then by the beginnings of discussions between the Presbyterian and Congregational churches for the unity they eventually achieved in the United Reformed church (URC) in 1972. His plan was built around a pattern of frequent consultation with every local Church of Christ, two rounds of which he carried through with his colleagues in his early years as general secretary. Resistance in a number of local churches was encouraged by the promise of money and manpower from like-minded circles in the USA, so eventually he arranged for the dissolution of the existing national association in order to allow those churches supporting union with the URC to establish a new national body and pursue that goal without in any way forcing the others. The unity of the majority of Churches of Christ and the URC was thus celebrated in 1981. In 1983 Morgan was elected to serve as the year-long moderator of that whole church, which he combined admirably with his BCC post. 
Meanwhile the invitation of the URC's founding assembly to the other churches to consider closer unity had led to the establishment of the Churches' Unity Commission, involving (unlike the BCC) the Roman Catholic church. This published a set of 'ten propositions' on 'visible unity' in 1976. These, with the Catholic and Baptist churches accepting only observer status, then led to the Churches' Council for Covenanting, which produced its proposals for a far-reaching covenant in mid-1980. Morgan had shared in drawing up the appendix on 'Joint decision making for common obedience under the covenant', and under his chairmanship the board of the BCC division of ecumenical affairs presented to the assembly just before Easter 1980 a paper, 'Unity: why not yet', surveying the movements towards unity among the British and Irish churches. Meanwhile the BCC had been in careful discussion with a group appointed by the Roman Catholic bishops' conference for England and Wales in the light not only of the Second Vatican Council's text on Christian unity but still more of the recommendation of their national pastoral congress in May 1980 that the bishops reconsider the question of the entry of the Catholic church into the BCC. This was the single most important goal that Morgan set for himself and the council in the 1980s. It was joyously achieved by means of the dissolution of the former BCC and the founding of the new Council of Churches for Britain and Ireland (CCBI), with the Catholic church and a number of black-led churches as incoming members, in a memorable service spanning both the Anglican and Catholic cathedrals in Liverpool in September 1990. Morgan's patience, determination, pastoral insistence on full consultation at every stage, and above all prayer-filled passion to be, as he saw it, pursuing God's path of unity for the whole of Christ's church, were crucial throughout these ten years. 
There were plenty of other matters to fill Morgan's agenda during his time as general secretary of the BCC. He eagerly led a group in considering the possibility of a British and Irish conference on church and society, whose inconclusive debates none the less provoked Lesslie Newbigin to write his worldwide best-selling 'The Other Side of 1984' (1983). Morgan admirably followed through the courage of his predecessor, Harry Morton, in engaging in secret conversations with certain men of violence in Northern Ireland in the hope of finding an agreed path to peace. He also followed Morton in interpreting the policy of the World Council of Churches to support those struggling against the violence of the apartheid regime in South Africa. He encouraged those who had collaborated with their colleagues in the conservative evangelical world to initiate a 'nationwide initiative in evangelism', and was founding chairman of the Centre for Black and White Christian Partnership at the Selly Oak Colleges from 1978 onward. Most startlingly, he led a small group from the BCC executive to the Falkland Islands after the war there, on the way to the World Council of Churches central committee in Buenos Aires. 
Morgan was delighted, on leaving the BCC as it transmuted into the Council of Churches for Britain and Ireland, to take up a local pastorate at St Andrew's United Reformed church in Frognal, Hampstead, north London, for five years up to retirement. He enjoyed a happy family life with his wife, Greta, who also became a minister in the URC. He died of aspiration pneumonia following a stroke, at Barnet General Hospital, London, on 17 October 2005, and was survived by Greta and their two children. A thanksgiving service was held on 2 November in St Andrew's, Frognal. 


@@@@@


doc= 96129


Gill, (George) Michael (1923-2005), television producer, was born on 10 December 1923 at a maternity home, The Firs, Weeke Hill, Winchester, Hampshire, the only child of (George) Arnold Gill, a bank cashier, and later manager with the Midland Bank, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Taylor. His mother's family were Yorkshire mill owners, and his father's mill workers. He was educated at Wootton Court preparatory school, Kent, and St Edmund's School, Canterbury. His childhood was blighted by tuberculosis, which forced him to spend most of five years on his back, and by bullying: he described his school years as 'the most unhappy of my life' ('Growing into War', 46). Early ambitions to become a doctor were set aside when the outbreak of the Second World War prompted him to join the intelligence branch of the RAF. Having seen service in Holland and, at the end of the war, Germany, he returned to England, decided against a career in medicine, and went to Edinburgh University to read philosophy and psychology. There he met Yvonne Janette Gilan, an actress, and daughter of Louis Gabriel Gilan, dentist. They married at the (Episcopalian) church of St John the Evangelist, Edinburgh, on 21 January 1952, when she was twenty. They had two sons, Adrian and Nicholas. 
In 1954, after a couple of years as a journalist on 'The Scotsman', Gill joined BBC radio, switching in 1958 to television to work in schools programmes, then on 'Monitor', the arts series edited by Huw Wheldon that trained a remarkable band of programme makers including Ken Russell, John Schlesinger, Melvyn Bragg, and Jonathan Miller. Gill brought in the writer, critic, and sociologist John Berger (who later made the seminal art series 'Ways of Seeing') as a presenter, and for five years the two of them rode around on Berger's motorcycle, arguing the toss and using the dialogue between writer and presenter to construct their programmes. 
In 1967, with BBC2 about to launch colour television, the network controller David Attenborough decided that snooker and art were prime candidates to exploit the new technology, thinking that led to 'Pot Black' (1969-86) and 'Civilisation' (1969). Attenborough asked Sir Kenneth Clark, the former director of the National Gallery and the author of several art books, to present the arts series, and Gill was chosen to produce and direct it. Although Gill began by distrusting Clark, the patrician aesthete, finding him 'glittering, self possessed, armed with precise certainties' ('The Independent'), the very antithesis of the attitudes adopted by Gill and Berger, in the end Gill and Clark achieved a remarkably successful working relationship, and Gill came to have a high regard for Clark's erudition and quiet passion. They ended up firm friends. It was not unusual for Gill to discover in this way qualities in an individual that clashed with his political or philosophical attitudes. Though he described himself as 'a doctrinaire socialist' ('The Times') and distrusted the very idea of an aristocracy, he developed a great admiration for the queen when he produced 'Royal Heritage' in 1976 to mark the silver jubilee. 
The making of 'Civilisation' proved to be an important milestone in television history. Clark had assumed that he would give studio lectures for which Gill would find suitable colour slides or clips of library film as illustrations, but Gill's ambitions went far beyond that. In the end Gill persuaded Clark to travel for two years all over Europe and beyond, to stand in front of paintings, sculptures, and buildings using a portable autocue to deliver terse but articulate descriptions and opinions which, with Gill's beautifully shot and edited sequences of pictures, conveyed a vivid impression of the history of western civilisation. Between them Gill and Clark had invented the authored documentary series, which became a staple first of BBC television in the 1970s and then of television everywhere in the 1980s and 1990s. 'Civilisation' became a 'succes d'estime' in Britain, eventually winning enormous prestige and worldwide sales for the corporation. Selling to America initially proved tricky, but when lunchtime screenings of the series with seats for 300 were arranged at Washington's National Gallery of Art 24,000 people turned up on the first day, including Jackie Onassis and half of President Nixon's cabinet. 
Gill went on to work with the veteran radio broadcaster Alistair Cooke to make the thirteen-part series 'America' (1972-3), which some critics regarded as even better than 'Civilisation', while Adrian Malone produced 'The Ascent of Man' (1973) for the BBC as a scientific counterpart to 'Civilisation', with Jacob Bronowski as presenter. Later Gill and Malone formed their own company to make programmes in the UK and the USA. After he left the BBC, Gill's series included 'The Commanding Sea' (1981), on the history of seafaring, 'Vintage: a History of Wine' (1991), 'The Buried Mirror: Reflections on Spain and the New World' (1992), and 'Highlanders' (1995), on the Scottish clans. His last series, in 1997, was 'The Face of Russia'. 
Gill's first marriage was dissolved and on 12 July 1978 he married Georgina Jane Denison, a publisher twenty-four years his junior, and daughter of Colonel William Maxwell Evelyn Denison, army officer. They had one daughter, Chloe. In his final years Gill wrote an account of his early life up to the end of the Second World War, 'Growing into War' (2005). It reveals him as a quintessential example of one particular type of middle-class Englishman: the product of brutal private schools yet gentle, diffident, a lover of poetry and the English countryside. 'Only the look of the countryside, though', according to his son Adrian, 'not the reality. Picnics were okay but not nature red in tooth and claw or even vaguely pink. He was terrified of heifers' (private information). The last years of his life were clouded by the disappearance in 1998 of his son Nicholas, a Michelin-starred chef, and by Alzheimer's disease, diagnosed in 2000. He died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, on 20 October 2005, of septicaemia and bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his wife, Georgina, their daughter Chloe, and his son Adrian, the journalist and author known as A. A. Gill. 


@@@@@


doc= 96132


Southwood, Sir (Thomas) Richard Edmund (1931-2005), ecologist and university administrator, was born at Marlborough Cottage, Old Perry Street, Northfleet, Kent, on 20 June 1931, the only child of Edmund William Southwood (died 1984), dairy farmer, and his wife, Ada Mary, 'nee' Regg (died 1949), jewellery designer and daughter of T. R. Regg, archdeacon of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia. When he was four years old, the family moved from the farm where he was born and where the family business continued, more as a wholesale and retail dairy business than a farm, to Kingston House, Old Perry Street. Northfleet, near Gravesend, was still 'country' at that time, although changing with urban creep. 
Southwood's interest in natural history, expressed in observing, identifying, and collecting specimens (mainly insects), began early, and by six he was resolved on a career as an entomologist. From the ages of five to eleven he attended the small and local Bronte School, where all ages were together in one class. He was thus ill prepared for Gravesend grammar school, but its headmaster's judgement in giving more importance to his eleven-plus result than to his formal learning at that point was validated by his performance there. He went on to study entomology at Imperial College, London (1949-52), and to complete his PhD there in 1955. His research was carried out at the Rothamsted experimental station, where he met his wife, Alison Langley Harden, secretary, and daughter of Arthur Langley Harden, hat manufacturer. They married on 10 September 1955, at the parish church in Harpenden, Hertfordshire, and had two sons, Mark ('b'. 1959) and Charles ('b'. 1960). 
Southwood published five scientific papers -- four entomological notes and an observation on sunbathing by pigeons in 'British Birds' -- while still at school. As an undergraduate at university he moved on to more serious publications in academic entomological journals. One of these was referred to in the leading ecology text of the day, giving him the unusual distinction of a textbook citation before he had completed his PhD. He was active in the Royal Entomological Society as a schoolboy, and as an undergraduate taught summer courses at the Field Studies Centre at Flatford Mill, in East Bergholt, Suffolk, showing early the flair and enthusiasm that generations of subsequent students at Imperial College's field station at Silwood Park, near Ascot, Berkshire, and elsewhere would appreciate. 
After completing his PhD Southwood was appointed to a lectureship at Silwood Park in 1955. His story to this point had been one of a keen and precocious naturalist -- a watcher, collector, and codifier, mainly but not exclusively of insects -- moving on to become a professional entomologist. The broader discipline of ecology at this time was still primarily an observational and descriptive science. Although prefigured by some early mathematical models and by some penetrating questions about 'why is it so?', it was not until the 1960s that the subject began to acquire a substantial conceptual base, at the hands of such seminal figures as Evelyn Hutchinson (at Yale), David Lack and Charles Elton (at Oxford), Robert MacArthur (at Princeton), and others. This quest for deeper understanding was reinforced by growing needs to control insect pests and the effects of introduced alien species, and other environmental problems associated with an unprecedented growth in the human population. From his base as a consummate entomologist, Southwood became one of the influential pioneers in forming a vision of how ecology should develop across a broad front, fusing scientific natural history, applied biology, and the more theoretical, quantitative approaches to population biology. 
Southwood's journey from classical entomologist to the newly emerging category of entomological ecologist was gradual; there was no Damascene epiphany. His first paper asking primarily ecological questions was 'The number of species of insect associated with various trees', published in the 'Journal of Animal Ecology' in 1961. In this he used his encyclopaedic knowledge of insects to examine why different tree species harbour markedly different numbers of herbivorous insect species feeding on them. This paper anticipated important aspects of Robert MacArthur and E. O. Wilson's highly influential 'Theory of Island Biogeography' (1967). His encyclopaedic knowledge of Heteropteran bugs led him to ask why they vary considerably in their dispersal abilities, with some being completely wingless and others strong fliers. The answer, he suggested, lay in the ways in which the spatial structure and scale of the environment influence the evolutionary strategies of species, affecting reproduction and dispersal in various ways. Beginning with his article 'The relationship of flight and habitat in some Carabidae', published in 'The Entomologist' in 1962, this body of work was drawn together in his presidential address to the British Ecological Society in 1977, 'Habitat, the templet for ecological strategies', which, after publication in the 'Journal of Animal Ecology', became one of the most cited papers in the entire field of ecology. This paper was particularly notable for the way it linked traditional informal and descriptive approaches to studying life histories with the growing body of mathematical theory based on optimality arguments and trade-offs among different demands on an organism's limiting resources. 
Ecology textbooks of the 1950s were almost wholly descriptive. The corresponding texts of the 1990s, by contrast, contained a blend of observation, field and laboratory experiment, and theory expressed often in mathematical terms. Southwood was one of the principal architects of this maturation of the subject. His strengths were an extraordinary knowledge of, and acute appreciation for, the natural world of plants and animals, coupled with an intuitive feeling for the major questions that population biologists and ecologists should be asking. His own mathematical talents were minimal, but when more explicitly mathematical elements were necessary in the assault on a question or problem he engaged fruitfully and happily with appropriate colleagues -- many of whose own careers flourished under his aegis. 
In addition to his primary research, on topics ranging from entomological systematics and taxonomy, through population and community ecology, to the practical control of particular agricultural pests or disease vectors, Southwood was also highly adept at consolidating and synthesizing in authoritative reviews. One such was his influential book with Don Strong and John Lawton, 'Insects on Plants' (1989). One compendium surpassed all else in its comprehensiveness and influence on generations of ecologists: Southwood's 'Ecological Methods' first appeared in 1966 and went through three editions by 2000, each extensively and conscientiously updated and otherwise revised. It was often referred to as the ecologist's bible. 
Southwood had remarkable skills as an academic manager and leader. Imperial College recognized this early, appointing him head of the department of zoology and applied entomology, and at the same time, director of the field station at Silwood Park, in 1967. In the early 1970s he took on additional major roles, becoming the first chairman of Imperial College's newly formed division of life sciences in 1974. In 1979 he moved to Oxford University to become Linacre professor of zoology, head of the zoology department, and a professorial fellow at Merton College. At Imperial College he had built arguably the world's leading group of researchers in ecology and evolutionary biology. His arrival at Oxford closely followed the retirement or death of three of the twentieth century's major figures in these fields: David Lack, Charles Elton, and the Nobel laureate Niko Tinbergen. But under his skilful leadership the zoology department retained its status (as objectively evidenced by one quarter of all the prestigious Royal Society research professorships in the UK, four out of sixteen, being held in this one department). He did this helped by an extraordinary -- almost uncanny -- instinct for 'good people', matched by a clear vision of the needs, directions, and values of the department as a whole. Such good deeds do not go unpunished, and in 1989 he was appointed vice-chancellor of Oxford University (1989-93), the first since 1632 who was not head of a college. In this post he initiated several important developments, including the beginning of significant reforms of governance, and a major fund-raising campaign (which exceeded its initial target by more than 50 per cent). 
Southwood was never one of those academics to whom teaching was a chore. As head of department at Imperial College and later at Oxford (including the period of his vice-chancellorship) he gave the introductory lectures for first-year students, illustrating his belief that the introductory courses were the most important in any academic department. These lectures were the basis for his trade book, 'The Story of Life' (2003), which was a masterly overview of the origin and evolution of living things. 
Southwood's administrative skills were increasingly recognized in the wider world. Especially pleasing to him was his appointment in 1974 as a trustee of the British Museum (Natural History). During his four-year term as chairman of the trustees (1980-83) he initiated a series of changes, responding to challenges in funding and the need for closer public engagement: an appropriately more diverse array of distinguished trustees, more visitors attracted to the museum (including more school parties), and an extraordinary increase in funds gathered from marketing and outside sponsors. 
Arguably Southwood's most important achievement and legacy was ensuring the removal of lead from petrol in the UK. The royal commission on environmental pollution was set up early in 1970; he joined it in 1974, and served as chairman from 1981 to 1986. His first act as chairman was to evaluate the effectiveness of the commission's work, and its possible future direction. The resulting decision was to concentrate on a study of lead in the environment, about which there was growing concern at that time, particularly in regard to lead additives in petrol. There was, however, fierce resistance to total elimination of lead from petrol by a combination of interests (motor manufacturers, oil refiners, and driving organizations). Southwood deployed his skills to good effect, producing an appropriately trenchant and urgent report, and steering through the political shoals, recommending the total removal of all lead additives from petrol. Within days of the publication of 'Lead in the Environment' in 1983, the secretary of state for the environment announced that all the commission's recommendations had been accepted. Appropriate legislation soon followed. In contrast with earlier unsuccessful efforts, Southwood's success owed much to the way his careful management of relations with officials and ministers had smoothed the way for this dramatic and satisfactory outcome (catching the opposition on the hop). 
In 1988 Southwood was asked to bring his committee skills and biological knowledge to chairing, for the Department of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the working party on Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE), in the wake of the outbreak of BSE or 'mad cow disease' in Britain. This committee was established two years after BSE had been identified in British cattle and thus after a large number of infected animals had already entered the food chain. The issue was obviously highly sensitive, with a risk to human health if the disease could jump the species barrier, but also with serious economic consequences for the British farming industry if such risks were overstated. From the start Southwood's group were strongly critical of the aggressive changes in 'rendering practice' that had resulted in the remains of cattle and sheep being fed to cattle. They regarded this as foolish on basic epidemiological and ecological grounds, and strongly recommended that such practices should stop forthwith. They further recommended that certain parts of the cow -- brains and offal -- should not enter the human food chain. Most of these recommendations were implemented in 1989, although not with the sense of urgency that Southwood wished. Southwood's study was, however, responsible for the changes in regulation of cattle feed that ended the epidemic in cattle, and for the changes in abattoir practices that kept infectious material out of the human food chain from then on. 
At the time it was not known whether the BSE prion, if ingested by humans, could cause disease. By analogy with scrapie in sheep -- a disease whose aetiology in sheep is similar to BSE in cattle, which has been around in sheep for centuries, and which has no known effect on humans -- the best guess was that there would be no problem. This opinion was shared by essentially all informed scientists at the time. But this best guess was not a certainty, and Southwood's report was properly cautious, emphasizing the uncertainty and the need to address it. Unfortunately, the proper equivocation in Southwood's report was glossed over by ministers and civil servants anxious to reassure the public. When it became clear that indeed there was a connection between BSE in cattle and a new variant of the allied Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) in humans, some sought to suggest that Southwood had not sufficiently emphasized the uncertainty. A retrospective reading of the report does not support this attempt to shift the blame. 
Another major contribution to public life was Southwood's chairmanship (from 1994 to 1997) of the government's Round Table on Sustainable Development, in the aftermath of the 1992 world summit on sustainable development. Building on the good start he gave it, this body later transmogrified into the Sustainable Development Commission. Looking beyond the UK, Southwood played a major role in helping establish the environment programme at the nascent Central European University, established in 1991 with funding from George Soros to help bring students from the former Soviet Union and central and eastern European countries into the mainstream. There was a crying need for such a programme in eastern Europe at this time. Southwood was subsequently invited to become rector of the Central European University, when he stepped down as Oxford's vice-chancellor. He declined, but did continue to play a strong role in this institution's successful growth. 
Southwood had an extraordinary influence on ecological and environmental science in Britain and more generally, partly through his own work but even more through the successive generations of younger colleagues whose careers he fostered. Some contemporaries saw the academic world as an increasingly competitive one; his emphasis was always on co-operation, and he took genuine pleasure in the achievements of others. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1977 (serving as vice-president in 1982-4), and gave its prestigious Croonian lecture in 1995. He was also elected a foreign associate of the American National Academy of Sciences (1988), a member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences (1992), an honorary foreign member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters (1987), a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (1995), and a member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (1998). He was knighted in 1984, and appointed a deputy lieutenant of Oxfordshire in 1993. Besides other honours, four major overseas universities and nine British ones awarded him honorary degrees. Major academic awards included Imperial College's Huxley medal (1962), the Zoological Society's scientific medal (1969), the Linnean Society's gold medal (1988), and the Maria Theresa medal of Pavia University (1997). He was a fellow (trustee) of Eton College (1993-2001), a member of the Rhodes Trust (1986-2002; chairman, 1999-2002), and an honorary member, member, or chairman of many other bodies, in the UK and elsewhere. 
Southwood had earlier encounters with cancer, but had been in healthy remission for some time. The final recurrence came quickly, and he died peacefully at his home, April Cottage, 32 Upland Park Road, Oxford, on 26 October 2005. He was survived by his wife and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 96135


Wimbush, Mary (1924-2005), actress, was born on 19 March 1924, at 60 Carlton Avenue, Kenton, Middlesex, the daughter of (Nelson) Norman Wimbush, schoolmaster and lecturer in economics for London county council, and his wife, Ida Margaret, 'nee' Hughes. The family moved to Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, when she was four. Her mother had attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, and her father (who was facially disfigured in the First World War) was keen on amateur dramatics. She was educated at the Masonic School, Bushey, Berkhamsted School for Girls, and the convent school of St Agnes and St Michael, East Grinstead, Sussex, before training at the Central School of Speech and Drama, London. Leaving a few months before the Second World War ended, she joined ENSA to give entertainment to servicemen along the south coast, at a time when flying bombs were frequently overhead -- an experience she found unnerving as she never knew when they were going to 'cut out and fall on you', as she put it years later ('The Independent', 2 Nov 2005). 
Wimbush began her peacetime acting career at Amersham repertory theatre and on 29 June 1946 married, as his second wife, the already well-known actor Howard Francis Marion-Crawford (1914-1969), who was then frequently employed by BBC producers in the Home Service and the new Third Programme. He was the son of Howard Francis Marion-Crawford, a lieutenant in the Irish Guards. They had one son, Charles. After her marriage Mary Wimbush (who continued acting under her maiden name) was soon also appearing on BBC radio, including in one of the first radio soap operas, 'Mrs Dale's Diary'; the connection with the BBC Drama Repertory Company lasted into the 1970s and she did other radio work for the rest of her life. Her marriage to Howard Marion-Crawford ended in divorce in 1954. Four years later, from 1958 until his death, she was the lover of the poet (Frederick) Louis MacNeice (1907-1963), who dedicated his last book of poems to her. She declined to participate in a BBC programme in which their relationship was discussed years later, a diffidence that was lived out in a modest cottage near Sherborne, Dorset, which for a long time was her home: she said that she was lucky in that she needed little in life except her work. 
As a radio performer Wimbush's range was wide. She was cast as the heroine in H. L. V. Fletcher's drama 'The Storm' in 1961, and the drama producer Audrey Cameron cast her in two Margery Allingham adaptations, 'Look to the Lady' (1961) and 'Black Plumes' (1964). But she could also be easily cast in the lighter roles of Alan Melville, such as 'At Your Service' (1976). Auburn-haired and blue-eyed, hers was virtually an unknown face (as distinct from voice) until, in 1969, she appeared as the 'universal mother' character Mary Smith in Richard Attenborough's film of 'Oh! What a Lovely War'. She got the part because Attenborough remembered that, years before, they had both been in a radio play in which she had played a mother who had to be told by her doctor that her son was dead. 'Every time she went through the scene, even at rehearsal, just standing by a microphone with a script in her hand, she made me cry', remembered Attenborough. 'I promised myself that if ever I were able to offer her a job, I would.' Her own reaction to the job was less flamboyant: 'Now at last they can see what I look like!' ('The Guardian', 2 Nov 2005). 
Wimbush's next films, 'Fragment of Fear' (1970) and 'Vampire Circus' (1972), and her television work in the 1970s and 1980s, including 'Lady Killer' (1973), 'Fall of Eagles', and 'Country Matters' (both 1974), were less notable, but her regular television appearances as Prudie Paynter in the Winston Graham series 'Poldark' (1975-6) for the first time made her a prominent figure in British television. Meanwhile she was establishing herself on the stage across a wide range of parts and venues, including working for the National Theatre as the Duchess of York in 'Richard III' and Mrs Sorby in 'The Wild Duck'; creating Edna Shaft in Simon Gray's 'Butley' in the West End; and at Birmingham Repertory Theatre playing the loyal wife of Sir Thomas More in 'A Man for All Seasons', Queen Gertrude in 'Hamlet', Clara in J. B. Priestley's 'When we are Married', and the Countess of Henslowe in 'Elizabeth Rex'. In a production of 'The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie', at the Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester, she played Miss Mackay. 
Nevertheless it was radio, and in particular the highly popular and long-running soap opera 'The Archers', that was to utilize to the full Wimbush's flair for strong-voiced roles with flashes of humour, and crown her career. She began in 'The Archers' in 1965 by playing the village schoolteacher Elsie Catcher, but that character retired in 1967 and it was not until two years later that she was recalled to the programme as the snobbish Lady Isabel Lander -- until she too was written out. In 1992 she became Nigel Pargetter's over-assertive, manipulative mother Julia Pargetter, who for a time takes to drink before reforming. This was a character Wimbush expected to die off or otherwise disappear, but the outcome was rather different, and the character was killed off only after Wimbush's own death. Wimbush was able to use her distinctive voice to create a memorably pretentious character from a very ordinary background whose son was the heir to Lower Loxley Hall and whose vulnerability made her just tolerable. The actress herself maintained that she had found the character most stimulating to play when she was on the bottle, but Julia Pargetter was a survivor like the actress who played her. 
In 1991 Wimbush won the Sony Radio award for best actress for her performances in 'The Horse's Mouth' and 'The Mystery of Edwin Drood', and two years later played Lady Edith in 'The Governor's Consort', a role written specifically for her by Peter Tinniswood. She was determined never to retire, and in 2004 was in a two-month tour of Arthur Miller's 'The Crucible'. 'I intend to go on enjoying myself to the last', she said ('Birmingham Post', 4 Oct 2004). She was taken ill with a retroperitoneal haemorrhage at the BBC Birmingham studios on 31 October 2005 after playing Julia Pargetter in a recording of an episode of 'The Archers', and was declared dead at the City Hospital, Winson Green. She was a modest but firm and distinctive favourite of radio, television, and theatre audiences, whose acting career had lasted more than sixty years. She was survived by her son Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 96138


Mill, Robert Duguid Forrest Pring- (1924-2005), scholar of Catalan, Spanish, and Latin American literature, was born on 11 September 1924 at Talbot House, Stapleford Tawney, Essex, the son of Captain (later Major) Richard Pring-Mill, an officer in the Royal Field Artillery, and his wife, Nellie Morton Turner, 'nee' Duguid. He was educated at the Jesuit school of Montesion, Palma de Mallorca, before enlisting in 1941 and serving in the Far East as an intelligence officer in the Black Watch, rising to the rank of captain and being mentioned in dispatches. His first published work, improbably in view of what he would go on to achieve, was entitled 'Chinese Triad Societies' (1946), and arose out of his post-war military service. He was demobilized in 1947 and graduated with a first-class degree in modern languages (French and Spanish) from New College, Oxford, in 1949. A visit to South America earlier that year under the auspices of Sir Eugen Millington-Drake kindled a lifelong interest in the continent. In 1950 he was elected to a senior demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, and on 19 August the same year, at the Roman Catholic chapel of Our Lady and St Paulinus, Dewsbury, married (Maria) Brigitte Heinsheimer, a 28-year-old undergraduate, and daughter of Ludwig Heinsheimer; they had a son, Francis, and a daughter, Monica. He was appointed university lecturer in Spanish in the University of Oxford in 1952, from which post he retired in 1988. He was simultaneously a lecturer at New College (1956-88) and Exeter College (1963-81), and tutor at St Catherine's College (1965-88). He was a fellow of St Catherine's College until his death. 
Pring-Mill was one of the most distinguished British Hispanists of his generation, with an unusually wide range of interests, reflected in a series of published works that achieved international critical recognition. His fascination with interlocking patterns of language and ideas found particular expression in his work on medieval Catalan and golden age Spanish literature. His interest in the medieval Catalan polymath Ramon Llull was sustained throughout his working life; his earlier studies, for which he was awarded the Premi Critica 'serra d'or' de Recerca (Barcelona), were collected in 'Estudis sobre Ramon Llull (1956-78)' in 1992. Golden age Spanish drama also claimed his attention from an early stage. His introduction to Jill Booty's translation of five plays by Lope de Vega (1961) proved very influential, while his extensive writing on Calderon culminated in his 'Calderon: estructura y ejemplaridad' (2001). His fascination with the intellectual currents of golden age poetry and prose, especially 'conceptismo', led to other important articles. 
Pring-Mill was also closely involved in the study of Latin American literature. He was instrumental in bringing the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda to Oxford in 1965 to be awarded a DLitt. He was proud that for some years Neruda, who would go on to win the Nobel prize for literature in 1971, was the only living author studied in a major paper in the final honour school of modern languages in Oxford. Pring-Mill's epic, year-long journey across the Americas in 1967, from Montreal to Puerto Montt, which Brigitte and their children shared in part, brought him new contacts with emerging trends in Latin American culture, most notably the poetry of the Nicaraguan Ernesto Cardenal, with whom he worked on the Solentiname islands in Lake Nicaragua in 1972, and of whose work he published editions, translations, and pioneering studies. Cardenal was minister of culture in the Sandinista government from 1979 to 1987, which brought Pring-Mill into contact with liberation theology (of which, as a practising Roman Catholic, he approved) and political revolutionary movements in Latin America (about which he became more sceptical). He also acquired a deep interest in the protest poetry and songs arising out of the political ferment of the continent, and devoted considerable scholarly attention to these. But it is probably for his work on Neruda, as editor, translator, and commentator, that he was best known. His 'Pablo Neruda: a Basic Anthology' (1975) quickly established itself as a standard work. He left his substantial collection of recorded and published material concerning protest poetry to the Institute of Popular Music at Liverpool University, and a significant archive of material relating to Neruda to the Taylor Institution in Oxford. 
Pring-Mill served as president of the Anglo-Catalan Society from 1973 to 1976. He was made an Oxford DLitt in 1986, and elected a fellow of the British Academy two years later. His work was recognized abroad in a series of honours and prizes: he became a corresponding member of the Institut d'Estudis Catalans in 1966 and of the Reial Academia de Bones Lletres, Barcelona, in 2002. He was awarded the Premi Pompeu Fabra (1956) and the Premi Catalonia (1991). He received the Creu de San Jordi from the Generalitat de Catalunya in 1990, and the same year was made a Comendador de la Orden de Isabel la Catolica by the Spanish government. The Chilean government honoured him twice, as an officer of the order of Bernardo O'Higgins in 1992, and with the Medalla Presidencial de Honor in 2004. 
Alongside his many contributions to scholarship, and in no sense for him less important or deserving of his full attention, was Pring-Mill's commitment to the teaching of undergraduates. As an assiduous and devoted tutor he won the respect and affection of generations of them. He was a man of innate courtesy and deep charity, and possessed a real gift for sustaining friendships, most memorably through the generous hospitality he and Brigitte provided in their home. Having lived latterly in Brill, Buckinghamshire, he died at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 6 October 2005, following an internal haemorrhage brought on by a duodenal ulcer. He was survived by his wife, Brigitte, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96141


Fisher, Herbert Albert Laurens (1865-1940), historian and politician, was born at 3 Onslow Square, London, on 21 March 1865. 
In his posthumously published 'Unfinished Autobiography' Fisher painted a charming picture of the family into which he was born. He was the eldest son of Herbert William Fisher (1826-1903) and his wife, Mary Louisa, 'nee' Jackson (1841-1916). They were a large family; a younger brother was distinguished in later life as Admiral Sir William Wordsworth Fisher. His mother was the daughter of the fourth of the legendary Pattle sisters, and was herself a considerable beauty. She was painted as the heroine of G. F. Watts's 'Una and the Red Cross Knight', and was photographed by Julia Cameron, her aunt. The young Fisher tried to evade his great-aunt Julia's attentions, since the two-minute exposures of mid-Victorian photography were a trial to the patience of a small boy. But these family links meant that Fisher was born into what Noel Annan a century later described as the intellectual aristocracy -- Leslie Stephen was an uncle, F. W. Maitland a brother-in-law, and Vanessa Bell and Viriginia Woolf were cousins. 
Fisher's father was a barrister by profession, but in Fisher's childhood occupied the glamorous post of private secretary to the prince of Wales. He had served as the prince's tutor when the latter had been an undergraduate at Christ Church, and was called on to act as his private secretary from 1860 to 1870. Such was his discretion that little of the life of the court washed over the young Fisher (though his second name, Albert, was bestowed on him by his princely godfather); perhaps more important to the formation of the historian was the sight of Froude and Carlyle walking past the house in Onslow Square. More important than either in Fisher's own memory were the pleasures of life in the family house in the New Forest. 
Fisher suffered sunstroke when taking the scholarship examination for Winchester College, and therefore attended Winchester as a commoner (1878-84). None the less, he was recognized as a superior intellect from the first, though he was himself inclined to note the fact that he had fagged for Edward Grey, the future foreign secretary, as the most striking fact about his school career. Family tradition destined Fisher for Christ Church, but Winchester tradition reserved the school's best scholars for New College; the school prevailed and Fisher emerged head of the roll. In retrospect, he thought his education too narrow, too classical, and too lacking in science, but acknowledged that it had given him a literary deftness and an aptitude for careful drafting that later stood him in good stead. 
Fisher's undergraduate years were not wholly happy, largely because he was slightly but persistently unwell for much of the time. Academic success did not wholly compensate. He was an excellent classicist, but 'the bright particular star' of his generation was, as he recalled, Gilbert Murray, and it was Murray who walked off with all the prizes. It is possible that Fisher was in any case beginning to tire of classical studies. For all that, he gained a first class in classical moderations (1886) and in Greats (1888), and in the autumn of 1888 both he and Murray were elected to fellowships at New College; Murray remained his closest friend for the rest of his life, and was a fellow editor of the 'Home University Library' as well as a political ally. 
At that time a fellowship was considered as a prize for a clever young man to aspire to, in the way that fellowships by examination at All Souls still are. There was as yet no understanding that a prize fellowship was more likely to lead to an academic career than to any other. Fisher was uncertain whether to follow his father to the bar, and certainly hankered for life on a wider stage than that offered by the life of a tutorial fellow of an Oxford college. However, he was the eldest of eleven children; his family was under financial pressure from the illness of one of his siblings, and the financial security of academic life was welcome. Even then, he was unsure what his intellectual bent might be. Of the two subjects that he had studied for Greats, he first and very briefly taught philosophy, but soon decided that it was not for him. He saw no future for himself as an ancient historian, however, as much because he thought the field itself was closed, as because he had lost his taste for it. 
With the encouragement of Frederick York Powell, Fisher set out to become a modern historian. Graduate studies scarcely existed in England at that time, and Fisher went off to Paris and Gottingen for further study. It was in Paris that he found himself particularly at home, enjoying the cultural riches of the city to the full. As a historian he benefited both from his induction into the sober and minute techniques of research pioneered by the Ecole des Chartes and from the inspired flights of speculation that he heard from Renan and Taine. His capacity for making friends of his French and German hosts, as well as among the expatriate English, was impressive in itself and does much to explain why so many of his colleagues felt that history's gain was diplomacy's loss. Among the young Englishmen whom he met in Paris, he particularly enjoyed the company of the artist Will Rothenstein. 
As a history tutor and lecturer in turn-of-the-century Oxford, Fisher taught long hours and over a vast territory: until the 1920s tutors might see twenty students a week, and Fisher taught English and European history from the classical world to the late nineteenth century. Among his claims to fame, one was that in those years he taught every member of Lord Milner's 'kindergarten', the clever and ambitious young men that Milner recruited to govern South Africa with him. Fisher was a very much admired teacher, and a meticulously well-read lecturer; even so, he was a fluent writer and apparently possessed of boundless stamina. A revised edition of G. W. Kitchin's 'History of France' in 1892 was followed after an interval by a steady stream of works on Napoleon and the political system produced by Napoleon's domination of Europe. Alongside these interests, however, he preserved an interest in the medieval and early modern world. 
So in 1898 there appeared 'The Mediaeval Empire'. 'Studies in Napoleonic Statesmanship: Germany' followed in 1903; volume 5 of Longman's 'Political History of England' in 1906, covering the reigns of Henry VII and Henry VIII. 'Bonapartism' (1908) was delivered as a series of lectures at the University of London, and 'The Republican Tradition in Europe' (1911) as the Lowell lectures in Boston the previous year. The most successful work of those years was the account of Napoleon that he wrote for the 'Home University Library' (1913). Fisher had a considerable talent for the depiction of personality; his short memoir of his brother-in-law Frederick William Maitland, whose 'Constitutional History of England' he published in 1908, and whose 'Collected Papers' he edited in 1911, had already shown this, and 'Napoleon' was widely thought to be the best brief study of its subject that had appeared in any language. 
Fisher's visit to the United States in 1910 began something close to a love affair with North America. One of the many non-academic careers that Fisher might easily have had would have been in the Foreign Office, and relations with the United States would have been a natural field of interest. But the path from the study to the political stage initially led eastwards rather than across the Atlantic. Many of Fisher's relatives had had connections with the Indian subcontinent; and on 6 July 1899 Fisher married Lettice ['see 'Fisher, Lettice (1875-1956)], the daughter of Sir Courtenay Ilbert. Ilbert was then a parliamentary draftsman; in an earlier career as a lawyer in India, he was the author of the ill-fated and contentious 'Ilbert Bill' that would have extended the authority of Indian magistrates over British residents in India. The Ilbert family was as fascinated by politics as Fisher's own family was by the arts, and Lettice Ilbert's interests were firmly in the family tradition. As Mrs Fisher, she was one of the leading Oxford campaigners for female suffrage (and founder of the National Council for the Unmarried Mother and her Child), and through her Fisher entered a wider and more political world than Oxford would have prepared him for. In 1912 he was appointed a member of the royal commission that inquired into the provision of public services in India. It was a demanding appointment for someone who could not bear to pronounce on any subject that he had not thoroughly researched and kept him busy until the commission reported in 1917. 
The appointment that led to the more dramatic change in his career, however, was to the vice-chancellorship of the University of Sheffield. He was appointed in 1912, but took up residence in spring 1914, after returning from the royal commission's visit to India in 1913. Fisher was a natural administrator, and felt neither overworked nor undervalued in the new roles that the post of vice-chancellor thrust upon him. His ability to master a brief may or may not have been inherited from his lawyer father, but it was quite out of the ordinary. His ability to put aside whatever preconceptions about higher education one might have expected him to have acquired at Winchester and Oxford was impressive, too, though less surprising against the background of half a century of Oxford initiatives in university extension and adult education. 
The University of Sheffield was, like many of the new civic universities, the mature product of a Victorian college that had initially been devoted to the applied sciences appropriate to its setting -- in this case, metallurgy and mining in particular. The university was established by royal charter in 1905, with four departments: of arts, pure science, applied science, and medicine. The first of these was the weakest, and Fisher devoted some effort to bringing it up to standard, but in general he felt that the best thing to do was to work with the grain of the institution itself. He was careful to avoid snobbish comparisons between the glamorous social life of the metropolis and life in the provinces, but some dry diary entries recording dinners with local worthies suggest that he occasionally felt the contrast pretty sharply. 
Fisher's work at the university was disturbed, but not stopped, by the outbreak of war in August 1914; nor was it stopped by service on the Bryce commission investigating the supposed atrocities committed by German forces in Belgium. He had always thought that local industry and the university should work in close co-operation, and he had already set up a university scientific advisory committee to encourage the application of research to the needs of industry. After the war began he worked with the lord mayor of Sheffield and the leaders of the cutlery industry to turn the city's talents to wartime production. When he asked about the production of steel helmets -- a military necessity in trench warfare, but an item of equipment that had not been needed since the seventeenth century, a Sheffield manufacturer observed that he had been making dish-covers for years and the general principle must be much the same. 
All this was interrupted in December 1916 by a bolt from the blue: an invitation from Lloyd George to join his newly formed coalition government as president of the Board of Education. The political world was far from alien territory to Fisher. He had a wide acquaintance among intellectually minded politicians such as Morley, Asquith, and Balfour. He had known Lloyd George socially for some years and they had liked each other, so that he was not intrinsically a surprising choice for the post. Some younger colleagues who knew Fisher after the war, such as Richard Crossman and Lionel Robbins, were surprised by Fisher's friendship with Lloyd George; Robbins, indeed, was moved to quote Walter Roche's description of Fisher as like 'a good man who had inadvertently entered a brothel -- and rather enjoyed it' (Buxton and Williams, 113). This underestimates Fisher's lifelong taste for politics, and ignores the impact of his Ilbert relatives, in whose veins ran a taste for political controversy. What was a surprise was that Lloyd George, who had been put in power essentially in order to prosecute the war more successfully, should appoint a president who would have his eyes fixed on peacetime reform. Indeed, Fisher had little enthusiasm for the war. He had argued for a compromise peace with Germany not only at the moment when Lloyd George was made prime minister to pursue an unconditional German surrender, but to the prime minister himself. The president held a cabinet post, the post later occupied by the secretary of state for education, and Fisher did much to turn the Board of Education into the department it subsequently became. 
Fisher was returned unopposed as the Liberal member for Sheffield Hallam in a by-election, and settled into his new occupation; in 1918 he was elected for the combined universities' seat in the Commons, which he held until he left the house in 1926. Given good relations with one's permanent civil servants, the life of a cabinet minister need not be very burdensome, at any rate at that time, and Fisher did not find it so. He was aided by two very distinguished permanent officials, Sir E. K. Chambers and J. W. Mackail. In his autobiography Fisher gave a self-deprecating but not wholly unconvincing account of his own initial success in the post; he had a very good memory, and astonished the House of Commons by delivering his maiden speech on the education estimates; on 21 April 1917 he spoke for over two hours without notes and without hesitation. The performance secured his authority over his hearers once and for all. 
The energy and diplomatic skill which had impressed the citizens of Sheffield were now devoted to mastering the school system of England and Wales. Fisher toured the country to find out for himself what standards were like in the elementary schools of the great cities and the village schools of the countryside. He brought to the task the right temperament and the right political inclinations. The system of public education was locally administered, and at that date locally financed; as a result it was everywhere underfinanced. Although it was in some areas a scene of enlightened experiment, in others it was a scene of grudging acquiescence in the need to educate working-class children at all. Fisher neither wished to sweep away local control, nor to leave everything in local hands. He saw the virtues of good elementary schools and the weaknesses of bad ones, observing after one visit to London that the gap between the best and worst elementary schools was much wider than the gap between the best of them and Eton or Winchester. 
The Board of Education contained a good deal of talent, and the so-called Fisher 'Education Act' of 1918 owed a good deal to the permanent officials of the board, and more remotely to a long history of debates over the nature, purpose, and financing of public education. None the less it was Fisher who nursed, shaped, and argued for the act. Not only did it determine the character of public education until the Butler 'Education Act' of 1944, it contained several features beyond its successor's ambitions. The most important feature of the act was that it made central government the major paymaster of primary and secondary education. Thereafter, central government contributed 60 per cent of teachers' salaries -- the major part of any education budget -- and local education authorities 40 per cent. This achieved several things, not all of them an obvious part of Fisher's goals. The goal he had in mind was the institution of decent salaries for teachers and a consequent elevation of their social standing. Soon afterwards a proper pension scheme was instituted as well. A change that might have been less to his taste was the steady transfer of power from localities to central government. Once the board paid the piper, the board increasingly called the tune. 
In some areas Fisher himself hankered after greater uniformity. Before he left office he made an abortive attempt to bring denominational schools under the control of local authorities, in the hope of diminishing the obscurantism and acrimony that had long disfigured discussion of the role of religion in public education. In the circumstances of 1918 chaos was a greater threat than over-centralization, and a strong, clear statement of the guiding principles of public education was worth having, especially when embodied in useful financial and administrative measures. Fisher established the school certificate examination that among other things replaced the fifty-five separate examinations previously used by professional organizations to assess the skills of school-leavers, and an examination that later blossomed into the higher certificate and A-level examinations that set a national standard for would-be university students. To help badly off students attend university, he created a system of state scholarships. To help the universities themselves he established the system of arm's length state support through the University Grants Committee that lasted for more than half a century. He performed a particularly important service for Oxford and Cambridge. 
By setting up the Asquith commission Fisher ensured that those universities could receive government funding in the way that other universities did, but without allowing government intervention in the lives of their constituent colleges. The delicate balancing of the government's interest in tertiary education and the universities' interest in their own autonomy was something of a triumph. The one area in which he had little success, and in which England is still unlike Germany and the Scandinavian countries, was that of allowing children to stay at school while working part-time. Fisher thought it wrong that children were in school full-time until the age of fourteen and were then, aside from those in academic streams, wholly cut off from education. His act provided for a system of half-time schooling after the age of fourteen when conditions allowed, but they never have allowed. A bleak assessment would be that Fisher was one of many ministers who have failed to create the secondary school system needed by modern Britain; a less bleak assessment might be that the combined effects of local religious prejudices and English assumptions about the needs of children from different social classes made any more extensive reform impossible. 
Even before the fall of the Lloyd George government in October 1922, Fisher found himself in difficulties. The financial crises of the post-war years meant that the education estimates were constantly under threat from the Treasury, and from the notorious Geddes committee. Fisher fought his corner as best he was able, but many of his plans for smaller classes and better-paid teachers were thwarted. The final fall of the coalition government posed a more direct and personal problem for Fisher. He held his parliamentary seat at the general election of 1922 and retained it until 1926, but now that he was out of the government he had no secure income. For the next two years he supported his family mostly by journalism. He was only fifty-eight, and could not afford to retire even if he had wished to. He did not want to become a history professor, and he felt that he was in any case not sufficiently abreast of his subject decently to do so. He regretted his loss of office a good deal on more directly political grounds, and in particular to be deprived of the influence in foreign affairs that he had exercised as a member of the cabinet. He served in the British delegation to the League of Nations from 1920 to 1922, and could have been a force for good for many years if events had turned out otherwise. Indeed, in April 1923, at the instigation of Lloyd George, he explored German sentiment on reparations, and in the following year returned to Boston to give a second set of Lowell lectures, with a side-visit to Canada that was a diplomatic triumph. It was not with any very great enthusiasm, therefore, that he accepted election as head of his old college in January 1925 and retired from parliament the next year. 'I fear it may come to that' is said to have been his acknowledgement of one attempt at congratulation on his new position (private information). 
Fisher was perhaps intellectually the most distinguished warden that New College has elected in its six centuries of existence; he was certainly the most distinguished in recent centuries. Richard Crossman, who was to all intents and purposes sacked by Fisher in the 1930s, none the less referred to his 'greatness as a Warden' in an essay on his former head of house (Crossman, 5). Although he decried (to the young Isaiah Berlin) the college to which he had returned as 'one enormous mausoleum' (private information, quoted in Ignatieff, 60) bereft of the bright and energetic young men whom the war had destroyed, he was an effective head of the college, and under his leadership the college enjoyed something of a golden age. A mausoleum was in any event an unkind description of a place that contained Lionel Robbins, G. H. Hardy, and J. B. S. Haldane. 
The role of a college head suited Fisher: he brought a feeling of the wider world to cloistered precincts, and his intellectual eminence usefully intimidated the idler sort of undergraduate. He was no longer the young tutor of thirty years earlier, but he was still a spellbinding lecturer. He took a deep interest in the prospects of the undergraduates, and made sure that they met the right people from the outside world, either at dinner or in other ways. Weekends were devoted to house parties at which Lloyd George, Virginia Woolf, or Elizabeth Bowen might be present, with dinner for eighteen on Saturday and lunch for awestruck undergraduates on Sunday. He was mocked behind his back for too often beginning his sentences with 'When I was in the cabinet...', but it was an admiring mockery, and half a dozen of the young men in due course held cabinet office themselves. 
Fisher's notebooks are full of accounts of visits to college properties, and he kept up a large correspondence with old members of the college; but the job could not occupy all his time and attention, and he served on many committees of the great and the good outside Oxford. In addition, he was elected president of the British Academy in 1928, and was active in the academy's affairs for many years. He served for several years as chairman of the Rhodes Trust, and very successfully. It is not, on the other hand, altogether easy to tell whether the oft-made comment that he was an excellent chairman because he did not much mind being outvoted was quite intended as a compliment. 
Fisher wrote as swiftly and persuasively as ever. As well as 'James Bryce' (1927) and 'Paul Vinogradoff: a Memoir' (1928), he wrote an odd little book on Christian Science and its founder Mary Baker Eddy, 'Our New Religion' (1929). As a rationalist of the high and dry kind, Fisher had every reason to be irritated by the spectacle of Christian Science, but why he chose to attack this target in particular remains unclear. The book aroused tremendous indignation among Christian Scientists, and even those of Fisher's colleagues who admired its ironic style, and shared its author's belief that a contempt for modern medicine is dangerous, wondered whether he had not gone too far in his portrait of the movement's founder. In spite of its notoriety, the book was a failure from the sales point of view: its American critics persuaded most wholesalers not to sell the book and denied it a 'succes de scandale'. Fisher may have underestimated the offence the book would cause because he was himself an agnostic in religious matters; in private letters he described himself as an atheist, and said firmly to his friends that religion 'rots the mind' (J. Hart, 'Ask me No More', 1998, 204). He wore his disbelief lightly, and did not set out to embarrass the devout, but he may have thought Christian Science so preposterous that he failed to appreciate the devotion of its followers to their creed and its founder. His friends and family remembered his life of Mrs Eddy as the one book he really enjoyed writing, however. A greater success was Fisher's contribution to the genre that sixty years afterwards became fashionable as 'counterfactual history'; in a collection of essays entitled 'If it had Happened otherwise' (ed. J. C. Squire, 1931), Fisher enjoyed himself on the question of what would have happened 'if Napoleon had escaped to America'. 
It was not until the 1930s, when he was almost seventy, that Fisher settled down to write the book for which he is remembered. His 'History of Europe' (3 vols., 1935) was an instant best-seller, and was a staple in the diet of schoolchildren and their elders for thirty years. He wrote it very quickly, considering that it covers the history of the entire continent from the ancient world until 1934; and after its publication Fisher took advantage of reprintings to add an epilogue bringing his judgements up to date with events down to the end of 1937. The appearance of ease is illusory; the effort of composition almost killed him. After five years of constant and intense hard work, he suffered a breakdown, and thereafter had to work more gently. 

'A History of Europe' remains a monument to a sensibility and a style of thought that has become old-fashioned but is neither incomprehensible nor outdated. As technical history, the work showed the defects one might expect in a book whose author had ceased to be a professional historian two decades before, and professional historians were quick to note them. Most of Fisher's readers readily forgave him the odd slip and misstatement, however. For the 'History' was what David Ogg called it a few years later, 'an intensely moral book' (Ogg, 194) infused with an anxious liberal humanitarianism. Like many books, it is best read backwards; Fisher's judgement on the fragile condition of European civilization in the 1930s, on the catastrophic consequences of the First World War, and on the human capacity for irrational self-destruction casts its light on the earlier volumes as much as on the last volume. 
It is a highly readable book, though the modern reader may flinch a little at the way Fisher awards good and bad marks to statesmen, cultures, economic policies, and political arrangements in the past, less perhaps because we have ceased to make such judgements than because we would rather insinuate them than openly deliver them. It was a liberal historiography that drove the 'History'. The primacy of politics over economics and ideology is not flatly asserted, but events are invariably narrated in such a way as to suggest that they are forces to be managed and contained by political talent, and not themselves determinant. Political talent itself was not treated by Fisher as something simple, stable, or always admirable: ruthlessness and steely determination are not intrinsically attractive qualities, but they are often needed in politics. That the liberal democracies of the western Atlantic littoral had accommodated successfully to the pressures of industrialization and the globalization of the economy, Fisher did not doubt. He was equally sure that their success was at best fragile and precarious. His calm certainty about what constituted a humane and successful society, offset by a deep uncertainty about the chances of such a society surviving the onslaughts of militarism and nationalism, makes the 'History' as readable as ever three-quarters of a century after it was written. 
Younger and more left-wing critics disliked the 'History' for predictable reasons. In the eyes of any Marxist it was theoretically naive, and its political vision equally so; no Marxist could agree that political leaders had the freedom of manoeuvre that Fisher appeared to allow them, nor accept that Edwardian Liberalism was the last word on political morality. Even a middle-of-the-road Liberal half a century younger than Fisher might have found too much anxiety and too little aggression in Fisher's Liberalism. He was a defender of the policy of appeasement until the bitter end, even though he admired Winston Churchill as a politician and statesman and threatened to resign from the British Academy when that body flinched at the idea of electing Churchill as a member. In the Oxford by-election of 1938, when A. D. Lindsay, the master of Balliol, stood as an 'anti-Munich' candidate against Quintin Hogg, Fisher sided with Chamberlain and Hogg in order to give Germany a further opportunity to see reason. The wish to give appeasement every chance of success was not so obviously foolish as it appears in retrospect. 
Fisher's public service and intellectual distinction were appropriately marked when he received the Order of Merit in 1937. It was, even so, something of a valedictory tribute, and not simply because he was seventy-two years old, with his serious intellectual, political, and educational life behind him. He represented a view of the world that had by this time lost much of its authority. His politics were those of radical Liberals such as John Morley and Lord Bryce; they were classless, rationalist, and not altogether democratic. Although he lectured to working-class audiences with great success, Fisher was not at home in a world of class or 'tribal' politics. By the same token, the 'History' is the testament of a rationalist liberalism that looks shallow to enthusiasts for history written from the bottom up, as much as it does to Marxists, or to psycho-historians hoping to apply the insights of Freud or Jung to historical narrative. In the Oxford of his day Fisher was uniquely distinguished among heads of house, and possessed of a rare administrative competence; none the less, he presided over a late flowering of an educational style and of educational ideals that the Second World War swept away. 
When the Second World War broke out two years after the award of the Order of Merit, Fisher took up the kind of burden that came naturally to him. He chaired an appeal tribunal examining the claims of conscientious objectors, and it was while he was in London to attend a meeting of the tribunal that he was knocked down and fatally injured by a lorry. Contrary to college legend, he was not a victim of the blackout -- only of his habitual inattention to the physical world around him. He died in St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 18 April 1940. He left a widow and a daughter, Mary Bennett ['see below']. Fisher was a strikingly handsome man, who looked every inch at home in the parts he played. A stiff but attractive portrait by William Nicholson, which hangs in the hall of New College, suggests the truth of David Ogg's observation that on first sight Fisher appeared to be a public institution, but on closer inspection emerged as a truly human being. 
Fisher's daughter, Mary Letitia Somerville Bennett (1913-2005), civil servant and college head, was born on 9 January 1913 at 37 Norham Road, Oxford. She was educated at Oxford high school and Somerville College, Oxford, where she obtained a second in classical moderations in 1933 and a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1935. One of her close friends was Isaiah Berlin, then a young prize fellow at All Souls. After graduating she gave tutorials in Roman history and started research on the Roman grain supply. In 1941 she joined the staff of the Joint Broadcasting Committee, a wartime propaganda organization, and later transferred to the transcription service of the BBC. In 1945 she joined the Colonial Office, where she initially joined the Mediterranean department, and later the east African department. She left the civil service after marrying, on 17 September 1955, a Colonial Office colleague (and musicologist), John Sloman Bennett (1914-1990), son of Ralph Bennett, veterinary surgeon. There were no children of the marriage. 
After her marriage Mary Bennett served as secretary of the Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies and a part-time teacher at Westminster Tutors, and served on the selection board of the Elizabeth Nuffield Trust. She was an unexpected choice as principal of St Hilda's College, Oxford, in 1965, but an inspired one. Her unflappability, attention to detail, great interest in young people, and liberal tolerance were qualities highly appropriate to a college head in an age of financial strain and increasing student assertiveness. (It was thought by some of her colleagues that she indeed encouraged her students to take part in demonstrations and sit-ins.) A reassuring figure, she frequently conducted interviews with a cat on her lap, a distraction that helped calm even the most anxious of students. She oversaw a period of expansion, including a doubling of the number of fellows and the erection of several new buildings, before her retirement in 1980. When the move to open the men's colleges to women students was first mooted -- by New College, as it happened -- she shared the hostility to the idea of the principal of Lady Margaret Hall, Dame Lucy Sutherland, seeing it not as a move to expand women's access to higher education but as a self-interested device to get 'stupid men out and clever girls in' ('Daily Telegraph', 21 Nov 2005). She subsequently changed her mind, and thought St Hilda's was being much too slow in following suit. It was only after her death that her old college started to admit men. In retirement in Alma Place, Oxford, and Thursley, Surrey (where she had inherited a cottage after her mother's death), she pursued historical research relating to her forebears, including her maternal grandfather, Sir Courtenay Ilbert, and her paternal great-grandfather, John Jackson, a professor at Calcutta Medical College, published in 'The Ilberts in India' (1995) and 'Who Was Dr Jackson?' (2000). She remained active until near the end of her life. She died on 1 November 2005 at Rock Cottage, Highfield Lane, Thursley, Surrey, of breast cancer. 


@@@@@


doc= 96146


Bentley Boys (act. 1919-1931), racing drivers, were a team of motoring enthusiasts who achieved remarkable fame as drivers on the racetrack and as playboys off the track during the 1920s. They attained the climax of their collective career between 1927 and 1930 when they won four consecutive victories in the 24 hour race at Le Mans; in 1929 they took the first, second, third, and fourth places in the race. While their success as drivers endowed Bentley motor cars with a high reputation for speed, performance, and reliability, their lives away from racing bestowed glamour and excitement on the struggling young company. Mostly wealthy men, the Bentley Boys epitomized the old-school amateurism of British sport. Obsessive motorists, they competed out of bravado and patriotism rather than for money or careers. As W. O. Bentley admitted: 'The public liked to imagine them living in expensive Mayfair flats with several mistresses and, of course, several very fast Bentleys, drinking champagne in nightclubs, playing the horses and the Stock Exchange, and beating furiously around racing tracks at the weekend... this was not such an inaccurate picture' (Bentley, 109). 
Even at the racetrack the Bentley Boys maintained their hedonistic lifestyle. According to one of their mechanics 'the pit they used [at Le Mans] was just like a small hotel... they'd have all the wine, champagne, eats, chickens, and everything that went with it. They'd have the head chauffeurs, butlers, secretaries... hangers-on too, plenty of them, and the womenfolk -- some beautiful women too' (Nagle, 134). One of the more sober drivers complained that the women 'were great fun but some of them could be a nuisance at times. Their girl-friends got in the way' (ibid., 128). However, for the British public this heady mixture of glamour, success, and recklessness proved immensely appealing. In the anti-climax of the post-war years they brought a vicarious element of excitement into thousands of ordinary lives. 
The founding father was W. O. Bentley, who enjoyed extensive pre-war experience in improving the speed and performance of engines. After the war, during which he had developed faster and more powerful aero-engines in the technical department of the Royal Naval Air Service, W. O. decided to produce his own motor car. From the outset everything was personalized and eccentric. He launched the enterprise by means of a party at a restaurant in Regent Street where a handful of investors agreed to guarantee a mere $4000, taking shares at ten shillings each. W. O. drew on the skills of three acquaintances to get the project off the ground in 1919. 

Clive Gallop ['see below'] was an old friend from wartime. After demobilization from the Royal Flying Corps in the summer of 1919 he accepted W. O.'s invitation to help design the new car and became works manager. Later that year, when the 3 litre Bentley had been assembled, Gallop could not resist taking it out for a test run with the mechanics. All went well until the tail of his dust-coat became wrapped around the cardan shaft and he began to disappear into the chassis; fortunately he stopped the car and was unwound. 
A different but equally important role was played by Sammy Davis ['see below']. Like Gallop, Davis was one of the Edwardian motoring enthusiasts, but was unusual in being a talented author and artist as well as a good driver. Davis came into contact with W. O. when the latter and his brother, H. M. Bentley, were making motorcycles. By the end of the war, when he had worked as an inspector of aero-engines, Davis had lost most of his friends and family; he suffered a breakdown but found a welcome escape in the world of motoring. As he and W. O. had kept in touch Davis was in on the original idea of the Bentley car and, as a journalist for 'Autocar' in 1919, he was perfectly placed to publicize it. In January 1920 he gave the 3 litre model a test drive. The car, he wrote, 'had the air of a lithe, active, and speedy animal straining a little on the leash'. He loved its powers of acceleration: 'instantly the exhaust changed its note from a purr to a most menacing roar, the white ribbon of road streamed towards the car, while the back seats pressed hard on one's shoulder blades' (Foulkes, 31; Hillstead, 40). 
As Davis saw immediately, the Bentley was designed for the big, straight continental roads where its speed and endurance were assets, but it was far from clear that it had a market in Britain, where few roads were suitable. 'We used a special bit of the Edgware Road for speed tests', recalled one driver. 'It wasn't used much then for anything else' (Nagle, 63). In effect Bentleys were offering the thrill of owning a racing car to the enthusiastic private motorist who shared their disregard for British rules and speed limits. But the car was expensive, selling at $750 initially and rising to well over $1000 at a time when most cars were becoming cheaper. 
This made it imperative for Bentleys to demonstrate that their cars could compete with vehicles built for racing. Hence the need for a professional driver, a role that was brilliantly filled by Frank Clement ['see below']. Unusually among the Bentley Boys he combined the talents of a professional driver and a first-rate mechanic. An experienced installation engineer, he had been a road-tester for Vauxhall before accepting W. O.'s invitation to join Bentley as development manager in 1920. 'There was nobody like Clement... he was always thinking something up -- experimenting all the time' (Nagle, 56). Recognizing that the company's success would depend on the skill of their mechanics he created the team that was the basis of the company's reputation. It was the mechanics who first attracted the 'Bentley Boys' tag after their hard partying at the Isle of Man TT in 1922, but the press applied it to the drivers after their performances at Le Mans from the mid-1920s onwards. A very consistent driver, Clement never got flustered and was famed for the speed of his pit-work. In 1921 he drove the first Bentley to win at Brooklands, he led the first Bentley team in the Isle of Man TT in 1922, and drove in every 24 hour Le Mans race from 1923 to 1930, being placed in all of them. 
In the early years Clement's co-driver was John Duff ['see below'], a tall, imposing figure always recognizable in his plus fours, roll-neck sweater, and tweed jacket. After service in the First World War he was in search of a new challenge and found it in fast cars, initially Fiats. But Duff wanted more power, moved to Bentleys, and emphatically demonstrated their endurance and his own stamina when he took the British double twelve record of 2082 miles at 86 m.p.h. at Brooklands in September 1922. He drove single-handed in a seat that was effectively a steel bucket; after twelve hours, with a raw back, he had to be lifted out of the car and carried off to the Hand and Spear in Weybridge, where he was helped into a bath; but he was fit to race the next day. In 1923 Duff insisted on entering the Le Mans 24 hour race for the first time. W. O. was sceptical, both because of the risk to the Bentley prestige and because of the expense. However, Duff's performance, followed by his victory in 1924 with Clement, proved that Bentleys could match the continental machines that had been designed as racing cars, thereby greatly boosting their reputation. 
Duff's 1923 race brought Bentleys to the attention of an improbable member of the group, J. D. (Benjy) Benjafield ['see below']. A thickset, balding individual, with a sunny disposition, Benjafield was a respected consultant bacteriologist, with a practice in Wimpole Street. He also possessed several of the attributes of a Bentley Boy, being a sportsman, 'bon vivant', and the husband of a rich wife who allowed him to indulge in expensive hobbies. In October 1923 he bought a Bentley and found its performance so impressive that 'I began to fancy myself' (Foulkes, 69). In this sense Dr Benjafield represented the Bentley dream made reality. On visiting the Bentley service department in 1924 he passed some jovial remarks about wanting a motor that would go faster and was promptly invited to Brooklands for a speed test. Benjafield confessed to being terrified by the run he was given, but as the experts thought he had what it took to become a Bentley Boy they offered him the services of a mechanic if he entered a small club race. By coming in fourth Benjafield passed the test and in 1925 was invited to race at Le Mans. Seen as the company's most reliable driver, he participated at Le Mans every year from 1926 to 1929; his most celebrated achievement was the 1927 24 hour race when, following a seven-car pile-up in the White House Corner crash, he and Sammy Davis, representing the third Bentley team, brought their car home to victory. 
Another customer-turned-driver was Sir Henry (Tim) Birkin ['see below'], an iconic Bentley Boy on account of his wealth, charm, eccentricity, and reputation as a ladies' man. After serving as a pilot in the war Birkin found post-war Britain too dull and took up racing in 1921 to restore some excitement to his life. He bought his first Bentley in 1925, but did not race for the team until 1927 and remained a semi-detached member. He competed regularly at Brooklands, where he won the lap record at 135 m.p.h. in 1930. A striking figure dressed in a dark blue shirt, white overall trousers, and a spotted scarf that fluttered, dangerously, in the breeze, Birkin filled his cars with oranges that he sucked steadily during races. He suffered from a stutter that, along with his wealth, made him appealing to women. 'Life was never dull with Tim around', recalled W. O., 'if only because of the abundance and wide variety of his girlfriends' (http://maisonblanche.co.uk/Bentley_boys.html). But his philandering resulted in divorce in 1928. 
Birkin's impatience to win races often led him to take undue risks with his vehicles and throw away his chances of victory: 'he really was a car-wrecker -- he'd do anything', complained Clement (Nagle, 128). As a result Bentleys used him in one of their three teams to set the pace so as to wear down and smash up the cars of rival teams. In 1928 Birkin hit on the idea of supercharging his 4.5 litre Bentley, thereby giving rise to the legendary 'Blower Bentley'. The car had terrific acceleration but was heavy, clumsy, and prone to overheating. Bentley's mechanics rightly saw it as a mistake because it undermined the company's reputation for reliability, but Birkin obtained funds from Bernard Rubin and the Hon. Dorothy Paget, a wealthy, eccentric racehorse owner, to sustain his own team. The Blower was the epitome of Bentleys: a car beloved by the fanatics that was a business failure. 
Birkin betrayed all the characteristics of a male obsessive spiced by an angry patriotism. He elevated his hobby into a great national cause capable of solving Britain's ills, using his autobiography for a long rant about the lethargy of the British motor industry, the failure to develop British racing cars and to build adequate racing tracks, the ignorance and apathy of the public, and the victimization of drivers for exceeding speed limits on the roads (Birkin, 29-31, 113-15, 201-5). The political side of the Bentley Boys emerged most blatantly in 1926 when they formed the Brooklands Squad of crack drivers to help the authorities break the general strike. 
Yet despite the publicity generated by their drivers' exploits on the racetrack, Bentleys failed to thrive as a business. Up to 1931 only 3037 motor cars were actually produced. As a result they were expensive, being virtually handmade, and in any case not suitable for the ordinary driver or chauffeur. 'What we badly wanted', admitted the chief salesman, A. F. C. Hillstead, 'was a bread-and-butter model that would appeal to the ordinary motorist of average means'. From time to time H. M. Bentley would instruct the sales staff: 'Nothing to pay the wages with next Friday. Go out and get some money' (Hillstead, 73, 111). 
Eventually in 1925 W. O. decided to rectify the company's under-capitalization by recruiting a prominent Bentley owner who was a great lover of fast cars. Already a multi-millionaire, Woolf Barnato ['see below'], who had recently inherited an extra $1.5 million, was an obsessive sportsman and outstanding athlete who excelled at boxing, cricket, and golf as well as racing. Boyish but self-assured, he was attractive to women. He routinely spent $900 each week, bred horses, loved betting, and became a leading playboy of the post-war era. In 1925 Barnato was given a test drive in the new 6.5 litre Bentley with a view to buying the company. But though he was no businessman Barnato was shrewd and hated lending money. In May 1926 his accountants imposed tough terms, devaluing the original shares to one shilling. Barnato eventually lost about $90,000 on Bentley Motors but admitted, 'I can't grumble'. He gathered the Bentley Boys to his parties in Grosvenor Square and to his huge red-brick mansion, Ardenrun, on a 347 acre country estate at Lingfield in Surrey. Though not quite respectable, he made Bentleys even more fashionable by associating the motors with a range of celebrities from the prince of Wales to Tallulah Bankhead. But Barnato was also a talented and obsessive racing driver. In September 1925 he and Duff had smashed the world speed record over twenty-four hours at Montlhery near Paris. He won at Le Mans in 1928, 1929, and 1930 and his determination to keep the company in the forefront of racing sustained the Bentley Boys legend in the later 1920s. 
In the process Barnato brought several acquaintances into the team including George Duller ['see below'], who was a regular guest at Ardenrun and nightclub companion, and had been Barnato's co-driver at Le Mans in 1925. Duller was a small, muscular man who enjoyed a brilliant career as a jockey; when driving a car he would periodically rise in his seat as though riding a horse and he claimed that driving kept him fit between horse races. Other regular drivers of Barnato's cars were Jack Dunfee ['see below'] and his brother Clive Dunfee ['see below']. Jack, who enjoyed acting as court jester to the group, won the Brooklands six hour race in 1929 as co-driver to Barnato. 
Another rich Bentley Boy who drove with Barnato in the 1920s was Glen Kidston ['see below']. Quiet by Bentley Boy standards, Kidston was a born adventurer, completely fearless and notorious for refusing to obey orders when he came into the pits. From 1920 he took up motorcycle competitions, representing Britain as an amateur. In 1929 he came second in the international grand prix at Le Mans and second in the Irish grand prix; in 1930 he and Barnato won the 24 hours at Le Mans covering 1831 miles at an average speed of 76 m.p.h. In 1928 Barnato also persuaded Bentleys to include another friend, Bernard Rubin ['see below'], a wealthy Australian who lived in a Grosvenor Square house next door to Barnato. He first raced at Brooklands in 1928, and the same year, co-driving with Barnato, he won the 24 hour race at Le Mans. 
By 1929 Bentleys had achieved fame on the racetrack and produced a 3 litre, 4.5 litre, 6 litre, and finally an 8 litre model capable of accelerating to 100 m.p.h. in fifty seconds. Yet they were still not selling enough and the onset of the depression undermined the market for luxury goods. As the annual cost of racing stood at anything between $2412 in 1925-6 and $3369 in 1927-8, substantial sums for a cash-strapped company, it was decided, after the sweeping success at Le Mans in 1930, to cut costs by withdrawing from racing to concentrate on production. Yet even this was insufficient and in June 1931 Barnato decided not to risk any more money. The company went into liquidation and was bought by Rolls-Royce. 
The Bentley name lived on, but by 1932 all but Birkin had given up racing. The Bentley Boys numbers dwindled, often through untimely and violent deaths: Kidston in a flying accident in 1931, Dunfee in a crash at Brooklands in 1932, Birkin from an infection from burns sustained in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933, and Rubin following surgery in 1936. Frank Clement retired from racing after his marriage in 1930. 
As Rolls-Royce had acquired the assets of Bentley Motors all the cups and trophies won by the drivers were carried off to Derby. Barnato, however, took his trophies and after a protracted argument Clement was allowed to keep one of his. It later transpired that the rest had simply been sold off for their value as silver. This mean-spirited act on the part of Rolls-Royce somehow encapsulated the story of the Bentley Boys, who had blazed brilliantly across the 1920s scene only to peter out amid the gathering gloom of the 1930s. 
The Bentley team also included, at various times, Herbert (Bertie) Kensington Moir (1899-1961) and the French drivers Jean Chassagne and Baron Andre d'Erlanger, while those associated with them included their chronicler Arthur Finch Clitheroe Hillstead (1894-1975). The principal figures are listed below. 

(Reginald) Clive Gallop (1892-1960), engineer, was born at Mena House, the Pyramids, Cairo, Egypt, on 4 February 1892, the son of Reginald George Gallop (died 1911), of Wimbledon, a barrister, and his wife, Helen Marion, 'nee' Duffield (died 1939). The diplomat and authority on Iberian folk culture Rodney Alexander Gallop (1901-1948) was his younger brother. After education at Harrow School (1905-10), he became a consulting engineer and pre-war racing driver. In the First World War he was commissioned in the Scottish rifles, gained a Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate at Hendon in October 1915, and went on to serve in the Royal Flying Corps. As well as designing cars for Bentley he built cars for Count Zborowski. He married on 29 September 1923 Barbara, daughter of Robert Dobb, with whom he had a daughter. Having divorced his first wife he married second, on 22 October 1932, Thora, daughter of Walter Waterhouse; they had two daughters and a son. In the Second World War he held the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the auxiliary military pioneer corps. Latterly resident in Leatherhead, Surrey, he was dead on arrival at Dorking General Hospital, on 7 September 1960, after sustaining a fractured cervical spine as a result of being thrown from a skidding motor car. 

Sydney Charles Houghton Davis (1887-1981), journalist and racing driver, was born at 68 Philbeach Gardens, Brompton, London, on 7 January 1887, the son of Edwin Charles Davis, tea merchant, and his wife, Georgina Maud Fielding, 'nee' Houghton. After Westminster School he attended the Slade School of Art, and then served an apprenticeship at the Daimler Motor Works (1903-7). He became a journalist and illustrator on motoring journals, starting the periodical 'Automobile Engineer' with A. Ludlow Clayden. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, where he served in the armoured car section. On 6 June 1917 he married Rosamund Sylvia Evelyn, daughter of Joseph Pollard, surgeon. After the war he became sports editor of 'Autocar', and went on to write a string of books on motor sport, notably 'Motor Racing' (1932). He was also a significant driver in his own right, competing at Brooklands in a variety of marques in the 1920s, and participating in rallies, hill climbs, and veteran car events in the 1930s. In the Second World War he served in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in north-west Europe, with the rank of major. His first marriage was dissolved and he married, second, on 5 January 1957, Susanna Aubrey-Hall ('b'. 1937/8), engineering tracer, daughter of John Leo Aubrey-Hall, foundry engineer. He died in a fire at his home, Sutton Lodge, Clandon Road, Guildford, Surrey, on 9 January 1981, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 

Frank Charles Clement (1886-1970), engineer and racing driver, was born at 33 High Street, Tring, Hertfordshire, on 15 June 1886, the second son in the family of at least two sons and five daughters of John Tripp Clement (died 1909), a jeweller and watchmaker, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Elliott (died 1890). He trained as a mechanical engineer and served with the Royal Engineers during the First World War. As well as his successes at Le Mans, he competed at Brooklands where, in October 1929, he and Jack Barclay won the 500 mile race, and in May 1930 with Barnato he won the double twelve, covering 2080 miles in twenty-four hours at an average speed of 85.68 m.p.h. On 3 August 1930 he married Kathleen Irene, daughter of William Smith, contractor. Latterly resident at Linnell Dene, Hexham, Northumberland, he died at St Mary's Hospital, Stannington, on 15 February 1970. 

John Francis Duff (1895-1958), racing driver, was born in Kiukiang, China, in January 1895, the son of John Lindlay Duff. His parents were missionaries, originally from Canada, where he was educated at Hamilton, Ontario. In March 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Berkshires, where he became known for leading from the front. He married, on 14 March 1917, Clarissa, daughter of John Henry Lindsey, brewer. After the war he became a car dealer in London, with an agency for Bentley. He moved to Los Angeles in 1926, where he ran a fencing school, but returned to Britain, where he was a horse breeder. He died at Whipps Cross Hospital, Essex, on 9 January 1958, from a fracture of the spine and crushed spinal cord after falling from a horse which he was training for a showjumping event. 

Joseph Dudley Benjafield (1887-1957), bacteriologist and racing driver, was born at Bletchenden, Church Street, Edmonton, on 6 August 1887, the son of William Barnett Benjafield (1856-1921), a general practitioner, and his wife, Miriam Alice, 'nee' Wilkinson. Educated at Marlborough College and London University, he qualified in medicine in 1909 and obtained the MD in 1912. Specializing in bacteriology and clinical pathology, he held appointments at the Western Skin Hospital, the Kensington General Hospital, and All Saints' Hospital for Genito-Urinary Diseases. He married on 28 July 1914 Elvera Helen (1886-1983), daughter of Gustave Caesar Edward Gelardi, director of companies. They had one son. In 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Army Medical Corps. By the 1920s he had become a respected consultant bacteriologist at St George's Hospital in London with a practice in Wimpole Street. He died at 78 Harley Street, London, on 21 January 1957 and was cremated at Enfield crematorium. 

Sir Henry Ralph Stanley Birkin, third baronet (1896-1933), racing driver, was born at Magdala Road, Basford, Nottingham, on 26 July 1896, the second son of Sir Thomas Stanley Birkin (1857-1931), second baronet, a lace manufacturer, and his wife, the Hon. Margaret Diana Hopetoun, 'nee' Chetwynd (died 1927). He had been known as Tim since a perceptive sister dubbed him 'Tiger Tim'. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Warwickshire regiment and later served in the Royal Air Force. He married on 12 July 1921 Audrey Clara Lilian, daughter of Sir Thomas Paul Latham, first baronet, textile manufacturer; they had two daughters. His wife divorced him in 1928. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in 1931. He wrote 'Full Throttle' (1932). He was injured in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933 when he burned his forearms when refuelling; this resulted in septicaemia which led to blood poisoning, from which he died in a London nursing home, at 7 Portland Place, on 22 June 1933. He was buried at Blakeney churchyard, Norfolk. His uncle succeeded him as fourth baronet. 

(Joel) Woolf Barnato (1895-1948), racing driver, was born at 27 St James's Place, Westminster, on 27 September 1895, the son of the wealthy South African diamond merchant Barnett Isaacs (Barney) Barnato (1852-1897) and his wife, Fannie Christiana, 'nee' Bees. Educated at Charterhouse School, he was admitted to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1913 to study for an ordinary BA degree, specializing in law. His university career was ended by the First World War, when he held the rank of acting captain in the Royal Field Artillery. He married at Marylebone register office on 7 December 1915 Dorothy Maitland (1892/3-1961), daughter of H. V. Falk of New York, with whom he had two surviving daughters, the younger of whom, Diana Barnato Walker, became a noted aviator. In May 1918, by deed poll, he renounced the Christian name Joel. He left his wife in 1921 and they subsequently divorced; she married Richard Butler Wainwright and, as Dorothy Maitland Wainwright, became a noted breeder of Guernsey cattle. As well as racing Bentley cars, he took part in motor boat racing, in 1925 winning the Duke of York's trophy on the Thames in his boat 'Ardenrun Manor'. He married second, in 1932, Jacqueline, 'nee' Quealy, of San Francisco, with whom he had two sons. He was commissioned pilot officer in the RAF in September 1940 and held the rank of wing commander. In December 1947 he married Joan Isachsen. He died from a coronary thrombosis at 90 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, on 27 July 1948, following an operation for bowel cancer. After a funeral service at St Jude's, Englefield Green, Surrey, he was buried in the churchyard there. 

George Edward Duller (1891-1962), racing driver and jockey, was born at 63 Edward Street, Plaistow, West Ham, on 26 January 1891, the son of George Henry Duller (1865-1930), a cab proprietor and later a trainer of racehorses at Epsom, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Green. He became a steeplechase jockey. During the First World War he was an air mechanic. On 17 September 1918 he married, at Epsom, Bessie Grace, the daughter of a racehorse trainer, George Godfrey Hyams. They had a daughter. Regarded as an 'outstanding hurdle race jockey' ('The Times', 8 Aug 1962), he rode Trespasser to three consecutive imperial cup wins at Sandown Park between 1920 and 1922. After retiring from riding he became a trainer. He died at his home, 78 Hookfield, Epsom, on 6 August 1962. 

Jack Lawson Dunfee (1901-1975), racing driver, was born at Albury, Putney Hill, London, on 19 October 1901, the second of four sons of Vickers Dunfee (1861-1927), a wine merchant and prominent figure in the corporation of the City of London, and his wife, Caroline Elizabeth, 'nee' Froy (1870-1922). He gave up racing after his brother's death in 1932. On 15 November 1939 he married the film actress Sandra Storme (1914-1979), born Eileen Violet Needham, daughter of Percy Needham, company director, and former wife of Arthur Griffiths. Jack Dunfee and his first wife divorced and she married Richard Francis Yarde-Buller, fourth Baron Churston. Dunfee married, second, on 19 July 1953, Margaret Audrey, daughter of John Francis White, company director, and third, in 1975, Jennifer Helen Oliver. He died at his home, Wychwood Manor, Ascott-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire, on 14 September 1975. His younger brother (Beresford) Clive Dunfee (1904-1932), racing driver, was born at 24 Gwendolen Avenue, Putney, on 18 June 1904. He became a member of the London stock exchange and married, on 11 December 1930, the actress Jane Baxter (1909-1996), who was born Feodora Kathleen Alice Forde, daughter of Henry Bligh Forde, civil engineer. During the 500 mile race at Brooklands on 26 September 1932, Clive Dunfee took over from his brother Jack driving Barnato's 8 litre Bentley. While overtaking another vehicle at a speed of 126 m.p.h. he went over the top of the high banking for which Brooklands was notorious, was thrown from the car, and was killed immediately. He was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 

(George Pearson) Glen Kidston (1899-1931), racing driver and aviator, was born at 54 Cromwell Road, Brompton, London, on 23 June 1899, the elder son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Archibald Glen Kidston (died 1913), a captain in the 3rd Royal Highlanders, and his wife, Helene Adeline Blanche, 'nee' Chapman. His family had established a firm of metal merchants in Glasgow. After his father's death, his mother married the naval officer and pioneer motorist and aviator Sir Walter Windham. Educated at Ludgrove School, Kidston passed through the Royal Naval College at Osborne (1912) and Dartmouth (1914). His life became a succession of dramatic escapes starting in September 1914 when, as a sixteen-year-old naval cadet, he survived two and a half hours in the sea when his cruiser, 'Hogue', sank after being torpedoed. Interned in Holland, he was repatriated and returned to naval service in the 'Orion' until transferring to submarines late in 1917. He was promoted to lieutenant in 1920, serving in submarines, and in December 1926 was given command of submarine H48 at Portsmouth. He retired from the navy with the rank of lieutenant-commander in 1928. He married on 25 November 1925 Nancy Miriel Denise (1906-1997), daughter of Edward Rowland Soames. They had a son. Debts incurred by her, while still a minor, were the subject of a high court action brought in 1927 by the firm of court dressmakers who had supplied her wedding trousseau. 
Kidston competed in motorcycle racing events from 1921, including the Ulster tourist trophy in 1928, when he crashed into a hedge at 95 m.p.h. In May 1927 he had survived an accident in the Solent when the motor boat he was racing split in two at 50 knots. He took up flying in 1928, gained his licence in April 1928, and became joint owner of a Fokker plane. Flying it on a big game expedition in east Africa he survived a landing in a swamp. In November 1929 he was the only survivor when a Junker airliner, on which he was a passenger from Croydon aerodrome to Amsterdam, crashed in dense fog near Caterham, Surrey. He was a keen promoter of commercial aviation and in April 1931 flew from Netheravon, Wiltshire, to Cape Town in six days to demonstrate the viability of a fast air postal service within the British empire. Kidston's luck finally ran out on a flight from Johannesburg to Durban, in connection with the affairs of Union Airways in South Africa, of which he was a financial backer. Crossing the Drakensberg mountains on 5 May 1931, the aeroplane disintegrated in a violent storm near Van Reenan, Natal, and Kidston and his co-pilot T. A. Gladstone were killed. It was later stated that Kidston had overloaded the plane with a heavy tea chest. Their bodies were returned to Britain, where Kidston was buried at Glasbury church, Breconshire. 

Bernard Rubin (1896-1936), motorist and aviator, was born at Carlton, Melbourne, Australia, on 6 December 1896, the eldest son of Mark Rubin (1867?-1919), a pearl merchant, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Davis. Educated at University College School, Hampstead, he served in the Royal Garrison Artillery in France where he was so severely wounded that he could not walk for three years. Subsequently he took up big game hunting, motor racing, and flying. On 22 March 1934 he set out from Lympne in a de Havilland Leopard Moth to fly to Australia, and starting the homeward flight from Darwin on 23 April 1934 reached Pevensey on 1 May. On 28 March 1935 he married, at the British consulate in Paris, Audrey Mary, eldest daughter of C. R. Simpson. He died at his home, the Old Cloth Hall, Cranbrook, Kent, on 27 June 1936, having contracted pulmonary tuberculosis following an operation for the collapse of a lung cavity. 


@@@@@


doc= 96151


Coke, Thomas, earl of Leicester (1697-1759), politician, architect, and art collector, was born on 17 June 1697, the eldest of the five children of Edward Coke (1676/8-1707), landowner, and his wife, Carey (1680-1707), the daughter of Sir John Newton, third baronet, of Barr's Court, Gloucestershire. The Cokes were a thriving gentry family in Norfolk whose considerable estate in the north of the county around Holkham had been established by Sir Edward Coke, James I's eminent chief justice. In 1671 the estate, comprising more than 1800 acres, was inherited by Robert Coke ('c'.1651-1679), Thomas's grandfather, who belonged to the younger branch of the dynasty, settled at Thorington, Suffolk, and served as MP for King's Lynn. 
In April 1707 Coke's father died, followed by his mother a few months later. Until Thomas Coke came of age in 1718 four relatives acted as his guardians and ran the estates conscientiously. Besides its large nucleus in Norfolk, the Coke estate consisted of lands and property in Suffolk, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Dorset, Kent, Somerset, and London. Prudent management and increased rents not only overcame the large debts left by his father but also enabled young Coke to embark in 1712 at the age of fifteen on a prolonged grand tour, one that would later prove to have made arguably the most artistically profound impact on an English student-traveller. Under the tutelage of Thomas Hobart, a fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, Coke had already developed a passion for classical antiquity. Accompanied by Hobart, he travelled extensively in France, Italy, the Netherlands, and the Habsburg empire, but it was classical Italy, especially Rome, that made the deepest impression. Coke saw himself as a young 'virtuoso' and spent liberally on rare books, manuscripts, paintings, drawings, and sculpture, as well as commissioning new works from contemporary artists. At Rome in 1714 he began taking instruction in the rudiments of architecture and draughtsmanship from the architect Giacomo Matiari, and during one of these sessions was introduced to William Kent, who at the time was still pursuing a painter's vocation. Over the next few years a lasting friendship grew from their architectural sightseeing excursions together to various parts of Italy, with Kent often acting as Coke's agent in the purchase of works of art. 
Coke returned to England in May 1718, and a month later, on coming of age, acquired control of estates that by then were yielding about $10,000 a year, making him one of the richest commoners in Britain. On 3 July he married Lady Margaret Tufton [Margaret Coke, countess of Leicester and 'suo jure' Baroness Clifford (1700-1775)], the third surviving daughter and coheir of Thomas Tufton, sixth earl of Thanet (1644-1729). The match had been arranged by his guardians primarily for the valuable social and financial benefits it would bring. Lady Margaret's marriage portion of $15,000 was used to defray the portions of Coke's two recently married sisters ($5000 in both cases), thus leaving untouched the estate and the income it provided. Their only surviving child, a son, Edward, was born in February 1719; two more children, born in 1721 and 1723, died in infancy. Coke nevertheless continued the dissolute ways he had fallen into while abroad, and was known to have resumed his debaucheries within six months of marriage. Margaret Coke -- 'a very agreeable and good lady' -- quietly tolerated her husband's persistent and open infidelity, tending to shy away from society. In 1737 he was reported to be involved 'with several ladies of quality and fashion' ('Egmont Diary', 2.392-3), and had lately been the subject of gossip on account of having lost to Lord Chesterfield in their rivalry for the affections of Lady Frances, a daughter of Robert Shirley, first Earl Ferrers. 
Coke quickly ruined the exemplary financial condition in which his estates had been handed over to him in 1718. Heavy expenditure, including large gambling losses, landed him in debt amounting to $15,000 by 1720. His hopes for a quick solution to these difficulties led him to speculate disastrously during the South Sea Bubble; the South Sea stock on which he laid out $48,900 resold for only $10,971. Not until the mid-nineteenth century would the Cokes feel confident again to invest significantly in the stock market. In the years that followed the crash Coke learned to live within his annual income of $10,000 or more, paying large sums of interest on his debts without drastically curtailing the lifestyle and expenditure of a gentleman of large estate. His high-spirited, boisterous nature was too deeply ingrained to keep him from the gaming table, the chase, the cockfighting arena, or from adding to his magnificent collections of art, manuscripts, and books. 
Coke chose to enter parliament at the general election of 1722, and was elected unopposed as knight of the shire for Norfolk. In the Commons he naturally supported his near neighbour, friend, and distant relative Robert Walpole, now one of the king's principal ministers, and in 1725 Walpole ensured that Coke was one of the wealthy commoners appointed knights of the newly created Order of the Bath. At court Coke became well known on account of his cultural interests and friendship with Kent, who by now was employed on various commissions in the royal residences. In May 1728 he was elevated to the peerage, as Baron Lovel of Minster Lovel, after his manorial property in Oxfordshire, though there was also dynastic affectation in his revival of this medieval barony. He felt, however, that he and his estate were worthy of an earldom, or at least a viscountcy, and confided to Lord Chesterfield in 1730 that since he always voted for the court in parliament 'I expect to be paid for it' ('Egmont Diary', 1.10). He was introduced in the Lords on 25 February 1729. Already a freemason by the early 1720s, he served as grand master of the grand lodge of England during 1731-2. His quest for pecuniary reward was eventually answered in 1733 when he was appointed joint postmaster-general, the proceeds of which brought him about $1000 a year. He was to hold this office for the rest of his life, exercising control over an important branch of local patronage throughout the country. A further reward came when Lady Lovel became a peeress in her own right in 1734, when the abeyance of the medieval barony of Clifford, which had been held by her father, was terminated in her favour. But although he enjoyed close social and sporting companionship with leading ministers and courtiers, and spoke fairly frequently in the Lords on some of the most important topics of the day, he was never regarded as material suitable for high ministerial office. Lord Hervey complained in 1729 that Lovel currently basked undeservedly as 'the darling idol of the wits' (Ilchester, 41-2), and it was this delight in social attention that he grandly exhibited at Holkham, with its convenient proximity to Walpole's Houghton, and where as part of the entertainment he would seek to impress ministerial friends and guests with his vision of a sumptuous new house in his barren corner of Norfolk. 
Lovel seems to have conceived the notion of one day building a classically styled mansion at Holkham while he was still on his grand tour. But the recovery of his finances meant that he could proceed only gradually, and work on the house did not begin until 1734. He had begun in the 1720s by sheltering the intended site from the bitter North Sea winds by planting extensive woodland. He also made considerable progress in landscaping the vicinity of the house, commissioning William Kent to design the obelisk, triumphal arch, and temple, although some of his visitors doubted whether such an inhospitable coastal area of dunes and salt marshes was suitable for country house-building. Lovel's plans for the mansion itself had been perfected over a long period. Initially he envisaged a rectangular block in simple but distinctive neo-Palladian style, the drawings for which were produced under his close supervision by his Norwich-born clerk of works, Matthew Brettingham. In due course this was elaborated by the addition of four connecting 'pavilions' at each corner, designed by Kent, to accommodate the family apartments, while the central block or 'corps de logis' would contain the state rooms and Lovel's collections of art and books. Lovel also worked on his design in close consultation with the earl of Burlington, the leading exponent of Palladianism, whose villa at Chiswick, completed in 1729, Burlington himself had designed. 
Holkham has previously been regarded entirely as the work of William Kent, following assertions by Horace Walpole, while others have accepted Brettingham's claim to have been the principal architect. But scholars are now convinced that though both Kent and Brettingham were much involved, it was Lovel himself who masterminded the final design, habitually intervening, amending, and redrawing. On completion of the first pavilion during 1740-41, Lovel was at last able to move from his cramped Elizabethan manor house nearby, Hill Hall. Holkham would not in fact be completed until after Lovel's death, but visitors who came to see its progress marvelled at the achievement and its promise as one of the most splendid new country houses in England. Lovel was never in easy financial circumstances, but remained undeterred by immense debts and large building costs. In order to press on with construction he sold off much land outside Norfolk, while also maintaining his policy to buy up property that would augment the Holkham estate. The effect of this, however, was serious depopulation in his locality, and towards the end of his life he lamented that he had swallowed up so many of his neighbours that the nearest one remaining was the king of Denmark. 
In May 1744 Lovel was advanced to the coveted earldom, but caused a minor furore in snapping up the title of Leicester, another title of medieval origin, which had only recently become extinct in the Sidney family. The dynastic vision that lay behind his peerage and the construction of Holkham was shattered, however, in 1753 upon the death of his heir, Viscount Coke. Coke had turned out even more dissolute than his father and his marriage on 1 April 1747 to Lady Mary Campbell ['see 'Coke, Lady Mary], a daughter of the second duke of Argyll, quickly ended in their separation. Leicester withdrew from society for a while, much concerned at the toll his wife's grief was taking on her, and feeling unable to recover his spirits until she had recovered hers. In subsequent years, finding himself out of place in fashionable London society, he dedicated himself with renewed determination and vigour to the completion of Holkham, while the constant stream of guests and visitors could count on the generous hospitality of 'the fat, laughing, joking peer... whose taste for building is so elegant that it is far beyond conception or description' (Admiral Edward Boscawen, 1757, quoted in James, 273). He died at Holkham Hall on 20 April 1759 and was buried in the Coke ancestral vault at Tittleshall church some 20 miles south. In accordance with his will, the entire estate passed to his wife to whom he also left detailed instructions for the completion of the mansion. By 1765 the dowager countess had dutifully fulfilled this wish. She died on 28 February 1775. Thomas Coke's Holkham has survived almost entirely unchanged and is widely acknowledged as the finest Palladian mansion constructed in eighteenth-century England. 


