@@@@@


doc= 96160


Alexander, Robert Scott, Baron Alexander of Weedon (1936-2005), barrister and banker, was born on 5 September 1936 at 12B Kingsway West, Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, the son of Samuel James Alexander, motor engineer and garage proprietor, and his wife, Hannah May, 'nee' Trevitt, an accountant's secretary. He was privately educated at Reading School, Brighton College, and King's College, Cambridge. At Cambridge he took advantage of the flexible tripos system to switch after two years from English, under the supervision of Dadie Rylands and F. R. Leavis, to law; he was taught by Kenneth Polack, a South African research student who had just completed a pupillage in the Temple, and who diverted him from his original plan of becoming a solicitor. He obtained a 2:1. Inspired by his reading of the lives of great advocates, he studied for his professional examinations by correspondence course, and was called to the bar -- a route, as he once put it in a British Council lecture in Pakistan, 'traditionally said to be followed by many actors manques' -- by the Middle Temple in 1961 with the aid of a Harmsworth scholarship. During this time he earned extra money by sub-editing the 'Times' law reports. 
Alexander's path to the pinnacle of his profession was not negotiated in a smooth upward trajectory. At university he had indulged in amateur theatricals without notable success and he never spoke at the union. For five years he practised on the western circuit, selected by indigent defendants for the occasional dock briefs by reason of his conspicuous presence, and he only moved to Brick Court in the Temple on the recommendation of Eustace Roskill, chairman of the Hampshire quarter sessions and an enthusiastic patron of the talented young. The chambers, whose alumni included Patrick Devlin, specialized in commercial work, but in the doldrums of the mid-1960s the head, Sam Cooke, was not in favour of his tenancy. He was persuaded by the senior clerk, Ron Burley, to take a chance, a shrewd piece of advice that in the long term made Burley the doyen of the clerking fraternity. During Alexander's membership and not least because of his own growing reputation Brick Court became part of the chambers' magic circle. But he was no solitary star. His contemporaries included Nicholas Phillips, later lord chief justice, and Sydney Kentridge, the celebrated South African advocate. 
Height is not a necessary or even a sufficient guarantee of success at the bar but it is an advantage; and at 6 feet 6 inches Alexander had the physical attributes to dominate a court. His advocacy was fluent but not florid, his voice plummy but not pungent, purged, save in his own view, of the midland accent of his youth. He was always immaculately dressed. He ascribed his forensic achievements to meticulous preparation. 'I would prepare my questions', he said, 'so that if I got the answer yes, I would go one way, and if not, another. It meant that you thought through the various permutations in advance' ('The Independent', 8 Nov 2005). Lord Denning described him as 'the best advocate of his generation' (ibid.). He took silk in 1973 after a bare twelve years. 
Consistent with Brick Court's traditional culture Alexander practised primarily as a commercial lawyer, but he ranged beyond the traditional fields of banking, shipping, and insurance. He held briefs for government, successfully in denying trade union rights to workers at the Government Communications Headquarters in Cheltenham, unsuccessfully in trying to prevent publication of 'Spycatcher', a book written by the rogue former MI5 officer Peter Wright. His private clients included Kerry Packer, whom he helped to defeat the cricketing establishment, and Jeffrey Archer, for whom he won a famous libel trial. Archer's subsequent imprisonment for perjury in no way detracted from the praise accorded to Alexander's conduct of the case, including his cross-examination of the prostitute who claimed -- contrary to his client's denial -- to have had sexual relations with Archer. When in 1985 'The Guardian' assessed his annual earnings at $1 million, Alexander publicly offered to disclose the true figure if the newspaper paid 20 per cent of the difference to charity. It declined the offer. But that his fees were at the top end of the market was indisputable, and enabled him to purchase, in addition to his London home, properties near Aylesbury, in the Dordogne, and in Spain, as well as to indulge a hobby of collecting paintings by young artists. 
Alexander's courtroom battles with Tom Bingham, later holder of the judicial 'triple crown', successively master of the rolls, lord chief justice, and senior law lord, were the forensic equivalent of the pugilistic struggles of Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier. Many thought he would choose -- as he certainly could have chosen -- the same judicial career as his sometime opponent, not least after his chairmanship of the Bar Council in 1985-6, a post that then gave legitimate expectation of appointment to the bench. He decided, however, on a complete career change. After a two-year stint as chairman of the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, from 1987 to 1989 (during which time he was made a life peer, as Baron Alexander of Weedon, in 1988), he became chairman of National Westminster Bank from 1989 to 1999, acquiring en route non-executive directorships of the Stock Exchange, RTZ Corporation, and Total Oil. He was not the first nor last of those who spurned judicial office, but he was a notable example of a barrister, eminently 'papabile', who (like an increasing number of his generation) recognized the virtues of life beyond the law. 
Alexander shone somewhat less as a banker than he had as a barrister, seeking to balance the interests of shareholders with stakeholders to (inevitably) the entire satisfaction of neither, and at the conclusion of his bank chairmanship he returned to practice, in 2001. His second coming was not an unalloyed success. Unwilling to retread the path of trial work he did not return to Brick Court, but became instead joint head of chambers (with Michael Crystal) at 3-4 South Square, a specialist insolvency set, where his son David practised. He promoted himself as an appellate advocate, arbitrator, and expert in constitutional and international law, but although he became treasurer of the Middle Temple in 2001, the complete break he had made for a decade meant that he never wholly recovered his earlier pre-eminence. He was in any event occupied by a collection of distinguished extra-curricular posts. He once lectured on 'My passions, Shakespeare and cricket', which explained his chairmanship of both the Royal Shakespeare Company (2000-04) and the MCC (2001-4). He was, as well, a trustee of 'The Economist' and of the National Gallery. His interest in education brought him the chancellorship of the University of Exeter, from 1998 (where a building dedicated to drama was posthumously named after him), a governorship of Wycombe Abbey School, and a quintet of honorary degrees. 
A consensual man by temperament, and schooled by the disciplines of his profession to see and to articulate both sides of any argument, Alexander was an early member of the Social Democratic Party but subsequently switched his allegiance, becoming a Conservative life peer in 1988. Although both a Europhile and a one-nation tory, he none the less was an admirer of Margaret Thatcher. He had well-known ambitions to become lord chancellor, but the vagaries of politics denied him a post to which he would have been well suited. He nevertheless rendered his public service without partisanship. He was on the government panel for sustainable development during the Major and the Blair premierships (1994-2000), was a member of the Jenkins commission on electoral reform (1997-8), and advised Gordon Brown (as chancellor) on the fiscal regime for the shipping industry. He also chaired the House of Lords delegated powers and deregulation scrutiny committee (1995-2002). 
If Conservative by party, Alexander was liberal by temperament. He served as chairman of Justice, the human rights organization (1990-2005), and of Crisis, a charity for single homeless people (1990-96). He wrote a book on constitutional reform, 'The Voice of the People' (1997). He was a vigorous defender of judicial independence and of the interests of the bar. But usually he carried his emollient style from his profession into his public life, always balancing his criticism of particular policies with words of general praise for their authors. His broadside against the legitimacy of the invasion of Iraq ('scraping the bottom of the legal barrel'; 'The Guardian', 15 Oct 2003) and his assault on the government's hastily announced plans for constitutional reform in 2003 ('apparently written on the back of an envelope'; 'The Independent', 8 Nov 2005) were exceptions to the rule: the consummate diplomat could on occasion adopt the mien of the warrior. 
Alexander was married three times: first on 26 October 1963 to Frances Rosemary Heveningham Pughe, a 22-year-old student, and daughter of Major Richard Pughe, army officer; secondly on 27 July 1978 to Elizabeth Frances Warrens Norman, a 25-year-old fashion designer, and daughter of Colonel Charles Richard Warrens Norman, army officer; and thirdly on 9 July 1985 to Mary (Marie) Anderson, a 38-year-old Irish-born barrister and former model, and daughter of Daniel Joseph Sugrue, farmer. The first two marriages ended in divorce but the third lasted until his death. With his first wife Alexander had three children, David ('b'. 1964), Mary ('b'. 1966), and William ('b'. 1969), and with his second a son, Mathew, who died in infancy. There was another daughter, Rosemary ('b'. 1962). He himself died at St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth, London of a stroke on 6 November 2005, having risen from a provincial background to the summit of the establishment -- a classic illustration of the opportunity for upward mobility in post-war Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 96161


Fowles, John Robert (1926-2005), author and museum curator, was born on 31 March 1926 at Waygate, 37 Fillebrook Avenue, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, the only son and elder child of Robert John Fowles and his wife, Gladys May, 'nee' Richards. While his father commuted into London, where he managed the family tobacco firm, Allen and Wright, his mother cheerfully assumed the traditional role of housewife, looking after their small but comfortable semi-detached home and the son who would remain their only child until the late arrival of a daughter, Hazel, in 1942. 
Fowles enjoyed a conventional middle-class childhood, attending Alleyn Court preparatory school in Westcliff-on-Sea, where he demonstrated an aptitude for both learning and sports. Among the teachers at the school was his mother's brother Stanley, who took his nephew on nature expeditions into the countryside, hunting for caterpillars and lappet-moths on the Thames estuary marshes. The experience helped to develop a lifelong interest that equalled if not surpassed his passion for literature. Indeed, the two pursuits would often coincide: his first published essay, 'Entomology for a schoolboy', which appeared in the Alleyn Court school magazine in 1938, offered an obvious foreshadowing of his first novel, 'The Collector', and through his life he regularly found opportunities to write about the nature that he loved. 
In 1939 Fowles won an exhibition to Bedford School. Having enjoyed an unusually sheltered and serene childhood, he found the experience of being a boarder at public school a shock. After enduring a year of homesickness and bullying, he was withdrawn from the school for a term, which coincided with his family evacuating to Ipplepen, a village halfway between Newton Abbot and Totnes in Devon. It was a sudden, dramatic change in his circumstances that reinforced his sense of nature as a restorative refuge and also marked the beginning of a strong identification with the west country, from where his mother's family had come. He returned to Bedford for the spring term of 1941 with a new-found resilience that enabled him to resume his school career with considerable success. He eventually became captain of cricket and head of school. Responsible for imposing discipline on 500 boys, he carried out his duties with an outward seriousness and respect for the rules of the school, but this display of conformity and convention hid a more sensitive and dissenting side. He would later compare his character in these years to a caddis-fly larva, which builds around itself a tough protective casing out of whatever surrounding material happens to be available. 
In 1944 Fowles left Bedford to join the Royal Marines. After completing his officer training, he was posted to Okehampton camp on Dartmoor as an instructor in charge of training commando units. Prizing the opportunity that the post offered to explore the natural world he loved, he considered continuing his military career into peacetime, but was persuaded by a visit from the mayor of Plymouth, Isaac Foot, to take up a place at Oxford. In 1947 he began at New College, where he read French and German, although he soon dropped German to focus on French language and literature; in later years he would cite his dislike of the 'Lieder' evenings of the German department as the reason. His time at Oxford was a period of significant self-discovery, in which a thirst for adventure caused him, once and for all, to cast off the skin of the rather conservative-seeming public school boy and Marine officer. A friendship with a fellow student and committed Marxist, Fred (Podge) Porter, caused him to challenge many of his previous preconceptions, laying the ground for views that would mature into a radical socialist outlook. 
As transforming an experience was a visit to the south of France during the long vacation of 1948. Befriending an elderly French millionaire, Monsieur Jullie, and his young companion, Micheline Gilbert, Fowles was invited to join the crew of their yacht, as it travelled along France's Mediterranean coast. Confiding details of a past in the resistance and a present divided between her rich lover and a husband in Paris, Micheline provided the young Oxford student with an insight into the complexities of grown-up life. Fowles would later confess a 'calf love' for Micheline; there was no prospect of his feelings being returned, but another lesson in his sentimental education quickly followed when he began an affair with the yacht's young Danish cook, Kaja Juhl, thus completing a memorable summer. During the long vacation of the following year Fowles joined an ornithological trip to the Finnmark region of Norway, which had been organized by the naturalist Peter Scott's Severn Wildfowl Trust. Journeying to the Arctic tundra and fir forests, Fowles encountered a northern landscape of spectacular solitude that, as much as his Mediterranean sojourn, helped to stir the imagination of the future novelist. 
At Oxford Fowles found himself free to think about, and to engage with, the world around him. The desire to express this new independence of thought tilted him decisively into becoming a writer. The journal that he began to keep consistently from this time marked the beginning of a long and determined literary apprenticeship, which also expressed itself in a continuous output of short stories, poems, plays, ideas for film scripts, and various other fragments of writing. 
After graduating with a second-class degree in 1950, Fowles, with the help of his tutor at New College, Merlin Thomas, secured a year-long post as a 'lecteur' at Poitiers University. While becoming a published writer had emerged as his chief ambition, entries in his journal for this period reveal the exacting standards that would put off his debut for many years: 'At twenty-five I have created nothing that I can venture to publish. All of it is derivative, or faulty in technique or conception' ('Journals', 1.108). Arriving in Greece the following year to teach English at the Anargyrios and Korgialeneios school on the island of Spetses, Fowles set to work on a novel, 'Journey to Athens'. In his own words 'a jewel, a Treasure Island, a paradise' ('Journals', 1.150), Spetses would play a critical role in determining both his career and his life. It introduced him to his future wife Elizabeth, 'nee' Bradley (died 1990), who arrived on the island with her husband Roy Christy and their young daughter Anna. (She was the daughter of Edgar Bradley, electrical engineer.) It also helped him to break away from the impasse of 'derivative' writing: the unpublished 'Journey to Athens' itself may have marked only one more stage in his apprenticeship, but what he saw, found, and did in Greece provided him with the inspiration for the novel that would, after many mutations, eventually be published as 'The Magus' (1965). If falling in love with Elizabeth in such an idyllic setting made the period in Spetses a highly romantic, fulfilling time for Fowles, it was also an extremely painful one, with the blossoming of their relationship involving the break-up of another. Fowles eventually married Elizabeth at Hampstead register office on 2 April 1957, but there was a heavy cost as Elizabeth struggled through a difficult divorce and separation from her daughter. 
Having returned with Elizabeth to England in July 1953, Fowles taught for a year at Ashridge College in Hertfordshire, and then, in 1954, became a teacher of English at St Godric's secretarial and language college in Hampstead, London. There he would remain until the successful publication of his first novel, 'The Collector', in 1963. Turned into a Hollywood film, starring Terence Stamp and directed by William Wyler, the recipient of three academy awards, the novel instantly established Fowles as a leading novelist on both sides of the Atlantic. Although over the course of his career Fowles would enjoy a huge worldwide audience, such fame was not something that he had consciously courted. His second book, 'The Aristos' (1964), a collection of numbered philosophical observations after the manner of Pascal's 'Pensees', was an example of how he would always follow his own instinct as a serious writer rather than the market. It was this uncompromising attitude that would help him over the next twenty years to push forward the boundaries of modern fiction in a series of works that were never content to repeat past success but always sought to experiment with the narrative form. 
Embracing his new career as a best-selling author, Fowles in 1965 left London with Elizabeth to live near the town of Lyme Regis on the Dorset coast. The move provided him with easy access to the nature and wildlife he loved, but also encouraged a new passion for local history. He referred to the collection of his different selves as the John Fowles Club, but whether writer, naturalist, or historian, those selves all found a common source in an extreme sensitivity to environment and a flair for describing it. Another way Fowles would explain this was to speak of 'the domain' -- the garden, literal or figurative, where one was free to wander. This sense of domain accounted for the often strong autobiographical vein in his novels. Just as 'The Magus' drew on his experience as a teacher on Spetses, 'The French Lieutenant's Woman' (1969) explored the past of the town in which he lived, and the eponymous hero of 'Daniel Martin' (1977), who is a screenwriter, provided another obvious alter ego. 
For the first few years of life in Dorset the domain was to be found at Underhill Farm. The house stood to the west of Lyme, on a geologically unstable stretch of coast known as the Undercliff. Overlooking the coast, the fields of the farm ran down to the cliff's edge. The sea's expanse complemented a rugged landscape that, inaccessible to human habitation, gave the impression of having been made over entirely to nature. Fowles derived a profound contentment from this setting, in his journals describing it as 'a huge, complex poem' ('Journals', 1.646). But the taste of paradise would be short-lived. When in February 1968 a large area of the farm slid into the sea, Fowles and his wife, Elizabeth, were forced to leave. Moving to Lyme Regis, they made their new home in Belmont House. A large Georgian property situated high above the town, it overlooked the Cobb, the harbour that Fowles's novel 'The French Lieutenant's Woman' would make famous. 
Published in 1969, 'The French Lieutenant's Woman', which won the W. H. Smith award, was a huge critical and commercial success, remaining on 'The New York Times' best-seller list for over a year. But although it firmly established its author as one of Britain's most important novelists, Fowles himself felt increasingly remote from what he regarded to be the narrow concerns of the literary world, with the often restrictive criteria that it applied to writers. After the appearance of a volume of poems in 1973 offered some defiance of this tendency to pigeonhole, Fowles published a collection of long stories, 'The Ebony Tower', in 1974, and then the novel 'Daniel Martin' in 1977, but through the decade his fiction writing formed an increasingly intermittent part of a literary output that, in such works as 'Shipwrecks' (1974), 'Islands' (1978), and 'The Tree' (1979), was as notable for its engagement with the natural world. A second volume of poems, written from the 1950s onwards, and collected from Fowles's papers following his death, was published in 2012. 
In 1978 Fowles was appointed curator of Lyme Regis's local museum, the Philpot. Although the position was intended to be honorary, he made of it a full-time occupation, as he set about organizing repairs to the dilapidated building and cataloguing a rich and varied collection of fossils, local artefacts, and old photographs. His work as local historian and naturalist was interspersed with long trips to Greece or France, which had remained continuing sources of inspiration since his first discovery of them as a young man. Although Fowles published only two more novels, 'Mantissa' (1982) and 'A Maggot' (1985), he remained as industrious a writer as ever, producing a steady stream of essays, translations, reviews, forewords, and introductions. Gathered together in the collection 'Wormholes' (1998), they formed a mosaic of varied but passionately pursued interests that reflected a wilfully eclectic cast of mind. 
In 1988 Fowles suffered a serious stroke and two years later his wife, Elizabeth, died. But over time he rediscovered an equilibrium, which was greatly aided by his marriage on 3 September 1998 to his second wife, Sarah Smith ('b'. 1943/4), advertising director, and daughter of Peter Smith, farmer. In the last years of his life Fowles prepared for publication two remarkable volumes of journals (2003 and 2006). Forthright and uncompromising, they were highly controversial, but, in the words of one reviewer, amounted to 'what may come to be seen as one of the very best of his works' ('Literary Review', Oct 2003). After many years of poor health he died of heart failure at Axminster Hospital, Devon, on 5 November 2005. He was survived by his second wife, Sarah. He did not believe in an afterlife. Thirty years earlier, he had named his new home, Underhill Farm, 'Nil manet', 'Nothing remains', aware of what lay in store for this house on a cliff-face even as he took possession of it. Careless of his fame and reputation, he would undoubtedly have taken the same attitude to his place in posterity, although the quality of his work will ensure that his name lasts longer than most. 


@@@@@


doc= 96170


Wragg, Edward Conrad (1938-2005), educationist, was born on 26 June 1938 at 158 Clarence Street, Sheffield, the only child of George William Wragg, fruit and flower hawker, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Brandstetter, a cook. His father's first wife had died and he had a half-brother from that marriage. His mother had been born in Urfahr, Austria, and Wragg's uncle had been at school with Adolf Hitler. Wragg's mother had come to the UK on a passage assisted by the Austrian government, worked in service, and met her husband when he came to the house with flowers to sell. She was ambitious for her son and rather than send him to the inner-city school local to the family's terraced home she took him on the tram to Hunters Bar primary school, then considered the best in the city. When early signs of Wragg's promise emerged his father, a strong, opinionated, and determined working-class man, was proud of him, but his mother remained the driving force. 
Wragg inherited a fine singing voice from his mother, who had sung on Austrian radio, and every Friday he was expected to sing in his primary school assembly. He would become physically sick with apprehension but his mother insisted he do it, sending him in with a biscuit to settle his stomach. In his last year at Hunters Bar an inspirational class teacher had a lasting impact. The teacher used projects to help his pupils learn at a time when projects were not generally done in schools. He took the class on trips, including one to Sheffield reference library to show them how to use reference materials. Wragg continued to use the library when he was a university student and met former classmates there. He passed the entrance examination for the city's King Edward VII Grammar School, where he excelled and pursued his loves of music, acting, and sport -- he was a lifelong Sheffield Wednesday fan even though he was discouraged from playing football at King Edward's because it was 'working class' ('The Independent'). Later he coached university sides and was a qualified referee. 
Wragg could have studied music at university but instead chose to study German at Durham University and contented his musical side by playing guitar in a skiffle band. His mother's native tongue had not been spoken at home. She and her sister, who also lived in England, had been reported for speaking in German when to do so during the Second World War risked internment, and abandoned their first language. Wragg grew up during the Second World War experiencing anti-German feeling and was the only child in his street not invited to VE-day celebrations, because he was known as the 'little German' ('Times Educational Supplement', 3 Feb 2006). 
At Durham Wragg was joined by his girlfriend, Judith King, whom he had met at a Congregational church conference at Easter 1956. The daughter of Beaumont King, steelworker, she annoyed her teachers by giving up a local authority exhibition to read geography and history at Durham to take a shorter teacher training course so that they would finish their studies at the same time. Wragg graduated with a first-class degree and a distinction in the oral, and followed this with a first in his postgraduate certificate of education. He then spent four years as an assistant master at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Wakefield, from 1960. He and Judith, who had qualified as a primary school teacher, married at Netherfield Independent Chapel, Thurlstone, Yorkshire, on 29 December that year -- the start of a highly successful marriage that produced three much loved children, Josie, Caroline, and Christopher. Meanwhile Wragg's ability was spotted early, and he was appointed head of German at Wyggeston Boys' School, Leicester, at the age of twenty-six. He stayed only two years but left a clear impression on his pupils. One of them, Paul Fletcher, later said: 'He was an inspiring teacher... His teaching style was effortless, his classroom control flawless, his humour still memorable' (http://newsvote.bbc.co.uk/mpapps, 10 Nov 2005). 
In 1966 Wragg became a lecturer in education at Exeter University, where he also studied for his PhD, awarded in 1972 (he had taken the degree of MEd at Leicester University in 1967). In 1973 he was appointed to the chair of education at Nottingham University, at thirty-five the youngest professor of education in the country. At Nottingham he led an intensive two-year project looking at mixed ability teaching that found that bright children were not sufficiently stretched as effort focused on bringing the less able up to standard. He wrote: 'It is probably true that only exceptional teachers can manage unstreamed classes. I have tried it myself, and it is the hardest thing I have ever done' ('The Times', 11 Nov 2005). But he thought it should be left to the schools to decide whether to stream classes or not, rather than to 'some moronic teenager in the Number 10 Policy Unit', as he later put it ('The Guardian', 1 Feb 2005). He vehemently opposed the 'marketization' of education. His overriding aim was to see all children get a better education, not just children lucky enough to get into good schools. He railed against the testing regime and the league tables that followed the introduction of the national curriculum by the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, but his branding as an educational establishment 'leftie' by the political right later in his career failed to take on board the traditionalist side of this progressive educator. 
In 1978 Wragg became director of the Institute of Education at Exeter University after he dazzled the interview board, and under his leadership it became pre-eminent in education research. During his time there he became the acerbic and witty spokesman for a generation of teachers who felt he uniquely understood what they did. For twenty-five years his columns in the 'Times Educational Supplement', and later 'The Independent' and 'The Guardian', poured jargon-free comic vitriol on policies that diminished and demeaned the professionalism of teachers. He was on the teachers' side. As he said in one of his columns, 'There is no higher calling; without [teachers] society would slide back into primitive squalor' ('Times Educational Supplement', 19 April 2002). Successive education ministers from Shirley Williams to Estelle Morris consulted him, and if they didn't he would ring and give the benefit of his advice. He was an ideal point of contact for journalists, since he seemed to know exactly what was going on in the corridors of power. He kept on teaching in schools whenever he could and was in touch with the realities of the job. Shortly before his death he took part in a television series that he masterminded, in which a group of disaffected teenagers was taught in a specially tailored school. At one point Wragg confessed to camera: 'I like all the kids and love them, but I could cheerfully take them behind a tree and ruin my career by smacking the hell out of them' ('Times Educational Supplement', 9 Sept 2005). Teachers took comfort from someone who knew how frustrating teaching could be. 
During the course of his career Wragg wrote more than fifty books and 800 academic articles but it was his newspaper columns and his frequent appearances on television and radio that made him the most famous man in education of his day. He lampooned government ministers and educationists who had come up with what he described as wheezes, and created such unforgettable characters as Tony Zoffis (as in 'Tony's office') -- a man who supposedly always did what the prime minister of the day, Tony Blair, wanted. His arch enemy Chris Woodhead, a controversial rightwing chief inspector of schools, was described as Woodentop. But Wragg was no dogmatist. In his book 'The Cubic Curriculum' (1997), which looked at theories of how children best absorb information and nurture their imagination, he said: 'Learners need the excitement of finding out, just as they need the confirmation of being told. It should not be a matter of one versus the other' (p. 89). As an example of his pragmatism, if asked whether he favoured 'phonics' or 'look and say' when teaching children to read, he would ask his interlocutor whether they favoured a fork or a knife when eating. 
Wragg stood down as director of the Institute of Education at Exeter in 1994 but continued as professor of education until 2003, when he retired, and was made professor emeritus. He had received numerous honorary degrees and had been a specialist adviser to parliamentary select committees on education and worked on numerous educational bodies, often from the chairman's seat. He was particularly influential as chairman of the School Broadcasting Council and its successor, the Educational Broadcasting Council (1981-7). He worked with Lord Puttnam to found the national teaching awards and from 2000 chaired the judging panel. His work in leading a commission investigating the struggling education system in Birmingham was seminal and helped the city's schools turn a corner. He suggested performance targets set by teachers, not governments, and entitlements to school trips and cultural visits, harking back to things that had excited his intellect and imagination as a boy. In 2008 cultural entitlements for all schoolchildren were introduced nationally. At the time of his death it was rumoured that he was about to join the House of Lords as a Liberal Democrat peer. 
Wragg had huge energy, rising at 4 or 5 a.m. to write articles before the working day began. He lived life in the fast lane both metaphorically and literally: his much loved BMW had a driver who liked to get a move on. He was an editor's dream, delivering sparkling copy on time and to length and, if necessary, at very short notice. He was a reporter's dream, too, whose formidable memory calling up complex background made further research redundant. He was also a man of great kindness and warmth. 
Wragg had taken up jogging in his mid-thirties and tried to jog every day. Once, in Belfast during the height of the troubles, he had jogged in his suit, his wife, Judith, having hidden his running kit because she didn't think it was safe out on the streets; he had a deliciously stubborn streak. It was while jogging one Sunday that he collapsed near his home and was taken to the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, where he died on 10 November 2005 of myocardial infarction. He was survived by his wife and their three children. When the news was released website message boards at the BBC, Exeter University, and the 'Times Educational Supplement' among others were inundated with messages of condolence. In February 2006 Exeter Cathedral was packed with 700 people for a memorial service. A tribute evening later that month at London's Institute of Education attracted more than 900 participants and speakers included John Prescott, the deputy prime minister; Neil Kinnock, the former leader of the Labour Party; and Rory Bremner, the impressionist and comedian (for whom Wragg had written sketches). A memorial fund was launched during the evening to provide educational opportunities for disadvantaged young people in Wragg's home town of Sheffield. 


@@@@@


doc= 96171


Anson, Thomas Patrick John, fifth earl of Lichfield (1939-2005), photographer, was born on 25 April 1939 at 16 Embankment Gardens, Chelsea, London, the only son and elder child of Thomas William Arnold Anson, Viscount Anson (1913-1958), army officer, and elder son and heir of the fourth earl of Lichfield, and his wife, Anne Ferelith Fenella Bowes-Lyon (1917-1980), later (following their divorce in 1948 and her remarriage in 1950 to Prince Georg of Denmark) Princess Anne of Denmark. His mother was a niece of Queen Elizabeth, later Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, who stood sponsor at his christening, and he was first cousin once removed of Queen Elizabeth II. He and his sister, Elizabeth ('b'. 1941), a party organizer, grew up with their father and grandfather at the family seat, Shugborough Hall in Staffordshire, with its 5000 acre estate. 
Anson was educated at Harrow School, where he began his career as a professional photographer by charging his friends 9died for the leaving pictures he took with his Kodak Retinette, and at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, where in 1957 he joined the regular army as an officer cadet, and was commissioned lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards in 1959. On 14 September 1960 he succeeded his grandfather as fifth earl of Lichfield, and ran what was left of the Shugborough estate after making over most of it to the National Trust, though he retained a thirty-five-room apartment. He resigned his commission in 1962 to take up photography, and worked as a darkroom technician for Dmitri Kasterine and Michael Wallis. A technically proficient craftsman, he was never afraid of advances, and enthusiastically embraced digital photography. 
Though born to be a society photographer (and he did many portraits of debutantes, signed Lichfield rather than Patrick Lichfield, which he reserved for his more serious work), Lichfield was lucky to start out in an era when photography was a chic profession -- whose members, though mostly working-class, included two earls, Snowdon, who, as Lichfield said, was a photographer who became a lord, and himself, a lord who became a photographer. He created some of the defining images of the 1960s and 1970s, such as a 1968 photograph of a nude Marsha Hunt, the African-American star of the rock musical 'Hair'. (He had shrewdly invested in 'Hair' and 'Oh! Calcutta!') Mick Jagger and David Bailey posed for him, as did Joanna Lumley and Jane Birkin, and he made the iconic 'Swinging London' group portrait with Roman Polanski, David Hockney, and Lady Antonia Fraser. Later he took pictures of his own relatives in the royal family, of which the best known were those of a relaxed duke of Windsor (his good humour helped by Lichfield having fallen through the seat of a chair), and his pictures of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer's wedding in 1981. Clicking his tongue to make the noise of a shutter, he deceived his rival photographers into using up their quota of exposures, leaving him alone to capture the famous shot of the bridal group collapsing in a heap of giggles after the formal shoot was finished. The portraits he made of most members of the royal family at work and on holiday contributed a good deal to the prevailing spirit of informality of the Windsors. 
Lichfield married, to great fanfare on 8 March 1975, Lady Leonora Mary Grosvenor ('b'. 1949), daughter of Robert George Grosvenor, fifth duke of Westminster, and sister of the sixth duke of Westminster. He was a devoted father to their three children, Rose ('b'. 1976), Thomas ('b'. 1978), and Eloise ('b'. 1981), though the marriage ended in divorce in 1986, owing something, he thought, to the fact that he was a workaholic who spent an average of 200 nights a year in hotels. 
Slim and elegant, despite his slightly absurd bouffant hair-do, with his beautifully tailored clothes, and seldom without a crisp, white pocket handkerchief, Lichfield was a fixture of the glamorous London social scene that began in the 1960s. He was a director of some London restaurants, including the casual chain Deals, which he ran with Eddie Lim and David Linley, and a dining club in Mayfair called Burke's that he opened with Doug Hayward, the society tailor. Thanks to Diana Vreeland, the celebrated (and helpfully snobbish) editor of American 'Vogue', he had a ten-year contract with the magazine that put him in the highest rank of British photographers, which included Cecil Beaton, Lord Snowdon, David Bailey, and Norman Parkinson. He published a dozen books, mostly of his photographs. 
At his holiday home on Mustique in 1991 Lichfield suffered serious injuries in a fall. He was cared for by his partner, Lady (Mary) Annunziata Asquith ('b'. 1948), with whom he had done a stint as models for a Burberry advertising campaign in the late 1980s. She was the eldest daughter of Julian Edward George Asquith, second earl of Oxford and Asquith. Lichfield died of a stroke, arterial disease, and emphysema on 11 November 2005 in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford. He was survived by Lady Annunziata Asquith and by the three children of his marriage, and was succeeded as sixth earl by his son, Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 96174


Woof, Robert Samuel (1931-2005), literary scholar and museum director, was born on 20 April 1931 at Royal Albert Farm, Lancaster, the third child of William Woof, a progressive farm manager, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Mason. He became head boy at Lancaster Royal Grammar School and in 1950 won an open scholarship to read history at Pembroke College, Oxford; he soon changed to English literature, graduating with a second-class degree in 1953. A Goldsmith's fellowship in the same year took him to the University of Toronto, where his graduate studies were supervised by the distinguished Romantic scholars Kathleen Coburn and J. R. MacGillivray; he began at this time to study manuscripts at the Wordsworth Library, Grasmere. In 1959 he made the first of many contributions to Romantic scholarship when he completed his PhD thesis at Toronto on 'The literary relations of Wordsworth and Coleridge'. The previous year he had been appointed a lecturer in English at Toronto and had married Pamela Shirley Moore, who had also read English at Oxford. They had two sons and two daughters. Pamela Woof went on to her own career as a literary scholar, and biographer and editor of Dorothy Wordsworth. 
In 1961 Woof resigned his lectureship at Toronto to become Lord Adams of Ennerdale research fellow at King's College, University of Durham (later the University of Newcastle upon Tyne). The following year he was appointed lecturer in English, and from 1971 to 1992 he was reader in English literature. At Newcastle he did not confine himself to teaching: with characteristic energy he played a leading role in many aspects of the city's cultural life. At the university he took charge of creative writing, then not an academic discipline. He acted as a judge in literary competitions, and was assessor for the work of the Morden Tower, a significant poetry venue. He was also instrumental in setting up a two-year poetry fellowship at the universities of Newcastle and Durham; among the poets he helped appoint were Tony Harrison, Basil Bunting, and Fleur Adcock. The theatre was another lifelong passion: he represented the university on the board of the Tyne and Wear Theatre Company, helped student amateur groups, and every spring brought the Royal Shakespeare Company to Newcastle for a six-week season of performances, workshops, and seminars. A confirmed bibliophile, he was chairman of the Friends of the University Library. 
Beyond Newcastle, Woof was vice-chairman of Northern Arts from 1974 to 1981, and in the 1980s held a number of positions on the Arts Council of Great Britain, including vice-chairman of drama and chairman of literature. In 1991 he was invited to take over the chairmanship of the Century Theatre in Keswick, which he successfully split into two companies: first, Theatre by the Lake, which remained in Keswick; and second, English Touring Theatre, which became under his leadership one of Britain's leading classical touring companies. 
Woof's greatest achievement, however, was his work at the Wordsworth Trust in Grasmere; it was there that his combination of erudition, creativity, and practical ingenuity found its fullest expression. Since its foundation in 1891, the trust had preserved Dove Cottage, William Wordsworth's home from 1799 to 1808, for 'lovers of English poetry from all over the world'. The trust was also the guardian of some 90 per cent of the poet's manuscripts. When Woof was appointed a trustee in 1970 it had remained essentially the same since the 1930s; he at once saw its hidden potential, and over the next thirty-five years, with rare dedication, he set about transforming it into a centre of international standing. As honorary keeper of collections he sought funding, and oversaw the conservation, first of Dove Cottage itself, and then, personally transporting manuscripts to the Cockerell workshop in Cambridge, of some 15,000 books and manuscripts. Further, thanks to his enlightened approach to acquisition, the collections in Grasmere widened in scope to include rare editions and manuscripts of most of the literary and political figures of the Romantic age; the work of the many artists who visited the lakes, such as Turner, Constable, and Wright of Derby, was included. 
The trustees supported Woof's transformation of an old coach house into a museum, which was opened in 1981 with a permanent Wordsworth exhibition and space for changing displays. It also, crucially, had the security and environmental controls needed to persuade both institutions and private collectors to lend priceless treasures to the series of special exhibitions on Romantic themes that Woof created, supported by brilliant catalogues. On top of this there were winter and summer international residential and scholarly conferences held in Grasmere; an award-winning educational programme for schools; and, under Woof's direction, an advanced training in museum studies that helped hundreds of recent graduates to gain an awareness of career possibilities. In return the trainees helped with the trust's activities and responsibilities to the public. 
In 1992 Woof resigned from the University of Newcastle to become the first director of the Wordsworth Trust. He encouraged a contemporary as well as a historical creativity, initiating the linking of the art and poetry of the past with that of the present through poet and artist residencies, weekly readings by contemporary writers, and contemporary art exhibitions. He kept the place as well as the trust's activities in mind, and by purchasing a number of nearby properties extended a quiet, unobtrusive protection around Dove Cottage and its garden. The culmination of his work in Grasmere was the planning and construction of a superb new building to house the collections. The Jerwood Centre at the Wordsworth Trust, modern yet sympathetic, was an architectural triumph, a great library, and a repository of Romantic works; it was formally opened in June 2005 by the poet Seamus Heaney. 
This development of the Wordsworth Trust was achieved against the odds, and the constant need to raise money was mentally and emotionally demanding. Nevertheless Woof still found time for the scholarship that provided the foundation for all this activity. His memorable lectures (lasting anywhere between an hour and half a morning) embraced literature, art, history, and the Lake District; some exhibitions went on to the New York Public Library, the British Library, and the National Library of Scotland. The interdisciplinary nature of the work enabled Woof to make the surprising intellectual connections in which he delighted and excelled. The many catalogues published by the Wordsworth Trust were indeed books. His edition of T. W. Thompson's 'Wordsworth's Hawkshead' (1970) was a treasure house of original research. Many articles testified to his scholarship. His magisterial account, from unpublished manuscripts as well as printed works, of Wordsworth criticism, 'Wordsworth: the Critical Heritage', was published in 2001. In his last years he brought out an edition of Hazlitt's 'Spirit of the Age' (2004), with his own essays matching Hazlitt's; in 2005 his 'Treasures of the Wordsworth Trust' appeared, a historical and scholarly account. Posthumously, in 2007, came his edition of Wordsworth's masterpiece completed in 1805, the thirteen-book 'Prelude'. 
In person Woof was animated, intense, humorous, generous, and immensely and immediately likeable. Blessed with a formidable memory, he drew lightly upon an astonishing range of reference, and in conversation was always persuasive, often inspirational. He was a fine reader of Wordsworth's poetry. His contribution to the artistic life of Britain was recognized in a number of awards and honours: honorary degrees from the universities of Lancaster, Newcastle, and Central Lancashire; the Northern Electric award in 1995; and the Creative Briton award in 1999. He was appointed CBE in 1998. 
A non-smoker, Woof died of lung cancer on 7 November 2005 at the Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne. The funeral was at St Oswald's Church, Grasmere, on 24 November 2005, and a memorial gathering, overwhelmingly attended, was held at the National Portrait Gallery, London, on 28 March 2006. He was survived by his wife, Pamela, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96177


Storey, Graham (1920-2005), literary scholar, was born on 8 November 1920 at North Ferriby in the East Riding of Yorkshire, the elder son of Stanley Runton Storey, dental surgeon, and his wife, Winifred Emily, 'nee' Graham. His parents had considerable means from both Winifred and the family firm of wine merchants, Asher-Storey. The family early moved to Manting House, Meldreth, Cambridgeshire, and the expectations of his parents focused on Storey 'in a way that he sometimes found oppressive' ('The Independent'). He was educated at St Edward's School, Oxford, and then entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge. His undergraduate career was foreshortened by the Second World War, but he took firsts in law and English. He served in the Royal Artillery from 1941 to 1945, was mentioned in dispatches, and formed a close friendship with Robert Runcie, the future archbishop of Canterbury; he was Runcie's best man and later his colleague, when Runcie was dean at Trinity Hall. Storey was demobilized with the rank of lieutenant. 
Called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1950, though he never practised, Storey was for some time undecided between law and English. Offered fellowships in Cambridge in law (at Gonville and Caius College) and English (at Trinity Hall), he determined on English. He was a fellow of Trinity Hall from 1949 to 1988, and very much a college man, serving as senior tutor (1958-68) and vice-master (1970-74). He was also a university lecturer (1965-81) and reader (1981-8) in English. His wider commitment to English and the university was demonstrated in his two years as chairman of the faculty board of English (1972-4), at that time, more even than usual, a poisoned chalice, with Cambridge English 'riven with personal animosities and fierce ideological disputes'; but Storey, 'whom no one considered a threat, thanks to his modest and polite demeanour', steered through reforms acceptable to all parties ('Daily Telegraph'). 
Storey's first publication came about through a lifetime friendship with John Chancellor, writer and antiquarian book dealer: he was invited by Chancellor's father, Sir Christopher Chancellor, chairman of Reuters, to write the firm's history to mark its centenary ('Reuters' Century', 1951). Subsequent publications were founded in taking up other men's work and pursuing them successfully to publication. He completed Humphry House's edition of the 'Journals and Papers of Gerard Manley Hopkins' (1959), following House's premature death in 1955, and edited A. P. Rossiter's Shakespeare essays, 'Angel with Horns' (1961). His lasting affection for Hopkins and Renaissance drama was demonstrated in his 'Preface to Hopkins' (1981) and in his general editorship of the 'Cambridge Renaissance and Restoration Dramatists' (1975-89). It was also through Humphry House that Storey came to his sterling academic achievement. He had had 'digs' with Humphry and Madeline House in Cambridge after war service and Madeline's confidence in him led to the Hopkins 'Journals' and to an invitation to complete House's work on Dickens. In 1949 House had begun work on a complete and thoroughly annotated edition of Dickens's letters and drew many enthusiasts and academics into the enterprise: much had been done before his death to collect and annotate letters. After his death Madeline House felt that Storey 'was the man' and in 1957 invited him to join her as general editor. Kathleen Tillotson joined as a general editor a little later and others were brought in as co-editors for individual volumes. Yet overall, more especially in the later volumes, Storey produced the bulk of the annotation and, while he could be hasty, feeling towards the end no doubt the need to see the work through, the completed twelve volumes (1965-2002) stand as tribute to his accuracy, determination, and assiduity. 
After his mother's death Storey acquired Crown House, Ermine Street, Caxton, Cambridgeshire, an old coaching inn, a rambling and dark building, far from warm in winter. Here was the archive room of the Dickens edition, its walls lined with works of reference (notably the 'DNB') and box upon box of photocopies, notes, and correspondence; here also, being a good cook, Storey gave a celebratory dinner on the publication of each volume of the letters for the immediate collaborators. The garden was long, with a pond (into which were blown, on at least one occasion, notes of a co-editor), and the venue for Storey's annual summer party, with a string quartet, for students and colleagues. 
Both colleagues and students appreciated Storey's care, tact, and generosity. If for him literature was something that disturbed, touching the 'primal' or 'archetypal terror', students found him ready to help and support them personally as well as academically, and he would delight in driving a group to Stratford to see a play, give them dinner, and return them that night. In committees he was well prepared and alert, so that business went without hitch. He was in many ways a shy man, who did not find it easy to relax in company, despite his delight in people and occasions, and was often self-effacing, even at events he had organized. His manner, particularly on the phone, could be abrupt, until callers learned how to fit their own rhythms to his. A homosexual, he kept his personal life largely separate and apparently believed that his sexuality was concealed from others, whereas in fact it was generally known and simply accepted. In his last years, he became increasingly physically and mentally frail and died of multiple causes on 6 November 2005 at the Hope Residential and Nursing Care Home, Brooklands Avenue, Cambridge. He was buried at Holy Trinity Church, Meldreth, Cambridgeshire, on 14 November. He had already munificently funded the conversion of the old college library into a public reception room, named in his honour and opened by the queen in 2000. (In his lifetime he gave more than $1 million to his college.) A legacy, supported by Trinity Hall, established a biannual lecture on 'The English novel' in the English faculty in his name, the first being given in 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 96183


Timpson, John Harry Robert (1928-2005), broadcaster and writer, was born on 2 July 1928 at Ridgeholme, The Ridgeway, Kenton, Middlesex, one of two children of John Hubert Victor Timpson, bank clerk, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Willson. In 1945, at the age of sixteen, he left Merchant Taylors' School in Northwood, Middlesex, abandoned youthful hopes for the theatrical life, and joined his local paper, the 'Wembley News', as a cub reporter. His early journalistic career was interrupted by two years of compulsory national service with the Royal Army Service Corps -- a 'monumental bore', as he later recalled ('Today and Yesterday', 16). Soon after returning to civilian life he became a district reporter for the Norfolk-based 'Eastern Daily Press', where he remained for eight years, covering a succession of council meetings, court cases, and darts club dinners. On 2 June 1951 he married (Muriel) Patricia Whale, a 24-year-old nurse he had met at a church social event. She was the daughter of Albert Edward Whale, storeman and packer. They had two sons, Jeremy and Nicholas. 
In 1959 Timpson joined the BBC as a general reporter, and was mentored by the former war reporter and court correspondent Godfrey Talbot. Between 1962 and 1967 he acted as Talbot's deputy, commentating on royal tours to Tunisia, Australia, and Ethiopia. Radio soon played to his strengths. He possessed a facility with words and reviewers noted, too, his 'rich, dark, deep-brown chocolate voice' ('Evening Standard', 2 March 1979). This eased his path to a succession of presenting jobs. In 1970 he joined BBC Radio 4's 'Today' programme, alongside -- though very much the junior partner of -- Jack de Manio. After de Manio's departure in 1971, Timpson co-presented with Robert Robinson and other up-and-coming broadcasters, such as Libby Purves and Sue MacGregor. 'Today' had begun with a reputation for being nothing more than a pleasant 'morning miscellany', and Timpson's role had been to help 'harden' its news coverage. In the event he found himself drawn to the programme's more amusing stories, and developed a penchant for corny jokes, newspaper misprints, and ambiguous headlines. His trademark 'ho ho' quips spoke of a firm belief in the need to leaven often depressing news, especially for early morning listeners. 
Timpson had two brief, largely unfulfilling flirtations with television. Before joining 'Today' he had worked on Britain's first half-hour television news programme, BBC 2's 'Newsroom' (1968-70), and in 1976 he joined 'Tonight' as a presenter. After just eighteen months he returned to radio, somewhat dispirited. 'I didn't like TV', he told one magazine; it demanded too many 'false smiles' ('Woman', 10 Dec 1983). By 1978 'Today' had been relaunched, and he provided a useful foil to the bumptiousness, northern pride, and cutting political commentary of his regular co-presenter, Brian Redhead. Timpson -- southern, something of a John Bull figure, invariably polite and calm -- sounded as if he was 'seeing things through with a rueful sense of humour' ('Daily Telegraph', 10 Oct 1973). It was said that he made listeners feel they belonged 'to a rather good club' ('The Guardian', 21 Nov 2005). For their next few years at the helm he and Redhead were a 'perfect and unbeatable duo' (Donovan, 79). 'Today', however, became more of a political heavyweight as the 1980s progressed, and seemed, increasingly, to favour an abrasive interviewing style that Timpson disliked. He left in 1986, but continued to appear regularly elsewhere on Radio 4, chairing 'Any Questions?' (which he had joined in 1984) and presenting the occasional travelogue. 
Though he spent much of his BBC career living in Chorleywood, apparently reconciled to the life of a suburban commuter, Timpson had always wanted to return to the country, and above all to his beloved Norfolk. In 1985 he bought a weekend cottage at Wellingham and moved there permanently in 1987, the same year he left 'Any Questions?' and was appointed OBE for services to broadcasting. He subsequently moved to a larger house in Weasenham St Peter, overlooking the village green. Now retired from the BBC, he started spending more time than ever writing, mostly on the pleasures and oddities of country life. There was, for example, a regular column for the 'Daily Mail', in which he described the annual cycle of church fetes and flower festivals taking place on his doorstep. He had already published his autobiography, 'Today and Yesterday', in 1976. There now followed a stream of other slight but highly readable books on country byways and characters, notably 'Timpson's England' (1987) and 'Timpson's English Eccentrics' (1991). In 1989 he published his first novel, 'Paper Trail', the semi-autobiographical story of a young newspaperman in Norfolk. This was followed by 'Sound Track' in 1991. His last book was 'Timpson on the Verge' (2002), about Norfolk village signs. Despite his prolific output, Timpson was never frenetic. More than anything he enjoyed simply 'idling' at home, in the garden, or on his four-berth cabin cruiser. He was, he happily admitted, 'a bit of a stick-in-the-mud' ('Sunday Express', 12 Feb 1984). He died at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, King's Lynn, Norfolk, on 19 November 2005, from multiple organ failure, sepsis, and a perforated ulcer. He was survived by his wife, Patricia, and son Jeremy, his son Nicholas having died suddenly a month earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 96184


Macgregor, (Janet) Elizabeth (1920-2005), cytologist, was born at 11 Lynedoch Place, Glasgow, on 12 January 1920, the daughter of Andrew McPherson (1884-1946), company secretary, and his wife, Jean (Jennie), 'nee' Craig (1886-1929). She had an elder brother, Andrew (1917-1940), later an RAF pilot who was awarded the first DFC of the Second World War, in 1939, and two younger sisters, Agnes Jean (1922-2005) and Margaret (1924-1984). When she was nine years old her mother died of tuberculosis. The family lived in Glasgow where she attended Bearsden Academy and then studied medicine during the Second World War. She qualified in 1943, after which she served in the Royal Army Medical Corps, reaching the rank of captain. She and her future husband, Alastair Goold Macgregor (1919-1972), met as medical students. They married at the University memorial chapel, Glasgow, on 13 October 1944, and their four children were born between 1946 and 1953. After working in both Edinburgh and Sheffield they moved to Aberdeen, where Alastair Macgregor was appointed regius professor of materia medica in 1958 and Betty (as she was known to friends and family) became a research assistant to Sir Dugald Baird, professor of midwifery, in the department of obstetrics and gynaecology. She was awarded the degree of MD with honours in 1963 and later became senior lecturer and consultant in the department of pathology. 
In Aberdeen, Betty Macgregor initiated, as early as 1960, and then managed and evaluated, the first successful population-based cervical cancer screening programme in the UK. Working with the wholehearted support and collaboration of Sir Dugald Baird, she was motivated by what she had seen of the clinical manifestations of this devastating disease, which most often affected women in their forties at a vital stage of life when they were bringing up their children. Macgregor and Baird, in an article in the 'British Medical Journal' in 1963, said that 'cervical cytology has now passed beyond the experimental stage' and that cervical cancer could largely be prevented by cytological detection and treatment of a pre-invasive stage (J. E. Macgregor and D. Baird, 'Detection of cervical carcinoma in the general population', 'BMJ', 22 June 1963, 1631). She kept meticulous records of her practice and, having the courage of her convictions, combined research with action. In the absence of computers she and her colleagues kept records in books and card indexes. Clinical and screening histories were coded on punch cards and sorted with knitting needles. But Macgregor did not spend all her time in the laboratory and applied a holistic approach to her work. She talked to and gradually won round general practitioners, convincing them that their patients should be screened. She visited women in their homes, giving balloons to the children to occupy them while she took their mothers' smears. She paid a great deal of attention to cytology training and quality control. Importantly, she collaborated with epidemiologists and statisticians to evaluate the effectiveness of screening. 
Although there were centres of excellence elsewhere in the UK where cytology screening was practised and promoted, there was considerable apathy and even antipathy to its development and some evidence that its effectiveness might have been overstated. A rather poorly funded NHS programme was started in 1967. Its inadequacy was foretold in a letter that year to the 'BMJ' by Stanley Way, chairman of the British Society for Clinical Cytology, of which organization Macgregor later became chairman and president. The failure of the first NHS programme was reported in a 'Lancet' editorial in 1985 entitled 'Cervical cancer: death by incompetence'. Meanwhile, the Aberdeen programme became internationally recognized with the publication in the 'BMJ' in 1985 of a case-control study demonstrating its effectiveness. This provided key evidence for the International Agency for Research on Cancer publication 'Screening for Cancer of the Uterine Cervix' (1986), which was influential in the development of cervical screening throughout the world, including the successful NHS programme that was implemented in 1988. Macgregor was invited to speak at a conference celebrating the silver jubilee of the Royal College of Pathologists in 1987 and was presentated to the queen and duke of Edinburgh. Always tactful and diplomatic, she was also honest and straightforward. When the duke asked her what caused cervical cancer she replied, 'Sexual intercourse, Sir' (private information). From her research she had always suspected there was an infective cause, which during her lifetime was proved to be high-risk types of human papillomavirus. This led to the development of a vaccine, which ironically was announced in the UK in a press release on the very day she died. 
There was much more to Betty Macgregor than her successful career, which she combined, at a time when it was difficult to do so, with a rewarding family life as wife, mother, grandmother, and finally great-grandmother. As one of her granddaughters later said, 'She was a remarkable woman, a much-respected colleague, an admired friend, a devoted mother, a generous, fun-loving and strong-willed grandmother' (private information). 
Macgregor was awarded fellowships of the International Academy of Cytology (1963), the Royal College of Pathologists (1982), and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (1986), and appointed OBE in 1984. After retirement, she became director of the Harris Birthright Research Centre in Aberdeen, commuting from a house she had bought on the Isle of Seil. Her husband predeceased her in 1972 as did her eldest son, Andrew, in 1995. She died of cerebrovascular disease on 8 October 2005 at the Lynn of Lorne Nursing Home, Benderloch, near Oban, having spent her final days on the west coast of Scotland enjoying the beautiful views that she loved so much. She was survived by a daughter, Elisabeth, and two sons, Alastair and Roy. 


@@@@@


doc= 96188


Brunt, Peter Astbury (1917-2005), ancient historian, was born on 23 June 1917, at 16 Highfield Road, Coulsdon, Surrey, the only child of Samuel Brunt, Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Gladys Eileen, 'nee' Blewett. He was educated at Ipswich School, and won an open scholarship in history to Oriel College, Oxford, in 1935. In the event he switched to classics, gaining a first in classical moderations and in 'literae humaniores', after a formal viva. By then, if not earlier, any trace of religious belief had disappeared. It was never as far as is known a subject of conversation between him and his mother, although almost everything else from his childhood onwards was: his mother was a frequent visitor to the house he bought in Oxford in 1970, first from the south coast, then from her own sheltered flat in Oxford. 
Frail in health as a child, Brunt was not fit for military service in 1939, and served instead in the Ministry of Shipping. He believed to the end of his life that his generation of Oxford students had been traduced by the public misunderstanding of the 'king and country' debate: the public ignored the subsequent vote of the Oxford Union to fight over the German occupation of the Sudetenland, and never understood that the first vote had not been a vote either against country or for tyranny. Reflecting later on his wartime service, he recalled with emotion the patriotism of shipowners who insisted that their best ships were taken, despite knowing that the compensation if they were sunk would not be in full. His time at the Ministry of Shipping also created a lifelong friendship with Derek Allen, allowed him to observe the beginnings of the cold war, with the conspiratorial obstructiveness of Russian delegates to meetings either side of the end of the war, and made it clear to him that he had substantial administrative gifts, to be deployed later in his career. 
In 1946 Brunt took up a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, and the Craven fellowship that had been awarded to him in 1939, choosing as a topic for research the relations between governed and governors in the Roman empire, and set off for the British School at Rome. Some of his later interest in Roman stoicism derived from that period, but his stay in Rome did not inspire him with a concern for the iconographic or archaeological sources for Roman history: archaeological evidence either told you something you knew already or was not to be believed. He was appointed to a lectureship at St Andrews in 1947, but succeeded in returning to Oxford in 1951, to Oriel, his former college, as fellow and tutor in ancient history in succession to M. N. Tod. He had by that time read, in the original Greek or Latin and in chronological order, all the major sources for Greek and Roman history, in preparation for a career as a teacher of ancient history: he stopped with Julian, on his appointment to Oxford, on the grounds that he would never need to teach any later period. It was also while he was at St Andrews that he formed a close friendship with one of his students that did not in the end lead to their marriage; the student in due course moved to America, and did marry, but she and Brunt remained close, with intermittent meetings. He never contemplated marriage thereafter, her photograph remaining on his bookcase to the end. 
Brunt claimed later that his published work arose out of teaching; but it certainly did not arise out of the ritualistic puzzle-solving that constituted much teaching of ancient history at Oxford during his period as tutor. He clearly rejected from the start, given his initial topic for research, the widely held view that the history of the ancient world is essentially the history of its governing class; and he set out to try to understand the ancient world as a whole, beginning with its economic and demographic structure. Hence his admiration both for A. H. M. (Hugo) Jones, whom he got to know when Jones simply knocked on his door one day, and Moses Finley. His style, however, was not that of either man, lacking both the effortless, often descriptive, lucidity of the former and the off-the-cuff epigrammatism of the latter. 
Brunt read and made notes on an astonishing range of material, both ancient and modern; and although some of his published work consisted of a snappy demonstration that current views of parts of Alexander's army or of the chronology of Cicero's letters were most unlikely to be right, his more substantial pieces are shot through with a sense of the obscurity and difficulty of his subject. Part of the reason for this is that he not only insisted on analysing every level of ancient society, but also saw the importance of philosophy, law, politics, and rhetoric. One of the themes that occupied him during the period from 1951 to 1968 was that of ancient slavery: some of his work issued in a devastating review of William L. Westermann's 'Slave Systems' (1955); but more of it flowed into the project that increasingly occupied his time and his attention, the demography of Roman Italy and of the Roman world in general. 
Despite the publication in 1962 of one of the most important articles on Roman republican history of the second half of the twentieth century, on the army and the land in the revolution that replaced the Roman republic with an empire, Brunt assumed that the Camden chair of ancient history would go to A. N. Sherwin-White, not him. Partly because of this, partly to get more time for writing, he became in 1968 bursar of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, which promised a professorial salary and time for research. In fact, he was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1969, and when the time came Hugo Jones insisted that the electors receive an application for the Camden chair from Brunt, the electors were given the page proofs of 'Italian Manpower', and the election was made. The book appeared in 1971, the year after he took up the chair, forming the most sustained attempt ever made to argue for the view that the Emperor Augustus changed the basis of the Roman census, and that up to that point the figures represented adult males, thereafter men, women, and (some) children. A rather different work was 'Social Conflicts in the Roman Republic', written at the instance of Moses Finley and also published in 1971: it was at the time and for many years remained the best introductory account of the Roman republic. It was also at Finley's behest that Brunt took over from him as chair of the ancient history committee of the Joint Association of Classical Teachers, overseeing the latter's A-level in the subject. His service to the national classics community also included a period as president of the Roman Society and as a member of the council of the British School at Rome. 
In the end Brunt was not at ease as Camden professor, disliking particularly the expectation that he should be able to think of topics for research students to work on, and not finding the atmosphere of the graduate seminar congenial. He was not sorry when the cuts in university funding imposed by the government of Margaret Thatcher in 1982 created an opportunity for him to retire, two years early. The years that followed were occupied by collecting for publication, with revisions and additional pieces, his articles on the Roman republic (1988), the Roman empire (1990), and Greece (1992), and by increasingly intensive work on Roman stoicism. The volume of articles on the Roman republic, in particular, contained new material that showed undiminished power, notably a long essay on the fall of the Roman republic that provided the title for the whole volume, and a piece setting out to demolish the importance of client relations for an understanding of Roman republican politics. It is a curious irony, and perhaps a measure of the extent to which the two men had lost contact, that at about the same time Finley was busy arguing that client relations provided the key to understanding Athenian politics. 
It was Roman stoicism, however, that claimed more and more of Brunt's attention; this took him into detailed analysis of the fragmentary and difficult evidence for the views of the founders of the school and of Panaetius, perhaps the single most important intermediary between Greek and Roman stoicism. From about 2000 onwards progressively failing physical powers led him to change his plan to write a book about Roman stoicism and collect his earlier articles on the subject with a number of new studies instead. Even this project was in the end defeated; but the undiminished intellectual ambition to try to get something difficult right led him to form plans with his executors for posthumous publication. By this time complaints of physical weakness were all too evidently justified, complaints of loss of memory much less so: to the end, Brunt combined an astonishing knowledge of English literature and British history with a sharply critical view of the politics and the follies of the world around him. In the autumn of 2005 he refused treatment for a cancerous growth in the oesophagus, and died in Sobell House, Oxford, on 5 November 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 96196


Best, George (1946-2005), footballer, was born on 22 May 1946 at the Royal Maternity Hospital, Belfast, the elder son and eldest of six children of Richard (Dickie) Best (1919-2008), an iron-turner in the Harland and Wolff shipyard, and his wife, Ann Mary (Annie), 'nee' Withers (1922-1978), who worked in Gallaher's tobacco factory. He was originally named Ronald Samuel Best, but two weeks after his birth was renamed George. 
The Best family lived on the newly built Cregagh council estate in east Belfast, a predominantly protestant area. They were Free Presbyterians who attended church twice on Sundays; as a teenager George Best joined the protestant Orange order. His father was a keen amateur footballer and his mother played hockey to almost international standard, but Best credited his maternal grandfather, George Withers, with encouraging his passion for football. Family photographs show the young Best kicking a ball at the age of about fifteen months. Later he played football in the street, or in a field behind the family home, and honed his skills by dribbling a tennis ball to and from school. It was said that he even took a football to bed with him. 
Best attended Nettlefield primary school and won a scholarship to Grosvenor High School, a grammar school where he often played truant because it was a rugby school and because his daily journey took him through a Catholic area where he suffered taunts and stone-throwing. After a year he was transferred to Lisnasharragh intermediate school, a secondary modern school where he played for the football team. He also began playing for Cregagh Boys' Club, and earned a reputation for dedicated practice. Advised that his left foot was weak, he spent several days wearing a plimsoll on his right foot and a football boot on his left, hitting a tennis ball until both feet were equally strong. 
Although the teenage Best drew admiration for his dribbling he was considered too frail to become a professional player, and was rejected by the Belfast club Glentoran. 'I looked like a stick of rhubarb', he later said. 'I weighed about seven stones' (Parkinson, 14-15). When he was fourteen, however, a friend of his father, Bud McFarlane, recommended him to Bob Bishop, the scout in Northern Ireland for one of England's top clubs, Manchester United. Bishop, too, was worried about Best's physique, but then successfully tested him in games against older and bigger players. 'I think I've found you a genius', Bishop is said to have told Matt Busby, the United manager, by telegram (B. Best, 62). 
In July 1961, a week after qualifying to become a printer's apprentice, Best crossed the Irish Sea for a two-week trial in Manchester. It began badly: United officials neglected him on his arrival, and Best felt homesick. Within forty-eight hours he returned to Belfast, but his father gently encouraged him to go back to Manchester. For the next two years Best remained an amateur with United, since Football Association rules barred Irish players from becoming professional until they were seventeen. Initially he worked as an errand-boy for the Manchester Ship Canal Company, and later he was given a bogus job with a local electrical firm. Yet within five months of becoming professional (in May 1963), and having played barely a few games for the reserves, Best had made his debut in the United first team -- a 1-0 win over West Bromwich Albion at United's Old Trafford ground on 14 September 1963. Although he played well it would be more than three months before he appeared for the first team again. On Boxing day 1963 United had been thrashed 6-1 at Burnley, and Busby made radical changes for the return fixture two days later. Best scored the first goal as Manchester United beat Burnley 5-1, and he stayed in the side thereafter. 
Best possessed a wide range of skills, including pace, acceleration, stamina, and physical strength. He beat defenders easily with an extraordinary control that made it look as if the ball was tied to his feet, and his repertoire of feints, swerves, and spurts once prompted his team-mate Pat Crerand to say he left opponents with 'twisted blood' ('The Times', 26 Nov 2005). Above all he had remarkable balance, and an elasticity that enabled him to bounce back quickly from the ground, ride challenges, and avoid serious injury. He was never afraid to tackle, could head the ball, was a master at passing, and deadly in front of goal. Although he was a shy and very private character he showed huge confidence even in his youth, unaffected by noisy crowds. He frequently played on the wing, especially in his early career, and could easily play as a forward, but was often given licence to roam the midfield. What made him special was his showmanship: to him football was entertainment. Crowds loved his cheeky, mischievous smile, and the way he played with his socks around his ankles. They responded with loud, expectant roars whenever he got the ball. His weaknesses were a tendency to perform unnecessary tricks, and an occasional selfishness that stopped him passing to colleagues who were better placed. He also had a volatile temperament. 
In a Manchester United career that lasted just over ten years Best scored 179 goals in 470 competitive appearances. He joined the side amid Matt Busby's rebuilding following the 1958 Munich air crash, in which eight players were killed. Along with Bobby Charlton and Denis Law he was one of the 1960s 'holy trinity' of world-class forwards who helped restore United to greatness. He won two English championship medals, in 1965 and 1967, but it was in Europe that he really made his mark. Perhaps his greatest game was United's European cup quarter-final in March 1966 against Benfica, the Portuguese champions, in Lisbon. Matt Busby warned his players against taking risks, but they produced an astonishing 5-1 win. Best scored twice in the opening minutes, and took most of the headlines. 'George just went out and destroyed them', said Busby. 'I ought to have shouted at him for not following instructions, but what could you say?' (Lovejoy, 95-6). He was still only nineteen. 
George Best -- Georgie to fans, or sometimes Geordie in Ireland -- soon became English football's first modern superstar, part of the 'swinging sixties', and it was said that his appearance added from 5000 to 10,000 to the attendance at any Manchester United fixture. It was an era when managers weren't used to handling wealthy stars whose fame extended beyond football, and here lay the seeds of Best's downfall. 'It might have been better if Matt had been harder on me', he later remarked. 'The normal laws of the club didn't seem to apply to me' ('Blessed', 114). Endowed with the perfect surname and blue eyes, he grew his hair long like the Beatles; indeed he was sometimes called the fifth Beatle. Although he still lived in the modest council home of his United club landlady, Mary Fullaway, in Chorlton-cum-Hardy, he was the 1960s 'man about town', wearing fashionable clothes and driving expensive sports cars. Like the Beatles he attracted screaming schoolgirls, though when many of them wrote requesting a lock of hair, he responded with tufts shorn from the Fullaway family's black dog. Over the years his many lovers included famous actresses, two holders of the Miss World title, and several married women who were a lot older than him, including the wife of the prominent Manchester QC George Carman (who would later unsuccessfully defend Best in an assault case). 
Best soon needed three secretaries to handle his fan mail. He was one of the first footballers to employ a commercial agent, and before long his income from outside activities outstripped his player's wages. He wrote ghosted columns for several newspapers and magazines, and in 1966 opened the first of several fashion boutiques in Manchester. He modelled clothes, too, and over the next few years he advertised sausages, oranges, aftershave, his own brand of football boots, and even women's bras. The Egg Marketing Board used him to promote eggs for breakfast, under the slogan 'E for B and Georgie Best' ('The Guardian', 10 May 2008). 
During the 1967-8 season Best was joint leading scorer in the English league, with twenty-eight goals (and four more in other competitions), a remarkable tally for a winger. At the end of the season, in May 1968, he scored his team's second goal as Manchester United became the first English club to win the European cup, with a 4-1 win over Benfica at Wembley Stadium. It was a typical Best strike, as he knocked the ball through a defender's legs and then dribbled round the goalkeeper. That year Best was chosen as footballer of the year in both England and Europe, the youngest player to win either award. 
Best's contribution to Manchester United's victory in the European cup, ten years after the club had lost almost a whole team at Munich, would prove to be the pinnacle of his achievements, even though he was barely twenty-two. 'Although I was not to know it at the time', he would subsequently admit, 'it was the beginning of the end' ('Where Do I Go From Here?', 13). He had a sense that there was nothing else to do at United. Busby stepped down as manager, but released from the burden of Munich the club seemed to lack ambition: the supply line of youth players dried up and United failed to exploit the transfer market. For five successive seasons Best was the team's top goalscorer, but felt the side relied too much upon him. 'I was finding it increasingly difficult to get motivated as the team was so poor', he later confessed ('Blessed', 141). 
Frustrated with football, Best adopted a more carefree lifestyle. First signs came with a succession of driving offences, one of which led to a six-month ban. This was followed by increasingly regular disciplinary measures, by Manchester United for missing training sessions, and by the football authorities for offences on the pitch. His bookings and dismissals were rarely for malicious conduct, but often stemmed from anger that referees weren't giving him protection from the violent attempts of defenders to stop him. In 1970 he was suspended for a month for knocking the ball out of the referee's hands after a defeat by Manchester City. On his return he scored six times as United won 8-2 in an FA cup tie at Northampton Town. Nevertheless by this time he had started to drink heavily, often all night long. Among his favourite haunts were the Brown Bull, a pub in the centre of Manchester, whose landlord gave him a key so that he could drink as he pleased, and Phyllis's, an unlicensed club that was open all hours. The pressure grew with the troubles in Northern Ireland, and a serious death threat delivered before a game at Newcastle in 1971. 
Best left his club landlady to live in a futuristic house he had had built in Bramhall, equipped with numerous electronic gadgets. But the property was too exposed, and he felt trapped in a 'goldfish bowl' by gawping fans outside ('Where Do I Go From Here?', 117). Before long he was annoying team-mates such as Bobby Charlton, who felt that Busby and his successors as manager, Wilf McGuinness and Frank O'Farrell, treated him too leniently. Relations got so bad that Charlton and Best rarely passed the ball to each other. If he had lived in later decades Best would almost certainly have moved to a leading Spanish or Italian club, but this was an era when there was little international movement in players. An alternative might have been a transfer to one of the big London clubs, since he loved playing in the capital, but Best felt huge loyalty to Manchester United. 
Best found little solace in playing for Northern Ireland, for whom he had made his debut against Wales on 15 April 1964. Aged just seventeen, he was then the youngest player ever to appear for his country. He envied his Manchester United team-mates Bobby Charlton and Nobby Stiles, who had helped England win the world cup in 1966, and he feared, rightly, that he would never achieve much with his national team. Northern Ireland never qualified for the world cup finals or the final stages of the European championship during the years he was at his peak. His best game for Northern Ireland was probably a 1-0 win over Scotland in October 1967, but he rarely performed well for his country. 'Recreational football', he later called his Northern Ireland games (Lovejoy, 162). He played in just thirty-seven international matches between 1964 and 1977, and scored nine goals, but had he played for a more successful country, it might have extended his ambitions, career, and reputation. 
In May 1972 Best announced from holiday in Majorca that he was giving up the game. 'I am no longer a footballer -- and that is final', he declared (Lovejoy, 227). It took only two weeks for Manchester United to persuade him to change his mind, but he was far less effective the following season. When Best again skipped training United first fined him and then put him up for sale for $300,000. It was a sign of his unreliability that the club received no offers, and shortly afterwards Best again announced his retirement from English football. He toyed with the idea of playing in North America, but in the summer of 1973 Busby and the latest Manchester United manager, Tommy Docherty, again persuaded him to return to the club. He trained hard, but this latest comeback did not last long. In January 1974 he missed training once more and was dropped for a cup tie, though it is disputed whether he was then sacked or quit. He had played his last game for Manchester United in a 3-0 defeat at Queen's Park Rangers on new year's day 1974. He was twenty-seven, an age when most players approach their peak, but he would never play top-flight English football again. 
Best continued to live in Manchester, where he had opened his first nightclub, Slack Alice's, in 1973, and a second, Oscar's, the following year. Gambling became his latest addiction, and he would often fritter away his clubs' nightly takings in a nearby casino. The sums were huge: one night he was losing $17,000, only to finish $9,000 in profit. Yet it was only a temporary retirement from football. Over the next decade his career stuttered on, as he played for more than a dozen different clubs on five different continents. In many cases these were purely money-making ventures, involving just a handful of games, and Best would be excused from training. Such deals were struck with a club called the Jewish Guild in Johannesburg, South Africa (1974), followed by Dunstable Town (1974-5) and fourth division Stockport County (1975) in England, and then Cork Celtic (1975-6) in Ireland. He was next lured by the emerging North American Soccer League, which had already attracted such ageing world-class stars as Pele and Franz Beckenbauer. For the next six years Best spent the summer months playing in the United States, with the Los Angeles Aztecs (1976-8), the Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1978-9), and the San Jose Earthquakes (1980-81), for whom he also played indoor six-a-side football. In all he played 150 competitive games in the USA, and scored fifty-seven goals. He combined this American summer football with winter performances in Britain. Between 1976 and 1978 he played for the London second division club Fulham, and scored ten goals in forty-seven games. In 1979 and 1980 he also scored three times in twenty-two matches for the Edinburgh club Hibernian. 
These were years of sad decline, as Best became slower and overweight, and more troubled by his addictions. He enjoyed the anonymity of living in America, where he settled in Hermosa Beach, and in 1977 opened a beach bar called Bestie's. During long drinking sessions in California he would disappear for days, walking or hitch-hiking from one clandestine bar to another, going without food, and sometimes sleeping in doorways and on the beach. Often he went penniless, and later admitted that he was once so desperate for a drink that he stole money from a woman's purse. There were violent mood swings, though he would often go for several months without drink, and he also felt guilty for neglecting his mother. She had died in 1978 of a heart attack that was probably brought on by alcoholism, and Best wondered whether his own troubled life had driven her to drink. The same year Best married Angela MacDonald (Angie) Janes, from Essex. They had one son, Calum, born in 1981 (the year in which Best entered a rehabilitation clinic in Los Angeles, the first of many), but separated a year later and divorced in 1986. After Best's death his sister revealed that he had also fathered a daughter back in 1969, though he never met her, and her identity has never been made public. 
Occasionally crowds saw flashes of the old Best brilliance. While playing for San Jose in 1981, when his drinking problems were acute, he scored what many regard as the greatest goal of his career. Playing against his former club, Fort Lauderdale, he dummied left and right, shaking off every defender in his path, before shooting past a helpless goalkeeper. That same year he entered negotiations about returning to the English first division, to play for Middlesbrough, with an eye to returning to the Northern Ireland squad that had just qualified for the 1982 world cup finals. In 1983 he was also approached by Manchester United about yet another comeback. After giving the idea 'serious thought', he declined, fearing 'I might go back and make a fool of myself' ('Blessed', 269). Instead he played five games for third division Bournemouth, and had brief spells with two teams in Hong Kong, non-league Nuneaton Borough in England, and two clubs in Australia. His last competitive match was for Tobermore United in Northern Ireland in 1984. 'It was a freak show', Best later said of these nomadic years. 'People were coming to see me fall over, or whatever. The problem was that I had to do it. I needed the money' (Lovejoy, 305). 
For most of his post-football years George Best lived in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, where his personal troubles worsened. In 1984 he was imprisoned for eight weeks for assaulting a policeman in an argument over a drink-driving offence. Another humiliating moment occurred in 1990 when he appeared on the BBC chat-show 'Wogan' and, obviously drunk, told viewers 'I like screwing' (Lovejoy, 341). In 1982 he was declared bankrupt in an action taken by the Inland Revenue over an unpaid tax bill for $22,000. By 1991 he was estimated to have debts of $100,000, though his bankruptcy was discharged the following year. His fortunes were restored with the help of his partner from 1987 to 1995, Mary Shatila, who acted as his agent in securing personal appearances. Best employed his wit and high intelligence to become a pundit on football, notably for Sky Television, and also delivered after-dinner speeches and stage shows, often in a double-act with Denis Law and his Fulham team-mate Rodney Marsh. He produced half a dozen editions of autobiography and reminiscences. On 24 July 1995 he married Alexandra Jane (Alex) Pursey, an air stewardess who was less than half his age, but they divorced in 2004 after she accused him of violence. 
Best's final years were a battle against his addictions, which involved regular trips to health farms (where he still managed to drink), and programmes of anti-abuse tablets sewn into his stomach. But the restoration of his finances only encouraged more gambling. When friends raised $20,000 at a testimonial dinner he lost it all the same night at a casino. At times he seriously contemplated suicide. In 1999 he was found to have severe cirrhosis of the liver. The following year he was admitted to hospital in London and came close to death, and in 2002 he was given a liver transplant, on the understanding that he would give up alcohol. He failed to do so. In October 2005 he entered the Cromwell Hospital in London for the last time, suffering from a kidney infection that was a side-effect of the drugs taken for his liver transplant. He spent seven weeks in intensive care, and he allowed one newspaper to photograph his haggard condition to warn people off drink. He died on 25 November 2005. The cause of death was a combination of pneumonia, septicaemia, multi-organ failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding. His funeral, in Belfast on 3 December 2005, was almost a state occasion, with a service held at the Northern Ireland assembly at Stormont, broadcast live on British television. An estimated 100,000 people watched the cortege pass through the streets to Roselawn cemetery. 
The Brazilian player Pele, who perhaps deserved the title himself, once described Best as 'the greatest footballer in the world' ('The Times', 26 Nov 2005). Certainly he is a prime contender as the greatest player in British history. Comparisons are difficult, as his early departure from the English first division and his absence from top international tournaments probably ensured that he never reached his true potential. 'I spent a lot of my money on booze, birds and fast cars', he once joked. 'The rest I just squandered' (Smith and Hunt, 59). He was the archetypal flawed genius. He was one of the most talented and entertaining players of the twentieth century, yet he was brought down by his other obsessions -- sex, gambling, and especially drink. 
Best's life was portrayed in the film 'Best' (2000), starring John Lynch, and celebrated in the 1970 song 'Belfast Boy', by Don Fardon. In 2006 the harbour airport in Belfast was renamed George Best Belfast City Airport. He was featured on a limited edition five pound banknote issued by Ulster Bank on the first anniversary of his death. He was also depicted on several of Northern Ireland's murals, a distinctive form of political street art of this period, and featured in a three-man statue at Old Trafford, alongside Bobby Charlton and Denis Law. There is a plaque on the family home in Burren Way, Belfast. The George Best Foundation was established in 2006 to help research into liver disease and alcoholism, and to promote football as an alternative to drink and drugs. 


@@@@@


doc= 96197


Cummings, Constance (1910-2005), actress, was born on 15 May 1910 in Seattle, Washington, USA, the younger child and only daughter of Dallas Vernon Halverstadt, lawyer, and his wife, Kate Logan, 'nee' Cummings, who had trained as a concert soprano. She was educated at St Nicholas's Girls' School in Seattle. Her parents separated when she was ten, and her mother, who had never fulfilled her own ambitions, transferred her aspirations to her daughter. She never saw her father again. 
Constance had wanted to be a classical dancer, but at the age of sixteen made her debut (as Constance Cummings) in a walk-on part as a prostitute in 'Seventh Heaven' (1926), with the San Diego Stock Company. She moved to New York, and in 1928 made her Broadway debut in the chorus line of the George and Ira Gershwin musical 'Treasure Girl', which starred Gertrude Lawrence. She was also in the chorus of 'The Little Show' (1929) at the Music Box, and took over the role of the showgirl Miss Rixey in George S. Kaufman and Ring Lardner's Tin Pan Alley musical comedy 'June Moon', on its post-Broadway tour (1930). Her dazzling looks caught the eye of the film mogul Sam Goldwyn, who brought her to Hollywood to star opposite Ronald Colman in 'The Devil to Pay!' (1930), only for her to be replaced at the last minute by Loretta Young. Colman, however, helped her find an agent, and the following year she made her debut at Columbia Pictures, in 'The Criminal Code', a well-received prison drama directed by Howard Hawks and starring Walter Huston. For the next four years she worked exclusively in films. The most notable were 'American Madness' (1932), directed by Frank Capra, 'Movie Crazy' (1932) with Harold Lloyd, and 'Night after Night' (also 1932) with George Raft and, making her screen debut, Mae West. Her last film in Hollywood before moving to England was a comedy-whodunit with Robert Young, 'Remember Last Night?' (1935). 
In Hollywood Cummings had met the British playwright Benn Wolfe Levy (1900-1973), who was there as a screenwriter. He was the son of Octave Levy, a wealthy wool broker, and his wife, Nannie Joseph. They were married on 3 July 1933, and while on their honeymoon in Venice she received an offer to film in England. She won a legal battle with Columbia Pictures that enabled her to make the move, and thereafter her career and family life were largely centred on the United Kingdom. Her husband was active in political circles, and from 1945 to 1950 served as Labour MP for Eton and Slough. They had a son and a daughter. 
Cummings made her London stage debut in 1934 in 'Sour Grapes', at the Apollo Theatre, and shortly after returned to New York and had a big personal success in Samuel Raphaelson's comedy 'Accent on Youth' at the Plymouth. She also started to appear in plays, mostly boulevard comedies, written for her, and directed by, her husband -- 'Young Madame Conti' (1936), 'The Jealous God' (1939), and 'Clutterbuck' (1946) among them -- and she developed a sophisticated comedic skill, elegant and with a light touch, that dominated her acting choices until the more demanding roles of her later years. Levy also directed his wife in his own adaptation of Flaubert's 'Madame Bovary' (1937), in New York, and the following year in London she had a big success as Mrs Chipping in 'Goodbye, Mr Chips' (1938), at the Shaftesbury. In 1939 she joined the Old Vic Company, then in wartime exile in Buxton and Streatham Hill, to play Juliet, opposite the Romeo of Robert Donat, and Shaw's Saint Joan, but neither production was considered a great success. She had better luck in a revival of Oliver Goldsmith's 'Good Natur'd Man', in another Raphaelson play, 'Skylark' (1942), and in Robert Sherwood's 'The Petrified Forest' (1943). 
On film Cummings and her fellow American Robert Montgomery were oddly cast as Dorothy L. Sayers's quintessentially English sleuths, Harriet Vane and Lord Peter Wimsey, in an adaptation of 'Busman's Honeymoon' (1940). She played an American ally in 'The Foreman Went to France' (1942) and was stylishly good as Ruth, the upper-middle-class second wife of Rex Harrison's Charles Condomine in David Lean's film of Noel Coward's 'Blithe Spirit' (1945). She had made her television debut in 1938, as Roxane in a live broadcast of 'Cyrano de Bergerac', with Leslie Banks and James Mason, and although television and film were to offer her fewer, and less satisfying, opportunities than the theatre, she did make some notable appearances on television, including in 'The Scream' (1953) with Douglas Fairbanks junior, an adaptation of Scott Fitzgerald's 'The Last Tycoon' (1959), and in televised versions of two of her later stage successes, 'Long Day's Journey into Night' (1973) and 'Wings' (1983). On film she had good roles as a movie star in Joseph Losey's 'The Intimate Stranger' (1956), and was wonderfully unsympathetic as Mrs Barrow, the American efficiency expert murderously pursued by Peter Sellers's mild-mannered accountant, in Charles Crichton's 'The Battle of the Sexes' (1959). 
On stage in London Cummings showed evidence of her emotional capabilities in Clifford Odets's 'Winter Journey' (1952) with Michael Redgrave, in Joseph Kramm's 'The Shrike' (1953) with Sam Wanamaker, and in her husband's 'The Rape of the Belt' (1957, and in New York in 1960). At the Oxford Playhouse the director Frank Hauser encouraged her to increase her range still further, first as Aristophanes' Lysistrata (1957), and then as the sadistic lesbian Ines in Sartre's 'Huis clos' (1962), which she played in a double bill with Max Beerbohm's 'A Social Success'. She was especially fine, taking over from Uta Hagen, as Martha in the London production of Edward Albee's 'Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' (1964), opposite Ray McAnally. Cummings was never averse to venturing outside the West End, where she was able to tackle some great roles in plays by great writers -- Tennessee Williams's 'The Milk Train Doesn't Stop Here Any More' in Glasgow; G. B. Shaw's 'Mrs Warren's Profession' in Bristol and Vienna; Edward Albee's 'All Over' in Brighton; Somerset Maugham's 'The Circle' in Guildford; and Friedrich Durrenmatt's 'The Visit' in Coventry. 
In 1969 Cummings played Gertrude in Tony Richardson's production of 'Hamlet' with Nicol Williamson, in London and New York, and in 1971 joined the National Theatre Company, where she gave some good performances in poorly received productions -- as Volumnia to the Coriolanus of Anthony Hopkins, in Bertolt Brecht's version of Shakespeare; as Leda in Laurence Olivier's production of 'Amphitryon 38', by Jean Giraudoux and S. N. Behrman; and as Agave in Euripides' 'The Bacchae' (1973). The National also gave her what was perhaps her greatest opportunity, as the morphine-addicted Mary, wife of Olivier's blistering James Tyrone, in Michael Blakemore's production of Eugene O'Neill's 'Long Day's Journey into Night' (1971). Cummings's delicate and fragile performance won huge plaudits and the Evening Standard drama award as best actress. 
Further success followed, as Madame Ranevsky in 'The Cherry Orchard' (1973) at the National, and as the widowed matriarch in A. R. Gurney's 'Children' (1974), which Cummings performed shortly after the death of her own husband. On returning to New York she triumphed in a captivating solo performance as Emily Stilson, a former aviator and wing-walker struggling to recover from a cerebral haemorrhage, in Arthur Kopit's memory-play 'Wings' (1979). She considered this to be her greatest performance. The public and critics agreed, and she won the Antoinette Perry (Tony) and Drama Desk awards. She also played the role at the National Theatre in London, and in 1982 made her final appearance in New York as the formidable Mrs St Maugham in an off-Broadway revival of Enid Bagnold's 'The Chalk Garden', with Irene Worth as the governess. In 1994 she played the part again at the King's Head, a tiny pub theatre in London, then toured in a one-woman show as Fanny Kemble, and made her final stage appearance as Maman in 'Uncle Vanya' (1996) at the Chichester Festival Theatre, finishing a career that had started seventy years before as a chorus girl on Broadway. 
After her husband's death Cummings maintained their country home at Cote House in the Oxfordshire village of Cote, a 600 acre dairy farm where they bred Friesians, and a house in Chelsea designed by Walter Gropius. She later moved to The Old Cow House, Cote. She supported a number of political and charitable causes, including Amnesty, Liberty, and the Actors' Charitable Trust. She was appointed CBE in 1974. She died at Wardington House nursing home, Wardington, Oxfordshire, on 23 November 2005, and was survived by her two children, Jonathan and Jemima. 


@@@@@


doc= 96201


Burns, Richard Alexander (1971-2005), rally driver, was born on 17 January 1971 at the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, the first of two children born to Alexander Kenmir (Alex) Burns, computer manager, and his wife, Denise Ann, 'nee' Pettafor. He was brought up in Henley-on-Thames, then Hook End, Checkendon. His interest in motor cars became apparent at a very early age and by the time he was eight he was to be found practising his driving skills on a circuit of some 165 yards around the yard of his parents' farmhouse. He also gained driving experience by volunteering to reverse horse trailers at his sister's pony club, and eventually became a member of the Under 17 Car Club. However, it was a visit to Jan Churchill's rally driving school in Wales, a fifteenth birthday present, that prompted him to commit his future to motor sport. He worked part time in order to raise the funds to support his ambitions but it was the backing of family and friends that was instrumental in allowing him to pursue them. His father was particularly supportive, providing him with his first rally car, a Sunbeam, which, with a friend, he converted to rally specification. This was the first and only rally car he actually owned, the remainder coming from supporters who admired his driving ability, including members of the Craven Motor Club in Reading. After honing his technique in a number of secondary meetings in 1988 and 1989 Burns participated in the 1990 RAC rally, his first involvement in a world championship event. 
David Williams, a rally enthusiast who had appreciated the young Burns's potential, was another important influence in his emergence as a key figure in British motor sport, providing finance and introducing him to Prodrive, Subaru's rally team in Britain. Prodrive became important in improving Burns's understanding of rallying and, with their support, in 1993 he became the youngest ever driver to win the British rally championship. It was during this period that Burns got to know Robert Reid, who became his principal co-driver for thirteen years. 
Burns's opportunities with Prodrive became limited by the success of his team-mate, Colin McRae, in the world championships of 1995, so he moved to Mitsubishi to further his career. He gained valuable experience during his three seasons with Mitsubishi, benefiting from partnering Tommi Makinen, the Flying Finn. His successes even enabled him to challenge Makinen as the team's principal driver. In 1998 he won the gruelling Safari rally in Kenya, his first victory in the world rally championship, and in the same year enjoyed success in the British rally. 
With his status in motor sport greatly enhanced, Burns left Mitsubishi in 1999 to rejoin Prodrive and Subaru as the team's lead driver. He won a number of events with Prodrive and came second two years running in the world championship, in 1999 and 2000, before securing the title in 2001. He was the first Englishman and only the second Briton after Colin McRae to win the world rally championship, the sport's highest achievement. The reasons for his subsequent move in 2001 from Prodrive to the Peugeot team based in France are not entirely clear. It turned out to be a two-year low in his career, and he was overshadowed by the success of his team-mate, Marcus Gronholm, who had narrowly beaten him to the world title in 2000. Burns had already decided to return to Subaru when he suffered a blackout 'en route' to the Wales rally GB in November 2003. He was later diagnosed with astrocytoma, a form of brain tumour. 
Burns claimed that he was not particularly blessed with natural talent as a driver, though he was recognized as being courageous, thoughtful, and tactically astute. Although determined to succeed, he did not drive beyond the limit of where he felt in control of the car. He believed strongly in the importance of personal fitness, including an appropriate diet, as well as the value of sports psychology in tackling the physical and mental problems that accompanied rallying at the highest levels. He was held in high regard, both personally and professionally, by his many followers and colleagues in the sport. His success contributed to the popularity of rallying as a television spectacle. His autobiography, 'Driving Ambition', was published in 2002. About 2001 he formed a relationship with Zoe Keen, a television producer, who supported him through his final illness. He died on 25 November 2005 at the Wellington Hospital (North), 27 Circus Road, Westminster, and was survived by her and his father Alex, his mother having predeceased him. A memorial service was held at St Luke's Church, Chelsea, on 22 December 2005, and the following year the Richard Burns Foundation was launched, to 'inspire and support people with serious injury and illness' (www.richardburnsfoundation.com). 


@@@@@


doc= 96206


Fewtrell, (Ernest) Malcolm (1909-2005), police officer, was born on 28 September 1909 at the police station in Newport Street, Ryde, Isle of Wight, one of six sons of Ernest George Fewtrell, police officer, and his wife, Minnie Albanette, 'nee' Simms. At the time of his birth his father was a police constable; later he was a detective in the Criminal Investigations Department (CID), and later still a newsagent. Three of Fewtrell's brothers also became detectives. He attended school in Reading, then worked for a year on a sheep station in Australia before returning to join the Buckinghamshire police force in 1927 as a cadet. On 4 June 1934 he married Ann Thomas, a 24-year-old nurse at the King Edward VII Hospital, Windsor (they had met when Fewtrell had had an appendix operation), and daughter of George Thomas, railway fireman. Fewtrell later described her as (like all successful policemen's wives) 'patient, tolerant and understanding' (Fewtrell, 8). They had one son and one daughter. 
Fewtrell gradually rose through the ranks of the Buckinghamshire police force, and was noted as a calm and capable officer. During the Second World War he was, as a policeman, prohibited from joining the armed forces, to his disappointment. In 1950 he was promoted to detective inspector, and in 1954 to detective superintendent, and head of Buckinghamshire CID. 
Fewtrell was looking forward to his retirement, then less than a year away, when he found himself charged with solving one of the most celebrated crimes of the twentieth century. At about 4.30 a.m. on the morning of 8 August 1963 he was woken by a phone call from the police headquarters in Aylesbury, with the message 'There's been a train robbery at Cheddington, sir' (Fewtrell, 9). Within half an hour he was at Bridego Bridge, near Linslade, to find the Glasgow to London mail train in two parts (the engine and high-value carriage having been decoupled from the other carriages, which had been left a mile behind at Sears Crossing), sixty-five bewildered postal sorters, and a badly coshed driver; 120 mail bags containing Scottish banks' takings after a bank holiday weekend were missing. At first it was thought (in amazement) that $1 million had been stolen, but over the next few days it became clear that nearer $2.6 million had been taken, in what the press immediately dubbed the 'great train robbery'. At lunchtime on the day of the robbery Fewtrell advised his chief constable to call in Scotland Yard, and from that point he shared responsibility for the investigation with Detective Superintendent Gerald McArthur of the Yard. 
Initially there were few clues to go on. Eyewitness reports from the train crew and postmen told of around fifteen men, wearing balaclavas and gloves, operating swiftly in a highly professional, military-style operation. Fewtrell's first thought was that the robbers would have made their getaway using the nearby M1 back to London. However, the train's fireman had been told to lie still for half an hour while the gang made their getaway. Fewtrell correctly surmised that the gang was holed up in a hideaway relatively near the abandoned train. He and McArthur therefore decided to search the surrounding countryside from the train outwards up to a 30 mile perimeter. 'I have kicked myself thousands of times for not having ordered the search the other way round', he later wrote; (Fewtrell, 44). They also took the calculated risk of calling a press conference to publicize their hunch. The result was spectacular: 'the whole country seemed to be in the grip of detective fever', Fewtrell wrote (ibid., 57). One particular tip-off proved decisive: a local cowman, John Maris, reported suspicions about Leatherslade Farm, near Oakley in Buckinghamshire. The two officers sent to investigate found a house well stocked with food, beer, and entertainments, and, in the basement, several mailbags stuffed with bank wrappers and Post Office chits. 'The whole place is a clue', Fewtrell was reported as saying (ibid.). Evidence from Scotland Yard's fingerprinting unit proved crucial in the subsequent course of the investigation, as did further tip-offs from the general public, and chance discoveries of some of the money. Fewtrell's own role was particularly important in trapping in interview Brian Field, the smooth-talking solicitor's clerk who had helped the robbers buy the farm. 
Fewtrell also had responsibility for the security of the courtroom in which the subsequent trials were held, and for the detention and transport of the defendants. No local court was big enough to accommodate the trial, so Aylesbury district council offices were temporarily converted into a courthouse, with additional security challenges. Fewtrell was later proud that none of the defendants escaped while in the custody of his officers. He was in court on 16 April 1964 to hear the sentences on the twelve convicted men, most for thirty years. He disagreed with the view that the robbers had been handed unduly harsh sentences, and especially disliked the romanticization of their crime, emphasizing the ruthlessness of the men, and the deterrent value of the sentences. 'It is easy in this country for people to forget that we all live on a biscuit-thin crust above violence and social upheaval below', he later wrote (Fewtrell, 143). 
Having retired, Fewtrell was free to write about the investigation, unlike serving officers; he wrote two long articles that appeared in the 'Sunday Telegraph' on 19 and 26 April 1964, and subsequently a book, 'The Train Robbers' (1964). In this he was at pains to emphasize that he had 'no desire to take more than a very modest share of the credit' (Fewtrell, 10). On leaving the police he worked for ten years as accommodation officer for Portsmouth Polytechnic before retiring to a bungalow in Swanage, Dorset; there he organized the local neighbourhood watch and played golf into his nineties. He died at Poole Hospital on 28 November 2005, following a stroke. He was survived by his son and daughter, his wife having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96214


Mary Hayley Bell (1911-2005) continued to write, though she largely subordinated her aspirations to those of her husband and children. Born in Shanghai on 22 January 1911, the daughter of Francis Hayley Bell, an army officer and commissioner for maritime customs in China, and his American wife, Agnes (1878-1960), she was educated first by a governess, then at Malvern Girls' College and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. She first appeared on stage in Shanghai in 'The Barretts of Wimpole Street' (1932) and subsequently in several roles on Broadway and in the West End. She stopped acting following her marriage to Mills and turned her attention to writing. Her first performed play, 'Men in Shadow' (1942), with Mills starring, had a substantial success at London's Vaudeville Theatre, as did her most famous play, 'Duet for Two Hands' (1945, at the Lyric), in which Mills played a maimed poet on whom a surgeon unwittingly grafts a murderer's hands. She gradually lost interest in writing plays when they proved difficult to place, and turned her attention to other forms. Her most acclaimed work was the novel 'Whistle Down the Wind' (1958), which was attractively filmed in 1961 by Bryan Forbes, with Hayley as one of the children who mistakes an escaped convict for Jesus Christ. She also wrote an autobiography, 'What Shall We Do Tomorrow?' (1968), and a book about the family dog in 1981. Above all she concentrated her attention on domestic matters, raising three children and maintaining a marriage of legendary happiness and longevity. She suffered from vascular dementia in later years, and like Mills she also lost her sight, but they managed to walk down the aisle in a renewal of their marriage vows in 2001. She died on 1 December 2005 at their home, Four Gables, Village Road, Denham, Buckinghamshire, of heart failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 96215


Allbeury, Theodore Edward Le Bouthillier (1917-2005), intelligence officer and novelist, was born on 24 October 1917 at 478 Manchester Road, Stockport, Lancashire, the son of Theodore Allbeury, cotton goods buyer, and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Bailey. He had one sister. His father died when Allbeury was young, though the circumstances are unclear; Allbeury later claimed both that his father was an officer in the Black Watch, killed a few days before the armistice in 1918 (no such casualty is recorded by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission), and that he died in Africa when Allbeury was five. Allbeury was prone to story-telling about his own life. After his father's death he and his mother and sister lived first in Birmingham, where he attended Slade primary school in Erdington, then in Ilford, where he attended Ilford county high school, then again in Birmingham, where he attended the King Edward VI Grammar School in Aston. He showed a particular flair for art, and on leaving school worked in the drawing office of an iron foundry, while also taking evening classes and teaching himself French and German. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War Allbeury responded to an advertisement in 'The Times' seeking linguists for special work with the army. He was interviewed in the back room of a barber's shop off Trafalgar Square, an encounter that he later wrote into several of his novels. Accepted into the intelligence corps, he served in Somalia, Ethiopia, the Sudan, Italy, and finally occupied Germany. He was demobilized in 1947 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
It is unclear whether, to what extent, and how long Allbeury continued in intelligence work after his official release in 1947; his own accounts varied. From the 1950s through to the late 1970s he worked in advertising and public relations, except for a few years in the early 1960s when he farmed chickens on the Isle of Oxney, Kent (which he found tedious and unrewarding). In the late 1950s he ran J. W. Southcombe, an advertising agency, and in 1964 he co-founded Allbeury Coombs & Partners. In 1965 he took over a pirate radio station, King Radio, which broadcast from the Red Sands fort in the Thames estuary. He renamed the station Radio 390 (from its wavelength) and relaunched it to provide middle-of-the-road, 'easy listening' music, mainly to housewives. It broadcast Allbeury's own show, 'Red Sands Rendezvous'. The station was closed, along with other pirate radio stations, in 1967. In 1968 Allbeury stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal candidate at Petersfield. He was married several times, the last on 13 May 1972 to Grazyna Maria [Graz] Felinska (died 1999), a 25-year-old secretary, and daughter of Richard Marian Felinski, businessman. He had a son and three daughters in total. 
It was the experience of losing contact with one of his daughters that in part inspired Allbeury to write his first novel, 'A Choice of Enemies' (1973), a spy thriller set largely in occupied Germany. Its main protagonist, Ted Bailey, clearly based in part on Allbeury himself, is sympathetically portrayed, faced with a recurrent choice between obeying orders and following his conscience (the latter with dire consequences). Allbeury went on to write some forty books under his own name, as well as others under the pseudonyms Richard Butler and Patrick Kelly; at one point he was publishing four books a year. Most were spy thrillers, set apart from most others in that genre by their preoccupation with character and psychology rather than action and gadgetry, though his early books in particular contained their fair share of spy chases. Perhaps his best books were 'The Lantern Network' (1978), a story about honour and betrayal in the Special Operations Executive in France, and a sequel, 'As Time Goes By' (1994), written from the perspective of its women agents in France. Other notable books included 'The Special Collection' (1975), about KGB infiltration of British trade unions, and 'The Alpha List' (1979), in which the narrator has to investigate his closest friend. Allbeury's books were commercially successful, and in one year he received a penny more under public lending right than Barbara Cartland, an achievement he relished. 
Allbeury gradually gave up his work in advertising in order to concentrate on writing. He continued writing into his eighties, his last book published in his own lifetime being 'Hostage' (2004). Several more were published after his death. The death of his wife, Grazyna, was a hard blow. Living latterly at 7 Lanthorne Mews, Tunbridge Wells, he died on 4 December 2005 at the Kent and Sussex Hospital, Tunbridge Wells, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96218


Hodgson, Miriam Ann (1938-2005), editor of children's books, was born on 10 December 1938 at Denison House, Denison Road, Rusholme, Manchester, the only daughter of Erwin Isak Jacob Rosenthal (1904-1991), Hebrew scholar and orientalist, and his wife, Elisabeth Charlotte, 'nee' Marx (1907-1996). She had one older brother, Thomas Gabriel (Tom) Rosenthal ('b'. 1935), later chairman and chief executive of Andre Deutsch Ltd. Her parents, of Jewish descent, had fled Germany in 1933 and at the time of her birth her father was lecturer in Semitic languages and literature at the University of Manchester. In 1948 the family moved to Cambridge when her father was made a lecturer (later a reader) in oriental studies at the University of Cambridge. He published widely on both Judaism and Islam. 
Miriam Rosenthal was educated at the Perse School for Girls, Cambridge, and then at St Anne's College, Oxford; she graduated with a third in modern history in 1960. She began her career working as an editor of adult books at Ernest Benn, which later became Associated Book Publishers. There she met her husband, Julian Russell Hodgson, then head of the education department, and son of John Hodgson, minister of religion. They married on 28 November 1969 at St Pancras register office. After the birth of her only child, Elinor, she returned to work in a new role working part-time as a children's books editor, which led to her becoming editorial director of publishing at Methuen Children's Books in 1986. 
Passionate about the craft of writing, on which she said, 'I never cease to be in awe not only of my authors' achievements but also of the creative process of writing' ('On being an editor'), she was a gifted editor who inspired great loyalty from her authors. One of them, Annie Dalton, described her 'rare ability to befriend her authors whilst continuing to challenge us on every level. Her respect for the creative process is unique in my experience and her sensitivity is downright supernatural' ('The Times', 6 Dec 2005). Hodgson herself defined the ideal relationship between editor and author as 'the touching of minds... The editor is the servant of the writer. He never dictates' ('On being an editor'). But there was one principle on which she felt that an editor could dictate to a children's author: 'The only condition an editor should impose is to remind the author that he is writing for children, who deserve to keep a belief in good defeating evil' (ibid.). 
Following this principle, Hodgson guided many of the best children's writers of her time, including Anne Fine, Caroline Pitcher, Michelle Magorian, Michael Morpurgo, Carlo Gebler, Theresa Breslin, Jamila Gavin, Bel Mooney, Jenny Nimmo, and many others. The importance of her role in shaping these authors' books was evident in their tributes to her. 'It was her ability to see the gold among the dross; it was her ability to recognise talent: big talent, small talent, fragile talent; to see the one seed she felt she could nourish like a gardener' that made her an outstanding editor, according to Jamila Gavin (Gavin, 'Miriam Hodgson'). Robert Westall dedicated 'The Kingdom by the Sea' (1990) to 'Miriam, who understood', while a more robust editorial hand was revealed in Jean Ure's dedication of 'Plague 99' (1989) 'To Miriam, who fought me womanfully every inch of the way'. Under her guidance and nurture Hodgson's authors went on to win the Carnegie medal, the Nestle Smarties prize, the 'Guardian' children's book prize, and the Whitbread award. 
In addition to editing the novels of others, Hodgson compiled anthologies of stories for teenagers, mostly by her own authors. These included 'Heartache' (1991), 'Mother's Day' (1992), 'Mixed Feelings' (1997), and 'Sisters' (1998). Following the sale of Methuen's children's book division to Egmont in 1998, she remained chief editor of Egmont's children's books for a further year before her formal retirement. (In fact she continued editing until shortly before her death.) In 1999 she was made editor of the year at the British book awards and in 2003 she won the Eleanor Farjeon award, presented by the Children's Book Circle for outstanding services to children's literature. She died of ovarian cancer at St George's Hospital, Tooting, London, on 14 November 2005, and was survived by her husband and daughter. Her life has been honoured by the launch on 23 November 2006 of the Miriam Hodgson perspective series, a lecture series to be run in conjunction with Seven Stories in Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 96222


Luke, Frederic Davey (1921-2005), German scholar and translator, was born at Emsworth, Linden Road, Clevedon, Somerset, on 13 June 1921, the son of Thomas Davey Luke, a doctor, and his wife, Jane Thompson, 'nee' Pattison. His father died young, and Luke (known in the family as Derek, to everyone else as David) was brought up by his mother and an elder sister. He was educated at Sedbergh School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where, exempted from military service, he took a first in modern languages in 1944, and a DPhil on the French symbolist poet Rimbaud in 1947. His career was shaped by a bizarre chance, when in 1947 his application for a French lecturership at Manchester was pre-empted by the offer of a less obviously relevant post in German. He occasionally expressed regret at the diversion. In 1959 he returned to Oxford to become student (fellow and tutor) in German at Christ Church. 
In these early years Luke published only the occasional article -- on Kafka, or Nietzsche. He was confessedly inhibited by the formal requirement to assimilate all previous scholarship on a topic before advancing one's own views. He made a pilgrimage to Zurich to ask Emil Staiger, author of an authoritative three-volume study of Goethe, how he had come to terms with 150 years of secondary literature. Meantime he was a devoted and effective tutor and a much appreciated, idiosyncratic lecturer, as recorded by a review for the undergraduate journal 'Isis' of his Nietzsche course by the later 'Private Eye' humorist John Wells (never published, since the proctors put a stop to the series). Though occasionally driven to despair at the deficient motivation of some students, and to positive rage at basic failures of comprehension, he conscientiously helped the lame dog while inspiring the talented. He would spend evenings rereading texts for the next day's tutorials so as to give full value. 
University teaching was then regarded as a respected activity for its own sake, with or without a research 'output'. Yet it would have been sad if, apart from teaching, Luke's literary sensitivity and European breadth of reading had gone to waste. The riches were released when he turned to translating, especially verse. Goethe's 'Roman Elegies' (1977), metrically simple and rhymeless, were followed by the immensely stiffer challenge of his 'Faust' (part 1 1987, part 2 1995), whose variety of verse forms exhausts the repertoire: a challenge triumphantly met, as was that of Goethe's equally protean lyrical poetry ('Selected Poems', 1999). Stephen Spender's notion that Luke had improved on the originals was nonsense; but here indeed were poetic recreations that allowed English readers to experience direct the quality of one of Europe's greatest poets. The care and elegance of the introductions and notes fully measured up in the end to what is expected of 'secondary literature'. Luke also translated narrative works by Kleist, Stifter, the brothers Grimm, and Thomas Mann, whose 'Death in Venice' he, as a homosexual, regarded virtually as a sacred text. His achievements were recognized by German and European prizes. British research evaluation, however, discounted literary translation in favour of learned articles. Yet quite apart from the social and international value of opening windows on otherwise inaccessible cultures, and the much broader audience for foreign literary works as against the narrow readership of specialized journals, translation is at least as rigorous an activity as secondary writing, calling for all a scholar's capacities and more: a precise and loving understanding of the original, a highly developed stylistic judgement, and a delicate, often ingenious feel for the resources of English. 
Luke's devotion to poetry made him a friend of W. H. Auden during the latter's tenure of the Oxford professorship of poetry in the late 1950s, and it was Luke's doing that Auden was allowed to live out his last years in the 'south brewhouse' (later called the Auden cottage) in the shadow of his alma mater. Luke's other great love was music, especially opera, more especially Mozart and Wagner. He was also (in this respect a typical bachelor don) a lover of the table and of travel. He was a generous and delightful host, witty and wrily self-ironizing, inclined to half-comic rage when a new piece of the technical equipment to whose acquisition he was addicted could not be made to behave. He kept animals, first a cat (dogs being forbidden in colleges, unless, in one legendary instance, pragmatically renamed 'the dean's cat') then in retirement dogs. When his in-college cat Mowgli died, he drove to his cottage in the Scottish borders to bury him. 
Luke stood at a mildly eccentric angle to the outside world. To go shopping with him was to witness cross-purposes over the simplest transaction. He could be awkward in academic matters too, but not by ill will, and in ways that did not lessen colleagues' affection. His closest colleague, the Christ Church French tutor Alban Krailsheimer, when asked why he put up with Luke's eccentricities without divorcing, answered: 'For the sake of the children'. The humorous parallel hits off the educational values to which, under a sometimes blase exterior, Luke too was committed. Variously influenced by Nietzsche's atheism, Goethe's secular humanism, and years of psychoanalysis, Luke went through phases of religious belief, the last being Russian Orthodox, it too finally abandoned. He died of pneumonia at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 5 December 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 96225


Sadie, Stanley John (1930-2005), musicologist and music critic, was born on 30 October 1930 at 57 Forty Avenue, Wembley, the only son of David Sadie, a silk manufacturer's agent, and his wife, Deborah, 'nee' Simons; he had one older sister. He was of Jewish descent. He was educated at St Paul's School, London, and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he read music under Thurston Dart, Charles Cudworth, and Patrick Hadley; he graduated BA MusB in 1953, and PhD in 1958. His thesis was on eighteenth-century British chamber music, a subject about which little had hitherto been discovered. As a schoolboy he had played the clarinet in the RAF central band; he went on to become an accomplished and active bassoonist. On 10 December 1953, at the New West End Synagogue, Paddington, he married Adele Bloom, formerly Simmons (1931-1978), a hospital committee clerk, and daughter of David Simmons, commercial traveller. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Sadie taught at Trinity College of Music, London, from 1957 to 1965, and in 1964 joined 'The Times' as a music critic, reviewing regularly for the paper until 1981. In 1966 he was appointed assistant editor of the 'Musical Times', two years later becoming its editor, a post he held until 1986. For forty years, from the mid-1960s, he also reviewed regularly for 'The Gramophone' and made many broadcasts for the BBC. He wrote numerous programme articles and notes to accompany recordings. 
Sadie's years with 'The Times' coincided with a period of rich diversity in British musical life: performances of contemporary and new music were widespread and, at the same time, there was a growing interest in early music and the re-creation of historical styles of performance (a subject that fascinated him). He was a percipient and lively critic of a range of music-making and, though he expressed his views very directly, his notices were fair. When he became editor of the 'Musical Times' it was the most widely read music journal in Britain and the only one of musical record. Under his editorship it published articles by leading scholars as well as a range of reviews of publications and performances; Sadie himself contributed numerous reviews, especially of opera (to which he was especially drawn throughout his life). In all his writings his prose was elegant and unpretentious, and revealing of his sharp and sometimes scathing wit. His trenchant views could lead to rifts with colleagues. 
In 1970 Sadie began work on a sixth edition of 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians', published in 1980 as 'The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians', in twenty volumes. His combination of encyclopaedic knowledge and experience of music's practicalities made him the obvious choice as editor of the new edition of the dictionary, his greatest achievement. Not only was it on an unprecedented scale, but it embraced topics new to musicology (including world music, ethnomusicology, ancient music, sources, analysis, popular music) and was written by an international team of specialists. No longer was the dictionary directed at the informed amateur. It set new standards of musical writing, scholarship, and bibliography. 
This ground-breaking work of musical lexicography generated several other reference works with which Sadie was involved, notably 'The New Grove Dictionary of Musical Instruments' (3 vols., 1984), 'The New Grove Dictionary of American Music' (with H. Wiley Hitchcock; 4 vols., 1986), 'The Grove Concise Dictionary of Music' (1988), 'The New Grove Dictionary of Opera' (4 vols., 1992), and 'The New Grove Book of Operas' (1996). Sadie was later co-editor, with John Tyrrell, of the seventh edition of the main dictionary (29 vols., 2001). In 2000, however, the publishers (Macmillan Holtzbrinck) suddenly stipulated that the dictionary be published later that year. Sadie protested that this would be impossible without compromising editorial standards; he was dismissed. (As it happened, the new deadline was still not met.) He was involved with the texts of these works at every level; he was a skilful editor who enjoyed teaching the art to his large team of young colleagues, in whom he inspired great loyalty; he launched the careers of numerous scholars, writers, and editors. 
Sadie's writings and performing editions focused on the music of his two great loves: Mozart and Handel. He published a monograph on Mozart in 1956, another in 1966, an edition of Mozart's piano sonatas (1981), a revised edition of Emily Anderson's edition of Mozart's letters (1985), a book on Mozart's symphonies (1986), and a volume of essays on Mozart (1996). In spite of his lengthy final illness he completed the first of a projected two-volume study of Mozart, 'Mozart: the Early Years, 1756-1791' (2006). His books on Handel were published in 1962, 1966, and 1972, and in 1987 he co-edited (with Anthony Hicks) the 'Handel Tercentenary Collection'. From 1976 he was editor of Dent's 'Master Musicians' series. He also published books of a less specialist nature, notably 'The Cambridge Guide to Music' (with Alison Latham; 1985), and he edited a set of eight volumes, 'Man and Music' (1989-93), which were conceived alongside a series of television programmes, presented by Bamber Gascoigne and Alan Bennett among others. 
On 18 July 1978, following the death of his first wife, Sadie married Julie Anne Vertrees, 'nee' McCormack ('b'. 1948), an American musicologist, bass-viol player, and cellist, and daughter of Walter Stewart McCormack, dentist. They had a son and a daughter, and lived initially in Hampstead. During their marriage they were involved in several joint projects, including 'The New Grove Dictionary of Women Composers' (with Rhian Samuel; 1994). In 1993 Sadie founded the Handel House Trust, to create a museum and recital room in Handel's London house in Brook Street; his wife was also instrumental in establishing the Handel House Museum. Through this venture Sadie and his wife developed a wider interest in composers' memorials and birthplaces. They made some forty trips to Europe, gathering information for a projected guide. (It was on one of these journeys, in Ukraine in 1999, that they were involved in a car accident in which Sadie was badly injured.) 'Calling on the Composer' was published posthumously in 2005. 
Sadie was at the centre of British musical life for nearly fifty years. He occupied a unique place: he was a distinguished scholar, but he possessed that rare gift of being able to communicate his knowledge and enthusiasms to the general reader and listener. He devoted passionate energy to his numerous projects, and usually worked long into the night. But he nevertheless had a strong sense of family and clear views on topical issues that affected everyday life. He listed his recreations in 'Who's Who' as 'watching cricket, drinking (mainly wine and coffee), bridge, travel, reading'. In 1982 he was made a CBE. He was president of the Royal Musical Association (1989-94) and of the International Musicological Society (1992-7). He received several honorary doctorates. 
Sadie and his wife moved to Cossington, Somerset, in 2000. There they established a series of chamber concerts. His last year was marked by a debilitating deterioration of his health; a diagnosis of motor neurone disease was made just a week before he died, of bronchopneumonia, at his home, The Manor, Cossington, on 21 March 2005. He was survived by his wife and five children. There was a private funeral in Cossington, followed by a woodland burial in the Quantock hills. A memorial service was held at Cossington on 4 April, and a memorial concert at the Royal Academy of Music on 1 November. Sadie lived long enough to see the publication a month before his death of a volume of essays in his honour, 'Words about Mozart' (edited by Dorothea Link). In 2005 he was posthumously awarded the Handel prize by the city of Halle. 


@@@@@


doc= 96226


Browse, Lillian Gertrude (1906-2005), art dealer and art historian, was born at 2 Carlton Mansions, West End Lane, Hampstead, London, on 21 April 1906, the younger child of Michael Browse, entrepreneur, champion cyclist, and son of a Jewish White Russian emigre who had settled in southern Africa, and his wife, Gladys Amy, 'nee' Meredith, a member of a large, close-knit, well-established Anglo-Jewish family. She was originally named Lily Gertie, but later adopted first Gertrude then Lillian. Aged three, she, her elder brother, Jack ('b'. 1904), and their mother emigrated to Johannesburg to rejoin their father, who had established himself as a racehorse trainer in the Transvaal. She was educated at Barnato Park High School, Johannesburg. She returned to London in 1928 to train under Margaret Craske at the Cecchetti Ballet School. 
In 1930, on tour with Anton Dolin's company to Amsterdam, Browse realized she would never be pre-eminent as a dancer. The following year, despite knowing nothing of the fine arts, she persuaded Harold Leger to take her on, unpaid, to file old master photographs in his Bond Street gallery. Over the next eight years she trained her eye, became familiar with the auction rooms, learned the essential skills of a cataloguer, absorbed the financial and negotiating skills of the commercial art world, and engaged deeply with the work of nineteenth- and twentieth-century French and British artists. In due course Leger made her manager of the gallery and allowed her to mount a series of adventurous one-man shows, as well as mixed thematic shows of contemporary work. On 3 September 1934 she married, in the Liberal Jewish synagogue at St John's Wood, her first cousin Ivan Harold Joseph. Four years her junior, he was a businessman then working as a depot inspector for a catering company, and the son of Walter Gordon Joseph, company secretary for a builders' merchants. They had little in common, and the marriage did not survive. They separated, but did not formally divorce until 1944. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Browse joined the London ambulance service. However, her unique wartime contribution was to persuade Kenneth Clark, director of the National Gallery, to let her organize exhibitions of contemporary British art to cover the bare walls of his gallery in place of the old masters removed to Wales for safe keeping. In 1940 she mounted 'British painting since Whistler' and 'Drawings of Augustus John'; in 1941 the first major, non-commercial Walter Sickert retrospective; in 1942 a two-man show of William Nicholson and Jack Yeats. She scoured the country gaining the trust and friendship of private owners and museum curators, and assembling an unrivalled personal archive of work by early twentieth-century British artists. She thus established the bedrock of her future attainments as dealer and scholar. In 1941 she initiated her career as an author by bringing together, in 'The Drawings of Augustus John', illustrations of the works she had collected for the 1940 exhibition. 1943 saw the publication of her first volume on Sickert, which included a fine selection of his works with informative catalogue notes. 
At the end of the war, together with Henry Roland and Gustav Delbanco, Browse became a founding partner of Roland, Browse, and Delbanco at 19 Cork Street, London. The firm held a succession of well-chosen and well-researched exhibitions, many featuring Browse's favourite artists. In 1946 she became general editor of 'Ariel Books on the Arts', overseeing publication of slim volumes on Constantin Guys, James Dickson Innes, Barbara Hepworth, Lesley Hurry, and Eric Ravilious. 

'Degas Dancers', published in 1949, brought together Browse's twin passions, dance and art. Widely reviewed and praised, this book led to her appointment from 1950 to 1954 as ballet critic of 'The Spectator'. A catalogue raisonne of paintings by William Nicholson followed in 1956. 1960 saw the summit of her achievement as a Sickert scholar. She selected the Arts Council centenary retrospective and her second, substantial, monograph on Sickert was published. The essence of her achievement as a scholar rested in the combination of individual discrimination and scrupulous research. She trusted her eye. 
Browse's second marriage, at the Westminster register office on 17 June 1964, to Sidney Henry Lines (1912-2000), was full and happy. The son of Sidney Augustus Lines, a buyer of oriental goods, he was a widower six years her junior, and a director of Wiggins Teape. They entertained their wide circle of friends in London and indulged their enthusiasm for gardening both in London and at their cottage in Petworth. Although childless, Browse had a clutch of godchildren, several the progeny of theatrical families. 
In 1977 Roland and Delbanco retired from their gallery, to be replaced by William Darby. After four years Browse withdrew all but her name and goodwill from the business. In 1978 she published her last monograph, 'Forain, the Painter', and in 1999 her autobiography, 'Duchess of Cork Street'. This sobriquet, bestowed by Rex Nan Kivell, director of the Redfern Gallery next door in Cork Street, alluded to her dignity and astounding elegance. She made many of her own clothes, favouring an Edwardian look with high ruffled necks. She always wore fabulous hats. Her gracious entry into the auction rooms, to take her reserved seat in the front row, held all in thrall. 
In 1982, honouring a promise she had made to Anthony Blunt some twenty years earlier, Browse gave much of her private collection of paintings, drawings, and sculpture to the Courtauld Institute of Art. She later bequeathed an important Degas sculpture, 'Preparation a la danse', to the Courtauld, and a few of her favourite pictures to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. Her many contributions to the visual arts were recognized in 1998 when she was appointed CBE. She died at her home, 29 Bloomfield Terrace, Westminster, of pneumonia on 2 December 2005, less than five months short of her hundredth birthday. She was cremated at Putney Vale cemetery on 15 December. A memorial exhibition was held at Browse and Darby in November 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 96229


Davie, Michael (1924-2005), journalist and author, was born at Belhaven, Cranleigh, Surrey, on 15 January 1924, the second son and youngest of three children of Russell Davie, head of a stock-jobbing firm in the City of London, and his wife, Harriet Selina Hatton, 'nee' Browne. He went to Haileybury College, where he appeared in the cricket eleven with Alan Ross, the poet, whom he was later to appoint as cricket correspondent of 'The Observer'. He spent a year at Merton College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner reading English under Edmund Blunden, before following his elder brother Peter into the Royal Navy, serving the last two years of the Second World War in the Pacific. He returned to Merton in 1946, changing to study history. 
Davie's tutor at Haileybury, Martin Wight (later famous as an international relations scholar), passed on to David Astor, 'The Observer''s new editor, a letter Davie had sent him about a holiday at Sandwich, in Kent. Astor was so impressed by the undergraduate's writing that he dined him at Boodle's and surprisingly offered him the post of diplomatic correspondent. Davie had to turn the offer down because he had not completed his course, but, having graduated with a second-class degree in modern history, he joined the paper in 1949 -- this time in the equally surprising role of religious correspondent -- after a short training spell on the 'Manchester Evening News'. Religious correspondent was apparently the only position the news editor had available. Davie, though describing himself as a 'middle-stump Anglican' ('The Guardian'), was not drawn to the subject, especially after being lectured at Cliveden on the virtues of Christian Science by the editor's mother, the redoubtable Nancy Astor. On 8 November 1954 he married Mollie Robin Atherton, the 24-year-old daughter of Guy Atherton. They had a son and two daughters. 
As sports editor in the late 1950s, in partnership with Christopher Brasher, the former Olympic athlete, Davie created a new form of sports journalism for which he recruited unlikely contributors, such as the Oxford dons A. J. Ayer and John Sparrow. He demanded a quality of writing on sport that matched that on the literary and arts pages. He also persuaded current players, such as the footballer George Eastham, to file a report after a match from the dressing-room, which had not been done before. He was fanatical about cricket and used to slip away from the office to watch Len Hutton or Gary Sobers batting. On one memorable occasion he persuaded Groucho Marx to accompany him to Lord's; 'It's great', Marx is reputed to have replied when Davie asked if he was enjoying himself, 'When does it start?' ('Daily Telegraph'). He covered the Melbourne Olympics of 1956 and went with the England cricket team on their Australian tour in 1959-60. He later wrote a book, 'Anglo-Australian Attitudes' (2000). 
After a brief spell in Washington, Davie next became news editor and earned the respect of reporters by showing a talent for handling both them and their copy. Two of his injunctions became famous: he sent back one over-excited story with the comment 'Not dull enough' and always insisted 'If necessary, cut the facts, never the jokes' (personal knowledge). Following his American heroes, H. L. Mencken and A. J. Liebling, he regarded the title of 'reporter' as the highest a paper could bestow. His authority rested partly on his easygoing personality, but also on his own graceful style of writing -- a grace that disguised a sharp cutting edge. Astor's 'Observer' was characterized by the brilliant writing of journalists like Patrick O'Donovan, John Gale, Kenneth Tynan, and Gavin Young, and Davie played an important role in finding talent to maintain that tradition. 
Astor chose Davie as launch editor of the colour magazine in 1964, where he worked closely with his friend Anthony Sampson; Astor then brought him back to the main paper as his deputy. Davie, however, torn between writing and editing, took every opportunity to go on reporting assignments. He was fascinated by American politics, especially by the Kennedy family, and wrote some highly regarded pieces on their so-called 'Camelot court'. A book about President Lyndon Johnson (1966) was much admired by American journalists. Richard Nixon was another favourite subject and later he followed the twists and turns of the Watergate saga. 
In the mid-1960s Davie looked like Astor's inevitable successor. In 1969, however, when his first marriage broke up, he disappeared for several weeks, infuriating Astor, at whose behest he gave up his executive role and turned fully to writing. He began a new column on the newspaper's back page called 'Notebook', in which he displayed his wide range of interests and his fluency -- authoritative and gossipy at the same time. A former colleague said: 'His prime gift was for concentration... he was a spectator of acute talent' ('The Guardian'). He obtained exclusive stories about cabinet committees as well as a rare interview with P. G. Wodehouse, who talked proudly of a try he had scored for Dulwich College against Haileybury in 1899. He was named journalist of the year in 1976. His second book, 'California: the Vanishing Dream', was published in 1972, and he had a big publishing success by editing Evelyn Waugh's waspish diaries (1973-6), which were serialized in 'The Observer' then the 'Sunday Times'. Meanwhile on 6 September 1975 he married Anne Katharine Chisholm, a 35-year-old journalist and author whom he had met through 'The Observer'. She was the daughter of Archibald Hugh Tennent Chisholm, oil company executive and former editor of the 'Financial Times', and the granddaughter of Hugh Chisholm, editor of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. They adopted one son. 
As well as America, Davie always had a special affection for Australia, where his first wife came from, and in 1977 he accepted an offer to join 'The Age' in Melbourne as an associate editor, becoming editor from 1979 to 1981. He was remembered there for his pursuit of investigative stories and campaigns, for persuading prominent Australian authors to write for the newspaper, and for promoting young journalists, especially women. In 1981 he returned to England and to 'The Observer', where he resumed his 'Notebook' column, mixing this with his book writing; his account of the 'Titanic' appeared in 1986. He retired from the paper in 1987, the year in which he published, with his son Simon, the 'Faber Book of Cricket'. He then produced, with his second wife, his most successful book, 'Beaverbrook: a Life' (1992), which won high critical praise. He had been fascinated by the legendary press lord ever since Beaverbrook had summoned him to his villa in the south of France in 1956 to offer him a job, impressed by an article he had written for 'The Observer' about Marilyn Monroe. 
Michael Davie was one of the most brilliant journalists of his generation. Some of his admirers believed that his equal facility at writing and editing may have prevented him reaching the professional heights that his talents deserved; others put this down to a natural diffidence. In any event, he was not a man to harbour regrets. He had great charm and modesty and was always, with his life long alertness for news and gossip, the best of company. He was described by a colleague as 'a quintessential Englishman... with his matinee idol good looks and faultless public school accent and manners... he would have looked completely at home at a 1930s country house party' ('Daily Telegraph'). He died at his home, Chaucer Cottage, in Ewelme, Oxfordshire, on 6 December 2005, following a heart attack. He was survived by his wife, Anne, and the three children of his first marriage, his adopted son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96231


Heilbron, Dame Rose (1914-2005), barrister and judge, was born on 19 August 1914 at 27 St James Road, Abercromby, Liverpool, the younger daughter of Max Heilbron and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Summers. She was originally named Rosie, but this was later changed to Rose. Her father, described as an emigration agent on her birth certificate, ran a boarding house for Jewish emigrants 'en route' to the United States, and then took over a small hotel, in which his daughters were expected to help. But it is said that Rose was allowed to get on with her studying while her elder sister, Annie, did much of the work. Her parents clearly thought it important that she be properly educated. She was sent to the Girls' Public Day School Trust's Belvedere School, Liverpool. There she regularly won prizes in history and drama. She also took elocution lessons, becoming a licentiate of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama at the age of sixteen. Her 'mellifluous voice' was a great asset to an advocate, although she never entirely lost a 'faint tang of the Mersey' (Rose, memorial oration). Another great asset was her intelligence. From Belvedere she went to Liverpool University, graduating LLB with first-class honours in 1935 and LLM in 1937. Meanwhile she joined Gray's Inn and in 1936 was the first woman to be awarded a Lord Justice Holker scholarship. 
Heilbron was called to the bar on 3 May 1939. She joined the chambers of her pupil master, Richard Trotter, at 43 Castle Street in Liverpool and was elected to the northern circuit on 2 February 1940, proposed by the recorder of Liverpool, Edward Hemmerde. She rapidly built up a substantial criminal defence and personal injury practice. Like Elizabeth Lane, she may have found it easier to get started, despite the ingrained prejudices of clients, solicitors, clerks, and other barristers, because so many of the men were away during the Second World War. But by the time they returned she had proved her worth and her practice continued to grow apace. She was known as 'a persuasive advocate who gave her all in the preparation of a case and the mastery of detail' (Lynch, 'Mrs Justice Heilbron', 159). She worked extremely hard, no doubt because she 'always loved her work' (private information), but also because she had to support herself. 
Heilbron was junior counsel in some notable reported cases: 'Constantine v. Imperial Hotels Ltd' (1944), establishing that a common innkeeper could not refuse a room to the famous West Indian cricketer Leary Constantine; 'Christie v. Leachinsky' (1947), establishing that an arrested person must be told the reason for his arrest at the time; and 'Braddock v. Bevins' (1948), in which the Liverpool MP Bessie Braddock sued a Conservative candidate for saying that she had a tacit deal with the Communists. Heilbron appeared alone before the House of Lords in 'Adams v. Naylor' (1946) representing two boys who were injured (one fatally) in a minefield on the sandhills between Crosby and Southport. The wind had blown the sand to cover the warning sign and most of the barbed wire fence. They lost the case for technical reasons but Heilbron was commended by the lord chancellor for her 'excellent argument', and the case led directly to the reform of civil proceedings against the crown in the 'Crown Proceedings Act' 1947. 
Heilbron's personal life also prospered. She met Nathaniel (Nat) Burstein (1905-2010), an Irish-born Liverpool general practitioner, at a VE-day party. They were married on 9 August 1945 at the Harrogate synagogue (because the rabbi was a distant relative of the bride). Their daughter, Hilary, was born on 2 January 1949 (and in due course also became a successful barrister). Not only was Heilbron the first woman to achieve spectacular success at the bar, she was also a pioneer in combining her career with a happy family life, helped by a live-in nanny and other domestics, as well as her husband, who as a GP could stay at home when she had to travel. She continued to use her maiden name. 
Three months after Hilary's birth Rose Heilbron and Helena Normanton became the first women to be appointed king's counsel in England and Wales. Their careers had been very different. Normanton was then aged sixty-six, of twenty-seven years' call, and had had to struggle to build up a practice in the difficult years between the wars. Heilbron was aged only thirty-four (younger than anyone since Thomas Erskine, who took silk in 1783 at the age of thirty-three) and had built up the practice to justify it in only ten years. At that time northern circuit silks were not allowed to live within fifty miles of any assize town on the circuit. Heilbron had to ask permission to go on living in the family home with her husband and baby, a request which was 'somewhat grudgingly' granted (Glidewell, 88). 
Once she had taken silk Heilbron's practice really took off and she became one of the most famous and successful defence advocates of the day. In the 1950s the broadsheet newspapers covered sensational trials in great detail and she became a household name. In 1949 she defended George Kelly, accused with George Connolly of shooting the manager and deputy manager of the Cameo Cinema in a bungled robbery. Kelly protested that 'I want no Judy defending me', but later praised her for her prodigious efforts on his behalf ('Daily Telegraph'). She should have won. The prosecution knew that its case was weak. It depended on the evidence of two people, who were rightly treated as accomplices, but they were corroborated by Robert Graham, who said that he had heard Kelly and Connolly confess in prison. The jury could not agree a verdict. Quite inexplicably a judge ordered that Kelly and Connolly be retried separately. Kelly was tried first, convicted and sentenced to death. Connolly was then persuaded to plead guilty to robbery and sentenced to ten years' imprisonment. After losing his appeal Kelly was hanged on 28 March 1950. But in 2003 both convictions were quashed by the Court of Appeal ('Kelly and Connolly v. R', 2003). The prosecution had failed to disclose to the defence that Graham had earlier told the police that another man, Donald Johnson, had confessed to the murder months before, ironically just after Heilbron had successfully defended him on a charge of helping to dispose of the murder weapon. 
In 1951 Heilbron defended three Liverpool dockers accused at the Old Bailey of conspiracy to incite an illegal strike. The attorney general, Sir Hartley Shawcross, withdrew the case shortly before it was to go to the jury. Among her other clients were Harold Winstanley, the Knowsley Hall footman found guilty but insane of murdering the butler, after her bold decision to call only a psychiatrist in his defence; Louis Bloom, the Hartlepool solicitor found guilty of manslaughter rather than murder of his mistress in his office; Violet Clark, also known as Vicky Wright, found guilty of manslaughter rather than murder when her twin sons died in a fire on the houseboat 'Windmill'; and Jack 'Spot' Comer, acquitted of stabbing in a Soho affray, who called her 'the greatest lawyer in history' ('Daily Telegraph'). This, she felt, was 'something of an exaggeration' (Rose, 3). 
Heilbron was a good lawyer as well as a good advocate. She continued to feature in the law reports as well as the press reports. Among the cases which she argued as leader were 'Ormrod v. Crossville Motor Services Ltd' (1953), 'Attorney-General v. Harris' (1961), 'Gore v. Van Der Lann' (1967), and 'S (an Infant) v. Recorder of Manchester' (1971). The most important was probably 'Sweet v. Parsley' (1970), where the House of Lords held that 'mens rea' (a guilty mind) was required for every criminal offence created by statute unless parliament had expressly said that it was not. A landlord was not guilty of 'being concerned in the management of' premises used for smoking cannabis if she did not know and had no reason to know that cannabis was being smoked there. 
By then Heilbron was also established in a judicial career. In 1956 she was appointed recorder of Burnley, a post she held until it was abolished by the 'Courts Act' 1971, when she became a recorder of the crown court and honorary recorder of Burnley. The first woman to hold salaried judicial office was Sybil Campbell (appointed a metropolitan stipendiary magistrate in 1945), the first woman to preside over a jury trial was Dorothy Dix (as deputy recorder of Deal in 1946), but Heilbron can properly be claimed as the first woman to be appointed judge. In 1957 she also became the first woman commissioner of assize, and in January 1972 the first woman to sit as a judge at the Old Bailey. 
Despite (or perhaps because of) her success with juries and the public Heilbron's profession was slow to give her the recognition she had earned. In 1968 she was elected a bencher of Gray's Inn, nineteen years after she had taken silk, and long after her standing at the bar would have merited it. In 1973 she was elected leader of the northern circuit, the first woman to be leader of any circuit; by rights she should have been leader long before. Customarily this honour went to the most senior silk on the circuit, but, as a senior barrister said in 1970, 'with a certain amount of care to avoid Rose Heilbron' (personal knowledge). The northern circuit was in many ways more open and progressive than the London bar, but it was not until 1970 that women were admitted as full members of the bar mess, the dining club of which all male members of the circuit were automatically members. Heilbron always refused to take part in the circuit's 'ladies' nights' because they treated women barristers as second-class citizens. 
In 1974 Heilbron became the second woman High Court judge. As a criminal and personal injuries practitioner of such repute she might reasonably have expected to be assigned to the Queen's Bench Division. There was a vacancy, but Sir Tasker Watkins was transferred from the Family Division to fill it, while Heilbron took his place in the Family Division. However, from 1979 to 1982 she was presiding judge on the northern circuit, again the first woman to be a presider. While on circuit she tried mostly criminal or civil cases. These included the six-month-long trial at Lancaster in 1981 of an international drug trafficker and his associates for the murder of the 'handless corpse' found in a flooded quarry. In 1980 the 'Daily Mail' reported that 'Heilbron rules her courtroom with a rod of silk -- smooth and elegant, but very tough' ('Daily Mail'). 
Heilbron's expertise as a criminal lawyer was also put to good use in 1975, when she was appointed by the home secretary, Roy Jenkins, to chair the advisory group on the law of rape. This was prompted by the outcry raised after the decision in 'DPP v. Morgan' (1975) that a man was not guilty of rape if he believed that the woman was consenting, no matter how unreasonable that belief might be. In its report ('Parl. papers', Cmnd 6352 of 1975) the advisory group accepted that principle, but recommended that, among other things, it should be made clear that absence of consent (and not violence) was the crux of the offence; that questions should not be asked about the previous sexual history of the complainant with men other than the accused without leave of the judge; and that complainants should be and remain anonymous. 
Heilbron showed a similar sensitivity to the realities of sexual politics in her most famous decisions as a judge in the Family Division. In 'Re D (a Minor) (Wardship: Sterilization)' (1976) she made an eleven-year-old girl a ward of court at the invitation of an educational psychologist in order to prevent the sterilization which her mother had agreed with her paediatrician and gynaecologist. The child suffered from a rare congenital syndrome but it was common ground that she had sufficient intellectual capacity to marry in due course. Heilbron held that it was neither medically necessary nor in her best interests to perform an operation which would involve 'the deprivation of a basic human right, namely the right of a woman to reproduce'. On the other hand in 'C v. S' (1988) she held that the putative father of an unborn child could not prevent the mother having an abortion, either on his own behalf or on behalf of the unborn child; the question was whether the proposed termination would have been a crime and she held that on the particular facts it would not. She was upheld by the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords swiftly refused leave to appeal so that the abortion could be performed before it was too late. 
When Heilbron was appointed to the High Court bench her husband had retired from his medical practice. Their daughter was practising at the London bar. So they left their home in the Wirral to live in the flat at 2 Gray's Inn Square which was to be their home for the rest of her life. In 1985 she was elected treasurer (leader for a year) of Gray's Inn, the first woman to be treasurer of any of the four inns of court. It was the final accolade in a life full of firsts. But the recognition which she eventually achieved should not obscure the prejudice and discrimination which delayed it for so long. 
Damned with faint and patronizing praise by some of the men, Heilbron was a beacon to all the women who joined the northern circuit in her wake. In 1994 there were six women High Court judges, five of whom (Dame Joyanne Bracewell, Dame Ann Ebsworth, Dame Janet Smith, Dame Heather Steel, and Dame Brenda Hale) were members of the northern circuit (and the sixth, Dame Mary Arden, came from a family of Liverpool lawyers). However slow the circuit had been to acknowledge one of its most successful practitioners, others had been able to follow where she had led. 
Heilbron retired from the High Court bench in 1988. On appointment to it in 1974 she had become a DBE. Other honours included being an honorary colonel in the Women's Royal Army Corps (TA); an honorary fellow of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford (1976), where her daughter had been a student, and honorary doctorates from the universities of Liverpool (1975), Warwick (1978), and Manchester (1980). Along with 'strength of mind and tenacious industry' she also had 'striking good looks' (Cowper, 182). The portrait by June Mendoza which hangs in Gray's Inn shows a woman of great beauty. She died at Highgate Nursing Home, Hornsey Lane, Islington, after some years there, on 8 December 2005, of pneumonia and cerebrovascular ischaemia. She was survived by her daughter, Hilary, and her husband, Nat, who was still living in Gray's Inn at the age of a hundred. 


@@@@@


doc= 96234


Sandbrook, (John) Richard (1946-2005), environmentalist and campaigner against poverty, was born on 13 August 1946 at Forbes Fraser Hospital, Bath, the second of five sons of John Peter Sandbrook, a lieutenant-commander, later captain, in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Ethel Joan Wakeham, 'nee' Sutton. He attended Dauntsey's School in Wiltshire, and went on to the University of East Anglia, where he took a degree in biology. After a year as president of the Students' Union he spent five years with the accountancy firm Arthur Andersen & Co. On 18 July 1970 he married, at the parish church of Earlham St Mary, Norfolk, Mary Wray, a 21-year-old economist, and daughter of George Arthur Wray, medical doctor. They had two sons. 
While working as an accountant Sandbrook was already active in the environmental movement, helping to set up Friends of the Earth in the UK, and attending the United Nations conference on environment and human development in Stockholm in 1972, before taking over as managing director of Friends of the Earth in 1974. After just two years there (which included some 'iconic' campaigning moments, such as dumping thousands of bottles on the doorstep of Schweppes UK as part of the campaign to promote returnable bottles), he moved on to join Barbara Ward (Baroness Jackson of Lodsworth) at the International Institute for Environment and Development, where he spent the next twenty-three years of his working life. 
The institute (established in 1973) is seen by many as the birthplace of the concept of sustainable development. Barbara Ward was a development economist and one of the first people to argue that environmental stewardship and the alleviation of poverty had to go hand in hand. Sandbrook rapidly became her favoured protege as he took on different roles within the organization, eventually becoming executive director for Europe in 1986 and overall executive director in 1989. By then the so-called Brundtland report, 'Our Common Future' (1987), had begun to popularize the idea that wealth should only be created in any one generation in ways that did not jeopardize the prospects of future generations -- in a nutshell, sustainable development. 
Sandbrook's tenure as executive director was later characterized by one close colleague as 'five parts inspiration, four parts perspiration and just one part administration' (private information). He was endlessly pursuing the next pot of money from donor governments or charitable foundations, but somehow there was always time to support other people's 'breakthrough initiatives' (such as Bob Geldof's Band Aid) and to establish enduring spin-offs such as Earthscan Books. It was for his services to the UK Overseas Development Administration that he was appointed OBE in 1990. 
In its early years the institute had been very apprehensive about working with big business, but when Sandbrook returned from the 'earth summit' in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 he set out on a path to establishing and getting involved in a number of ground-breaking initiatives that brought the influence and resources of multinational companies to bear on a range of sustainability challenges. One of the first outcomes was the report 'Towards a Sustainable Paper Cycle' (1996), which looked at ways of reducing the massive environmental and social impacts of the pulp and paper industry. This led on to a similar but more controversial project with the mining industry (from which the International Council on Mining and Metals emerged), and further work with the United Nations Development Programme as part of its 'growing sustainable business' initiative. But even Sandbrook's astonishing mediating skills were put to the test in projects with both BP and Shell International in 'hot spots' like Colombia and Nigeria. Radical environmental organizations looked on askance at his strategy. 
The reason for Sandbrook's engagement with 'big business' was not so much ideological as tactical: he just couldn't see a way of making solutions work without the enthusiastic participation of the business community. Most of his new ventures after leaving the International Institute for Environment and Development in 1999 reflected that pragmatic urgency, including his activity as a founder trustee of Forum for the Future, as non-executive director of the Eden Project in Cornwall from 1999 to 2003, and as vice-chairman (and for a short while acting chief executive) of Plantlife, a conservation charity that gave full rein to his own personal passion for plants and gardening. The focus on British initiatives (together with his work as an adviser to the prince of Wales) helped him cut back on what had always been a punishing amount of international travel, which in turn generated an endless flow of amusing and often improbable anecdotes. Despite such adventures, he was never happier than when at home with Mary and their two sons -- especially in their garden in Wimbledon. He died at St George's Hospital, Tooting, on 11 December 2005, of cancer. His wife and children survived him. 
Sandbrook's interest in the environment had started in the early 1970s, and remained his abiding passion as the rest of the world gradually awoke to the seriousness of the environmental crisis. He had a profound influence both on the environmental movement and on the world of international development. He was a much-loved friend to countless people all over the world, and a man who understood the joy and the importance of constant conviviality. In July 2006 his life and work were celebrated at a gathering in central London. Many people commented at the time that it wasn't until they looked back over everything he had achieved that the real significance of his work became apparent. 


@@@@@


doc= 96242


Barber, Anthony Perrinott Lysberg, Baron Barber (1920-2005), politician, was born at Bornholm, Northfield, Kingston upon Hull, on 4 July 1920, the youngest of three sons of John Barber (died 1958), businessman, and his wife, Ellen Katty (Mussee) Lysberg (died 1945). His father was managing director of a confectionery firm in Doncaster and at one time a personal assistant to Lord Leverhulme. His mother was Danish. His brother Noel (1909-1988) became a respected journalist and author and his brother Kenneth became a banker. 
Barber was educated at Retford grammar school in Nottinghamshire. Plans for him to be articled as a solicitor were aborted by the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. He joined the Doncaster branch of the territorials, was commissioned into the Royal Artillery, and went to France in 1940. He was in the withdrawal from Dunkirk in the same year and on his return to Britain was transferred to the RAF as a pilot in the photographic reconnaissance unit. On a mission in 1942 he ran out of fuel and bailed out over France. He was captured and remained a prisoner for the rest of the war. He made a number of escape attempts (one in which he was involved inspired the film 'The Wooden Horse') and once managed to reach Denmark -- thanks to his Danish mother he could speak the language -- but was recaptured. He then decided to concentrate on studying by correspondence for a law degree from London University. He relied on materials supplied by the International Red Cross and gained a first-class degree. He was already showing the qualities of application, intellect, and ambition that marked his later career. Following the war he spent two years in the war-shortened philosophy, politics, and economics course at Oriel College, Oxford, emerging with a second-class degree. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1948, and practised as a barrister specializing in taxation. He was also set on a political career and, as the only applicant for the Conservative nomination, was selected to fight the safe Labour seat of Doncaster in the general election of 1950. Helped by redistribution, he substantially reduced the majority. In the general election of 1951 he was narrowly elected. On 5 September the previous year he had married Jean Patricia Asquith (died 1983), the thirty-year-old daughter of Milton Asquith, businessman, of the Manor House, Wentbridge, Yorkshire. She had also fought the election of 1950 as a Conservative candidate. They had two daughters, Louise ('b'. 1951) and Josephine ('b'. 1953). 
In parliament Barber had a three-year stint as a parliamentary private secretary and between 1955 and 1958 a three-year spell as a junior whip. Significantly for his later career the chief whip at the time was Edward Heath, later Conservative leader and prime minister. In 1958 Barber became parliamentary private secretary to the prime minister, Harold Macmillan. In October 1959 he was promoted to the Treasury, serving first as economic secretary and from July 1962 as financial secretary. In October 1963 Sir Alec Douglas-Home became prime minister and he appointed Barber to the cabinet as minister of health, in succession to Enoch Powell, who had refused to serve. Barber was also sworn of the privy council and held the health post for twelve months. In the general election of October 1964 he lost Doncaster but in February 1965 was returned in a by-election for Altrincham and Sale. He held that seat until his retirement from the House of Commons in the general election of 1974. During the period of opposition he built up a successful business career. He was a non-executive director of Chartered Bank (later merged with Standard, and to figure in his later career), a director of British Roads, and chairman of his father-in-law's company, Redfearn National Glass. In 1965, following Douglas-Home's resignation as leader of the Conservative Party, he managed Edward Heath's successful campaign for the post. His reward came in 1967 when Heath appointed him party chairman. He diligently toured the local associations, explaining party policy and listening to complaints, which he passed on to Heath and the shadow cabinet. Among the grass roots he loyally backed Heath against the supporters of Enoch Powell, whom Heath had sacked from the shadow cabinet following his notorious 'rivers of blood' speech. 
Barber held his nerve during the general election of June 1970, which produced a surprise victory for the Conservatives. The press and many of Heath's colleagues, prompted by the opinion polls, expected a comfortable majority for the Labour government. British entry to the European Economic Community was central to Heath's plans for reviving the British economy and strengthening Britain's place in the world. He appointed Barber chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster with special responsibility for negotiating Britain's entry to Europe. But a month later the chancellor of the exchequer, Iain Macleod, died suddenly. Heath needed a replacement. Recalled from Brussels to meet Heath in number 10, Barber said to a friend in a lift going up to see the prime minister: 'I hope he's not going to ask me to be Chancellor' ('The Independent', 19 Dec 2005). Barber had already decided that he would return to a business or City career in the next two to three years. Nevertheless Heath persuaded him to take the post, and on 25 July he was appointed chancellor of the exchequer. During his tenure of 11 Downing Street he was caught between a prime minister set on a course of economic expansion and a more cautious Treasury, and his reputation has suffered because of the onset of a savage inflation, some of it caused by his policies. 
It might have been expected that with his specialist legal background in taxation and his previous Treasury experience Barber would be a successful chancellor. In fact the verdict of most commentators places him near the bottom of the list of effective chancellors. Most of the tax reforms he inherited from Macleod. In his October 1970 statement Barber abolished purchase tax and selective employment tax, and introduced value added tax (VAT). He also announced a reduction in the basic rate of income tax of 6died in the pound as well as cutting spending, notably in housing subsidies and welfare, imposing charges for entry to museums and art galleries, and ending free milk for primary school children. In his 1971 budget statement Barber had referred to the 'baffling combination of evils', rising unemployment and rising inflation. Old Keynesian methods of trading off unemployment and price increases no longer worked. His initial priority was to combat inflation. But in 1972 these policies were put into reverse, and the new imperative was to stem the rise in unemployment. In January the unemployment figure had passed the 1 million mark. The government, however, continued to face numerous inflationary pressures. There was a steep rise in commodity prices and in 1973 Arab oil prices were quadrupled, following the Arab-Israeli War, and militant trade unions were pressing for large wage increases. 
Edward Heath increasingly relied for economic advice on Sir William Armstrong, head of the civil service. The two men shaped the expansionist budget of 1972, which combined tax cuts, incentives for investment, and increased public spending. The government set a target of 5 per cent growth in the hope that a dynamic British economy would be able to take advantage of its access to a larger European market. Heath was determined to end the stop-go British economy and, faced with a declining currency, floated the pound in June 1972. But Barber added to inflationary pressures by presiding over a large increase in the money supply in 1972 and 1973, after his removal in November 1971, on the recommendation of the Bank of England, of quantitative controls on bank advances. Heath resisted the obvious alternative -- raising interest rates -- because he wanted business to invest. The economy grew rapidly but at an unsustainable pace and the balance of payments went into heavy deficit. Barber later conceded that the budget of 1972 had proved inflationary and expressed regret. The Treasury proved unable to withstand the political influence of the prime minister and spending ministers. The government then reversed its previous disavowal of prices and incomes policies in autumn 1972, introducing the statutory prices and incomes policy to head off rising inflation. By December 1973 the government was forced to reverse economic policy again, imposing cuts in public spending, increases on surtax, and controls on the money supply. The incomes policy meanwhile led to conflict with the trade unions, notably the miners at the end of 1973, a general election, in February 1974, and the downfall of the government. 
Barber was made a life peer in Edward Heath's dissolution honours list and entered the House of Lords as Baron Barber, of Wentbridge, Yorkshire. He had left politics aged only fifty-four. Politics may have had little to offer him, however. He lacked a base in the parliamentary party and his reputation had plummeted; 'the Barber boom' was an enduring and unfortunate appellation. His legacy when the government fell in February 1974 was rapidly rising inflation and a record balance of payments deficit. He became chairman of Standard Chartered Bank (the merger had been completed in 1969), and remained in post until 1987. It was an overseas bank and Barber spent a lot of time travelling, particularly in Africa and Asia. (At one time the young John Major was one of his advisers.) He was also a director of BP. In 1982 he was a member of the Franks inquiry into the conduct of the war with Argentina over the Falklands. Interested in conservation, he was chairman of the council of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. He was one of the Commonwealth eminent persons group who visited South Africa in 1986 to explore ways in which the tensions in the country might be eased. He was in a minority of one in opposing tougher sanctions to force the South African regime to abandon apartheid. Critics noted that Standard Chartered did much business in South Africa. In fact Barber detested apartheid, but he feared that sanctions would have an impact largely on the black population. In 1991 he was chairman of the RAF Benevolent Association's appeal launched for the fiftieth anniversary of the battle of Britain, which raised over $25 million. He had a low profile in the House of Lords and avoided public comment on Conservative Party politics. In private, however, he was critical of what he regarded as the divisive conduct first of Edward Heath, after he had lost the party leadership to Margaret Thatcher in 1975, and then of Thatcher after she lost the leadership in 1990. In 1996 he published privately a discreet and little noted memoir, 'Taking the Tide'. 
Anthony Barber was a professional politician, largely self-made, and one of the so-called 'Heathmen' who had been to grammar schools or minor public schools. Sir Alec Douglas-Home's last cabinet contained eleven old Etonians, Heath's only three. In private he was modest, witty, and charming, as well as being businesslike. In public some interpreted his directness as abruptness, and he was a pugnacious debater. Proud of his Yorkshire background, he retained a home there until late in life. He was relatively short, wiry, prematurely bald, and a desperate smoker. Smoking was forbidden in Heath's cabinet meetings and Barber regularly withdrew from cabinet to enjoy a cigarette. Until he was enlightened the prime minister thought that his chancellor's sudden withdrawals were designed to check for a change in the bank rate or some other dramatic economic news. 
Following the death of his first wife, on 8 September 1989 Barber married Rosemary Ann (died 2003), the 61-year-old daughter of Canon Fearnley Algernon Cyril Youens, and the former wife of John Surgenor. Following her death he decided to move to Suffolk to be near his daughter Josephine. He suffered from Parkinson's disease and died at Ipswich Hospital of bronchopneumonia, on 16 December 2005. He was survived by his two daughters. A memorial service was held on 27 April 2006 at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 96246


Painter, George Duncan (1914-2005), biographer and bibliographer, was born on 5 June 1914 at 23 Galton Road, Oldbury, Worcestershire, near Birmingham, the son of George Charles Painter, schoolmaster and singer, and his wife, Minnie Rosendale, 'nee' Taylor, artist. He was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was a Bell exhibitioner, attaining first-class honours in classics and the second chancellor's classical medal in 1936. In 1938, after a year working as a lecturer in Latin at Liverpool University, he joined the British Museum printed books department. During the Second World War he was a conscientious objector, serving in the Pioneer Corps. On 1 August 1942 he married (Isabel) Joan Britton, a 29-year-old state registered nurse, and daughter of Samuel Morley Britton, inspecting engineer. They had two daughters. After the war Painter returned to the British Museum. In 1954 he was appointed assistant keeper in charge of fifteenth-century books. He remained in that post until his retirement twenty years later. 
In 1951 Painter published 'The Road to Sinodun', a volume of poetry written more than ten years earlier, which tells of the suffering and anxious self-scrutiny provoked by a failed relationship. The book was not a success and was Painter's only foray into that genre. His penetrating vision was focused thereafter on the lives of others, and on documents and textual sources, the assessment, analysis, and translation of which he performed with great skill, as testified by his short life of Andre Gide, also published in 1951. He published translations of two of Gide's novels ('Marshlands' and 'Prometheus Misbound') in 1953, and, in 1956, Proust's 'Letters to his Mother'. Nevertheless it was the two volumes of his 'Marcel Proust: a Biography' (1959-65) that made his name. 
Painter's life of Proust is a hugely accomplished piece of scholarship, albeit flawed in the assumptions upon which it is founded (that Proust's characters in 'A la recherche du temps perdu' each had one or more 'originals' among his real-life acquaintances, and that understanding the novel, a 'creative autobiography', was largely a matter of mapping one set of individuals onto the other) and in its overly simplistic Freudian interpretations of many events in Proust's life. Notwithstanding such criticisms -- and there are others, for instance that Painter did not carry out any interviews with Proust's living relatives or acquaintances -- his biography formed a landmark in an exceedingly crowded field, remained in print throughout his life, and contributed invaluably to an understanding of the socio-historical circumstances of the novel's production. The second volume of Painter's 'Proust' received the Duff Cooper memorial prize in 1965, the same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. The first volume of his life of Chateaubriand (1977) -- in fact the only one to appear -- although less critically acclaimed than his 'Proust' won the James Tait Black memorial prize. 
As with his biographies, Painter's work in the field of bibliography and fifteenth-century printing was meticulous, although never without humour. This is evinced by his essay 'Caxton through the looking-glass' (1963), his account, combining technical expertise, rigorous scholarship, and admirable analytical clarity, of how, using a mirror in analysing a fragment of printer's waste, he identified otherwise unknown editions of a text probably printed by Caxton. Painter's great depth of knowledge of his subject, something that exudes from the pages of his 'Proust', was no less evident in his bibliographical essays and reviews, the pick of which were collected in his 'Studies in Fifteenth-Century Printing' (1984). His talents were seen at their most adventurous in his contributions to 'The Vinland Map and the Tartar Relation', a contribution to the debate over the authenticity of the Vinland map, a supposed fifteenth-century copy of a much earlier Norse map of the North American coast, which he published in collaboration with R. A. Skelton and T. E. Marston in 1965. Painter introduced, edited, translated, and commented on the 'Tartar relation', the Latin text from which, he argued, much of the controversial map's annotations were drawn. He was repeatedly challenged by scholars sceptical of his claims for the map's authenticity and showed great tenacity in fighting his corner; the debate, nevertheless, remained open at the time of his death. His description of his remarkable undertakings as the efforts of a 'well-meaning layman' was characteristic of his humility. 
Painter published 'The Chelsea Way, or, Marcel in England', a translation of Andre Maurois's Proustian pastiche, the year after 'The Vinland Map', an antidote, perhaps, to the rigours of his recent immersion in the Mongol conquests of the thirteenth century. This easy to-and-fro between the literary productions of the twentieth century and the medieval and early modern worlds is testimony to the remarkable amphibiousness of Painter's mind. He was appointed OBE in 1974, the year of his retirement. He published an exhaustive quincentennial biography of Caxton in 1976 and three years later received an honorary doctorate from the University of Edinburgh. From 1970 he lived with his wife in Hove, Sussex, where he enjoyed gardening and playing violin to his wife's piano accompaniment. He died at the Victoria Highgrove Nursing Home, 59 Dyke Road Avenue, Hove, on 8 December 2005. He was survived by his wife, Joan, and their two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 96247


Fox, Aileen Mary, Lady Fox (1907-2005), archaeologist, was born on 29 July 1907 at 12 Kensington Square, London, the eldest of three daughters of Walter Scott Henderson (1871-1945), a solicitor, and his wife, Alice Livingstone, 'nee' McClean (died 1966). She was educated at Downe House School, Berkshire (1921-5), and, after a court presentation, read English at Newnham College, Cambridge (1926-9). Early continental travels with her father had sparked her interest in archaeology. After graduation she obtained an introduction to the inspector of ancient monuments, J. P. Bushe-Fox, and started unpaid work at the Roman site at Richborough: in the 1930s there was no formal archaeological training in Britain. She gradually became well known among the rising generation of archaeologists and on 6 July 1933 married Cyril Fred Fox (1882-1967), director of the National Museum of Wales at Cardiff, who was knighted in 1935. They had three sons. She collaborated in her husband's fieldwork in south Wales and initiated her own projects, notably excavations at Caerleon Roman fortress, published in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' (1940). These experiences established her interest and expertise in later British prehistory and the Roman occupation of Britain. During the Second World War she lectured in archaeology at University College, Cardiff. 
In 1945 Aileen Fox was invited to undertake rescue excavation on bombed sites in the Roman city of Exeter, in which she used a range of pioneering open area methods. This led to 'Roman Exeter: Excavations in War-Damaged Areas, 1945-7' (1952). She became lecturer in archaeology at the University College of the South West at Exeter in 1947. On her husband's retirement in 1948 the family moved to Exeter, where she remained as senior lecturer until her retirement in 1972, five years after her husband's death. Throughout her time at Exeter (which obtained university status in 1955) she promoted the teaching of archaeology with a strong practical bias. 
South-west England in the late 1940s was an open research field to a dynamic archaeologist, and Aileen Fox was known for her energy. On Dartmoor there had been no systematic research for decades and her excavations of settlements at Kestor and Dean Moor, published in the 'Transactions of the Devonshire Association', remain classics. A series of papers established significant regional variations among Iron Age hillforts. With William Ravenhill, she investigated a range of Roman military sites, and produced the first evidence of the Roman army's presence in Cornwall, at the fort of Nanstallon near Bodmin. She drew all this research together in her significant synthesis 'South West England' (1964), written in her distinctive, clear and definite style. She continued rescue work in Exeter but by the late 1960s the scale of archaeological work was changing. She was instrumental in setting up the Exeter Archaeological Field Unit, later Exeter Archaeology, which in 1971 produced dramatic proof of the presence of Legio II Augusta in the cathedral close. The publication 'The Legionary Bath-House and Basilica and Forum' was both dedicated to, and prefaced by, her. Successive directors of the unit owed much to her practical help and encouragement. She helped revitalize the Devon Archaeological Society and was elected its president for 1963-4. She also served as a vice-president of the Council for British Archaeology. 
By Fox's retirement in 1972 local archaeological provision was much expanded, largely due to her efforts. She felt the need for a new arena for research and moved to Auckland, New Zealand, and left her local successors, mainly in positions she had helped establish, to 'get on with things' (in her own words). In New Zealand she found a small but thriving archaeological community to which she could make a major contribution. She remained for ten years, first as visiting lecturer at the university, then as acting archaeologist at Auckland Museum, and finally in a voluntary capacity. Her research in New Zealand ranged from excavations on Maori pas -- in some ways similar to British hillforts -- to studies of artefacts. Significant publications were 'Prehistoric Maori Fortifications' (1976) and 'Carved Maori Burial Chests' (1983). Her colleagues contributed to an affectionate Festschrift, 'A Lot of Spadework to be Done', on her return to England in 1983. 
Aileen Fox was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1944. A highlight of her later years in England was the award by Exeter University of an honorary doctorate of letters in 1985. Another valued award was honorary membership of the Prehistoric Society in 1998. She remained active in archaeological life in Devon, publishing papers well into her late eighties. She suffered from ill health in her last years and died at the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital in Exeter on 21 November 2005, following a stroke. Her body was cremated on 29 November at the Devon and Exeter crematorium, Topsham, Exeter. Her final work was her delightfully readable autobiography, 'Aileen: a Pioneering Archaeologist' (2000). This is a graphic inside portrait of a career that brought about major developments in the understanding and organization of archaeology in two very different areas, south-west England and New Zealand, and made her a valued influence on scholars and amateurs in both areas. She was survived by her three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 96251


Bailey, David Roy Shackleton (1917-2005), classical scholar, was born on 10 December 1917 at School House, Lancaster, the youngest of the four children (three sons and one daughter) of the Revd John Henry Shackleton Bailey (1875-1956), mathematician and headmaster, and his wife, Rosamond Maud, 'nee' Giles (died 1949). The family was a very unhappy one, which may go some way to account for 'the intense shyness and self-protection that many mistook for a lack of humanity' (Thomas, 'PBA', 5). He was educated at Lancaster Royal Grammar School, where his father was headmaster, and where he drilled himself to read privately every day a substantial quota of Greek and Latin. He then went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. After obtaining a first class in part one of the classical tripos and part two of the oriental studies tripos he left Cambridge in 1941 for wartime service in British intelligence at Bletchley Park. On his release from war service and return to Cambridge in 1944 he was elected a fellow of Gonville and Caius College, and in 1948 was appointed university lecturer in Tibetan, a post he held until he left Cambridge in 1968. In 1955 he moved to Jesus College, as fellow and director of studies in classics, returning to Caius in 1964, first as deputy bursar and then a year later as senior bursar. On 12 December 1967 he married Hilary Ann (1928-2010), the former wife of Kingsley Amis, and daughter of Sidney Leonard Bardwell, a clerical officer in the Ministry of Agriculture. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1968 Shackleton Bailey left Cambridge to become professor of Latin at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, where his wife kept a fish restaurant called Lucky Jim's. Their marriage was dissolved in 1974, and in 1975 Shackleton Bailey moved to Harvard as professor of Greek and Latin; from 1982 he was Pope professor of the Latin language and literature. His academic distinctions included an honorary LittD from Trinity College, Dublin (1984), and, in recognition of his work on Cicero's letters, the Kenyon medal of the British Academy (1985), to which he had been elected in 1958. On retirement from Harvard in 1988 he returned to Michigan, and in 1994 married Kristine Zvirbulis, continuing to teach as an adjunct professor until 2002. 
Between 1948 and 1955 Shackleton Bailey had produced a number of articles and reviews on Sanskrit and Tibetan topics, and a critical edition of two Buddhist hymns, 'The Satapan-casatka of Matrceta' (1951). These texts called for the application of sophisticated editorial techniques, an experience that he turned to account in 1975 in an examination of the analogous problems confronting the editor of classical texts ('Editing ancient texts', republished in 'Selected Classical Papers', 1997, 324-5). As early as 1953 he had been seriously considered for election to the Kennedy professorship of Latin; and his move to Jesus College two years later signalled a return to his original classical allegiance, which was confirmed by the publication of 'Propertiana' (1956), his first book on a classical subject. This was a collection of notes on passages of critical interest in the text of Propertius which, apart from its value to future editors, was a rich source of information on Latin poetic usage. Meanwhile he had begun to publish a series of notes and articles extending over the next forty years on textual and interpretative problems in Latin writers ranging in date from Lucilius to Nigel de Longchamp, and critical editions of Latin authors including Horace, Lucan, and Martial, culminating in eighteen volumes in the 'Loeb Classical Library', a total unequalled by any other editor in the series. 
These bilingual editions were critically important and testified also to Shackleton Bailey's gifts as a translator. Nowhere were these displayed to more effect than in his seven-volume edition of Cicero's letters to Atticus (1965-70), his 'magnum opus'. Of these letters he wrote: 'Nothing comparable... has issued out of the classical world... In Cicero's letters we see a Roman Consular, on any reasonable estimate one of the most remarkable men of his eventful time, without his toga' ('Selected Classical Papers', 364). It was Cicero as a human being, 'sometimes petty, sometimes heroic' ('Cicero: Select Letters', 1980, 11), who fascinated him and brought out the best in him as a commentator. There was the added attraction that they posed the sort of critical and historical problems that he was pre-eminently well qualified to solve. 

'Propertiana' had been dedicated to the memory of A. E. Housman, whose unpublished edition of Propertius had been destroyed at his death in accordance with his will. Housman himself he had seen only once, at the last lecture Housman gave, shortly before his death. It was his admiration for Housman's scholarship and his relentless emphasis on accuracy as a duty, not a virtue, that focused his own approach to establishing and interpreting the texts that he edited. In one crucial respect, however, he differed from his exemplar. Manilius's 'Astronomica' had offered Housman a uniquely appropriate field for the exercise of his critical talents, and his commentary is in a class of its own as a source of information on Latin usage; but for the poet himself he felt nothing but contempt. Shackleton Bailey's work on Cicero was a labour of love. Even when he was critical of his authors he was rarely dismissive. Like Housman he despised 'literary gush' ('Selected Classical Papers', 1997, 344) and what he termed 'noorrhea', the uncontrolled flow of whatever enters the interpreter's head (ibid., 359). 
To those who did not know him well Shackleton Bailey could seem unapproachable, but close friends found in him 'a true but lovable eccentric' (Luck, 3) and a lover of good food and wine. His criticism was informed by a sensibility of which his responses to poetry and music were testimony. This trait was seen most appealingly in his love of cats. The first and most beloved of many was Donum (so called because given him by a friend), to whom he dedicated his 'magnum opus'; and it was reputed that his move from Jesus back to Caius had been occasioned by the college's refusal to allow him to put a cat flap in the door to his rooms. 'Everybody who met Shack had Shack stories', according to one of his students ('Michigan Daily', 12 July 2005). In his final years he suffered from Alzheimer's disease, and he died in Ann Arbor on 28 November 2005. He was survived by his wife Kristine. 


@@@@@


doc= 96253


Duckworth, (David) Keith (1933-2005), automotive engineer, was born at 112 Accrington Road, Blackburn, Lancashire, on 10 August 1933, the son of Frank Duckworth, a textile engineer who also sold cotton cloth on the Manchester cotton exchange, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Hardman, a cooker demonstrator in electricity board showrooms. Following his education at Giggleswick, a boarding school in Yorkshire, Duckworth joined the Royal Air Force as a national serviceman. He undertook pilot training, moving from Tiger Moths to Chipmunks and then to twin-engine Oxfords. Eventually he was rejected as a pilot as he fell asleep in the cockpit during a night training flight owing to an allergy to medication he was taking for an ankle injury. Nevertheless his conduct was considered incompetent and dangerous. Subsequently he was offered training as an RAF navigator, but owing to differences of opinion with his navigational instructor the RAF released him. (Later in life he succeeded in gaining a helicopter pilot's licence.) Immediately he took up a place at Imperial College, London, to study engineering. He obtained, as he fully anticipated, only a pass degree, as his dissertation comprised primarily a critique of his BSc course, its content, and methodology. 
Duckworth's interest in practical engineering dated back to his childhood and he was encouraged by his father, who provided him with a lathe, a vertical drill, and a grinder. He made model steam and aero engines and won local popularity for dealing with the neighbours' mechanical and electrical malfunctions. It was at university that his fellow undergraduates introduced him to motor racing, and he bought a sports kit car from Colin Chapman, which after three outings he crashed at Goodwood. During his student holidays he found employment in Chapman's gear and transmission department at Lotus's factory in Hornsey, which at that time was headed by the racing driver Graham Hill. It was there that he met Mike Costin, who was to become his business partner. On Hill's departure from the company in 1957 Duckworth succeeded him in charge of gearbox engineering. Almost immediately he pointed out the deficiencies in Chapman's product and left the firm. 
In 1958 Duckworth joined forces with Mike Costin and established Cosworth Engineering, with an authorized original capital of $100. Duckworth focused on design and Costin on engineering development. The new firm was depicted as a no-frills operation, and its first premises were in Shaftesbury Mews before it moved to rat-infested premises at Friern Barnet and then on to Edmonton in 1961, before finally moving to a purpose-built complex in Northamptonshire in 1964. On 10 January 1959, at All Saints' Church, Carshalton, Surrey, Duckworth married (Dorothy) Ursula Cassal, the 22-year-old daughter of Charles Victor Cassal, electrical engineer. They had a son, Roger, and a daughter, Tricia. 
Duckworth had been aware of the potential of the Ford 10E 1100 engine that powered the Ford Anglia saloon, and began experimenting. The firm's big break came in 1965 when Colin Chapman and Walter Hayes, public relations director of Ford, persuaded Sir Patrick Hennessy, chairman of Ford of Britain, to fund the design and manufacture of a new 3 litre formula one car, a category that was due to be launched on the racing circuit the following year. In essence, for the cost of $100,000, this brought Duckworth, Ford, and Lotus together. Rather than work in the factory, Duckworth designed the new engine in the quietness of his own home, losing forty pounds in weight in the process. The initial outcome was a four cylinder, 1600 cc formula two engine from which was developed the V8 Cosworth-Ford DFV (double four valve). Production of this new engine was timely for British motor racing, as it had been announced that Coventry Climax would no longer produce racing engines. The DFV changed the face of formula one racing in that, following Jim Clark's victory in a DFV-powered Lotus in the Dutch grand prix in 1967, it and its subsequent derivatives went on to dominate formula one racing down to 1983, winning 155 events. It was also used in formula two, three, and junior races with considerable success, and DFV-engined cars won the Le Mans twenty-four-hour race and several American speedway races. The key to the engine's success lay in Duckworth's precision in the use of a narrow angle, four-valve-per-cylinder, twin overhead camshaft cylinder head layout, which other firms had to acquire or develop themselves to remain competitive. More important, this was an off-the-shelf engine that was sold to independent firms like Brabham, Tyrrell, McLaren, Hesketh, and Wolf. It contributed significantly to the repeated success of such British racing drivers as Jackie Stewart, Damon Hill, and James Hunt. 
Duckworth suffered a heart attack in 1973, which ultimately resulted in bypass surgery in 1987. As he owned 85 per cent of the company, his failing health and the prospect of crippling death duties persuaded him in 1980 to sell his interest in the business to United Engineering, and soon after he gave up his chairmanship of the company in favour of Mike Costin and retired to live in his hilltop house, Buckby Folly, in the village of East Haddon, Northamptonshire. His first marriage having ended in divorce in January 1986, on 18 April that year he married Gillian Mary (Gill) Reeve, the 43-year-old daughter of Thomas Francis Cockerill, farmer. 
A bluff Lancastrian, Duckworth 'could always be relied upon to upset an otherwise tranquil discussion with one incisive comment' ('The Times', 23 Dec 2005). He also enjoyed a talent for conjuring up pithy phrases and aphorisms, which became popular throughout the world of formula one racing and were known as Duckworthisms. He died of a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm at Northampton General Hospital on 18 December 2005, leaving an estate valued at over $10 million. He was survived by his wife, Gill, and the two children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 96254


Brett, Sir Charles Edward Bainbridge (1928-2005), solicitor and architectural historian, was born on 30 October 1928 at Glenard, Holywood, co. Down, the eldest son of Charles Anthony Brett (1897-1988), solicitor, and his wife, (Elizabeth) Joyce, 'nee' Carter. His father was senior partner of L'Estrange and Brett, an old-established firm of solicitors in Belfast. After schooling at Aysgarth in Yorkshire and at Rugby School Brett went up to New College, Oxford, with a scholarship in history. At Oxford he pursued what became a lifelong interest in literary and artistic matters and people, becoming chairman of the University Poetry Society and enjoying a convivial friendship with Dylan Thomas. He graduated in 1949. Following a gap year working as a journalist in Paris he returned to Belfast to commence his legal career. He qualified as a solicitor in 1953, and in the same year married Joyce Patricia Worley ('b'. 1927), with whom he had three sons. 
Brett became a partner of L'Estrange and Brett in 1954. But he did not confine himself to what he called 'the conventional life of a provincial lawyer' ('Long Shadows', 47), though he became in time a distinguished practitioner in company and commercial law, whose advice was highly valued. He immersed himself with enthusiasm in the cultural life of Belfast and plunged into local politics as an active member of the Northern Ireland Labour Party. If this caused some raised eyebrows among his firm's more conservative clients, it was only because they failed to appreciate the radical streak in generations of the Brett family. For some twenty years Brett was involved in constituency canvassing and pamphleteering controversy, serving a term as chairman of the party. 
In 1956 Brett was invited to join the Northern Ireland committee of the National Trust, and he later (from 1975 to 1989) served as a member of the national council. In the former capacity he was one of the pioneers of the Ulster coastline appeal, which became the model for the trust's wider Enterprise Neptune campaign. On discovering the lack of books on local architecture he proceeded to fill the gap himself. His book 'The Buildings of Belfast' (1967) was followed by a stream of authoritative and attractively written books and monographs, mostly on the buildings of Ulster but also extending to architectural studies in such diverse places as the Channel Islands and the Crimea. 
Brett's concern for the preservation of the built heritage led him to play a pivotal role in the foundation in 1968 of the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society, of which he was the first chairman and then president from 1979 until his death. Architectural preservation in Northern Ireland was then in a critical state, the result of many depredations from developers and later from bomb damage. Over the succeeding years he spearheaded the society's activities, campaigning tirelessly to raise the profile of conservation, institute the listing of buildings and a historic buildings record, and create conservation areas. A signal early achievement of the society was the restoration of Belfast's Grand Opera House after it sustained serious bomb damage, a project that sparked the revival of Belfast's cultural and night life, which had almost disappeared as a result of the civil disturbances. To assist in the preservation of endangered buildings Brett was instrumental in setting up the conservation charity Hearth, a novel concept consisting of a revolving fund and housing association, the latter offering advantages that Brett was quick to seize when the governing legislation came into force. Under his aegis Hearth successfully acquired and restored many historic buildings at risk and made them available as social housing at affordable rents or offered them for resale. 
In 1971 Brett was appointed a member of the Northern Ireland housing executive, newly formed to administer the stock of public dwellings. The responsible Unionist minister, Roy Bradford, later said that he was taking a chance politically in making this appointment, but few public appointments can have been more fruitful. Brett served for thirteen years on the executive, the last five as chairman, and made an immense and unique contribution to ensuring quality in design, construction, and layout of public housing and the fairness of its allocation. There followed another public appointment in 1986, as founding chairman of the International Fund for Ireland, financed largely by the United States and the EEC 'to promote economic and social advance and reconciliation'. Brett created the framework and guided it with Robespierrian integrity into its pattern of activity in the application of its funds, refusing to allow its resources to be diverted into the partisan projects of political parties. 
All this Brett undertook at the same time as carrying a full working load in his solicitor's practice. He was able to do so by channelling his energy into concentrated and effective work in his practice and other activities. His record of public service was recognized by his appointment as CBE in 1981 and a knighthood in 1990. Queen's University, Belfast, conferred the honorary degree of LLD on him in 1989 and he was made an honorary member of the Royal Society of Ulster Architects and the Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland, and also of the Royal Institute of British Architects, a unique distinction that he valued highly. 
Brett was tall, slim, and upright, with a good head of sandy hair. With his questioning mind and a never failing willingness to engage in controversy he was regarded by many as formidable, but that exterior concealed a warmer persona. With wide cultural interests and reading he rejoiced in entertaining conversation, and discussion ranging over a wide field. His literary output in his many publications was idiosyncratic, entertaining, and a trifle iconoclastic, but his writing flowed with deceptive ease. He had a complete lack of interest in all organized sports, amounting to marked disapproval. He reserved his particular spleen for golf, which he called the most wasteful land-use in the world. His marriage to Joyce, a fellow Labour sympathizer and party worker, was a great solidifying factor in his life. Possessed, like her husband, of an independent spirit and an inquiring mind, she gave Brett unfailing support in all his activities during a long and happy marriage. They complemented each other in their multifarious activities and interests, made many enduring friendships, and dispensed much warm hospitality. Brett retired from his solicitor's practice in 1994, but he remained a consultant for four more years, and he continued to serve on various public and civic bodies with distinction. He died on 19 December 2005 at Belfast City Hospital, of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and was buried in the old graveyard in Holywood, co. Down. He was survived by his wife, Joyce, and their three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 96257


Lawton, Harold Walter (1899-2005), soldier and French scholar, was born on 27 July 1899 at 28 Grove Street, Burslem, Staffordshire, the son of William Thomas Coates Lawton, potter's tile fixer, and later owner of a tile-laying and mosaics business, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Hill. He attended Newcastle-under-Lyme middle school, and then Rhyl grammar school, after a family move to north Wales. In 1916 he enlisted as a private, initially with the Royal Welch Fusiliers. He was sent to the western front with the Manchester regiment in 1917. In March 1918 he was dispatched to Bethune to help the 4th battalion, East Yorkshire regiment, hold the line against a major German offensive. The German army redoubled its attack on 8 April. Lawton's battalion was sent to reinforce Armentieres. The enemy outflanked Lawton and six companions as they attempted to reoccupy a trench that had just been abandoned. They were cut off for several days, with limited supplies and no officer support, before the Germans came to take them prisoner. At first incarcerated in a cage in a field, Lawton next spent a brief period in the fortress at Lille known as the Black Hole, where conditions were intolerable. He was transferred to Germany, eventually to a prisoner-of-war camp at Minden, where, as a better-educated prisoner, he spent the rest of the war peeling potatoes. 
After this 'interruption' Lawton began to study for a degree in French at the University College of North Wales in 1919. He graduated BA in 1921, and MA in 1923, with a dissertation on Roman Gaul. In 1923 he embarked on doctoral research in Paris under Henri Chamard, one of the first French scholars to specialize in Renaissance French literature. Lawton was awarded his doctorate in 1926 for a thesis on the dissemination and influence in sixteenth-century France of the Roman comedies of Terence. It was a massive undertaking. Terence was a major school author and a formative influence on French writers brought up, as almost all were at that period, to imitate the elegance of classical Latin. Lawton was working as something of a pioneer in a body of literature that was only just being opened up to scholarly investigation, but his valuable expertise in Latin enabled him to underpin his research with the methodological rigour associated with classical studies. The result was a two-volume study entitled 'Terence en France au XVIe siecle', of which the first part was devoted to Latin editions and French translations of the plays and the second to imitations by French playwrights. The first volume was published in Paris in 1926, but it was not until 1970 and 1972 that both volumes appeared in print. The work set a standard for research into early printed editions of an ancient author and for study of the impact of the classical tradition on vernacular culture. 
In 1926 Lawton was made lecturer in French at University College, Southampton, where he was promoted to the chair of French in 1937. In 1950 he was appointed professor of French at Sheffield University, remaining in that post until his retirement in 1964. His far-sighted administrative skills, spiced by a subversive sense of humour that manifested itself in witty limericks and deft caricatures, were widely appreciated. As pro-vice-chancellor of Sheffield from 1961 to 1964 he was active in preparing the university for the student expansion of the 1960s. 
Lawton's main academic publications, apart from the magisterial work on Terence, were an extremely well-received anthology of texts ('Handbook of French Renaissance Dramatic Theory', 1949) and an annotated selection of the poems of Joachim du Bellay (1961). But Lawton had other strings to his bow. A committed Anglican, he composed numerous sermons. Perhaps as a side-effect of this aspect of his life he was asked by the archbishop of Canterbury to produce a typescript of W. E. Gladstone's vast daily journal, held at Lambeth Palace, which he completed between 1933 and 1936. A happy consequence of this commission was that he was helped in the task by Bessie Pate (died 1991), daughter of Thomas Coates Pate. They married on 8 July 1933, and had two sons and a daughter. 
Already a recipient of the Medaille d'Argent de la Reconnaissance Francaise (1946) and named officier d'Academie (1948), Lawton was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1999. This was not a belated tribute to his promotion of French studies, but to his position as a surviving veteran of the First World War. Indeed in his last years Lawton enjoyed considerable fame as Britain's only remaining former prisoner of war from that conflict. He himself became a rather amused object of historical research, providing lucidly recalled information for interviewers who came to visit him at his last address, Oak House residential home, Pond Lane, Greetham, Rutland. He died there on 23 December 2005 and was cremated on 3 January 2006. He was survived by his daughter, his sons having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96259


Stammers, Katharine Esther (1914-2005), tennis player, was born on 3 April 1914 at 31 Glenferrie Road, St Albans, Hertfordshire, the only child of Hubert Charles Stammers, insurance clerk, and his wife, Alice Louise, 'nee' Curchod. She was educated at St Albans High School for Girls. Stammers learned to play tennis on a grass court at home after her parents moved to Wood Walk, in Sandpit Lane, St Albans. She developed into a talented and attacking left hander, and reached the final of the British junior championships in 1931. She made her Wimbledon debut that year, from the qualifying competition, and took four games from Dorothy Round in their first round match. The following year she reached the fourth round at Wimbledon, and won the Surrey hard court championship at Roehampton. By 1934 she had risen to third in the Lawn Tennis Association rankings, and in 1935 she scored a notable victory over Helen Wills Moody in the Kent championships at Beckenham. That year she won the women's doubles at Roland Garros in Paris with Margaret Scriven, and at Wimbledon with Freda James: they enjoyed 'a scintillating victory in the final against the formidable combination of [Simone] Mathieu and [Hilde] Sperling', 6-1 6-4 (Macaulay and Smyth, 107). The following year, 1936, Stammers and James successfully defended their Wimbledon title against Sarah Fabyan and Helen Jacobs, 6-2 6-1. 
The Wimbledon doubles victories, coupled with appearances in the American championships and the Wightman cup, made Stammers known on both sides of the Atlantic. She was an exciting and popular player, with an indefinable physical grace, and attracted attention as much for her looks as for her tennis. The Wightman cup was a society event, and the British and American press enjoyed the spectacle offered by the annual exchange of athletic young women between the two countries. One British journalist wrote in 1939: 'Our six Wightman Cup girls, who start for America next Wednesday, are good lookers. For shorts, morning costume or evening dress, they will win admiration anywhere' ('St Louis Post-Dispatch'). A New York reporter greeted 'Kutey Kay Stammers and Co.' with less restraint: 'Gentlemen... We're not a glamour agent for these British beauties, but we think we ought to let you in on the fact that they're all knockouts' (ibid.). On one visit to America Stammers caught the eye of the young John F. Kennedy and she was his guest at Hyannis Port: she thought him 'divine' and a 'terrific catch', but recognized that he could, and would, play the field ('The Times', 27 Dec 2005). 
Although the Americans won the Wightman cup every year from 1931 to 1939 the British women offered real competition, and none more so than Stammers. In 1935 she won a hard-fought victory over Helen Jacobs, 5-7 6-1 9-7, and in 1938 she defeated the top-ranked American Alice Marble. The pair met again the following year in what is regarded as an era-defining Wimbledon final. Stammers, the British number one, was in top form, but Marble played brilliantly to win 6-2 6-0 in thirty minutes. Stammers 'actually hit more winning shots than she conceded errors', but she could not counter Marble's serve and volley game (Davidson and Jones, 53). The American did not drop a set in the singles that year and, fittingly, won the triple crown. Her victory foreshadowed the complete American dominance of the post-war era, with its greater emphasis on power and athleticism. 
After the outbreak of the Second World War Stammers's tennis was largely confined to charity exhibition matches, in which she had appeared regularly before the war. On 24 January 1940 she married Michael Menzies, an officer in the Welsh Guards, at the parish church of St Peter, Pimlico; the bride 'wore a gown of oyster-pink satin, made on close fitting lines' ('The Times', 25 Jan 1940). The couple had a daughter and two sons. The first child was born in 1943, but Stammers returned to tennis within a year, and in the first post-war Wimbledon, in 1946, she reached the quarter-final of the singles and the semi-final of the women's doubles, a feat that she repeated in 1947. She also played in the Wightman cup. The British were relatively confident of their 1946 selection, but were whitewashed that year and the next, and Stammers later reflected on dispiriting times: 'There we were, rather emaciated married women and mothers. The reason why we had to struggle away was because there was nobody in England coming on... It was hard work. I'm afraid by that time the American girls were very much better than we were. They played a stronger game. (Wade and Rafferty, 79)' Peter Ustinov, a tennis aficionado, once named Kay Stammers as his favourite woman player: 'So beautiful, so elegant, so delicate, such a fragile English rose. She never won anything, of course, but she always lost so gracefully' ('Daily Mail', 3 June 1998). In fact Stammers was tougher and more successful than her looks allowed. She won two Wimbledon titles and one French; defeated both Helens -- Wills Moody and Jacobs -- and Dorothy Round; and reached the quarter- or the semi-final of the American championships every year between 1934 and 1939. It is a testimony to her fortitude that in August 1939, weeks after losing so heavily to Alice Marble at Wimbledon, she won a 'tremendous battle' against the American Dorothy Bundy in a quarter-final encounter in the eastern grass court championships, resurrecting her game at the end of the second set to win 10-8 0-6 8-6 ('The Times', 11 Aug 1939). Stammers was fun-loving and enjoyed society, but if she never quite fulfilled her undoubted potential she had to contend with the lack of resources and often inclement weather that afflicted the English game: 'we all had Dan Maskell at Wimbledon as our coach, for an hour or two twice a week. Half the time you'd go plodding down there and there'd be frost on the court or it'd be raining. It was quite hard work just getting the practice' (Wade and Rafferty, 72). 
Stammers captained the British team in 1948 and 1949, but by then she was edging towards retirement. In 1951 her husband took up a post with Hill Samuel in Johannesburg, and the family lived there until, in March 1968, Menzies was transferred to New York. The couple divorced in 1974 and the following year Stammers married the American lawyer Thomas Walker Bullitt, whom she had met on the American tennis circuit. They lived at the Bullitt family home at Oxmoor Farm, near Louisville, Kentucky, where Stammers created an English garden, and involved herself in charity work. She continued to live at Oxmoor after her husband's death in 1991, and attended Wimbledon annually until she could no longer travel. She died on 23 December 2005. She was survived by her three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96269


Bywater, (Richard) Arthur Samuel (1913-2005), munitions factory official, was born on 3 November 1913 at 1 Teignmouth Road, Selly Oak, Birmingham, the third son of Walter Bywater, clerk at a tinplate works, later chief clerk of stores at the Austin Motor Company, Longbridge, Birmingham, and his wife, Florence Amy, 'nee' Mould. He won a scholarship to Kings Norton grammar school, graduated from the University of Birmingham with a first in chemistry, and received the degree of MSc in 1936. After three years as chief chemist at Boxfoldia Ltd, packaging manufacturers, in Redditch, Worcestershire, at the beginning of 1939 he became a technical assistant at the Royal Filling Factory at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich. After the outbreak of the Second World War Bywater applied to join the RAF, but was turned down because he was in a reserved occupation, and was put in charge of the experimental department at the Woolwich Arsenal. In the summer of 1940 he took charge of the fuse section. 
Because the munitions factories were in London, and at risk from enemy bombing, new factories were built in the west and north-west of the country, areas regarded as safe. One of the new factories was the Royal Ordnance Factory no. 7, a large filling factory built at Kirkby, Lancashire, north-east of Liverpool, which opened in March 1941. The filling factory at the Woolwich Arsenal had been destroyed in an enemy raid in September 1940, and Bywater moved to Kirkby as factory development officer. Most of the employees, mainly women, had the hazardous job of filling anti-tank mine fuses with explosives, and by the beginning of 1944, in preparation for D-day, 150,000 fuses a week were filled by women working a three-shift system, twenty-four hours a day. On 22 February 1944 a fuse exploded, detonating a tray of twenty-five fuses, killing one woman and badly damaging the factory. When Bywater reached the scene with Lawrence Gale, the superintendent of the factory, he realized the danger of further explosions and arranged the evacuation of the building, volunteering to lead a team of volunteers in removing the remaining 12,000 fuses. It was discovered that the original explosion had been caused by a defective striker in the fuse, and 4000 of the remaining fuses were also found to have faulty strikers. They were removed to a site a mile away and detonated: twenty-three were in such a critically sensitive state that he carried each out individually to be destroyed. The operation took two days. He was awarded the George Cross, the highest civilian award for bravery, for his leadership and disregard for personal safety. 
A few months later, on 15 September 1944, there was another incident at the Kirkby factory, while workers were filling a set of 8 pound bombs into a container attached to a parachute. Fourteen people were killed in a series of explosions, and again Bywater organized the evacuation of the building: when the fires were extinguished he led the team in the dangerous operation to clear the debris of unexploded ammunition. Each of the 4000 bombs had to be handled separately and taken away for destruction, a job that took three months. In his report the director-general of filling factories wrote: 'the work in progress was possibly the most dangerous ever attempted in an industrial factory' (Hay, 79). For this he was awarded the George Medal, and became the first and only civilian to hold both the GC and the GM. 
After the war Bywater became works manager of R. N. Coate and Co., cider makers, at Nailsea in Somerset, near Bristol. In 1947 he married Patricia Ferneyhough: they had one son and one daughter. In 1954 they emigrated to New South Wales, Australia, where he worked for the Mulwala explosives factory and later became assistant manager of St Mary's explosives factory. After moving to Melbourne he became general manager of the banknote printing works of the Reserve Bank of Australia. He retired in 1976 and bought a 240 acre farm at Cobram, on the Murray River in Victoria, before moving to Albury in New South Wales in 1980 to help his daughter and son-in-law in the running of their equestrian business. He died on 6 April 2005 in Australia, and was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96270


Woodrow, Joash (1927-2006), painter, was born at Leeds Maternity Hospital on 6 April 1927, the fifth of seven children of Harry Woodrow (formerly Herzl Wiadrow) and his wife, Rebecca (formerly Rifka), 'nee' Brostoff, who were both of Jewish descent, born in Russian Poland; his birth certificate recorded his name as Jehoash. Woodrow's parents had each come to Leeds with their own parents in the early 1900s. They married on a long visit to Boston, Massachusetts, in 1911, and returned to live in Leeds the following year. 
Until 1932 the Woodrow family lived at 53 Chapeltown Road in Leeds. On the ground floor, the studious Harry opened a bookshop, which, however, did not prosper. He was therefore forced to return to work as a tailor's machinist, at the Leeds factory of Montague Burton, though the family was able to move to a large house, also in the Chapeltown area. 
As a small boy Woodrow showed an artistic streak, making immaculate cardboard copies of board games that his family was unable to afford. In a small gouache painting of about 1945 showing a homburg-hatted male figure (a memory of his father) peering into a shop window of a sooty Victorian building, 'Mr Woodrow's Bookshop', Woodrow recalled his early childhood milieu. From 1942 to 1945 he was a student at Leeds College of Art. During this period -- like members of an earlier generation of English Jewish artists, notably Isaac Rosenberg and Mark Gertler in London's East End, and the Ukrainian-born painter Jacob Kramer in Leeds -- Woodrow made compassionate studies of his careworn immigrant parents, usually showing his father reading, and his mother resting or sleeping. His father died in 1951, his mother ten years later. 
From 1945 to 1948 Woodrow did two years' national service, working mostly as a cartographer in a Cairo office. He then returned to Leeds College of Art to complete his studies. A fellow student there, Jack Coulthard, recalled him as 'an exotic and quite cosmopolitan figure' who 'read Sartre and Kafka, and was very interested in Matisse and Picasso'; he was 'warm, charismatic' yet 'somehow vulnerable, delicate' (Vann and Wullschlager, 26). From 1950 to 1953 he attended the Royal College of Art in London on a scholarship. The artist Cyril Satorsky, who attended art college in Leeds and London with Woodrow, recalled him as a young man as 'under average height, thickly built, square-faced with a very Russian-looking face. He had a Yorkshire accent but not a broad one. He was extremely shy and ultra-sensitive' (ibid., 23). This shyness and ultra-sensitivity meant that throughout his adult life Woodrow hardly ever revealed anything about his personal emotions to friends and family. It is not known if he had any romantic associations or attractions. 
On graduating, Woodrow received glowing testimonials from his teachers. Ruskin Spear wrote, 'He shows great enthusiasm, intensity and ability' (Vann and Wullschlager, 28); Rodrigo Moynihan noted his paintings' 'mature richness of colour and expression' (ibid.), and Carel Weight, while noting his 'distinct sense of humour', saw him as 'a young artist of marked originality' (ibid.). His paintings of city parks and streets dating from the 1950s are remarkable for their painterly intensity and disciplined spontaneity of mark-making. Satorsky later described Woodrow's radical approach: 'it was as though he was defying the brush -- there'd be paint on bristles sticking out in all directions... what looks like a careless brushstroke reveals the deepest consideration' (ibid., 27). 
Woodrow stayed on in London for a while after leaving the Royal College of Art, but suffered a nervous crisis and returned to Leeds. In 1955 the Woodrow family moved to a small new semi-detached house in Allerton Grange Gardens, Leeds. The household now consisted of Rebecca, her son Israel, her nephew Paul (who was born in 1940), and Joash. Paul and Joash enjoyed one escape from post-war Leodensian austerity in a mid-1950s trip by train to Paris, where they visited art galleries and sat in fashionable left bank cafes. This was Woodrow's only post-war trip abroad. There was also a 1960 visit to London with Paul, where the Picasso exhibition at the Tate greatly impressed him. 
Following Woodrow's mother's death, the family home began to fill up with artworks. Furniture was moved to make space for paintings; walls were so densely multi-layered with canvases that it became difficult to pass. Over the next four decades, living in relative seclusion and supported by modest stipends from two elder brothers and, latterly, his state pension, Woodrow painted and drew prolifically. He also made bizarrely inventive assemblages and, in the early 1960s, decorated a series of Victorian art books with his own hilariously surreal interventions. His late 1950s and 1960s portraits of handsome young men, rabbis, Leeds businessmen, and both stylish and sometimes somewhat grotesque-looking women, show a gracefully expressive use of line. Dozens of notebooks detail acute observations of Leeds city streets, its impressive Victorian architecture, its pedestrians and buskers, as well as succinct, dynamic studies of the Yorkshire countryside and coast. 
Woodrow's most considerable achievement was the large body of paintings he made of Leeds from the early 1960s until about 1995. City centre panoramas, and semi-industrial sites around town, are the subjects of tautly structured, richly impastoed, shimmering oils. Inspiration was almost literally on his doorstep in the form of the local Gledhow Valley allotments, whose derelict huts, white picket fences, trees, and flowers were portrayed with a jousting use of line and a diaphanous palette. There is a poignant affinity between the appearance of Woodrow's allotments, with their huts, fences and muddy tracks, and the tragically extinguished world of the shtetls and towns of Jewish Poland, where his parents had come from. 
For over forty years Woodrow painted in Leeds with astonishing perseverance and dedication, free from public scrutiny. Not having to exhibit his works or having to compromise to the demands of critics or dealers, he enjoyed extraordinary inner freedom. In 2000 he left Leeds to live in sheltered accommodation in Manchester, and never painted again. The first solo exhibition of his work, at 108 Fine Art Gallery, Harrogate, drew a remarkable degree of press attention and critical acclaim. In August 2005 his brother Saul took him to see the first retrospective exhibition of his paintings, held at Manchester Art Gallery, the first time he had seen his work on public display. Further exhibitions at the Ben Uri Gallery and the Royal College of Art the same year drew critical acclaim. He died at North Manchester General Hospital on 15 February 2006, of a bowel obstruction. 


@@@@@


doc= 96271


Mico, Sir Samuel (d. 1666), merchant and benefactor, was the son of Richard Mico and his wife, surnamed Allen. He had a younger brother, John, and a sister, Hester. His family claimed to have originated in the Ile-de-France, with the name Micault, and to have settled in Devon in the reign of Henry VII. Two lineages developed thereafter, both apparently in Somerset; the junior one stayed in Taunton, but Samuel Mico was either born in London or migrated there. He is first recorded in the capital in the 1630s, when he paid a fee to become a member of the Levant Company and also joined the Mercers' Company. He may well have been trading to the Mediterranean as early as 1633, the likely year of a petition that he presented, with two other London merchants, asking that the ship the 'Virgin Queen', bound for Genoa, be spared the attentions of the press gang. By the end of the decade Mico was a major importer of currants from Zante and Cephalonia, off the western coast of Greece, and he also traded with Spain and her Atlantic dependencies -- in 1637 he and his partners were recorded as importing forty-one bags of saltpetre, an essential ingredient of gunpowder, from the Canaries. His advancement probably owed much to his association with Henry Andrews (died 1638), a merchant adventurer who was a director of both the Levant Company and the East India Company, and whose daughter Elizabeth he had married by 1635. But their hopes of children were blighted. Their son Henry, baptized in St Michael Bassishaw on 3 June 1635, was buried there on 30 April 1638, only five days after his sister Ann, who had been baptized on 6 January 1637. Another daughter, Elizabeth, was buried in the church on 28 December 1637. A second son, Samuel, was baptized there on 29 November 1638, and moved with his parents to the parish of St Stephen Walbrook. But the tragic sequence continued. A daughter, Margaret, was baptized there on 19 March 1640; her birth clearly killed her mother, who was buried in the chancel of St Stephen's on the same day. And less than a year later, on 24 February 1641, both the surviving Mico children, Samuel and Margaret, were buried alongside their mother. 
Although he had royalist sympathies, Mico was able to continue trading during and after the civil wars, in London and also in the borough of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis, where he acquired property and where he was importing goods before 31 May 1650, when he owed $3 18's'. 11died 'for the Towne dutyes' (Weinstock, 82). From 1647 to 1649 he was one of the Levant Company's court assistants, and he continued to trade to the Mediterranean. In 1649 he was paid just over $1000 for 230 bags of Milan rice that had been shipped to Ireland, presumably for the parliamentary forces there. A year later the ship the 'Unicorn', carrying silk, oil, and other goods belonging to Mico and other English merchants, with an estimated value of $34,000, was seized by the French in the Mediterranean. In April 1651 Mico was one of a group of leading London merchants consulted by the council of trade during a period of debate over commercial policy. Unsurprisingly, he agreed with his associates that customs should not be levied on imported goods when they were re-exported for sale abroad -- two years later he was recorded as preparing to export previously imported calicos. But when the first 'Navigation Act' was passed in October that year, with the intention of protecting English trade by ensuring that goods entering the country did so in English ships, Mico himself fell victim to it. In December 1651 he told the council how he had sent a cargo of cloth to Alicante, near Gibraltar, directing that the proceeds of its sale should be spent on Spanish produce like raisins, figs, and wine, but because no English ship was available these had to be brought home in a German one, and were consequently impounded under the act that had been passed in the meantime. His petition for the restoration of the ship and goods was, however, successful. On 6 December 1653 Mico was elected alderman for Farringdon Without ward, a position he held until 13 May 1656, when he was discharged following payment of a fine of $700. Meanwhile in 1655 he was said to be the chief owner of the 'Anne Bonaventura', a ship hired in March 1653 by the state of Venice for use in war, and now needed to bring currants from Zante. He seems also to have become involved in banking and credit transfers, for when the grand duke of Tuscany sent an ambassador to England in 1661, preparations for his arrival reportedly included the dispatch of bills 'having reached here already in the hands of the merchants Mico for many thousands of pounds sterling' ('CSP Venice', 1660-61, 245). He was still paying for the use of wharves in Weymouth and London at the beginning of 1663, and indeed it seems likely that he continued to trade to the Mediterranean until the end of his life, in currants and also in various kinds of cloth. As late as 1666 he petitioned the commissioners of prizes for compensation for four bales of silk taken from a Florentine ship by Sir Jeremiah Smith and subsequently sold at Tangiers. 
His ability to prosper under the Commonwealth may have created difficulties for Mico in 1660. Twice that year he was a parliamentary candidate for the borough seat of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis, but without success. But if he needed rehabilitation he had clearly acquired it by 18 March 1665 when he was knighted, an honour doubtless to be associated with his mastership of the Mercers' Company in the year 1665-6. But his health was now beginning to fail. He made his will on 21 September 1665, and died in the following year, some time before 24 May 1666, when his will was proved. He had been living in the parish of St Andrew Undershaft, but it is not known where he was buried. Mico had married again ['see below'], but though he made numerous bequests to relations and godchildren, he had no recorded child at the time of his death. An evidently lively religious faith may help to account for the generous charitable provisions contained in his will -- he bequeathed his soul 'into the hands of God my maker hoping assuredly through the only merits of Jesus Christ my saviour to be made partaker of life everlasting'. But another motivation, in the light of his repeated concern for the upbringing of the young, may have come from his childlessness. The legacies were divided between Weymouth and London. To the former he left his house at Melcombe Regis, 'in the east end of the key of that towne', stipulating that its 'profitt' was to pay for the apprenticeships of three poor children every year, and also $500 to buy lands, in order to finance an annual sermon in Melcombe church, together with alms for 'tenn poore decayed seamen... who are to be at the hearinge of that sermon'. And in London he left $500 to Christ's Hospital, to buy lands 'to the benefit yearly of the poore Children of that Hospitall', and another $500 to the Mercers' Company, in order to provide interest-free loans of $100 apiece to 'five young men of that Company', to help them start their careers. The loans were to be repaid at the end of three years, whereupon the money was to be lent out again 'to other five young men every three years successively gratis' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/320, fols. 206'v'-207). 
Sir Samuel's residuary legatee was another Samuel Mico, described as the son of John and so possibly his nephew. Among the other beneficiaries of his will was his widow, who received 'all my houshold stuffe Plate and Jewells' as well as the portion due to her by London custom. 
Of all Lady Mico's bequests the most far-reaching in its effects was one intended to consolidate both her husband's concern for his family and her own desire to forge links between that family and the others closely related to herself. She bequeathed $2000 to the younger Samuel Mico on condition that he marry one of her own nieces, a daughter of either her sister Elizabeth Barker or her brother William Robinson. If he did not do so, then $1000 was to go instead 'to Redeeme poor slaves' -- a clause that at this date certainly meant Christians enslaved by the pirates of Tangier. She also provided that when Samuel came of age he was to give 'a full discharge' to her husband's executors 'for his estate in thare hands', and that upon his doing so he was to receive another $1000. But this gift too was conditional, upon the discharge being made to the satisfaction of the executors. If it was not, this money was also to be used 'to Redeeme poore slaves in what manner my Executors shall think most convenient' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/334, fols. 322'r'-323'v'). 
In 1668 the younger Samuel Mico had brought what appears to have been a collusive action in chancery against Lady Mico and her fellow executors, in order to obtain funding for his own education, for which he estimated $100 per annum would be sufficient. The money was evidently forthcoming, for on 6 May 1670 he matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, aged sixteen. At almost exactly the same time he sued in chancery for the whole of Sir Samuel's estate, but this time the executors demurred; they were still trying to recover money owed to Sir Samuel, and in any case the plaintiff had not yet reached the age of twenty-one. Some five years later, however, the younger Samuel came of age and entered upon his inheritance, allegedly worth $60,000, and presumably also received Lady Mico's second conditional legacy. But he never obtained the first, for around the beginning of December 1679 he died, intestate and unmarried. As a result, in the following year $1000 were by order of the court of chancery used to buy a rent of $50 from two London wharves, the money to be used, as directed, for the redemption of slaves. No further action was taken until 1731 when, by a further decree of chancery, three-quarters of the charity's funds were to be transferred to Sir Charles Wager, who had connections with Jamaica, with a view to their being applied to the purposes of the original legacy. Again, nothing was done. In 1827 chancery referred the bequest to Lord Henley, master in chancery, who was to devise a scheme whereby the legacy could be used in a way that was as near as possible to Lady Mico's intention. In the meantime, possibly as a result of his links with Weymouth, the slavery abolitionist Thomas Fowell Buxton took an interest in the legacy, whose value had now accumulated to about $120,000, producing an annual yield of $3,625. 
Along with Stephen Lushington, Buxton drew up a plan to divert Lady Mico's bequest to the education of emancipated slaves in the West Indies. An order to this effect was made by the master of the rolls in July 1835, and the first trustees of Lady Mico's reconstituted charity, who included Buxton and Lushington, met for the first time in August 1835. They decided that the bequest should be open to all religious denominations, and that 'the grand object of this charity shall be the promotion of education in general, but especially of religious education' (Cundall, 25). Assisted by government grants, Lady Mico's trustees established a network of infant schools and teacher training colleges across the British West Indies, but after 1847, when the government subsidy lapsed, the charity's efforts were confined to Jamaica, Antigua, and St Lucia. From 1890 the trust concentrated solely upon Jamaica. The centrepiece of the trust's activities was the Mico Institution, a pioneering teacher training college founded in Kingston in 1836 and a precursor of Mico Teachers' College, which continues the work. 


@@@@@


doc= 96272


Jane Mico, Lady Mico (b. in or before 1634, d. 1670), whom Samuel married at an unknown date, was apparently the elder of the two daughters of William Robinson of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Burrell. Her sister Elizabeth married Andrew Barker of Fairford, Gloucestershire, who clearly became friendly with his brother-in-law, since Sir Samuel named him as an executor. Lady Mico's own will, which she drew up on 1 July 1670, shows that she had a place in a network of contacts comprising relations by birth and by marriage. Like Sir Samuel, she used her will to make a profession of religious faith, commending her soul to God, 'hoping and assuredly believing through the onely death and passion and merritts of my deere Savior Jesus Christ to be maide partaker of Life everlasting', and also to record her warm affection for 'my deere deceased husband', alongside whom she wished to be buried. She left $1500 to build an almshouse in London, in a place to be decided upon by her executors, or failing them by the Mercers' Company, for ten poor widows over the age of fifty. A further $400 was given to the town of Fairford, to buy lands whose revenues were to 'put out fore poore boyes of that Towne Prentices', they being (in terms that underline her religious motivation) 'such as can say the Lords Praier the Ten Comandements the Beleefe and the Church Catechisme'. Another $100 was left to an existing almshouse at Cheshunt. Lady Mico had died by 9 December 1670, when her will was proved, and all these bequests subsequently took effect. The London almshouse was eventually built in Stepney, and the requisite property was duly acquired in Fairford, though in the nineteenth century it became increasingly difficult to find masters for the apprentices, and in 1877 Lady Mico's charity was amalgamated with Fairford free school. 


@@@@@


doc= 96273


McNeillie, John Kincaid (1916-2002), writer, was born on 7 November 1916 at Old Kilpatrick, near Dalmuir, Dunbartonshire, the eldest of the four surviving children of Robert McNeillie (1889-1959), then a journeyman engine-fitter and later a foreman, and his wife, Jean Kincaid, 'nee' McDougall (1893-1957). A little before the death of his younger sister Ellen (some time after May 1919) John was sent to live with his paternal grandparents, John McNeillie and Elizabeth McGarva, and his aunts at North Clutag, Wigtownshire. By removing their son from Dalmuir John's parents hoped that he would not fall victim to the meningitis epidemic that killed his sister. He spent about five years at North Clutag, during which time he attended Malzie village school before returning to Dalmuir. In 1926 McNeillie's father lost his job and was forced to take work with an engineering firm in Hayes, Middlesex. The family settled in Southall, west of London, where John was educated at Southall county school, with summer holidays spent with his grandparents in North Clutag. 
McNeillie left school aged seventeen with the intention of becoming a writer and took a job on the 'West Middlesex Gazette'. The novelist and journalist Neil Munro was his second cousin and a confiding friend of his maternal grandfather, so there was a precedent within the family. In either 1935 or 1936 he met Sheila Cynthia Hoyles ('b'. 1920), the daughter of Thomas Hoyles, chauffeur and taxi driver. At the end of their first evening together, he dropped a note down the back of her dress which read: 'John McNeillie. One day this name will be famous' (McNeillie, 2). The couple were married at Southall, Middlesex, on 8 June 1940 and had one daughter and two sons. 
In 1936 McNeillie began work on his first novel -- and one of his best-known works -- 'Wigtown Ploughman: Part of his Life', which was published in March 1939. The novel depicts the relentless poverty, depravity, and violence of the rural community in the Machars district of Wigtownshire, told through the early life of the stubborn, hostile, and terrifying Andy Walker. 'Wigtown Ploughman' provoked strong reactions from reviewers who praised its realism or condemned its amorality, and it gained a much wider audience from serialization in the Glasgow 'Sunday Mail' from April 1939. This generated a fierce debate on the extent to which real-life social conditions were a cause of the behaviour depicted in the novel, with questions raised in the House of Commons on the poor quality of Wigtownshire housing. McNeillie followed 'Wigtown Ploughman' with 'Glasgow Keelie' (1940), the story of another outsider, Jimmie Lunn, who gives up his apprenticeship for gambling and gang violence. Both works were taught as set texts in Scottish secondary schools in the early twentieth-first century. 
Following the outbreak of war McNeillie attempted to join the RAF but was persuaded by his father to take work at a precision tool engineering firm in north-west London, with the intention that he would then open a new factory at Old Colwyn, near Colwyn Bay in Denbighshire. In 1940 McNeillie and his wife moved to Coed Coch Road, Old Colwyn, where they lived for the next nineteen years and where he combined a writing career with full-time employment in engineering. McNeillie's next book, 'No Resting Place' (1948), was the first he published under the pseudonym Ian Niall, which he subsequently used for all of his books and journalism. Like 'Wigtown Ploughman' and 'Glasgow Keelie', 'No Resting Place' is a story of wandering and rebellious people -- on this occasion a band of travellers situated in an indeterminate Galloway or Ireland. The novel's violent conclusion, which McNeillie refused to alter, led to its being rejected by his publisher, Putnam, and taken up by Heinemann. Reviewers in Britain and the United States assumed this to be a first novel by a previously unknown writer, Ian Niall, and praised its authenticity, pace, and lack of sentimentality. The book's success resulted in a film version, directed by Paul Rotha and first screened in 1951, which despite favourable reviews did not reach general release. 
Since his move to Old Colwyn McNeillie had greatly enjoyed exploring and observing the countryside of north Wales, as he had that around North Clutag. In late 1950 he published 'The Poacher's Handbook', which recounted the stories of real-life underdogs, from Wigtownshire and Denbighshire, similar to those who populated his earlier fiction. Selections from the book first appeared in 'Country Life' (August 1950) and led to McNeillie's long association with the journal as author of the weekly 'A countryman's notes' from 1953. 'The Poacher's Handbook', with illustrations by the woodcut artist Barbara Greg, was widely and favourably reviewed and remained in print in the early twenty-first century. While continuing to publish fiction -- works from this period include 'Tune on a Melodeon' (1948), 'Foxhollow' (1949), a barbed comedy of missing persons and neighbourhood spies, and the unpublished 'The Wick Burned Low' (1947), his professedly favourite novel -- McNeillie now established his reputation as a writer on natural history and rural sports. A keen fly-fisherman, between 1954 and 1956 he edited the monthly journal 'Angling', and in 1961 published 'Trout from the Hills'. In addition to writing for 'Country Life', McNeillie also contributed a column of the same name for 'The Spectator', which appeared alongside John Betjeman's 'City and suburban' column until 1957. In the 1960s McNeillie wrote two studies of his early life at North Clutag: 'A Galloway Childhood' (1967, illustrated by Charles Tunnicliffe, whose biography McNeillie wrote in 1980) and 'My Childhood', published posthumously in 2004 under his real name. Two later works, 'A Galloway Shepherd' (1970) and 'To Speed the Plough' (1977), described the rural life of his grandfather and of modern chemical farming respectively. 
McNeillie's work as a storyteller was admirable and ancestral, and his feeling for landscape is equal to that of John Buchan. The harshness of much of his fiction recalls the Ayrshire writer George Douglas Brown, whose 1901 novel, 'The House with the Green Shutters', rejected the sentimentality of the kailyard school of Scottish writers. Reviewers of 'Wigtown Ploughman' also drew parallels with the novels of Lewis Grassic Gibbon and D. H. Lawrence, while McNeillie was himself attracted to the realism of John Steinbeck and (notably for 'No Resting Place') the subject matter of the Irish writer J. M. Synge. As Ian Niall, however, he increasingly turned away from realism and came to reject his first novel for its crudity, writing later that 'No one who writes about life does life justice by being a realist' (McNeillie, 46). 
Towards the end of his life John McNeillie and his wife moved to a house, Five Acres, at Ashley Green, Buckinghamshire. He died, following a stroke, on 24 June 2002 at Hemel Hempstead Hospital, and was survived by Sheila and their three children. His body was cremated at Amersham crematorium on 1 July and his ashes were scattered -- and watered in with Bladnoch whisky -- at North Clutag. In 2003 his legacy of more than forty books and two million words of journalism was acknowledged with the opening of the John McNeillie Library in Wigtown, now one of Scotland's leading literary centres. 


@@@@@


doc= 96280


Burton, William Kinninmond (1856-1899), civil engineer and photographer, was born in Edinburgh on 11 May 1856, the eldest of four children of John Hill Burton (1809-1881), historiographer royal for Scotland, and his second wife, Katherine, 'nee' Innes (1824-1898). His maternal grandfather, Cosmo Nelson Innes (1798-1874), professor of constitutional history in the University of Edinburgh, was one of several influential figures in his early life. His mother, who had served as a nurse in the Crimea with Florence Nightingale, was an author and a promoter of women's education. His aunt, Mary Burton (1819-1909), persuaded the Watt Institution and School of Arts in Edinburgh to open its classes to female students in 1869. His half-sister Ella -- one of three elder half-siblings -- was among the first to enroll. At Mary Burton's home at Liberton Bank, Edinburgh, he met the young Arthur Conan Doyle, who became a lifelong friend. His younger siblings included Mary Rose Hill Burton (1857-1900), who studied under the auspices of the Edinburgh Association for the University Education of Women and became an artist, and Cosmo Innes Burton (1863-1891), who graduated BSc at Edinburgh University in 1885, was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1887, and was professor of chemistry at the English Technical Institute in Shanghai, where he died. 
Burton was educated at Edinburgh collegiate school before, in 1873, starting a five-year apprenticeship with Andrew Betts-Brown of the hydraulic and mechanical engineers Brown Brothers & Co. Ltd at the Rosebank Ironworks, Edinburgh. Burton became chief draughtsman before leaving the firm in 1879 to enter partnership in London with his uncle, the civil engineer Cosmo Innes junior (1842-1887). 
Cosmo Innes was secretary of the London Sanitary Protection Association, and Burton became the association's resident engineer in 1881, working on sanitary systems for St Thomas's Hospital and Eton College. His wider reputation in this period was as an amateur photographer, an enthusiasm he shared with Conan Doyle. Cosmo Nelson Innes had been a member of the Calotype Club of Edinburgh and of the Edinburgh Photographic Society, which Burton joined in 1880. He found professionals to be generous in sharing their expertise with newcomers to photographic societies, and this ideal inspired his popular manual 'The ABC of Modern Photography', first published in 1882. Highlighting the opportunities that the era of dry gelatine emulsions had opened up to amateurs, his book set out clearly and engagingly the technicalities of photography. It was an immediate success, reaching a fourth edition by 1884, and a ninth by 1890, though his plan to establish a business manufacturing the new photographic emulsions came to nothing. 
Burton's sanitary engineering consultancy with Innes did not prosper financially, and in May 1887 he accepted the invitation of the Meiji government of Japan to become professor of sanitary engineering and lecturer on rivers, docks, and harbours in the faculty of engineering at the Imperial University of Tokyo. During his tenure of the chair, which lasted until 1896, he produced an important book, 'The Water Supply of Towns and the Construction of Waterworks' (1894). It reached a posthumous fourth edition in 1928. Essentially a practical book, aimed at practising engineers and students of engineering, it summarized the techniques applied in Europe and North America to secure supplies of pure water, especially in cities, and illustrated his ability to disseminate in an accessible way new technological developments. His own expertise was in the sand filtration of water, pioneered by an earlier generation of water engineers; he took account of the subsequent research of bacteriologists, which had found that this was not simply a physical process of purification. He insisted that pure water was a benefit to the community, which should be provided as a public good rather than for profit, and emphasized the importance of a supply of water for extinguishing fires, which he cited as an important consideration in Japan. 
The growth of Japanese cities, with the resulting hazards of cholera, made the provision of pure water a priority for the Meiji government, and in addition to his professorship Burton became in 1888 consulting engineer to the Tokyo waterworks, and also in 1888 engineer to the sanitary bureau of the home department of the government of Japan. His textbook referred to the scheme he designed for the Tokyo waterworks, and also to methods used in other Japanese cities. In addition to Tokyo he is known to have provided technical advice on water supplies between 1887 and 1898 in Hakodate, Aomori, Numata, Nagasaki, Fukuoka, Osaka, Okayama, Yokohama, Shimonoseki, Kobe, Moji, Omuta, Kofu, Nagoya, Niigata, Hiroshima, and Takamatsu (Checkland, 179), and also to have designed waterworks for many of them. He was elected an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in May 1891, his application having been supported by several other British engineers employed by the Meiji government. 
Burton was involved in the foundation in 1890 of the Photographic Society of Japan, and he promoted to a British readership the work of two Japanese photographers, Kazumasa Ogawa and Seibei Kashima. Photographs by Burton accompanied the text of the works by the seismologist John Milne on the earthquake of October 1891, 'The Great Earthquake in Japan' (1891) and 'The Volcanoes of Japan' (1892). He also published a collection of his photographs, 'Wrestlers and Wrestling in Japan' (1895). 
Burton's participation in Japanese photographic circles is an indication of what has been described as his remarkable assimilation into Japanese society (Checkland, 185). He learned Japanese, and with his Japanese wife, Matsu Arakawa, whom he married on 19 May 1894, he had a daughter, born in 1892. 
Burton was responsible for a popular landmark in the Asakusa district of Tokyo, the Ryounkaku ('cloud-surpassing pavilion'). Designed by him on the model of water towers, this twelve-storey, redbrick, octagonal building was constructed as a tourist attraction, with entertainments throughout and viewing positions from its highest floor. At 225 feet the Ryounkaku was the tallest structure in the city when it opened in 1890. It was demolished after the earthquake of 1923. 
In 1896 Burton left Tokyo for Taiwan, under Japanese rule following the war with China, and undertook designs for water-supply systems there for three years. He intended to return to Scotland, but was taken ill and died on 5 August 1899 in Tokyo, where a tombstone was placed in the Aoyama cemetery. Although his death passed largely unnoticed in British newspapers, his achievement as a designer of waterworks for towns in Japan and Taiwan was noted within his profession, where he was known as 'an original and independent worker, of great energy and industry' ('PICE'). His career exemplified the observation of a reviewer of his book on water supply that the modernization of Japan opened up new opportunities to 'the engineer as an apostle of progress' ('The Scotsman', 27 Aug 1894). In Japan his contribution to water systems continues to be remembered, and in 2006 a memorial was unveiled outside his childhood home, part of the Craighouse campus of Edinburgh Napier University. 


@@@@@


doc= 96283


Jane Birch (b. 1643/4, d. after 1703), who was then aged fourteen and who remained intermittently in Pepys's employment until he died. Except in its length, there was much in her service that was typical of women servants in this period. After Samuel was appointed clerk of the acts of the navy on 13 July 1660 she accompanied him and Elizabeth to the new home that they occupied in the Navy Office complex in Seething Lane, near the Tower of London. Jane stayed there with them until 26 August 1661, when she returned 'into the country' to her mother, showing that she was not a native Londoner, but had presumably come to the capital in search of employment. Since on 1 January 1660 Pepys recorded himself as 'esteemed rich, but endeed very poor', Jane could have hoped only for a fairly minimal wage, probably between $2 and $3 per annum (two years later she was able to insist on the latter sum). In the early days of her employment Jane was a maid of all work -- cleaning, cooking, and mending. She was on good terms with Elizabeth, who on 23 January 1660 even dressed her hair, making her look 'very pretty' -- possibly an unfortunate development, since Jane became apt to catch Samuel's constantly roving eye. On 1 August 1662 he recorded having 'a mind to my own wench', but then and later he prudently resisted temptation, 'for fear she should prove honest and refuse and then tell my wife'; on 16 September 1668 he was less restrained, however, fondling her in ways which 'ella did give way to more then usual heretofore, so as I have a design to try more what I can bring it to'. Though matters seem to have gone no further, it was not entirely without reason that on the following 7 February Elizabeth became jealous of the maid -- 'she did believe me false to her with Jane' -- and probably just as well that Jane left the Pepys household to get married in March 1669. 
As Pepys rose in the world he became able to afford a larger and more specialized household. From 25 March 1662 Jane, who had now returned to London, was employed as cook-maid on $3 per annum ('she would not serve under'), and in that capacity produced such delicacies as 'a good dish of stewed beef of Jane's own dressing', a masterpiece served up on 11 May 1662. In December she was promoted to chambermaid, making her responsible for her mistress's clothes, but on the 26th she quarrelled with Elizabeth, who complained of 'some sawcy words' from Jane, while on the 31st Samuel recorded her as 'growing proud and negligent' and decided to part with her again. She left in February 1663, she and Pepys both weeping at her departure. Elizabeth's relations with her servants were always liable to be problematic. Her husband seems to have been usually able to relax in the company of his domestics: on 13 November 1663, for instance, he recorded complacently how after he had had his hair cut off and made into a periwig, he 'caused all my maids to look upon it and they conclude it to become me, though Jane was mightily troubled for my parting with my own hair and so was Besse'. But Elizabeth had had no previous experience as an employer, and was apt to become friendly with her maids before remembering at intervals that she was supposed to be the lady of the house. The resulting alternation of familiarity and distance added to the problems of the Pepys household. 
Jane returned again in March 1666 after Elizabeth had sought her out. She was again employed principally as a cook. To Samuel she was now 'our little old Jane' (she was in fact about ten years younger than him), and despite his predatory impulses both he and Elizabeth clearly regarded her with affection. When her brother William died in July 1667 Samuel gave her money and wine for the funeral. And during all her years of working for the Pepyses she also benefited from the friendly companionship, and even love, of her fellow servants. In December 1662 she had wept at the departure of Sarah, whom she replaced as chambermaid. When she herself left shortly afterwards, her going was clearly regretted 'below stairs' -- on 11 January 1664, nearly a year later, Elizabeth was irritated to overhear Samuel's clerk Will Hewer saying 'what a good maid my old maid Jane was and that she would never have her like again'. And following her second return it was within the Pepys household that she found a husband. 
One of the essential adjuncts of Pepys's position at the Navy Office was a boy, who wore his livery (with a sword), walked in attendance upon him, and ran errands for him. One of the first of these was Jane's second brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 96284


Wayneman Birch (fl. 1660-1663), described as 'a pretty well-looked boy' when he entered Samuel's service on 22 September 1660, and whose identification with his master became such that on the following 14 February he was referred to as 'young Pepys'. His employer found him engaging at first, but he soon developed a number of tiresome habits, mostly conventional manifestations of original sin, though he once contrived to explode some gunpowder in his pocket. 
Samuel's response to Wayneman's misbehaviour was similarly conventional. Servants were regarded as members of their employer's 'family' (an expression Pepys often used to describe his household), and were accordingly disciplined with methods appropriate to an age when the right of paternal authority to inflict physical chastisement went largely undisputed. On 1 January 1660 Samuel had been so exasperated by Jane's untidiness that he 'took a broom and basted her till she cried extremely', though he immediately regretted his unkindness. Wayneman was much more harshly treated, receiving repeated beatings, though these seem usually to have hurt Pepys much more than they did his servant -- on 28 February 1662 he recorded that 'the rods were so small that I fear that they did not much hurt to him, but only to my arme, which I am already, within a Quarter of an houre, not able to stir almost'. When Jane begged for mercy for her brother during another of these whippings, on 18 April following, Pepys pleaded the need to correct the boy's faults, 'or else he would be undone', but Wayneman proved incorrigible. Pepys already had it in mind to turn him away at the end of 1662. Though he retained his place until the following summer, he was finally dismissed after being spotted playing with other boys in his best suit. He was last recorded in November 1663, being then sent to Barbados as an indentured servant. 
By May 1664 Pepys was thinking of employing another boy, one who could wait on him and also work in the Navy Office. In August he engaged 


@@@@@


doc= 96285


Thomas Edwards (d. 1681), a boy in his teens who was in the process of leaving the Chapel Royal, where he had been a chorister. His musicality, which extended to playing the lute and theorbo as well as singing, appealed to Samuel, and he was also liked by Elizabeth, who on 3 February 1665 was found sitting with him 'in the dark, telling of stories', and whom Samuel thought inclined to spoil the boy. As Tom began to work as a clerk he made friends with his colleagues -- in 1667 he shared a Christmas dinner with three of them -- but his most important relationship developed closer to home, with Jane Birch. On 11 February 1668 Elizabeth told her husband how 'our Tom and Jane' had admitted to having fallen in love and wishing to marry. Samuel was worried about his own position at the time, but gave a slightly grudging consent, undertaking 'to give her 50'l'. in money and do them all the good I can in my way.'. 
The prospect of Jane's marriage may have induced a spasm of jealousy in Pepys, prompting his advances later that year, and leading in turn to matching (and much better justified) outbreaks of jealousy on the part both of Elizabeth and of Tom himself, who on 19 August prompted a fit of hysterics in Jane, thanks to her fiance's being 'now cold in it'. In this fraught atmosphere it was finally decided that Jane should leave at the following Easter, and that Tom should go with her, though assured of Pepys's continuing good will. Samuel declined to go to the wedding, which was organized by Elizabeth on 26 March 1669, but was as good as his word in providing the newly-weds with financial assistance -- he paid for their wedding dinner, and agreed to give them $60, to which Elizabeth added $20 more. He also maintained Tom's employment by the Navy Office, secured promotion for him, and in 1673 stood godfather for his first-born son. Edwards died in 1681, and his widow returned to work for Pepys. She was married again, to one George Penny, but soon lost this husband too. She retained the favour of her first employer, however, for in 1690 Pepys gave her a $15 annuity, and confirmed it in his will, in which he also left Jane $5 5's'. to buy mourning clothes. It was a poignant end to a relationship that had extended over forty-five years. 
Tom Edwards had been recommended to Pepys by the latter's friend the composer Captain Henry Cooke, while Wayneman Birch was presumably introduced by his sister. It is not known how Jane herself entered Pepys's employment, but the latter's diary has much to say of other servants in this respect. Most came with recommendations from neighbours, friends, or relations, who included the Navy Office's doorkeeper and waterman, Samuel's lawyer cousin Roger Pepys, his rival for naval promotion John Creed, and his friend and neighbour the linen draper William Batelier. A disastrous experiment conducted within his family briefly brought Samuel's plain and cross-grained sister 


@@@@@


doc= 96286


Paulina Pepys (1640-1689), known as Pall, into his household. On 12 November 1660 Samuel and Elizabeth offered to 'have her not as a sister in any respect but as a servant', a suggestion received by Pall with tears of joy. She arrived on 2 January 1661, to be discouragingly greeted by her brother, who refused to let her sit down at table with him, 'that she may not expect it hereafter from me'. But the distinction between sister and servant proved impossible to maintain. On a few occasions Pall was allowed to accompany Elizabeth on visits to her own relations, but otherwise she was kept at home, where by 23 June she had become increasingly 'proud and Idle', undermining the domestic discipline that Samuel was struggling to enforce. In July he resolved to send her to join their parents, now living in rural squalor in Huntingdonshire, and on 5 September she departed, with 20's'. and an infinity of good advice, shedding as many tears as when she had arrived. In January 1663 Elizabeth suggested having her back as her attendant, but then changed her mind, while Samuel was resolutely opposed, on 23 April confiding in his father 'my distrust of Pall, both for her good nature and housewifery'. Instead he applied himself to finding her a husband, finally achieving this in 1668. 
Another agent was Elizabeth's brother Balthasar, or Balty, de St Michel, a man of eccentric personality and unreliable judgement, consistently distrusted by Samuel, who recorded that the cook-maid Susan had arrived on Balty's recommendation on 10 December 1662, 'for which I like her never the better'. On one occasion she produced a dinner so much better than expected that her employer gave her 6died, but she took to drink and was dismissed in May 1663. At least she lasted longer than Jinny, a 'little girl' who had been maintained by St Bride's parish and was sent to his brother by Tom Pepys, himself acting on a recommendation from the churchwarden. Jinny arrived at noon on 20 August 1663, to be cleaned and put into new clothes by her employers, whereupon she ran away in them that night. Next day the beadle of St Bride's returned both girl and garments, for which the parish paid him 6died; the fee doubtless also covered the whipping demanded by Pepys for the runaway, after she had been put back into her old clothes. It was in fact increasingly common for would-be employers to ask for references from potential servants, and the Pepyses often did so, to the extent that Samuel thought it worthy of note that Hannah, another cook-maid, had been hired without one in March 1663. She proved a good cook but an unsatisfactory cleaner, and was finally dismissed in August for stealing, whereupon she departed in precisely fifteen minutes. 
As Pepys's fortunes improved so his household grew. In 1660 he had employed a single maid, but by the end of 1666 he had four maids (one of them a companion for his wife) and a boy. There was a considerable demand, and competition, for good servants in Restoration London, and a well-qualified cook or chambermaid could move easily from one position to another. Sarah, dismissed by the Pepyses at the end of 1662, promptly moved in with the Penns next door, and stayed there until the following March, when she was turned away in a neighbourly gesture rare among the quarrelsome members of the Navy Office. And even then she seems to have remained on good terms with her former associates in the Pepys household, since in June 1665 she sent Will Hewer a lobster. Unsurprisingly, servants' wages rose. Jane Birch could insist on $3 per annum in 1662, while a cook who arrived in March 1663 was able to demand $4, but then her previous employer had been the duke of Albemarle -- the 'very tall mayd' (probably another Jane) who required $5 for the same office in May 1664 was faced down by Elizabeth, who still had to pay $3 10's'. for her services. 
The proximity in which Samuel and Elizabeth lived to their servants made the diarist observant of their qualities, and though he was often critical he could be appreciative too. He wanted a peaceful and contented household, and recorded gratefully on 31 December 1664 that 'a pretty and loving quiet family I have as any man in England', but his resigned comment of 10 September 1663, as yet another good cook went -- 'we having no luck in maids nowadays' -- seems more typical of his domestic fortunes. Some of these maids proved quarrelsome or light-fingered; others took to drink. Nell Payne, a waterman's daughter whom Pepys made persistent efforts to seduce, was dismissed on 5 August 1667 for having 'turned a mere gossip and gads abroad as soon as our backs are turned', and Bess, having been described at the end of 1663 by Samuel as 'our excellent good-natured cook-maid', became so intolerably careless that on 10 November 1664 she had to be sacked as well, having 'no care nor memory of her business at all'. In the case of Susan, a diminutive cook who showed an unexpected talent for lifting heavy weights, and whom Pepys characterized on 21 February 1664 as 'a most admirable slut and pleases us mightily', the fact that her departure in 1666 seems to have been caused by sickness cannot have made her employers feel any less put-upon. 
An additional factor that increasingly complicated the life of the Pepys household was the presence within it of a series of young women who were employed as companions for Elizabeth. Kept at home by her husband, by November 1662 she was complaining of feeling lonely, and persuaded him to employ a gentlewoman to attend upon her. The first candidate for this position was found by Balty, with predictably unfortunate results. 


@@@@@


doc= 96287


Winifred Gosnell (fl. 1662-1669) was all that could be hoped for in terms of accomplishments and social background -- she sang and danced well, and had an uncle who was a JP -- but turned out to have come with radically mistaken assumptions as to what her position might entail. She arrived on 5 November 1662, and on the 8th it transpired that Balty had led her to believe that she would 'go every day in the week to Court and plays, and that she should have liberty of going abroad as often as she pleased'; Pepys, however, expected her to share, and thus relieve, his wife's relative seclusion. Consequently Gosnell left on the 9th, having stayed for just four nights, and by the following May was pursuing a modestly successful career on the stage. 
Pepys had been excited at the prospect of Gosnell's arrival. The terms in which he recorded his impressions of his wife's subsequent companions show all too clearly how his own expectations were liable to confuse and confound Elizabeth's hopes and needs. He principally wanted good looks and musical skills, or at any rate aptitude, in these girls, together with a becoming modesty of demeanour and a willingness to stay at home with his wife. While there is no evidence that Elizabeth was particularly musical, she was well aware of her husband's susceptibility to female beauty (if not yet of how far this sometimes actually led him), and she hoped for at least a degree of social freedom as well as congenial domestic companionship. 
Gosnell's successor 


@@@@@


doc= 96288


Mary Ashwell (fl. 1662-1664) also came on Balty's recommendation, followed up this time by extended discussions with the girl's family. On 29 December 1662 she was described as 'a young gentlewoman... of a good family and that can sing', on 14 March 1663, two days after her arrival, as 'a very pretty ingenuous girl'. The daughter of an exchequer official, she had previously been a teacher in a girls' school in Chelsea, and during a Sunday walk on 26 April she impressed Pepys with her 'most prodigious memory' of plays she had taken part in six or seven years earlier. With her youthful high spirits -- the word 'merry' recurs frequently -- she got on well at first with Elizabeth, who was probably only a few years her senior. But as time passed Ashwell's presence began to seem unfortunate. On 19 April 1663 her 'very fine carriage' led to Elizabeth's wishing to emulate it by taking dancing lessons, thereby triggering off one of Samuel's most memorable fits of jealousy. And about the same time Elizabeth started to show signs of a reciprocal jealousy directed at Samuel, who had been teaching Ashwell music. A rupture finally came in June, during a visit to Samuel's parents' house at Brampton, Huntingdonshire, when the two women exchanged 'high words' and even blows. In August Ashwell went back to teaching, rather to the relief of Samuel, though he was pleased to see her when she paid a visit, 'as merry as ever', on 17 January 1664. 
Nearly a year passed before a replacement for Ashwell was found. 


@@@@@


doc= 96289


Mary Mercer (b. 1647), described on 8 September 1664 as 'a decayed merchant's daughter', was suggested by Will Hewer, who had taken lodgings in her mother's house. She was less ebullient than her predecessor; at the end of 1664 Samuel referred to her as 'a pretty modest quiet maid', no doubt because she was prepared to undertake domestic tasks that included combing his hair and washing his ears. She danced well and had a good ear for music, though she did not improve it by practice. Above all she evidently had an attractive singing voice, and often sang with Samuel, a duet that Elizabeth sometimes made into a trio. On 22 June 1667 the sound of her singing with Tom Edwards moved Pepys to ecstasy -- 'making exceeding good music, to the joy of my heart that I should be the maister of it'. In fact Mercer was by then no longer in Pepys's employment. As early as 19 September 1664 Elizabeth had been becoming suspicious of her husband's intentions towards the newcomer; though her fears may have been groundless at this stage, from the spring of 1666 Samuel seems to have made a habit of fondling Mercer's breasts while she dressed him in the morning. But it was not her husband's roving eye, or hands, that led to Mercer's dismissal, but the latter's understandable concern for her mother during the great fire in September. Returning to her home against orders on the 3rd, she was found there by Elizabeth and given notice, whereupon she departed. But although efforts to re-engage her were firmly rebuffed, she remained on friendly terms with the Pepyses. She went to the theatre and on outings with them, and continued to sing with Samuel, notwithstanding his continued advances. As late as April 1669 he recorded taking his hat off to her in the street. 
It was probably no coincidence that Mercer's successor, recorded only as 


@@@@@


doc= 96290


Barker (fl. 1665-1667), should have lacked the former's physical allure. She had been introduced to Pepys on 21 September 1665, when Samuel noted her as being 'a plain little girl'. It is not surprising that when she moved in with the Pepyses a year later Elizabeth should have liked her more at first than her husband did, though on 18 October 1666 the latter was gratified to discover 'what a good pretty wench our Barker makes', once she was provided with expensive new clothes. She had a good singing voice, but proved exasperatingly slow to improve in the use of it, and there seems to have been relief on both sides when she was given notice on 12 May 1667, after Elizabeth had found Barker 'to have been abroad and tells her so many lies about it, that she struck her'. She left next day, when Samuel recorded that Barker 'did always declare to her mistress and others that she had rather be put to drudgery and to wash the house then to live as she did, like a gentlewoman'. Clearly she had found herself in a false position in more senses than one. 
Elizabeth had no further companion until the end of September 1667, when a replacement for Barker was found by William Batelier. 


@@@@@


doc= 96291


Deborah Willett (1650/51-1678) was the daughter of a Bristol merchant who had been brought up in London by an aunt following the deaths of her parents. In 1667, when she was aged seventeen, she had just left a boarding school at Bow. Reviewing the situation on 24 September 1667, Pepys resolved to leave it to Elizabeth to choose her own attendant, though when he discovered on the 27th that the girl was 'mighty pretty' he was sufficiently aware of his own weaknesses to record that he 'could be contented as to my own judgment, though not to my passion, that she might not come, lest I may be found too much minding her, to the discontent of my wife'. 
But come she did, bringing trouble with her. Demure and petite, at first Willett made a wholly favourable impression, and it was no fault of her own that she became the cause of violent discord between the Pepyses. Though she danced and played at cards, Deb (as Samuel was soon calling her, whereas her predecessors were usually only referred to by their surnames) seems to have had no musical talent. She went shopping with Elizabeth and accompanied her to the theatre, and attended the Pepyses both on a visit to Brampton and on an extended jaunt to the west country, during which her coming to Bristol brought joy to people who remembered her parents. But as a counterpoint to her domestic services to Elizabeth there developed the increasingly insistent theme of Samuel's sexual advances, beginning with a kiss in December, and continuing from the following March with ever more intimate fumblings and gropings, despite Deb's initial efforts to fend them off. Intermittent outbursts of ill temper by Elizabeth suggest that she had sensed the affair's development, but that it was never literally consummated was due only to her surprising Samuel and Deb in a close and passionate embrace on 25 October. After that it was quickly decided that Deb must leave, and on 14 November she went, having received $10 as her wages for a year and a half-quarter. Yet despite his wife's fury, and his own awareness of the likely consequences of the affair for Deb, 'whom I fear I have undone by this', Samuel's obsession with her was now such that he persisted in seeing her, and in continuing their muted intimacies, until the middle of April 1669, only forbearing when she moved to Greenwich. 
Pepys ceased to keep a diary on 31 May 1669, in his last entry referring to his 'amours to Deb' as a thing of the past. Elizabeth died on 10 November in the same year, making it necessary for her husband to reorder his domestic arrangements, which he did in the following year by setting up Mary Skinner at their head. Not long afterwards Deb Willett re-entered his life, through her husband, Jeremiah Wells (1646-1679), an Oxford-educated parson whom she had married at Chelmsford on 27 January 1670. Wells moved to Whitechapel shortly afterwards, and solicited Pepys's patronage, doubtless at the instigation of his young wife. Whether there was now or later any more direct contact between Deb and Samuel is unknown, but at any rate it seems reasonable to assume that a residual 'tendresse' for his wife's last significant companion played a part in moving Pepys to generosity. He secured a naval chaplaincy for Wells in October 1671, and probably also helped him in 1676 to become curate of All Hallows Barking, the church at the south end of Seething Lane, very near where the Navy Office had recently stood. It is possible that Pepys had at first assisted Wells in the hope of thereby advancing his own previously frustrated relationship with Deb, and even of getting him out of the way by sending him to sea. By 1676, however, her health was probably failing. She had a daughter, also named Deborah, late in 1670, but no more children are recorded, and she died in the spring of 1678 and was buried in All Hallows on 30 March. Her husband, who subsequently remarried, remained on friendly terms with Pepys until he himself died on 23 August 1679. 
Pepys's household had continued to grow during these years. It had already been reinforced in November 1668 by the arrival of a coachman, and it expanded further thereafter, despite two changes of address. A fire in 1673 led to the Navy Office moving to Derby House, south of the Strand, from where Pepys himself moved again in 1679 to York Buildings, a short distance down the river, where he stayed until he finally settled in Will Hewer's house at Clapham in 1701. During the 1670s a housekeeper and a butler arrived, to be joined by a black boy (sold in 1680), while in 1697 he recorded a staff at York Buildings made up of porter, housekeeper, coachman, cook, laundrymaid, housemaid, and two footmen. In his will Pepys left mourning clothes to seven former servants and dependants, headed by Jane Penny, suggesting grateful memories of past services. But there is also evidence that his household arrangements could be as problematic in the years after 1669 as they had been earlier, at one point life-threateningly so. 
By the late 1670s Pepys's prominence in the administration of the navy had become such as to make him a target for opponents of Charles II's government, and on 22 May 1679, against the background of the growing anti-Catholic hysteria generated by the Popish Plot, he was arrested and committed to the Tower, accused of selling naval secrets to the French. In their efforts to build a case against Pepys his antagonists had the assistance of his former butler, 


@@@@@


doc= 96292


John James (d. 1680), who had recently been dismissed after being caught in bed with the housekeeper. James now wanted vengeance. Once more Pepys had to admit to being unfortunate in his servants, but now he had to do so publicly, in the House of Commons, where his foes mocked his domestic difficulties. And there was worse to come, for James, having visited Holland and made plans to go to Spain, was persuaded instead to provide his former master's enemies with lurid stories of popish practices in York Buildings, and fed damaging material to whig pamphleteers, who worked it up into highly effective pamphlets purporting to expose corruption at the heart of government. But the religious feelings that lay at the heart of the political crisis now came to Pepys's rescue. By January 1680 James was a sick man. Increasingly fearful for the state of his soul, he approached Pepys and offered to make a retraction. Eventually, on 2 March, he made a formal statement admitting that he had lied, and although he then came under severe pressure to stick to his original fabrications, he held his ground until he succumbed to tuberculosis on the 20th. 
A significant figure in James's allegations against Pepys was the musician 


@@@@@


doc= 96293


Cesare Morelli (fl. 1673-1687), who had actually surprised the butler 'in flagrante'. His presence in Pepys's household provides further evidence for the latter's wealth and prosperity in the 1670s, as well as for his abiding passion for music. A native of Flanders but trained in Rome, Morelli spoke several languages, but was initially recommended to Pepys in April 1673 primarily as one 'who has a most admirable voice, and sings rarely to his theorbo, and that with great skill', prompting Pepys to offer him $30 per annum, for which he expected to 'find in him a servant not of less real use by his languages, in reading, writing, translating, or other offices depending thereon, than satisfaction to myself in his excellent qualifications in music, in which my utmost luxury still lies, and is likely to remain so' (Tanner, 222-3). He came to England in the spring of 1675, and though he appears to have undertaken some private music-teaching, became a member of Pepys's household. When Samuel's second brother John died in 1677 Morelli composed a lament, which he and Pepys sang together, and he also made copies or arrangements of other people's music. But though he provided a civilized embellishment to Pepys's life, in the late 1670s Morelli was also a dangerous one, for he was brought up and remained a Catholic, making his association with Pepys the source of potentially lethal ammunition for someone like John James, who wanted to avenge himself on both men, and did not scruple to claim that they had said mass together. Efforts to persuade Morelli to convert to protestantism failed, and he moved to Brentwood, pursued by allegations that he was a Jesuit. Pepys remained in touch with him -- in 1681 Morelli sent him some opera transcriptions and a cure for fever -- and continued to pay his salary, but Morelli did not return to London, and probably in 1682 he went abroad. In 1686 he wrote to Pepys asking for help in securing a position in James II's chapel, but nothing came of this, and the marriage to which he made apologetic reference in a letter of the following February probably helped to ensure that he stayed on the continent thereafter. 
None of his other employees brought such perils on Pepys as did James and Morelli. But although his domestic life was relatively quiet after the crisis of 1679-80 it was not always free of inconveniences, which sometimes appeared in a familiar guise. In 1689 he wrote to John Evelyn concerning his housekeeper Jane Fane (whom Evelyn had probably found for him). Pepys acknowledged her many good qualities, but added that 'with all these excellences she hath a height of spirit, captiousness of humour, and bitterness and noise of tongue, that of all womankind I have hitherto had to do withal, do render her conversation and comportment as a servant most insupportable' (Tanner, 273-4). His words convey a distinct echo of the earlier diarist's hopes for a quiet life at home, and of his regrets when these went unfulfilled. In 1689 Pepys dismissed Mrs Fane, but he was subsequently persuaded to re-engage her, and in 1703 she appeared among the servants remembered in Pepys's will. Perhaps one reason for the tranquillity of his latter years was his ability now to temper his expectations of his domestics to a realistic understanding of their likely frailties and an appropriate gratitude for the services they rendered. 


@@@@@


doc= 96296


Hubback, Arthur Benison (1871-1948), architect and army officer, was born on 13 April 1871 at 74 Rodney Street, Liverpool, the eldest of the three sons and two daughters of Joseph Hubback (1814-1882), merchant and lord mayor (in 1870) of Liverpool, and his third wife, Georgina, 'nee' Eliott-Lockhart. Joseph Hubback's death in 1882 left his widow to bring up five young children, but Arthur Hubback went to Fettes College, Edinburgh (1884-1887), on a scholarship, and was then articled to the city architect in Liverpool. 
Hubback began his Malayan career in July 1895 as chief draughtsman of the Selangor public works department, when it was fully extended in the construction of new government offices (later the Bangunan Sultan Abdul Samad), which the forceful state engineer, Charles Edwin Spooner, had decided should be designed in an eclectic style, new to Malaya, variously known as neo-saracenic or British raj. It had originated in India by a process of 'architectural miscegenation' (Davies, 188) that combined Indian Muslim, Hindu, Gothic, and other traditions, as an expression of imperial achievement. Apart from its novelty this style posed structural problems which led Kuala Lumpur 'old hands' to predict the collapse of the central tower. But a century later it stood to prove the sceptics wrong. On its completion Hubback left the government service for private practice, but he returned in 1901, and until 1914 he designed a number of large public buildings in the same style though with ingenious variations, including a state mosque (1909), and main railway stations in Kuala Lumpur (1911) and in Hong Kong (Kowloon, 1913). He became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1905 and a fellow in 1909. In 1901 he married Margaret Rose Frances (Daisy) Voules, daughter of Sir Gordon Blennerhassett Voules, a judge in India, and sister of a Malayan colleague, Arthur Blennerhassett Voules; they had a son and a daughter. Hubback captained the Selangor cricket team, though he could not equal his brother Theodore ['see below'], who, keeping wicket for Lancashire, caught W. G. Grace and then hit forty runs off the doctor's bowling. Both were outstanding games players. 
Arthur Hubback was also prominent in what became the Federated Malay States Volunteer Force, used both for local defence and in support of the police in maintaining law and order. Under a commandant who lacked any idea of suitable training the new force, formed in 1902, had declined in numbers and morale. When Hubback took charge in 1907 he moved from 'uninteresting' barrack square drill to training at weekend camps in musketry and tactical movement (Wright and Cartwright, 598). The force then grew rapidly in strength and efficiency, and a contingent under Hubback attended the coronation of George V in 1911. 
On the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 Hubback joined the 19th battalion, London (territorial) regiment, as a major. In the course of service in France he rose to the command of a brigade, was wounded, mentioned six times in dispatches, appointed CMG (1916) and DSO (1918). As early as 1916 he had considered transferring to the British regular army, and he did not return to a post-war Malaya that lacked the means and exuberance needed to continue building as it had done up to 1914. He commanded (from 1920 to 1924) the 5th London infantry brigade of the territorial army and then retired. He does not appear to have resumed practice as an architect after 1914. During the Second World War he held a senior post in Hertfordshire in the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Family Association, the leading armed services family welfare organization. He died at his home, 4 The Hollies, Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, on 8 May 1948, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife and two children. His son, (Arthur) Gordon Voules Hubback (1902-1970), naval officer, was knighted in 1957. 
Hubback's architectural achievements and his reforms of the Federated Malay States Volunteer Force, followed by a distinguished war record, show that he had versatile ability as well as strong character. J. H. M. Robson, in his 'Records and Recollections' (1934), included both Hubback and his brother Theodore in his list of the 'men who absolutely identified themselves in the interests of the people of Malaya, irrespective of race' (Robson, 2001 edn, 29). 


The third brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 96297


Guillemard, Sir Laurence Nunns (1862-1951), civil servant and colonial governor, was born on 7 June 1862, the only son in the family of six children of William Henry Guillemard (1815-1887), clergyman, headmaster, and Hebrew scholar, and his wife, Elizabeth Susanna, 'nee' Turner (died 1887). The Guillemards were of Huguenot descent although William Guillemard keenly promoted the Oxford Movement. At the time of Laurence's birth his father was headmaster of the Royal School, Armagh. In 1869 he became vicar of Little St Mary's, Cambridge, where he remained until just before his death. Laurence Guillemard was educated at Charterhouse School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took first-class honours in the classical tripos in 1884. Having toyed with the idea of a career at the bar, he attended a crammer to prepare for the home civil service entrance examinations. 
Guillemard entered the Home Office in 1886 and two years later was transferred to the Treasury, where he served as private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer from 1892 to 1902. He was in the thick of Sir William Harcourt's controversial budget of 1894, which, to the alarm of the landed interest, introduced graduated death duties (estate duty), designed to meet increased navy estimates and redress social inequalities. When in 1895 the Liberal government gave way to a Conservative administration, Guillemard continued as private secretary to the chancellor, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, whose plans for retrenchment were frustrated by naval expenditure and the South African War. In 1902 Guillemard was appointed deputy chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue and on 2 July the same year he married Ellen (Ella) (died 1940), elder daughter of Thomas Spencer Walker of Walsingham, Norfolk. She was Guillemard's junior by eighteen years. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1908 Guillemard transferred to the Board of Customs to be its chairman. Commonly regarded as 'the Cinderella of the Revenue family' (Guillemard, 50), customs grew in importance as the result of the acquisition of excise duties from the Inland Revenue in 1909 and of new functions consequent upon old-age pensions legislation. In 1910 Guillemard was knighted KCB, having been made CB in 1905. Following Lloyd George's budgets and the vast growth in taxation during the First World War, the revenue raised by Customs and Excise from beer, tobacco, and spirits increased more than fourfold between 1913-14 and 1920-21. 
At the end of 1919 Guillemard became governor of the Straits Settlements and high commissioner for the Malay states. This seemed a surprising appointment for a man who had spent thirty-four years in the home civil service. Lord Milner (secretary of state for the colonies) was confident that Guillemard would provide this particular colonial estate with necessary leadership in the modern management of public finance and economic development. As chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue during 1894-7 Milner had worked closely with Guillemard on the formulation of estate duty and, as a member of the Lloyd George cabinet, he had been impressed by his part in raising war loans. Although he accepted with some hesitation, Guillemard was a natural optimist and departed for the East with what he regarded as 'special advantages': an insider's knowledge of Whitehall, an open mind regarding the problems and personalities of Malaya, and a 'close friendship' with the secretary of state (Guillemard, 78-9). When, however, Milner left office in February 1921, Guillemard found himself with few allies in a virulent controversy that was to dog him for the remainder of his governorship and would torment the administration of British Malaya until the Japanese occupation. 
The dispute was over the so-called policy of decentralization. British Malaya consisted of the colony of the Straits Settlements (Singapore, Penang, Malacca), four Malay states whose sovereign rulers had agreed to accept British residents and had joined in the Federated Malay States (FMS) in 1896, and five other protected Malay states that remained outside the FMS. By 1920 the fragmentation of government was obstructing efficiency while progressive centralization of the FMS was both undermining the autonomy of the rulers and impeding pan-Malayan policies. Decentralization was proposed to restore the sultans' authority and place all nine states on the same footing with a view to their closer association some time in the future. Reasonable though it may have been in conception, decentralization failed on account of the rulers' mistrust of the British, tension between Singapore and Kuala Lumpur, differences between commercial, planting, and mining interests, and the ambitions of officials. In a brazen campaign to present himself as protector of the Malay rulers and, in so doing, reinforce his own standing, Sir George Maxwell strenuously resisted Guillemard's attempts to downgrade his position as chief secretary of the FMS. A Malay expert and the son of a Malay expert, Maxwell regarded Guillemard as an ignorant outsider and mustered considerable support for his views from the Malayan civil service, the business community, and 'old Malayans' in retirement. As Maxwell's insubordination grew, Guillemard, who was by no means wholly isolated since he developed congenial relations with the rulers, adopted an entrenched position that jarred with the lightness of touch characteristic of his earlier career. What had started as a difference in approach to administrative matters deteriorated into an acrimonious power struggle between the chief secretary in Kuala Lumpur and the high commissioner in Singapore that came to overshadow successes in public works and even anxieties over rubber prices. Maxwell was forced to retire in 1926. Guillemard, who was appointed GCMG in the 1927 new year honours (he had been made KCMG in 1923), stayed until May, but he failed to advance the cause of decentralization beyond the devolution of some financial functions and the reconstruction of the federal council. 
On their return to England Guillemard and his wife retired to Rodsall Manor, between Shackleford and Puttenham in Surrey. Physically slight, he had been a keen tennis player and continued to shoot and fish. He joined the board of the Prudential Assurance Company and in 1937 published his memoirs, 'Trivial Fond Records', which skated over his career. In April 1946 he joined Maxwell, Sir Frank Swettenham, Sir Cecil Clementi, and other senior officials, who had once bitterly contested forms of Malayan government, in protest against Whitehall's plans for the union of the Malay states. He died on 13 December 1951 at Rodsall Manor of an acute coronary thrombosis. His funeral was held at Puttenham parish church on 18 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 96298


Purcell, Victor William Williams Saunders (1896-1965), colonial administrator and historian, was born on 26 January 1896, the son, and apparently the only child, of Victor Adolphus Purcell (1863-1951), clerk in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Harriett Eva, 'nee' Saunders. He was educated at Bancroft's School, then in November 1914 was commissioned second lieutenant in the 11th battalion of the Green Howards. During his war service in France he was wounded and, in April 1918, taken prisoner. 
Following his repatriation and demobilization Purcell studied international law at Trinity College, Cambridge (1919-21), but left early in 1921 without graduating in order to take up an appointment to the Malayan civil service. He opted for the Chinese-speaking cadre of the service in order to have two years' study of Cantonese and Mandarin at Canton. He then served in Malaya, mainly in the Chinese protectorate, specializing in its work of supervising Chinese education. This was also the subject of his PhD thesis ('Education and the West in modern China', Cambridge, 1935). However, he had a comprehensive knowledge of the Malayan Chinese and his book 'The Chinese in Malaya' (1948) was for many years regarded as a standard work. In 1931 he married (Margarita) Norah Mary Noelle Burbury (died 1981), but incompatibility soon led to the dissolution of the marriage. They had one son, Hugh Dominic Purcell (1932-2002). 
The colonial hierarchy in Malaya recognized Purcell's ability but, in his own words, came to regard him as 'a turbulent and adventurous character' who needed watching (Purcell, 312). In 1940 he was seconded to the UK information ministry as head of its publicity department in Singapore under Sir Robert Scott. He went off to spread the message in Australia and then the USA, where in 1941 he married Jean Rivers, an American whom he described as a 'cheerful bohemian' (ibid., 329). The marriage lasted amicably until his death, though latterly his wife lived apart in New York. 
In December 1941 a delayed return passage to Malaya saved Purcell from falling into the hands of the Japanese. After a spell in Australia he moved to London to become the senior Chinese expert of the Malayan planning unit, which prepared a post-war constitution (the Malayan union) that treated the immigrant communities as permanent settlers in Malaya but was utterly unacceptable to the Malays. Purcell regarded the restoration of the rulers' sovereignty in 1948 as a retrograde step towards feudalism. During the British military administration (September 1945 - March 1946) Purcell took a leading part in a firm but conciliatory containment of the aspirations of the communist-led and Chinese-dominated Malayan Peoples' Anti-Japanese Army to take control of the country. He was appointed CMG in 1946, but retired on the restoration of civil government in the same year, since he disagreed with the high commissioner, Sir Edward Gent, over his future official position. His retirement deprived Gent, who had urged him to stay, of well-informed advice in dealing with the Chinese in the 'emergency' that erupted in 1948. Purcell was later a vigorous champion of the British record in Malaya and even took the questionable view that the years between the wars were its climax and 'a serene and happy' period (Purcell, 359). 
After two years as a United Nations consultant Purcell, in 1949, was appointed to a lectureship in Far Eastern history at Cambridge, from which he retired in 1963. He travelled widely and in 1952 revisited Malaya to advise the Malayan Chinese Association on current constitutional negotiations. His statements troubled the waters of inter-communal relations and Sir Gerald Templer, the high commissioner, summoned him for an abusive 'dressing down' that is not unknown to the regular army but was deeply offensive to an academic of Purcell's temperament. In journal articles and a book, 'Malaya: Communist or Free?' (1954), Purcell accused Templer of subordinating the necessary progress of Malaya towards self-government to the short-term requirements of a police state. Templer had provoked the dispute but perhaps had the better case, though it damaged the reputation of both men. 
In addition to his authoritative writing on China and on the Chinese in south-east Asia Purcell wrote satirical verse and other literary works. He was a large figure and a dominant personality. Notwithstanding his violent criticisms of Templer, his 'urbanity, wit and distaste for everything pretentious made him... the most charming of literary companions' (Short, 380). His memoirs, published posthumously as 'The Memoirs of a Malayan Official' (1965), were anecdotally ebullient but occasionally defensive. In the Green Howards' officers' mess he and others were 'just plain British 'bourgeoisie'... with working class grand-parents' and he had attended an ancient but 'obscure' public school (Purcell, 11). In the Malayan civil service 'most of us belonged by origin to the upper lower middle class' (ibid., 291), but he married a wife distantly connected 'with the British aristocracy' (ibid., 329). However, he was a good administrator, with sound judgement unless provoked, an excellent scholar, and a prolific author, and he had many friends, not least among the Malayan Chinese. He died at his home, 10 Lyndewode Road, Cambridge, on 2 January 1965, of heart failure, and was survived by his second wife and the son of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 96299


Shellabear, William Girdlestone (1862-1947), missionary and Malay scholar, was born on 27 August 1862 at Buttlands, Wells, Norfolk, the son of Samuel Shellabear, accountant, and manager of the earl of Leicester's estate at Holkham Hall, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Young. He was educated at Haileybury College from 1876 to 1879. Intending to pursue a military career, he entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1879, and was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in 1882. From then until 1885 he studied at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham. In 1885 he underwent a conversion to evangelical Christianity before shipping out as an officer in the Royal Engineers to Singapore in 1886. There he became part of a close-knit fellowship of Methodist, Presbyterian, and Congregational missionaries. Under the influence of William Oldham, founder of the American Methodist mission in Singapore, he had a second conversion, to 'holiness' Christianity. He became known as the 'preaching captain' for his frequent sermons to soldiers and sailors, and began to translate Christian hymns into Malay for the Malay soldiers under his command. In 1889 he returned to England, resigned his commission, and on 31 July 1890 married Fanny Maria Kealy, the 20-year-old daughter of John Robert Kealy, medical doctor. 
Shellabear returned to Singapore with his new wife and joined the American Methodist mission. Over the next decade, with a brief hiatus in England where Fanny died in 1895 (leaving him with a son, Hugh), Shellabear built the Methodist Mission Press and began hymnals, tracts, and booklets in Malay (most of which he composed or translated) for the Bible Society and the Tract Society. His studies of the Malay language led to his publication of a new edition of the 'Sejarah Melayu' ('History of the Malays', 1896) followed by a series of published editions of Malay classical literature. He also wrote and published both 'Malay-English Vocabulary' (1902) and 'Practical Malay Grammar' (1899). His secular works cemented a long-standing relationship between the Methodist Mission Press and the colonial government, which used them in building up a system of Malay-medium schools. 
In 1896 Shellabear was made presiding elder of the Methodist mission, and in this capacity had oversight of the entire mission. With other missionaries he vigorously attacked licensed prostitution and the sale of opium, while fending off attacks from Chinese nationalists who accused the Methodist Anglo-Chinese school of forcing children to convert to Christianity. Convinced that such English-medium schools were absorbing too many resources and missionary personnel, he was also engaged in a struggle with his fellow missionaries over the merits of vernacular versus English-language education. On 16 February 1897 he married Emmaline (Emma) Ferris (died 1923), with whom he had two daughters, Fanny and Margaret, as well as bringing up his son from his marriage to Fanny Kealy. 
In 1900 Shellabear left his various responsibilities with the Methodist mission and began to revise the Malay 'Bible' while living from 1902 in Malacca with his family. He also worked with Sulaiman bin Muhammad Nur, with whom he edited two books of Malay proverbs and poetry, and served as superintendent of different Methodist districts in Malaya. He published his 'New Testament' in Malay in 1910 and his 'Old Testament' in Malay in 1912. From 1909 to 1911 he managed a rubber estate and orphanage in the midst of a Chinese Christian colony that the Methodists had built at Sitiawan, on the west coast of Malaya. There he began a translation of the 'Bible' into 'Baba Malay', the Malay dialect of the Straits Chinese, published in 1913. He once again took up residence in Singapore from 1912 to 1916. 
Shellabear and his family went to the United States in 1916 to represent Singapore and Malaya at the Methodist general conference. Upon his return to Singapore in 1917 he became embroiled in struggles over leadership of the mission and suffered a mental and physical breakdown, forcing his return to the USA in 1918. An attempt to return to Singapore in 1920 ended with a breakdown in health even before reaching Singapore, and in the same year he officially retired from the mission. In 1922 he joined the staff of the Kennedy School of Missions at Hartford, Connecticut, as a teacher of Malay language and culture. Soon afterwards he travelled to Leiden to study Arabic with Snouck Hurgronje, and then to Cairo to learn 'Koran' reading and vernacular Arabic. In 1924 he took a permanent position at Hartford, and remained there until his death, briefly occupying the chair of Muhammadan studies and serving as editor of the journal 'Muslim World' until 1936. 
In the final stage of Shellabear's career he sought to create a new kind of Malay Christian literature, sensitive to both the cultural and the religious heritage of the Malays. He translated the story of the 'Bible', and later the gospels, into classical Malay poetry or 'shair'. First published in the 1930s, these books went through a number of editions in the next twenty years. Following the 'shairs' he wrote commentaries on the gospels in Malay, concentrating on what he believed were key theological points of contact with Islamic teaching. These books enjoyed wide circulation, and were published in several editions. At the time of his death, in Hartford, on 16 January 1947, he was engaged in translating the 'Koran' into Malay, as a tool for Christian evangelism. 


@@@@@


doc= 96300


Robson, John Henry Matthews (1870-1945), colonial administrator and journalist, was born in Sydney Road, Guildford, Surrey, on 8 May 1870, the eldest son of John Henry Robson, then chaplain at the Surrey County Hospital, and his wife, Martha Esther, 'nee' Adcock. He was educated privately and (from 1884 to 1886) at Christ's College, Finchley. Like many young Englishmen of his period he took the opportunities of a career abroad, beginning with an apprenticeship on a tea estate in Ceylon, but within months he moved on to become an administrator in the protected Malay state of Selangor. 
Despite a promising start (1889-96) as a colonial official, Robson's inclination and talent led him to a career in journalism, and later business. As a district officer he had written articles for a Singapore newspaper (partially reprinted in 'People in a Native State', 1894) and was a regular contributor to the 'Selangor Journal', a fortnightly magazine. In 1896 he left the government service to found the 'Malay Mail', based in Selangor, the first daily newspaper published in the Federated Malay States, acting as its editor, reporter, and business manager until the early twentieth century, when it was well established. (It continued to flourish a century later.) Thereafter he was its part-proprietor and a 'hands on' managing director and occasional contributor, but it employed journalists from the UK as editor and as staff reporters. When he founded the 'Malay Mail' Robson had borrowed the necessary funds from Loke Yew, a prominent Chinese businessman and public figure. Relieved of the day-to-day production of his newspaper, Robson managed the extensive urban properties of Loke Yew, and in his memoirs, 'Records and Recollections, 1889-1934' (1934), gave a sympathetic character study of one of the most influential -- and richest -- Malayan Chinese of his time. 
The legislative council of the Federated Malay States, established in 1909, began with Robson as one of its four appointed unofficial members (1909-12). He pressed, with success, for the establishment of a London information agency to advertise the opportunities of investment in Malaya. A second and longer term (1921-7) earned him appointment as a CBE. This second period saw a bitter controversy between Sir Laurence Guillemard (high commissioner) and George Maxwell (chief secretary) over the former's decentralization scheme for returning federal powers to the Malay states' governments. As senior unofficial member Robson often spoke for the commercial community and supported Maxwell, but he later gave a fair assessment of Guillemard in his memoirs. 
As a public figure and newspaper columnist Robson championed other causes. He was a member (in 1905-6) of the municipal authority of Kuala Lumpur and supported -- though without success -- farsighted but expensive plans for urban improvement. Again he recognized that his opponent, the resident, had a duty to be financially prudent. As a member of the legislative council he helped Raja Chulan, the only unofficial spokesman of the Malay community on the council, in preparing his speeches advocating measures to improve the condition of the Malays, overwhelmed at that time by commercially dominant immigrant Asian communities. Throughout his career Robson was one of the leading advocates of good race relations between Malaya's disparate peoples (including the Europeans), though he took a perhaps rose-tinted retrospective view of a situation that had deteriorated since the 1890s. He showed a shrewd and realistic grasp of essential facts, yet found a way through controversies without making enemies. He had many friends, and was a good listener as well as an articulate spokesman. 
Despite his prominence in public life Robson was a private man and his memoirs were noticeably reticent about his domestic life. When he arrived, in the 1890s, European men greatly outnumbered women in their small community and often found Asian partners, especially Malay widows or divorcees ('janda') whose prospects of remarriage within their own community were poor. Of the attitude of polite European society to these unions Robson wrote that 'the voice of Mrs Grundy [is] heard but little of and cared for less' (Butcher, 196). But discretion was necessary. There are indications that Robson had such a partner, who bore him a daughter and a son. By 1920, however, the relationship had run its course, and European society was more censorious. In 1921 Robson married Theodora Syers ('c'.1860-1937), the widow (since 1897) of Harry Syers, a friend of his early days who had become the Federated Malay States' commissioner of police. When she died in 1937 an obituary (probably by Robson) described her as 'a kindly, charitable, thoughtful and gracious personality' ('Malaya', July 1937). Robson himself did not end his life, and half a century in Malaya, on a happy note. Internment in Singapore in February 1942 broke his heart as well as his health; he died, as the ordeal was near its end, on 20 July 1945, in Changi internment camp, 'after ailing for the last three years' (Lewis, 261). His career illustrated the opportunities for achieving success and influence in colonial society without holding the actual reins of power. 


@@@@@


doc= 96312


Johnston, George (1855-1945), engineer, was born at West Linton, Peebleshire, on 3 August 1855, the third child of James Aitchison Johnston, the United Presbyterian minister of West Linton, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Fulton. His mother came from Glasgow and in 1861 his father accepted the call to be minister of the congregation at Springburn in the east end of the city, the home of Neilson & Co.'s locomotive works. By the age of fifteen he was an apprentice engineer at the works where he was later joined by his younger brother Hugh Fulton Johnston. He took Professor John Thomson's classes in civil engineering and mechanics and office and field work in engineering at the University of Glasgow in 1878. 
In 1882 with William John Menzies, a fellow engineer from Balornock near Glasgow, Johnston established the firm of Menzies and Johnston, taking over the Plantation Engine Works to manufacture his 'simplex doughing machine' that he patented early in 1884 (1884 no. 1). This device divided the dough to form loaves. Menzies left the partnership in 1886 when Johnston renewed and elaborated his patent (1886 no. 16115). Menzies and Johnston reportedly helped design machinery for making custard powder and corn flour for the Paisley firm of Brown and Polson and equipment for producing pan drops or Scots mints probably for their inventor James Ross of Edinburgh. 
Menzies and Johnston was wound up in 1890 when Johnston embarked on a new venture in partnership with Joseph Brown of the Plantation Starch Works, with whom he had patented apparatus for vacuum drying distillery waste products for use either as cattle feed or manure (1889 no. 9850). In agreement with Distillers Company Ltd, they formed a company, Scottish Grains Ltd, with outside capital to exploit the patent and to sell its products. Describing himself now as a consulting engineer, Johnston also turned his attention to textile machinery, patenting in 1890 'driving fastenings for drying machines' (no. 21072), and returned to his initial specialism in locomotives. 
During 1894 Johnston was invited to trial the mechanical steam tram car that he had designed on the Glasgow Tramways, which the council was in process of taking over from a private contractor. The experiment ended in failure when the vehicle caught fire in George Square. He now switched his interest to the internal combustion engine as a means of propulsion and travelled to the continent to examine as many models as he could. By early 1895 he had acquired one of the first automobiles to arrive in Scotland, a Panhard-Levassor chassis with a Daimler engine. He was convinced that in existing designs 'both motor and gearings were far from perfect' ('The Scotsman', 13 Nov 1895) and that he could design a better car with much less vibration and discomfort to the passengers. To assist him design and build his car in a workshop at his father's manse at Mosesfield he enlisted the assistance of two engineers, his young cousin Norman Osborne Fulton and Thomas Blackwood Murray. 
Within months of Johnston, Fulton, and Murray getting together in the workshop at Mosesfield in 1895, their 'Benzoline' or petrol 'dog cart', the first to be built in the United Kingdom, was ready for road trials. In November 1895, at midnight, to the astonishment of passers-by, Johnston drove it at 12 miles an hour on a 20 mile journey across Glasgow. Belatedly on 22 January 1896 he was charged with contravening the 'Locomotive Act' by driving his 'horseless carriage' during prohibited hours along Buchanan Street, then the main shopping thoroughfare. He patented his design (1895 no. 20865). In February 1896 he drove his dog cart an unprecedented 110 miles over rough roads from Glasgow to beyond Ayr and back at an average speed of 8 miles an hour. Towards the end of 1895 Johnston coined the term Mo-Car in an address to a meeting of the Edinburgh Association of Science and Arts ('Cycling', 4 April 1896, 191). 
Meanwhile Johnston continued to work for Scottish Grains and formed a partnership with Murray as consulting electrical engineers with the telegraphic address of Mo-Car. They won financial backing from the Glasgow engineer Sir William Arrol and the Paisley threadmaker Archibald Coats to form the Mo-Car Syndicate to exploit their patent rights and to build dog carts with a works in Yates Street, Camlachie. They began tentatively to manufacture their dog carts in 1896, which sold for between $300 and $500. Apart from building cars the partners designed a motorized tramcar incorporating their patent springs to 'reduce vibration' (1896 no. 11367) and improvements in the design of engines (1896 no. 185850) which, in 1897, they tried unsuccessfully to persuade Glasgow Corporation to adopt. By then Fulton and Murray were becoming impatient with Johnston, whom they regarded as kindly but an incompetent businessman, and without Johnston the pair went on to establish the Albion Motor Car Company in 1899. 
Scottish Grains went bankrupt in 1898 and at the same time the Mo-Car Syndicate was converted into a limited company with a capital of $40,000 and Sir William Arrol as chairman and Johnston as managing director. On 9 May 1901 the works in Yates Street was completely destroyed by fire along with all the machinery, cars under construction and drawings. It was estimated that the loss was more than $10,000. Within a week the Coats family had come to the rescue with the offer of vacant premises in the Underwood Mills in Paisley. Nevertheless the Mo-Car Syndicate was not back in business until the spring of 1902 by which time Albion had left them behind. The following year the syndicate was able to enter a dog cart and one of its six-seater carriages in the Glasgow to London motor car race, coming eighth and fourteenth respectively and gaining non-stop certificates. In 1903, four dog carts, one with a female driver, completed the run from Lands End to John O'Groats. Despite this the syndicate was not a financial success. In 1905 William Beardmore, the Glasgow ironmaster, bought the business for $14,500 and relaunched it as the Arrol-Johnston Car Co., ironically without either Arrol or Johnston. Their cars were redesigned by the new manager, the legendary motor racer J. S. Napier. An Arrol-Johnston vehicle secured victory in the inaugural TT race on the Isle of Man in 1905. 
In partnership with a cousin, Robert Thomson, and one of his employees, Thomas Wardell, Johnston set up his own Johnston car company with premises in Bridgeton in the east end of Glasgow. The new firm was to build a 54 horsepower eight-cylinder car for the top end of the market and to exploit four new patents taken out in 1904 and 1905 for improvements in lubrication, connecting rods, ignition gear and throttle valves. The partners had financial backing from James MacKeggie and Thomas Semple junior in Glasgow and James Brown, a Canadian. Before production could begin the All-British Car Company of Bridgeton was formed in 1906 to acquire the business with the support of the earl of Roseberry, Thomas Dunlop, a leading Glasgow shipowner, and George Macmillan of the Edinburgh tea merchants A. Melrose & Co. Some $80,000 was raised through public subscription and George Johnston signed a ten year contract. No sooner had the company been launched than 'great demand sprang up for London omnibuses' and a contract was signed with John Goode, a London 'motor car dealer and bus financier' to supply 250 chassis. To finance production the All-British Car Company exhausted all its capital and borrowed $27,000 against the personal guarantees of the directors, as it proved impossible to raise further capital in the market. When his negotiations for new bus routes failed, Goode reneged on the contract. In the circumstances, at the end of 1907 the directors had no alternative but to liquidate the company which had liabilities of $76,000 and assets of just $12,000. 
Johnston was personally declared a bankrupt on 31 December 1907. As he ruefully explained at his examination, he had sunk all his money on 'experiments and inventions' which 'did not turn out very well' (NA Scot., CS 318/65/115). Although he blamed his financial difficulties on the failure of the All-British Car Company, he could offer no adequate explanation as to where the $44,000 he had been paid for the business had disappeared. 
Johnston left the country in 1910 to become the manager of the newly formed West Mexican Mines Ltd. This had been set up with a capital of $470,000 by the Glasgow architect and property developer John Campbell McKellar to buy mines at Bufa de Ore and La Fortuna in Chihuahua from the Rosario Mines Company of Arizona. With the very unsettled political situation in Mexico, this was not a good time to be speculating in Mexican minerals. Johnston was hired to use his engineering knowledge and ingenuity to develop new methods of extraction. This he seems to have achieved, since the West Mexican Mines remained open while others failed, but an error in registering claims for compensation with the Mexican government forced Johnston to return home, where he fell on his family for support. He spent the last years of his life in Edinburgh, apparently experimenting with hydroponics in the bathroom. He never married. He died at Limefield House, Main Street, Gilmerton, Edinburgh, on 30 November 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 96345


Miller, William Alexander (1890-1970), local politician, was born William Ernest Miller at 10 East Street, East Stonehouse, Devon, on 15 July 1890, the son of John Alexander Miller and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Wall. His father was a sailor from Sierra Leone, and the port of neighbouring Plymouth, with both merchant and Royal Naval facilities, was a major harbour with marine industries and other employment opportunities. After education at local schools Miller went into the building trade, then served an apprenticeship as an electrician in the dockyard at Devonport, the Royal Navy's substantial base. On 11 May 1913, at Devonport, he married Marion Ruby Fowell (1887-1933), daughter of John Fowell, carpenter. During the First World War he served in the Royal Flying Corps, rising to be a warrant officer. 
On his return to Plymouth Miller continued to work as an electrician in the dockyard, and was active in the Electrical Trades Union. With Henry George Mason, a friend from school days, he was active in Labour Party politics in the town. He became the secretary of the party in Drake division, and an election agent for John (Jimmy) Moses in the general elections of 1923, 1924, and 1929. In the latter Moses won by two thousand votes and became Plymouth's first Labour member of parliament. Opponents claimed that Moses (and Miller) had used bribery and other corrupt practices, and petitions were raised. Miller was alleged to have allowed a hire car to be used in the campaign -- a breach of electoral law. Defended by Stafford Cripps, Moses was tried in October 1929. Miller was called to give evidence. The petition was dismissed. Moses, despite Miller's continuing help and guidance, lost the 1931 election by 12,000 votes. 
Meanwhile Miller involved himself in civic activities, having first been elected a member of Plymouth council in 1925. He served on various committees including those relating to electricity, cemeteries, and tramways. Innovations under his leadership included free wiring, cremations, and showrooms to encourage the purchase of electrical products. The open-air swimming pool on Plymouth Hoe, opened in 1935, was known locally as Miller's Lido. His reputation as a person prepared to assist led to queues of people outside his home in East Street, Stonehouse, waiting to see 'the poor man's lawyer'. All this activity meant his family -- on 6 October 1934 he married, secondly, in Willesden, Winifred Alberta Tavener ('b'. 1910/11), daughter of Herbert Tavener -- had a limited income. 
Miller's vision of a future war -- influenced by his knowledge of flying -- led him to criticize the council's lack of preparation against bombers, despite Plymouth's massive naval dockyards making it a certain target. The city was half-destroyed by German raids during March and April 1941. Miller headed the air raid wardens in Stonehouse (and saw his home bombed), getting the army to provide street kitchens and the marines to assist in clearing the debris from streets. He also organized an unofficial evacuation of women and children, commandeering buses and trucks to take them to less dangerous areas. He was arrested and put on trial: he was reprimanded, but some days later the city copied his actions. He served as a member of the Plymouth reconstruction committee from 1944, and again as an election agent for the Drake constituency in the 1945 general election. All three of the city's constituencies saw Labour members take their seats (Bert Medland in Drake, Lucy Middleton in Sutton, and Michael Foot in Devonport). 
In November 1945 the Labour Party became the dominant group on Plymouth council. Miller now chaired the housing committee. As well as the dream of new, hygienic accommodation to replace the bombed slums of dockyard families, there was an urgent need to find homes for returning soldiers and sailors. One thousand temporary homes were erected within one year. Miller and his colleagues started on new estates, despite grave shortages of materials. The wartime expansion of manufacturing facilities at the dockyards led Miller to obtain the navy's assistance, and drainpipes and other hard-to-come-by goods were made there. Miller's involvement in Plymouth's new housing led him to reject an offer to become lord mayor as that would have caused him to step down from being chair of the housing committee. Plymouth had by 1950 become the county borough with the third highest level of house building relative to population. Plymouth's housing estates were built in neighbourhoods centred on shops, schools, and churches. 
Miller was awarded the British Empire Medal in 1946, and in 1947 was appointed OBE. He joined such national organizations as the National Housing Council and the housing committee of the Association of Municipal Corporations. He met Labour government ministers and worked with the future prime minister Harold Wilson on projects to educate and train building workers. After a spell in 1950-51 off the council he again chaired the housing committee from 1953 to 1959. In 1959 he attended two world congresses organized by the National Housing and Town Planning Council, which he chaired. In 1962 he became deputy mayor, remaining a councillor until shortly before his death on 21 December 1970, at Freedom Fields Hospital, Plymouth, of uraemia, bronchopneumonia, and other causes. His son Claude Miller ('b'. 1915) followed his father, being active in the Labour cause from the 1930s; he served as a justice of the peace from 1968 to 1985, a member of Devon county council from 1981, a Plymouth councillor from 1997, and in 2004 lord mayor of Plymouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 96346


Payne, John Charles (1872-1952), singer and choirmaster, was born in Montgomery, Alabama, USA, in 1872, the son of former slaves. As a young man he 'possessed an outstanding soprano voice' ('Cornish Times', 10 Oct 1952), which changed to a rich baritone, and he found work in various venues around the United States. He came to England in 1919 as a baritone and choirmaster with the Southern Syncopated Orchestra. He also sang with a splinter group from the orchestra, the Exposition Jubilee Quartet, also known as the Southern Syncopated Singers and later the Royal Southern Singers (after they had appeared by royal command at Buckingham Palace). Payne appeared with this quartet at the Wigmore and Aeolian concert halls. It was through his friendship with Mary, Lady Cook (wife of the art connoisseur Sir Herbert Cook and daughter of the second Viscount Bridport) that he was able to acquire a home at 17 Regent's Park Road, London. In the 1920s and 1930s this was a popular meeting place for African-American expatriates or visitors, mainly from the world of music. Lady Cook had a fondness for black people, and insisted they should call her 'Mother'. She happily subsidized Payne's hospitality and he cared very much for her, but there was almost certainly no sexual relationship between them since Payne was homosexual. 
For African-American musicians and singers who visited Europe, Payne was their unofficial ambassador. Most of them, like Paul Robeson and Adelaide Hall, found their way to his home, if not for a place to stay, at least for introductions to new friends in the entertainment and social circles of England. The contralto Marian Anderson lived at Payne's house after her arrival in London in November 1927 and later recalled: 'Life in London for me centred largely around the house in Regent's Park Road. I spent most of my time in it when I was not out taking lessons' (Anderson, 103). In 1928 the blues singer Alberta Hunter stayed with Payne when she accepted an offer to appear with Paul Robeson at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in the musical 'Show Boat'. Payne was also featured in this show, in the Mississippi Chorus. When Robeson stayed with Payne on his first visit to London in 1922 he befriended another guest, Lawrence Brown, a gentle, charming man, also a homosexual, who had travelled to London from America to accompany the African-American concert singer Roland Hayes. According to Robeson's biographer 'One night at Payne's, Robeson sang a few songs 'just for fun'', and thus began the highly successful musical collaboration between Robeson and Brown (Duberman, 49). Throughout his stay in London in the 1920s and 1930s Robeson often attended and sometimes sang at the open-house parties Payne gave on Sundays in his Regent's Park Road drawing room. He also found work for Payne as a bit player and extra in some of his British films, including 'Jericho' and 'King Solomon's Mines' (both 1937). 
In the 1920s Payne formed the Southern Trio with Mabel Mercer and C. C. Rosemond, and together they appeared in the West End revue 'Blackbirds' (1926), starring Florence Mills. In the 1930s he formed the Negro Choir, which took part in a 'pageant of parliament' that ran for three weeks at the Albert Hall in 1934. The choir also featured in several films, including 'Radio Parade of 1935' (1934) and 'Lily of Laguna' (1938). In London in 1935 Payne recorded some spirituals for the Regal-Zonophone label. 
Shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Payne and Lady Cook moved away from London to Looe, Cornwall. She died in 1943. Payne, meanwhile, taught music, sang in choirs, and became a popular figure in the local community. He died on 7 October 1952 at Dawn, Hannafore, Looe, of cancer of the pancreas. He was buried in West Looe cemetery and his memorial reads: 'To the memory of John C. Payne, singer and musician. Loved and remembered by his many friends. The song is ended, but the memory lingers on.' 


@@@@@


doc= 96347


Singuineau, Francis Ethelbert Dominic (1913-1992), actor, was born on 4 August 1913 in Port of Spain, Trinidad, the son of Francis Albert Singuineau, provision merchant, and his wife, Ethel. He was raised by his mother and two aunts after his father died unexpectedly three months before he was born. He later said that: 'All the things I learnt, I learnt from women. I realised from a very early age, that I was very lucky in growing up in the presence of a superior, smarter, stronger race. I had a different vision of what life should be. (Lowenthal)' Encouraged by his mother, he took an interest in drama and literature. He later described her as 'a marvellous person, a great organiser, she taught me never to think about myself. She taught me about life and love and charity' (ibid.). He was educated at a private school and then at St Mary's College, Port of Spain, where he developed a love of acting from a drama teacher. During the Second World War, he joined the staff of the Shell Company and took an active interest in amateur dramatics. 
Singuineau left his job with Shell and moved to London soon after the end of the war, and gained early acting experience by working with the left-wing Unity Theatre and various repertory companies all over Britain in plays including 'Deep Are the Roots' (1950) and 'The Hasty Heart' (1953). He also made his pantomime debut as Friday in 'Robinson Crusoe' (1949). He made his London stage debut in a production of Richard Wright's 'Native Son' (Boltons Theatre, 1948), starring the Guyanese actor Robert Adams, and roles followed in Noel Coward's 'Ace of Clubs' (Cambridge Theatre, 1950) and Jean-Paul Sartre's 'The Respectable Prostitute' (Q Theatre, Kew, 1954). His stage career continued into the 1980s with roles in John Steinbeck's 'Of Mice and Men' (Leatherhead Theatre, 1967), Mustapha Matura's 'As Time Goes By' (Royal Court, 1971), 'Play Mas' (Royal Court, 1974), and 'Playboy of the West Indies' (Tricycle Theatre, 1984), Christopher Hampton's 'Savages' (Royal Court, 1973), and Shakespeare's 'Measure for Measure' (Royal National Theatre, 1981). 
Singuineau made his film debut in 'The Captain's Paradise' (1953) and went on to play numerous character roles over the next thirty years in a wide range of films. These included 'Simba' (1955), 'The Mummy' (1959), 'The Nun's Story' (1959), 'Peeping Tom' (1960), 'Dr No' (1962), and three films directed by Bryan Forbes, 'Seance on a Wet Afternoon' (1964), 'The Wrong Box' (1966), and 'The Whisperers' (1967), in which he played the sympathetic doctor. In Jack Clayton's 'The Pumpkin Eater' (1964) he made a brief but memorable appearance as the mysterious King of Israel. Later films in which he appeared included 'Carry On Again, Doctor' (1969), Lindsay Anderson's 'O Lucky Man!' (1973), 'Live and Let Die' (1973), 'Rollerball' (1975), 'An American Werewolf in London' (1981), and, finally, 'Biggles' (1986). He was also cast in a major role in 'Pressure' (1975), directed by the Trinidadian Horace Ove, believed to be the first feature film drama to be made by a black film-maker in Britain. Singuineau gave an outstanding performance as Lucas, the disillusioned shop owner whose old-fashioned values are despised by his son, Colin (Oscar James), who has become involved in the black power movement. 
After his television debut in 1953 Singuineau made many appearances, mostly in popular drama series like 'Emergency Ward 10', 'Z Cars', 'Out of the Unknown', and 'Crown Court'. Three memorable plays were John Hopkins's 'Fable', screened in the BBC's 'Wednesday Play' series (1965); 'Armchair Theatre: the World in a Room' (1970), Emanuel Litvinoff's study of a mixed marriage; and Barry Reckord's 'In the Beautiful Caribbean' (1972). He also appeared in hundreds of radio plays. 
Described by John Tydeman as a 'gentle, charming, enthusiastic, tolerant, cultured, sometimes over-diffident, remarkable human being' ('The Independent', 22 Sept 1992), Singuineau was affectionately known by Britain's black actors as a father figure, always ready to offer help and advice. He had married, on 6 October 1954, Doreen Elsa Keogh ('b'. 1923/4), actress and daughter of John Keogh, publisher's representative; there were no children of the marriage, which ended soon after in divorce. Ill health forced Singuineau into retirement in the mid-1980s, and he died on 11 September 1992 at his home, 47 Loveday Road, Ealing, London, of heart failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 96348


Trimmingham, Ernest (1880/81-1942), actor, was born in Bermuda. As yet, little is known of his early life, or of when he settled in Britain. His first known appearance -- and the first known appearance of a black actor in a British film -- was in 'The Adventures of Dick Turpin: the King of Highwaymen' (1912), in which he played a character called Beetles alongside Percy Moran's Turpin. Produced by the British and Colonial Kinematograph Company, the film was popular, and led to a series. Trimmingham appeared again in the third instalment, 'The Adventures of Dick Turpin: 200 Guineas Reward, Dead or Alive'. In the romantic drama 'Her Bachelor Guardian', also released in 1912, he was listed in the cast simply as 'Negro'. Before this point it was usual for black characters to be played by white people in 'blackface'. Indeed it was only in 1914 that the first recorded African-American actor played a major role in a commercial American film (Sam Lucas as Uncle Tom in 'Uncle Tom's Cabin'). In 1919 Trimmingham made his most interesting film appearance, as the cowboy Pete in 'Jack, Sam, and Pete'. The influence of Hollywood was very much in evidence in this adventure film, one of the few westerns made in Britain. His last known film appearance was in 'Where the Rainbow Ends' (1921), a fantasy based on a popular Christmas children's play in which a group of children find a magic carpet and save their shipwrecked parents from a dragon. Trimmingham was cast as the Genie. 
On stage Trimmingham was frequently in demand to portray black characters (though these were rarely major parts). His West End appearances included 'Welcome Stranger' (Lyric Theatre, 1921), 'In Walked Jimmy' (Q Theatre, Kew, 1925), 'Might-Have-Been' (Prince's Theatre, 1927), 'Magnolia Street' (Adelphi, 1934), 'Sweet Aloes' (Wyndham's, 1934), 'The Miracle Man' (Victoria Palace, 1935), and 'No Sleep for the Wicked' (Daly's, 1937). His last recorded appearance was in 'Room V' at the Garrick Theatre in 1941. He died on 2 February 1942, at 216 Clapham Road, Stockwell, London, and was buried in the variety artistes' section of Streatham Park cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 96367


Crisp, Dorothy (1906-1987), author and political activist, was born on 17 May 1906 at 26 Aylesford Terrace, Leeds, the only child of Albert Edward Crisp (1877-1943), railway brakesman, and his wife, Annie Beckwith (1873-1957). Although her father had no settled career, and her mother had been a tailoress before their marriage, the family acquired sufficient means for Dorothy to receive a middle-class education, initially with an order of Anglican nuns and later at the Thoresby High School for Girls. Inspired by voracious reading in theology, poetry, and history, in her teens Dorothy Crisp had a vision that she must become prime minister, in order to save England and the empire. Her unwavering convictions, that England was dangerously threatened by enemies at home and abroad, and that she alone had the intelligence, courage, and imagination to save the country, remained her motivating forces throughout her life. 
In 1925 Crisp passed the entrance examination for Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, but never took up her place. Instead, she spent brief periods in Oxford and Vienna, before launching herself into political journalism. She began a campaign of self-promotion, sending her essays and articles to editors and politicians alike, seeking introductions and approaching people of influence. She was published, fitfully, in the 'Yorkshire Evening Post', Leo Maxse's 'National Review', and Lady Houston's 'Saturday Review'. She devoted great energy to her first book, 'The Rebirth of Conservatism' (1931). As she had been persuaded by her publisher that her own essay could not stand alone, it also contained five essays by young university men including John Boyd-Carpenter (later a Conservative minister) and an introduction by John Buchan. 
The book received little attention, but it secured Crisp's place in political circles and drawing-rooms in London. Never a fascist, and certainly not pro-Nazi (she had too much scorn for any but the English to support a foreign ideology), she none the less found her most sympathetic hearers among the flourishing radical right of the 1930s: historians Arthur Bryant and Sir Charles Petrie were sympathetic, she was tangentially connected with groups like the English Mistery, she spoke regularly for groups opposed to Indian independence, and she counted acknowledged fascists like Lord Queenborough and die-hard Conservatives like Lord Lloyd among her patrons, friends, and associates. Frustrated by her inability to persuade editors to publish her articles, for three years from 1933 she used -- with his permission -- the name of the industrialist Sir Thomas Polson for her articles in the 'Saturday Review'. 
Crisp wrote prolifically and fluently, her dominant tone one of anger tempered by scorn and directed variously at Stanley Baldwin, Ramsay MacDonald, Herbert Morrison, and Archbishop Temple. Her political programme was one of ultra-imperialist, individualist anti-socialism. In 1931 she set out a manifesto calling for a reduction in taxation to a bare minimum, a reduction in welfare benefits, the removal of health and unemployment insurance from state control -- sweeping away the 'thousand petty restrictions' placed on industry -- the reform of the Post Office, the abolition of death duties, the promotion of patriotism, and the reinforcement of British power and prestige abroad. These measures, she insisted, were essential to save England from financial crisis and international decay. She took to self-publishing with her anti-pacifist tract 'Christ Is No Pacifist' in 1937. In the three weeks following Neville Chamberlain's return from Munich with 'peace in our time', she wrote 65,000 words on the 'philosophy and the practical acts needed in England to restore her greatness', to which she gave the title 'England -- Mightier Yet' (1939); the book brought her to the attention of the former Canadian premier R. B. Bennett, who became a sympathizer. 
Following the outbreak of war Crisp addressed public meetings around the country and began a campaign to persuade the BBC to allow her to broadcast; the BBC proved resistant to the 'extremely forceful young woman'. Following an interview with her, one BBC official noted: 'Truculence often accompanies merit, but in her case I am clear about the truculence and supremely doubtful about the merit' (BBC WAC, file RCont1/Dorothy Crisp, 5 Dec 1939). Her persistence paid off to the extent that she was allowed to make two broadcasts, on the 'Calling All Women' slot on the Home Service in 1940, one shortly after she had herself been injured in the September bombing. She also broadcast twice in 1942; her themes were British pride, courage, and distinctiveness: 'Don't forget. Queuing for sausages, you are saving civilisation and even as you walk you proclaim the temper of the British race' ('Calling the Home Front', 13 Aug 1942). Crisp's jingoism did not go down well with the BBC, and when they declined a talk about English achievements in the war, she published it in the 'Sunday Dispatch', which thereafter gave her a weekly column. Her columns could be incendiary: one issue of the 'Dispatch' was banned in Eire in 1943 over her criticisms of the De Valera government. 
In 1943 Crisp sued the 'New Statesman' for libellously identifying her with Mrs Dorothy Patterson, one of the fascist council of seven; the case was settled with damages of $750 and an apology. The taint of the accusation lingered and was used against Crisp when she stood for parliament as an independent at the Acton by-election in 1943. She took some 8 per cent of the vote, as opposed to the successful Conservative candidate's 60 per cent, and lost her deposit. Finding it nearly impossible to find a publisher for her next book, 'The Future of Europe' (1944) she set up her own publishing company, Dorothy Crisp & Co. Ltd. Using information gained from her connections, who by now included her future husband, John Becker, an army intelligence officer recently sent home from the Far East after warning his superiors of the danger and likelihood of a Japanese invasion through Siam, and who had acted as her secretary during the Acton campaign, she wrote an indictment of British military policy in the Far East. The first of her own books to come out under the Dorothy Crisp & Co. imprint, 'Why We Lost Singapore' (1944) was and remains perhaps the most widely read of her books. Her company published an eclectic list of books mainly by foreign authors. 
On 21 March 1945 Dorothy Crisp married John Neill Herman Becker (1900-1948), son of Neill Theodore Becker and a descendant of a family of German-Danish shipbrokers and merchants. He had by then become active in the Society of Individualists and the National League for Freedom. She continued to be known as Dorothy Crisp, and kept up her frenetic round of public speaking and writing. She stood again for parliament in the general election of 1945, for Westminster St George's, once more losing her deposit. Her daughter, Elizabeth, was born in July 1946, shortly after Crisp had published her first autobiography, 'A Life for England' (1946). 
About this time Crisp joined the committee of the British Housewives' League (BHL), formed by Irene Lovelock to protest at the hardships caused to housewives by rationing and queuing for food. Notionally a non-party organization, it argued for an immediate end to rationing and a return to the free market in food. Crisp hoped to use it as the vehicle for a large-scale, popular movement, and toured the country, speaking at fifty-seven towns in twelve months, urging members to militancy in the suffragette style to stop 'any tendency to totalitarianism' in the country (Hinton, 145). She became chairman of the BHL in early 1947. In February, following a speech in Liverpool, the Road Haulage Association offered to pay for the hire of the Albert Hall in London for the BHL to attack ''controls', bureaucracy and nationalization' (Crisp, 'A Light in the Night', 21). The meeting, held in June 1947, attained notoriety but not the success Crisp had hoped for: a planned march of women from the north attracted few participants and the meeting in the Albert Hall was disrupted by communist women, who scattered leaflets and water from the balcony onto the housewives below. It was, 'Life' magazine reported, 'an impressive brawl while it lasted' (23 June 1947, 34-5). 
Crisp's relationship with the BHL rapidly broke down; she opposed what she saw as attempts by the Conservative Party to co-opt the movement, and when a statement was circulated at an extraordinary general meeting implying that Crisp had used league funds for her own purposes, she resigned and issued a writ for libel against the 'Daily Herald', which had reported the allegations made at the meeting. Crisp insisted that, far from using BHL funds, the league had been a constant drain on her own income. 
Early in 1948 John Becker travelled to Singapore, where he worked as a senior assistant in the firm of Watts & Co., leaving Dorothy, who was pregnant once more, in England. In Singapore he enrolled as a special constable, and was shot dead on 24 August 1948 when (off duty himself) he went to the assistance of a policeman attempting to make an arrest. Four days later Dorothy gave birth to a son, and a few days after that she learned that a bankruptcy order had been made against her, which she ignored. She found Becker's affairs in disarray -- he left no will, there was no record of any money in Singapore, and no inquest was held into his death until she travelled to Singapore in March 1949. Although there was a compensation scheme for widows of special constables, because Becker was not on duty at the time of his death, Dorothy was ineligible. The Conservative MP Irene Ward took up the case, but it was not until 1952 that she was finally awarded an annual pension of $500. In the meantime the libel case against the 'Daily Herald' lapsed, and Crisp continued to ignore the bankruptcy order. 
In March 1958 Crisp was convicted of obtaining credit while an undischarged bankrupt, and sentenced to a year in prison. Her account of her time in Holloway Prison, 'A Light in the Night' (1960), laced with self-justification and increasingly paranoid that the authorities were persecuting her for her political beliefs, nevertheless offers an interesting insight into the effects of arbitrary power. Granted leave to appeal against sentence, she was released at the end of October 1958. After writing her prison memoir she completed another book, 'The Dominance of England' (1960), devoted to denigrating the role played by the Americans in the Second World War. She served two more terms in Holloway, in 1966 and again from 1969, for offences of obtaining credit while an undischarged bankrupt, and obtaining credit by fraud. She remained litigious, taking a claim for the Home Office to pay her taxi fares between prison and the courts all the way to the Court of Appeal, where in 1972 it was rejected by Lord Denning. By 1975 she had been declared a vexatious litigant, and was required to seek the leave of the court to begin an appeal against a rent tribunal. Crisp self-published a final book in 1986. 'Truth Too Near the Heels', which continued her old themes into modern times, was her final diatribe. Dorothy Crisp died after an operation for a perforated duodenal ulcer in the Charing Cross Hospital, Hammersmith, on 19 May 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 96373


Argent, (Bernard) Godfrey (1937-2006), photographer, was born on 6 February 1937 at Taringa, Eastbourne Road, Willingdon, Sussex, the only son of Godfrey Stanley Albert Argent, a motor engineer for a local builders' merchant, and his wife, Helena, 'nee' Smith. The couple also had two daughters. He was educated at Bexhill grammar school and, after a brief spell in the police force in Eastbourne (where he was introduced to photography), he entered the Household Cavalry in 1954 in which he served as a corporal in the Life Guards for nine years. 
Argent's interest in portrait photography developed while he was stationed at regimental headquarters, Whitehall. In 1960 he won the army's photographic competition and was appointed an associate member of the Royal Photographic Society. Two years later he was asked to photograph Sir Gerald Templer, chief of the imperial general staff, in full dress uniform, on his appointment as colonel of the Royal Horse Guards. Templer's pleasure at the portrait led to further commissions, including an invitation to photograph Prince Philip's uncle, Earl Mountbatten, in the following year. Templer also advised Argent on where his future might lie, informing him that he was 'a much better photographer than you will ever be a soldier', and warning him not to 'get to my age and then regret what you might have done' ('The Independent', 15 June 2006). He duly left the army and, as Godfrey Argent, began work as a freelance photographer in June 1963. Initially his portfolio comprised portrait photography of friends and former army connections, as well as picture postcards of regimental ceremonies and English and Welsh beach scenes. By now he had a young family of three daughters to support, having married Janet Rosemary Boniface (1937-1969), daughter of Robin Boniface, nightwatchman, on 17 November 1956 at St John's Church, Polegate, Sussex. After her death he married, on 29 December 1969, Ann Yvonne Coxon ('b'. 1939/40), physician, and daughter of James Coxon, businessman, at St Edward's Roman Catholic church, Sutton Park, Woking. They had no children and were divorced in 1973. 
On the recommendation of Templer, Argent was invited to provide the illustrations for a forthcoming study of the Royal Mews, published in 1965 as 'The Queen Rides'. This led to an introduction to the monarch, who evidently warmed to the young photographer, and opened the way to Argent's emergence in the late 1960s as a leading royal portraitist specializing in elegant black and white images. In June 1966 he was invited to photograph Princess Anne on her sixteenth birthday and followed this with studies of the eighteen-year-old Prince Charles (also in 1966), the last portraits of Prince Philip's mother, Princess Andrew of Greece (1967), a portrait for the postage stamp marking Charles's investiture as the prince of Wales in 1968 (one of many studies of the prince to 1974), and group portraits for the royal family's Christmas cards (1966-74). Part of the success of these commissions lay in Argent's ability -- a skill perhaps honed in the army -- to combine deference to his sitters with a charming, relaxed, sometimes playful manner. Even so, he admitted to feeling 'physically sick with tension' before sittings throughout his career ('The Times', 30 June 2006). 
Argent's work as a royal photographer coincided with his growing reputation as an artist and businessman. An invitation to join the prestigious Camera Press picture agency (whose clients included lords Snowdon and Lichfield, Cecil Beaton, and Yousuf Karsh, whose work Argent greatly admired), was followed in 1967 by his purchase of the business of another leading portrait photographer, Walter Bird. This brought Argent both a new studio, at 49 Queen's Gate, London, and the post (replacing Bird) of official photographer of the National Photographic Record, a collection of portraits of noteworthy Britons established on behalf of the National Portrait Gallery (NPG) in 1917. Argent's appointment came soon after Roy Strong's as director of the NPG. With Strong eager to see the record broadened to include studies of 'people who are actively doing things', Argent's four-year tenure included photographs of David Attenborough, Alan Bennett, John Betjeman, Sir Noel Coward, and Spike Milligan. A selection of the 650 portraits Argent created for the record was exhibited as a one-man show at the NPG in 1972. From 1967 until 1993 he was also the official portrait photographer for the Royal Society, for whom he undertook 750 portraits, including studies of Sir Ernst Chain, Dorothy Hodgkin, Francis Crick, and Stephen Hawking. 
Alongside these official positions Argent continued to develop his private business. In 1967 he began a long-running association with the theatre as cast photographer for 'The Mousetrap', a commission he undertook annually on a further twenty-two occasions and combined with similar records for other productions. In 1974 he moved to new premises at 8 Holland Street, Kensington, and in the same year he purchased the Mayfair studio of the dance and society photographer Baron (Sterling Henry Nahum); the sale also gave Argent the lucrative copyright to Baron's negatives, which in turn he presented to the NPG in 1998. 
Now established as one of the capital's leading society photographers, with a speciality in corporate, military, and family studies, Argent undertook a number of overseas commissions from the 1970s. In 1976 an exhibition in Johannesburg included portraits of the politicians John Vorster, P. W. Botha, and Helen Suzman, the transplant surgeon Christiaan Barnard, the author Alan Paton, and Archbishop Desmond Tutu. Argent had written to these and other prominent South Africans to request a sitting while visiting the country on honeymoon with his third wife, Sally Dorothy McAlpine ('b'. 1951/2), whom he married on 25 April 1975 at Westminster register office; the couple had one daughter and were divorced in 1990. Further shows in Cape Town and Durban (1977) were followed by several visits to Los Angeles, where he photographed the city's mayor Tom Bradley and exhibited in 1978. Argent later worked from his London home, 8 Ladbroke Walk, near Holland Park, and from the late 1990s combined this with portrait painting in oils. In 2005 he held his final exhibition at the Special Photographers' Gallery, London, by which time his photographic commissions and other work totalled more than 9000 images. 
Godfrey Argent died on 1 June 2006 from cancer of the oesophagus at Pembridge palliative care centre, St Charles's Hospital, Kensington, London. He was survived by his four daughters. Between 2007 and 2009 his contribution to photography was marked with the Godfrey Argent award for the most outstanding black and white photograph or the best photographer aged twenty-five and under at the NPG's annual portrait competition. 


@@@@@


doc= 96377


Harding, (Thomas) Walter (1843-1927), pin manufacturer and civic art patron, was born in Lille, France, on 22 January 1843, the only son and second of four children of Thomas Richards Harding (1812-1895), manufacturer, of Leeds, Yorkshire, and Doddington, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Sarah Ann Cocker (1814-1888), of Hathersage, near Sheffield. Educated at the lycee in Lille, where his father had established a factory and, from 1857, at Leeds grammar school, Yorkshire, following his father's acquisition of a second factory there (1853), he became an associate in arts through the Oxford local examinations, specializing in British constitutional history, before studying German in Dresden (1860-61). He then returned to the family firm, which made steel pins and other components for textile machinery. On 19 May 1869 he married Anne Heycock (1846-1923), daughter of Ambrose Edmund Heath Buckley Butler, ironmaster, of Kirkstall, Leeds; they had a son, born in Leeds in 1870, and a daughter, who died in infancy. 
Harding became chairman of the family business, which as well as producing components for the textile industry made pins for gramophones, engine counters, and speed indicators. The business was incorporated in 1892 as a limited company, T. R. Harding & Son, and, after his father's death (1895) and an amalgamation, this became Harding, Richardson and Rhodes & Co. He invented machinery, and travelled widely for business and pleasure in Europe, north Africa, and America. 
Harding played a significant role in the civic life of industrial Leeds, helping to influence its public face. He was a high church Anglican; his faith was strengthened during his youth in France, as was his interest in public order, his taste in public art, and his commitment to art and technical instruction for British manufacturing industries to remain competitive. His early interest in constitutional history, particularly its medieval origins, and in civic pageantry also influenced his public art patronage, for which he was noted. Art and industry were joined first for Harding in the design of the extraction shafts at his family's factory, the Tower Works, Holbeck; fashionably uniting function and beauty, the three shafts, built between 1864 and 1919, reflected Italian Renaissance campaniles and remain a Leeds landmark. Harding generously pursued civic building initiatives; as a young man he was secretary of the Social Improvement Society, and founded the Industrial Dwellings Company to improve housing. He and his father helped found Leeds Grand Theatre and supported the Yorkshire College, later Leeds University, which awarded him an honorary doctorate (1909). In 1880 he was elected to the Institute of Mechanical Engineers and was active in Leeds's Philosophical and Literary Society and chamber of commerce, becoming vice-president (1890-91) and president (1892-3) of the latter. From 1895 he chaired the West Riding rivers board, and in 1898 he was appointed to the royal commission on river pollution and trade effluent. He styled himself Colonel T. Walter Harding when the Leeds artillery volunteers, which organization he served from 1862 to 1895, bestowed that honorary title on him at his retirement. 
In politics Harding was a Liberal who became a Unionist. He was president of the Leeds branch of the Imperial Federation League (1882) and was elected to Leeds council for Headingley ward as a Liberal (1883-8). Influenced by Joseph Chamberlain, Harding joined the Unionists over home rule (1886) and thrust his energies into establishing an art gallery as part of Leeds's jubilee celebrations, achieved (1888) through public subscriptions; Harding provided a $2000 collections fund. As chairman (1887-1904) he acquired a public platform and gave artworks displaying romantic patriotic and religious themes. He stated at its inauguration that Leeds, 'with its great reputation... for its cloths, its iron, and its machinery, was practically unknown in the higher sphere of art' ('Leeds Mercury', 4 Oct 1888). Henceforth Harding's political, business, philanthropic, and artistic interests entwined. When in 1895 the Conservatives, pursuing a policy of promoting prominent local men to national office, won a majority on the Leeds city council for the first time in sixty years, Harding became alderman and set his sights on parliament. 
To commemorate Leeds's elevation from township to city status (1893) Harding proposed and offered to finance (1896) an ambitious bronze sculpture scheme for the new City Square, comprising eight nude female figure-lamps representing Morn and Even by Alfred Drury (celebrating Leeds's adoption of electric street lighting) encircling an equestrian statue of Edward, the Black Prince, by Thomas Brock, chosen as a founding father of parliamentary traditions and to rival Joan of Arc at a time of imperial rivalry with France. To gain local support Harding added four worthies associated with Leeds: Dean Walter Hook (by Frederick Pomeroy), Joseph Priestley (by Drury), and James Watt and John Harrison (by Henry Fehr), endorsing loyalty to the crown and Anglicanism, with a concession to nonconformity, philanthropy, scientific innovation, and industrial technology. Costing some $5000, the equestrian statue, unusually, took seven years to complete. 
Harding was lord mayor of Leeds (1898-9), helped organize the city's trades exhibits at the Brussels International Exhibition (1898), and was the chamber of commerce representative for the British section of the Paris International Exhibition (1900); the art gallery sent bronze artwork to both. Having promoted Unionist parliamentary candidates for a decade, he stood in the general election of 1900 as Unionist candidate for the Leeds West constituency against the sitting Liberal MP, Herbert Gladstone, but lost by 521 votes. His 'khaki' election champion, the Black Prince, was incomplete; City Square's inauguration occurred in 1903, when the Anglo-French antagonism had waned. 
In 1901 Harding was appointed high sheriff of the counties of Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire, leaving Abbey House (originally Kirkstall Abbey's gatehouse) for Hartsholme Hall, Lincolnshire (1902), and Madingley Hall, Cambridgeshire (1906), which he restored. There Harding wrote historical romances and chaired Addenbrooke's Hospital building committee. He belonged to the committee for the county, university, and town war memorial in Cambridge and also helped to organize Leeds's war memorial campaign (1920-22). He died in office as high steward of Cambridge at Madingley Hall on 26 March 1927 and was buried at the church of St Mary Magdalene, Madingley, on 29 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 96405


Powell, Felix Lloyd (1878-1942), composer, was born in the High Street, St Asaph, Flintshire, on 23 May 1878, second child and first son of John Morris Powell (1842-1882), a house painter and lay clerk at St Asaph Cathedral, and his wife, Sarah Snelson, 'nee' Hill ('b'. 1855, died in or after 1901). A second son, 
Building on musical talent inherited from their father, the Powell brothers took up careers as entertainers, the more introverted Felix as pianist and the more extrovert George as vocalist, for which he assumed the surname Asaf after their place of birth. Their concert party, Asaf and Powell's Harlequinaders, toured the variety circuit with considerable success for some years. It included, besides themselves, two other men and the Powell brothers' wives, who had earlier performed in variety as a duo. On 15 July 1905, at Exeter register office, George married Leila, the 22-year-old daughter of Thomas Byron, tailor and outfitter; they had no children. Felix married, on 11 June 1911, at Scarborough register office, Mabel, the 26-year-old daughter of Rolande Florence, solicitor, and had one son ('b'. 1916), named Harley after the concert party. 
The Harlequinaders' song successes included 'Queen of Summer' (1913), with music by Felix Powell and words by their elder sister Constance ('b'. 1877). However, the brothers' careers as songwriters really took off when in 1915, after the outbreak of war, the popular song publisher Francis, Day, and Hunter announced a prize of 100 guineas for the best ballads, chorus songs, and march songs. First prize of $35 in the march-song category, announced in August 1915, went to 'Pack up your troubles in your old kit-bag', with words by George Asaf and music by Felix Powell. Written originally in 6/8 time, the song was revised for the competition and sung first in the Harlequinaders' own revue 'Some Glee'. Performed in that winter's pantomimes and taken up by chorus singer Florrie Forde, it became a huge success -- above all as a morale-booster for troops. Across the Atlantic it was the hit of the 1916 Broadway show 'Her Soldier Boy'. Though other Powell songs achieved publication, none had remotely similar success. 
In 1917 Felix Powell disbanded the Harlequinaders and formed another concert party, the White Knights, to tour the trenches. George Powell, a Christian Scientist and pacifist, was left to tour the country in a caravan, selling alternative medicines. After the war Felix ran a public house in Hungerford, entertaining customers at the piano. Then the Canadian entrepreneur Charles William Neville brought the brothers and their wives to Peacehaven, his 'Garden City by the sea' near Newhaven in Sussex. George became the first editor of the 'Peacehaven Post' in 1921, and the brothers collaborated on songs to promote the resort, including 'Come to Peacehaven' and 'Lureland Waltz', named after the resort's dance-hall. 
As musical director of Peacehaven's amateur theatrical entertainments in the resort's 300-seat Pavilion Theatre, Felix Powell conducted several comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan. Then in 1933 the company staged the 'farcical operetta in 2 Acts' 'Rubicund Castle', for which Felix had written book, lyrics, and music. When revived in 1936 it attracted the attention of the West End singer-producer Anne Croft, who saw it as a potential successor to her show 'Tulip Time'. Revised as 'Primrose Time', the show was produced professionally at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, in December 1937. However, the finance promised to take it to the West End failed to materialize. 
In these later years Felix Powell worked as an estate agent, and when war broke out he joined the Peacehaven Home Guard, becoming a staff sergeant and quartermaster. However, with his most famous song once more a rallying song for troops, he found himself unable to pack up his own troubles. Not only had his work on 'Primrose Time' come to nothing, but he had apparently incurred financial difficulties attempting to fund it. Recently recovered from a bout of pneumonia, he arrived for Home Guard duties in the requisitioned Lureland dance-hall, Peacehaven, on 10 February 1942, locked the door, left notes on the piano for his colleagues and family, and shot himself in the chest with a service rifle. He died later that day in the Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton. 
George Powell moved to Hove around the same time and, after years of ill health, died there, at his home, 10 Palmeira Avenue, on 3 December 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 96414


Hendry, James Findlay (1912-1986), poet and essayist, was born James Hendry (he later added Findlay, derived from his mother's maiden name) in Balgrayhill, Dennistoun, Glasgow, on 12 September 1912. He was the first child of John McEwen Hendry (1881-1945), master butcher, and his wife, Christina McMillan Finlay (1886-1967), who were both from Glasgow. He had a younger sister, Mamie, and a brother, Ian. In his one published novel, 'Fernie Brae: a Scottish Childhood' (1947, completed 1938), Hendry recalled his final years at Whitehill School, Dennistoun, and his first years at Glasgow University (1930-32): David Macrae, the novel's central protagonist, closely articulates Hendry's own Scottish intellectual and cultural preoccupations, consciously paralleling James Joyce's 'Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man'. For all his access to formal education, Hendry retained characteristics of the classic autodidact, being both self-informed and unorthodox. As a schoolboy he was fascinated with languages, and joined Hugh Brennan's evening class in Russian. Brennan, who later became a mentor to Hendry, subsequently taught him at Glasgow University, where Hendry's principal subjects were initially French and German. Wary of academic philosophy from the extensive reading he continued all his life, promiscuously independent rather than scholarly, he was permitted to study 'political economy' as an alternative to the otherwise compulsory course in philosophy. In the summer of 1932, and before an obligatory study year in Paris, Hendry visited the Soviet Union on a package tour. Here private conversations with Russians deepened his own reservations about the Soviet regime's official commentary. 
Rather than completing the course for his Glasgow MA, in 1933 Hendry went to Vienna to study at the Consular Academy. He fell in love with the city, and with a fellow student, Theodora (Dee) Ussai (1905-1941), a Slovenian emigre to the USA, where he later travelled to visit her. They married in Glasgow on 25 December 1936. With a child expected 
(David, 'b'. 1938)
, Hendry worked briefly, and unhappily, as a civil servant with the Inland Revenue in Leeds, where the family lived between 1937 and 1940. By then he had begun to publish verse and make significant literary contacts, editing with its publisher C. J. Russell a pamphlet of new Scottish verse: 'Albannach' (1938). 
Hendry is now best-known for his work with Henry Treece as an editor of, and contributor to, three anthologies of verse and prose, 'The New Apocalypse' (1939, for which Hendry was solely responsible), 'The White Horseman' (1941), and 'The Crown and the Sickle' (1945). In this capacity he emerged as an initiator and leader of a loose affiliation of writers, known as the New Apocalypse, which was critical of the 1930s literary school of W. H. Auden, and others, and concerned by moves towards abstraction in the arts and totalitarianism in politics. The New Apocalypse 'movement' was less a co-ordinated, positive programme than a bringing together and promotion of works by writers with shared artistic and intellectual sympathies. As Hendry explained in 'Writers and apocalypse', his introduction to 'The New Apocalypse', these sympathies went beyond literary considerations to address the dangers of mechanization and the restrictions placed on human initiative by what he considered the false prestige and impersonality of science, at the expense of myth and subjectivity. In response Hendry championed apocalyptic writing as 'the war for justice to man' measured in the ability to express the emotional and intellectual organicism of 'the whole man'. The importance here of William Blake should also be noted, and Hendry planned but did not complete a subsequent study of Blake. Hendry's own fiction and verse reflected models he knew in languages other than English: the prose of Boris Pasternak and Ivan Bunin (as seen in 'Fernie Brae'), or the Spanish poets of 1927 who deplored outright rejection of the seventeenth-century poet Gongora ('The Bombed Happiness', 1942; 'Orchestral Mountain', 1943). Hendry's praise in 'Writers and apocalypse' for the work of Dylan Thomas, in whose poetry and prose he identified a 'definite organic purpose' and an appreciation of 'wholeness and roundedness', identified values central to his understanding of the New Apocalypse, with which Thomas himself was not involved. 
In September 1939 Hendry and Theodora travelled to Yugoslavia, where they visited her relatives and Hendry made contacts and recorded political observations for private circulation and publication. The tales and sketches in 'The Blackbird of Ospo' (1942) vividly express Slovenia's pre-war predicament, divided between Yugoslavia and fascist Italy. During his visit Hendry was interrogated by the Yugoslav authorities, who suspected him of being an American agent. In Britain he was later interrogated as a suspected Soviet agent. The trip -- which Hendry had been led to believe would benefit his prospects -- had been suggested by John Cairncross, a sometime university friend and former Foreign Office official, now at the Treasury. Hendry's relatives and friends recalled his conviction that Cairncross had been a Soviet agent; and, indeed, after Hendry's death Cairncross's identity as a former Soviet spy became a matter of public knowledge. 
With the outbreak of war Hendry joined the army in 1940. On 31 March 1941, on an extension of compassionate leave, he witnessed his wife's death in physical and mental agony from terrible internal injuries sustained during the London blitz. Hendry returned to this most devastating period of his life in his final years, in a long allegorical novel, 'The Wild and the Beautiful' (unpublished). In 1944 he was posted as a translator to an Italian prisoner-of-war camp in the Lake District, and met Dorothy Stainton (1915-2004). They married in St Thomas's Church, Milnthorpe, Westmorland, on 3 July 1944, and had a daughter and a son. In addition to volumes of poetry and his study of Yugoslavia, the war years also saw the publication of the 'Penguin Book of Scottish Short Stories' (1943), edited by Hendry and his late wife, which maintained a rule of lengthy delay between completion of a book and its publication. 
Hendry remained in the army, working as a translator in the British administration in Vienna, until 1950. After his discharge he finally graduated MA at Glasgow University (1952), trained as a teacher, and taught at St Mungo's Academy, Glasgow, and at the university's Institute for Soviet and East European Studies. In 1962 the Hendry family moved to Geneva, where Hendry worked as a translator for, among other bodies, the International Atomic Energy Agency. Hendry moved to Canada in 1968 following his appointment as professor and founding head of the School of Translators and Interpreters at Laurentian University, Ontario. Here he taught Russian, published 'Your Future in Translating and Interpreting' (1969), and studied issues of the standardization of official terminology. He retired from his university post in 1977. Receipt of his pension remained conditional on his residence in Canada until 1987, though he was able to spend summers in Glasgow even if he was not, as he wished, able to live permanently in Scotland. There followed a number of publications, including essays, collections of verse ('Marimarusa', 1978; 'A World Alien', 1980), and a biography of the poet Rainer Maria Rilke ('The Sacred Threshold', 1982) drafted while he lived in Geneva. Hendry died of a heart attack, in his sleep, at his home, 343 Lawrence Avenue West, Toronto, on 18 December 1986. He was buried on 22 December at the city's North York cemetery, where his bones rest beside those of many Slovenes. Hendry's prepared 'Collected Poems' remains unpublished, along with several works of fiction, and an extended study of the linguistic preoccupations of a lifetime. Since 2000 there have been flickers of new interest in his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 96446


Staples, Sir Robert Ponsonby, twelfth baronet (1853-1943), painter, was born in Dundee on 30 June 1853, the third son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Sir Nathaniel Alexander Staples, tenth baronet (1817-1899), a captain and interpreter in the Bengal artillery, and his wife, Elizabeth Lindsay, 'nee' Head (died 1907). On resigning his commission in 1853, his father spent much of his time in Belgium, and succeeded to the baronetcy in succession to an uncle, Sir Thomas Staples, ninth baronet, in 1865, but did not take up residence at the family estate at Lissan House, Cookstown, co. Tyrone, until the death of his uncle's widow in 1872. 
Staples was educated by his father until the age of twelve, then studied art and architecture at the Louvain Academy of Fine Arts from 1865 to 1870; he also studied at Dresden in 1867 and the Brussels Academy from 1872 to 1874. His works were first exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1875. Apart from a year spent in Australia (1879-80) he sought to build his career in the London art world under the patronage of his cousin, Sir Coutts Lindsay, who owned the Grosvenor Gallery. He married, at Pancras register office on 25 April 1883, Ada Louise (1862-1940), daughter of Hassard Stammers, photographer; they had a son and three daughters. 
Staples made his name by a succession of group portraits of participants in late Victorian public events. 'Australia v. England' (MCC Museum, Lord's cricket ground), painted jointly with George Augustus Hamilton Barrable (1845-1893), was an imaginary scene of a cricket match at Lord's, composed of 'ideal' teams on both sides, with W. G. Grace and W. W. Read at the wickets, F. R. Spofforth bowling, and fashionable spectators in the foreground, including the prince and princess of Wales and Lily Langtry. Portrait heads of the two elevens appeared in the predella. Exhibited at the Goupil Gallery in June 1887, it was painted for exhibition by Coutts Lindsay in Australia and New Zealand and was reproduced in photogravure. The formula was repeated in 'The Last Shot for the Queen's Prize, Wimbledon' (1889; Worthing Museum and Art Gallery), begun in the summer of 1887 at the invitation of the National Rifle Association, when it was believed that that year would be the last in which the competition would be held in south-west London (the move to Bisley did not in fact occur until 1890). The central figure of Reginald Olliver Warren, queen's prizewinner in 1887, is placed in a crowded scene, also including the prince and princess of Wales. This was accompanied by the 'Queen's Prizemen' (1889; Worthing Museum and Art Gallery), a chronological line of twenty-seven prizewinners. 'Cardinal Manning's Last Reception' (Archbishop's House, Westminster Cathedral), first exhibited in March 1892, showed leading British Roman Catholics, including the duke of Norfolk, Henry Vaughan, Charles Russell, and Henry Matthews. His 'The House of Commons, February 13, 1893: Mr Gladstone Introducing the Second Home Rule Bill', was based on individual portraits of the leading figures made during the subsequent parliamentary recess, and was first shown in May 1894. 
From 1884 Staples and his family lived in Kensington. Letters from his father refer to money problems and the latter's assistance, in particular his involvement in Staples's borrowing money on the strength of 'Australia v. England'. In 1897 he became an art master at the People's Palace in Mile End Road, London, and was also elected a member of the Royal Society of British Artists. He was a member of the Savage Club, and sketched several of its members. An exhibition of his portraits, 'One Hundred Men and Women of the Time', as a souvenir of the century, was held in 1900. His subjects included Phil May (1898; NPG), Edward Carson (1898; NPG), Swinburne (1900; NPG), Whistler (1901; NPG), and Kitchener (1902; NPG). He also exhibited domestic subjects, sometimes including his daughters, and landscapes; 'On the Beach, Broadstairs, Kent' (1899; NG Ire.), combined the two genres. 
In 1904 Staples moved to Belfast, where he exhibited with the Belfast Art Society. He was offered a commission to paint two triptychs on shipbuilding and linen for the new city hall, but only the former was completed because of a disagreement with the council. 'Shipbuilding in Belfast: Liner on Stocks; Turbine Makers; Bangor Boat' (Ulster Museum, Belfast) was completed over a twenty-year period, between 1904 and 1924. When he was living in Belfast he also completed portraits of Winston Churchill, Lord Kitchener, Sir Edward Carson, and the nationalist MP Joseph Devlin. In politics he was a protestant home ruler, and a member of the nationalist United Irish League, though he supported recruitment to the army on the outbreak of the First World War. 
About 1912 Staples took up residence at the family home, Lissan House, where he sketched and painted. The estate had lost considerably by land legislation and the building ventures of his father, and Staples spent many years unsuccessfully endeavouring to re-open the coalfield at Coalisland, which had been closed after a pit explosion. He made various attempts to sell his work in the 1920s to raise funds, offering works for sale to the National Portrait Gallery, and there is evidence that on occasion he had to pawn his pictures. His granddaughter Hazel Dolling (1922-2006) recalled that 'money just slipped through his fingers. So little for his pictures -- four children to educate and only the pawn broker available when the kitty was empty. He was always short of the price of a 'half un' and much of the estate shrank during his guardianship. (Dolling, 32)' He was nearly eighty when he succeeded to the baronetcy on the death, in February 1933, of his elder brother, Sir John Molesworth Staples, eleventh baronet, who had spent much of his life as an inmate of an asylum in Belgium. 
Since his days as an art student Staples had preferred to work in bare feet, and he avoided footwear except on social occasions. His belief in a regime of fresh air and barefoot early morning walks gained him the nickname the Barefoot Baronet. He died at Lissan House, Cookstown, on 18 October 1943 and was buried in the family plot at Lissan parish church. His unpublished diaries provide a continuous record of his engagements and work from 1888 to 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 96448


Wilson, Guy Livingstone (1885-1962), gardener, was born at Knockboy, Skerry, co. Antrim, on 29 January 1885, the son of William Orr Wilson (1834-1906), owner of a small farm, Knowehead, at Coreen, near Broughshane, and also of a drapery business in Ballymena, and his wife, Jemima, 'nee' Barnett (1843-1910). His family was of Scottish covenanting descent, and he had a strong Presbyterian upbringing, one of his brothers becoming a Presbyterian minister. His mother introduced him to daffodils at an early age through plantings of yellow daffodils she made around the farmhouse. One of his clearest childhood memories was an occasion when he asked his mother whether there were any white daffodils, and was surprised by her affirmative reply, although she added that she had not seen any herself. She gave him a copy of 'Ye Original Little Booke of Daffodils' for 1888, a catalogue compiled by the Cork nurseryman and daffodil breeder William Baylor Hartland (1836-1912), and it was this book that set Wilson's future course as a hybridist. He later recalled hours spent poring over Hartland's catalogue, and the inspiration it provided. He was a boarder at Campbell College, Belfast, and Belfast Academy. While still a pupil at Campbell College he had begun hybridizing daffodils, his registration of three cultivars in 1907 indicating that these crosses had been made in his early teens. 
Wilson's intention on leaving school was to become a daffodil grower, but his mother insisted that he join his cousin's cloth manufacturing firm, which owned the Raceview and Knowehead woollen mills at Broughshane. He became the firm's chief dyer, his eye for colour serving him well in his later work with daffodils. His mill duties seldom interfered with his main interest, and in 1920 he gave up the job, saying that he was ashamed to continue to draw money from the firm. Instead, orders for his bulbs enabled him to set up in business as a full-time daffodil hybridist. On land bought at The Knockan, Broughshane, in 1916, he built a house in 1923, which enjoyed a fine view to the Slemish Mountain. He remained unmarried and lived and worked there for the rest of his life. 
Wilson's work in breeding new and progressively improving white daffodils brought him recognition as 'one of the world's leading raisers of new daffodils' ('The Times', 10 Feb 1962). His greatest work was with white trumpet cultivars, beginning in 1922 with 'White Dame'. In 1934 he achieved his major breakthrough with the registration of 'Kanchenjunga', a tetraploid showing great vigour, flower quality, and size; it was the major influence on the future breeding of white trumpet daffodils, and featured in most of Wilson's subsequent successes, which included 'Empress of Ireland' (1952). He also had major success with large and small cupped whites. Although his major interest was in improving whites, other types of daffodils were not neglected, and he bred the 'poeticus' hybrid 'Cantabile' (1932), the yellow and orange 'Armada' (1938), the pioneering reverse bicolour 'Spellbinder' (1944), and the pink and white 'Passionale' (1956). Many of his introductions of all types remained as top exhibition cultivars until the end of the twentieth century. 
Wilson was a familiar figure at daffodil shows in his characteristic knickerbocker outfit, cloth cap, and knitted stockings. In his early twenties, at the Midland Daffodil Society's show at Birmingham, he met many of the best-known daffodil growers, notably the celebrated amateur hybridist George Herbert Engleheart (1851/2-1936). He maintained a twenty-year friendship with another noted breeder, Ian Brodie (1868-1943) of Brodie Castle, Elgin, and among the last visitors to his collection before his death was another great Irish daffodil hybridist, J. Lionel Richardson (1890-1961) of Waterford. He was also a regular contributor to the 'Daffodil Year Book' and other gardening periodicals. 
Wilson received many awards, including the Royal Horticultural Society's Victoria medal of honour (1950) and the honorary degree of master of agriculture from Queen's University, Belfast (1951). He was guest of honour at the first convention of the American Daffodil Society in 1956, when it was acknowledged that 'the genetic strains resulting from wise and painstaking hybridisation by an outstanding plant breeder will necessarily be part of plants and gardens for centuries to come' (Lee, 5). 
Wilson was increasingly frail towards the end of his life and in 1961 his bulb stocks were acquired by P. De Jager & Sons of Marden, Kent. He died of a stroke at the Braid Valley Hospital, Ballymena, co. Antrim, on 5 February 1962. From 1971 a large collection of Wilson cultivars was planted at the University of Ulster, Coleraine, where the Guy L. Wilson Daffodil Garden was named in his memory. Opening the garden in April 1974, his nephew Professor Fergus Wilson described the character traits that had led to Guy Wilson's success: total dedication, infinite patience, and the capacity to learn from experience, which largely made good his lack of formal scientific education. The garden was designated a heritage garden in 1981 and a national collection in 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 96495


Levy, Moses Elias (1782-1854), Jewish reformer and slavery abolitionist, was born in Mogador, Morocco, on 10 July 1782, son of Eliahu Ha-Levi ibn Yuli ('d. c'.1800), a courtier and royal merchant, and his wife, Rachel, one of three wives in a plural marriage. The Ibn Yuli family were elite Sephardi Jews who served as court officials and advisers to the sultans of Morocco. 
In 1790 widespread atrocities directed against the Jewish community forced the family to flee to Gibraltar, where Moses Levy grew to young adulthood. At eighteen Levy -- having dropped the Yuli surname -- left the region for the Danish Virgin Islands, where he established himself as a leading merchant and shipper in Charlotte Amalie, St Thomas. In 1803 he married Hannah Abendanone (1786-1872), the daughter of a local merchant, David Abendanone, and his wife, Rachel. They had four children. Moses Levy's firm of Levy and Benjamin pursued an extensive trade throughout the Caribbean, the Americas, and Europe. 
Influenced by evangelical culture, in 1816 Levy underwent a spiritual epiphany, an event that was at least partially attributable to a rancorous and long-failing marriage. After a rare, formal divorce granted by the Danish king (1818) Levy abandoned a flourishing business in favour of a life devoted to what he called the 'sacred cause' of reform. His plans included an 'asylum' for Jews who were then suffering extensive abuse in post-Napoleonic Europe. His colonization attempts in frontier East Florida, entirely self-funded, were beset by difficulties and in 1825 he departed for England, where he hoped to elicit support. 
In London, Levy took on an activist role during 1827-8 and his writing and oratory became well known in the metropolis. His initial celebrity can be largely attributed to the enthusiastic backing of influential Christians -- particularly the editors of the evangelical newspaper 'The World' as well as the leadership of the Philo-Judaean Society. Philo-Judaeans were ostensibly devoted to the material and educational welfare of London's impoverished Jews but nevertheless harboured conversionist goals. In contrast Levy sought tangible relief for his co-religionists, most of whom dwelt in the East End slums, but steadfastly rejected the tactics of conversion. Striking an unprecedented diplomatic balance, Levy was able to rise within the reform ranks and still retain a staunchly Jewish persona. His prominent Philo-Judaean supporters included the radical evangelical and former tory MP Henry Drummond; the decorative glass manufacturer Apsley Pellatt; and the Anglican clergyman Hugh McNeile, whom Drummond had presented to the rectory of Albury. Levy's first major address before the organization, held at Freemasons' Hall in May 1827, stressed the commonality of the Judaeo-Christian tradition, condemned antisemitism, and challenged Christians to end 'the persecution of contempt' ('The World', 20 June 1827). Positive press coverage presented Levy as an admired orator, philanthropist, and promoter of inter-faith relations. Millennialist zeal contributed to Levy's notoriety and some viewed his actions as 'extraordinary signs of the times' and proof that 'something most singular is approaching' (ibid., 9 January 1828). Previously any public notice among Anglo-Jewry was purposely avoided and debates with gentiles were considered anathema -- a passive strategy that emerged after centuries of Old World oppression. 
Levy's agenda for reform also included the gradual abolition of slavery and he frequently expounded the subject in England. His pamphlet 'A Plan for the Abolition of Slavery, Consistently with the Interests of All Parties Concerned' (1828) was praised for addressing pragmatic issues that other abolitionists avoided. Despite the publication's anonymity Levy's authorship was well known in reform circles. His anti-slavery philosophy evolved from his background as a sugar planter in the New World -- practical experience that few abolitionists could equal. From his perspective immediate emancipation would be calamitous since blacks were not only psychologically injured by slavery but were also hampered by illiteracy. Consequently Levy -- an actual slave-owner in Florida -- advocated universal education for slave children, a system that would stress reading, writing, and science fundamentals as well as farming skills. Freedom would be awarded at the age of twenty-one and each family would be given land for cultivation. Levy envisaged a 'united association' of philanthropic businesses that would put his tenets into practice. 
Despite Levy's rather utopian outlook his ideas received wide recognition. The London 'Literary Chronicle' recommended the pamphlet 'to the serious attention of the legislature and the public' (cited in 'The World', 20 August 1828); 'The World' devoted a lengthy column to the treatise, in which the author's 'great benevolence of soul, and deep and enlightened piety' (ibid., 9 July 1828) were particularly stressed; and a new anti-slavery society, organized at Salvador House, Bishopsgate, London, took up Levy's far-ranging abolitionist creed. 
Levy chaired a series of impassioned and much publicized 'public meetings of the Jews' held at the City of London tavern. These meetings condemned Jewish persecution in Russia -- then one of Britain's prime military allies. He was a prolific writer, contributing articles and letters to the newspapers almost daily. His 'Letters Concerning the Present Condition of the Jews, being a Correspondence between Mr. Forster and Mr. Levy' (1829) was published in London with an evangelical co-author, John Forster of Southend. Levy can be seen as a Jewish social activist without parallel in early nineteenth-century Britain. His outsider status allowed for a certain freedom of action, but his transnational standing also marginalized his contributions after he returned to the United States in the summer of 1828. Full recognition has only been recently accorded to him by historians. 
Upon his return to the slave-holding south, Levy curtailed his abolitionism. But other elements of his reform agenda could be safely broached, and from his residence in St Augustine, Florida, he led the first campaign for free education in public schools in the territory. His appointment as education commissioner by the governor (1831) reflected a growing acceptance of Levy's call to action. However, the onset of the Second Seminole War (1835) and the resultant devastation put an end to his reform career -- as well as his Jewish communal farming settlement, Pilgrimage -- and, in combination with legal challenges to his extensive land holdings, caused great economic hardship. By 1849 Levy had regained much of his former wealth after his claim to nearly 100,000 acres was validated by state and federal courts. Levy died while on a summer excursion to the White Sulphur Springs resort in Virginia on 7 September 1854. The youngest of his children, David L. Yulee (1810-1886), became the first Jew elected to the American senate, representing Florida. 


@@@@@


doc= 96506


McIntosh, Angus (1914-2005), linguistic scholar, was born on 10 January 1914 at Healeyfield, Whitburn Road, Cleadon, co. Durham, the elder son of Kenneth McIntosh, accountant and insurance broker, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Thompson. He was educated at Ryhope grammar school and Oriel College, Oxford, graduating in 1934 with first-class honours in English language and literature. A Harmsworth scholarship at Merton College led in 1936 to a diploma in comparative philology. He spent 1936 to 1938 at Harvard University as a Commonwealth Fund fellow, graduating (in 1937) AM in comparative literature, before taking up a lectureship in the department of English at University College, Swansea. In 1939 he married Barbara Bainbridge (1917-1988), a New Englander. They had two sons and a daughter. His academic career was interrupted by the Second World War. From 1940 to 1945 he was in the army, beginning as a trooper (private) in the tank corps and ending as a major in military intelligence. His most significant war work was at Bletchley Park where, with other academics turned code-breakers, he contributed to the Ultra operation that followed the decryption of the Enigma cipher. His time at Bletchley strongly influenced his thinking about problems in the history of the English language. In particular he foresaw the potential of computers as a tool to aid linguistic analysis. 
From 1946 to 1948 McIntosh was lecturer in medieval English at the University of Oxford: after tutoring at Jesus College and Wadham College he was lecturer then student (fellow) at Christ Church. In 1948 he was appointed Forbes professor of English language and general linguistics at the University of Edinburgh and thereafter his academic career was based in Edinburgh. After the establishment of a separate chair in general linguistics in 1964, he held the new Forbes chair of English language until 1979. From then on, as emeritus professor, he became full-time director of the Middle English Dialect Project, which he had initiated in 1952 and which was the source of his most important work. He had been joined at an early stage of the project by Michael Samuels (later professor of English Language at the University of Glasgow) and subsequently also by Michael Benskin (later professor of older English at the University of Oslo). The culmination of this work came in 1986 with the publication of 'A Linguistic Atlas of Late Medioeval English'. 
During his long academic career in Edinburgh, McIntosh displayed a tremendous breadth of interest, and a creative energy that led to the inception of a number of major enterprises. As well as setting up the Middle English Dialect Project (later the Institute for Historical Dialectology) he was a prime mover in the establishment of the Linguistic Survey of Scotland and of the university's school of Scottish studies and school of applied linguistics. He was a key supporter of the 'Scottish National Dictionary' and the 'Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue'. After his retirement in 1979 he was honoured by two separate Festschriften, celebrating the main areas of scholarship that he fostered in his teaching and research. The first focused on philology and historical linguistics: the dialectology of medieval English, Scots, and Hiberno-English, codicology, textual studies and scribal orthographies, word-geography, onomastics, and the rise of standard English. The second reflected his general linguistic interests in language structure, syntax, style, and metre. In both areas McIntosh not only published himself but was also an inspirational and generous motivator of research. 
McIntosh's intellectual vision led him constantly to forge connections between the disciplines with which he was engaged, and he never lost this capacity for flexible cross-disciplinary thinking. Indeed it was McIntosh's involvement with the modern language Linguistic Survey of Scotland that provided the context for one of his most important insights in the historical study of language. It was already well known that Middle English in its written forms exhibited high degrees of linguistic variation, which had broad correlation with the regional geography of England. What had not been attempted before was the application of the methodology of modern dialect surveys to past stages of the language. McIntosh experimented with the Linguistic Survey data, discovering that it was possible to localize material from informants purely on the evidence of their linguistic forms. The method McIntosh devised became known as the 'fit-technique', and it revolutionized dialect research in historical linguistics. 
McIntosh served on numerous academic councils, committees, and editorial advisory boards, and was awarded many honours. From 1977 to 1989 he was president (and thereafter honorary president) of the Scottish Text Society. He was a member of the council of the Early English Text Society and a foreign member of the Finnish Academy of Sciences and Letters. He held honorary doctorates from the universities of Poznan (1972), Durham (1980), Glasgow (1994), and Edinburgh (2004). He was a fellow both of the British Academy (which awarded him its Sir Israel Gollancz prize in 1989) and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. After his death in 2005 his name was added to the Institute for Historical Dialectology annual lecture, and in 2007 the Scottish Text Society also established an annual lecture in his name. His academic legacy included a corps of active researchers, at the University of Edinburgh and elsewhere, pursuing work in the tradition whose foundation he laid. 
McIntosh was inspirational not just as an academic. He combined charm, wit, and determination with the capacity for making others feel the possibility of success. He led by example and his interests were always translated into action. His entry in 'Who's Who' listed as his recreations gardening, painting, and music, in all of which he was, at one time or another, a proficient practitioner. He was also an accomplished and published poet. If the size of his academic projects was on a monumental and serious scale, his poems tended towards economy -- haikus, tankas, limericks, and clerihews -- delighting in the whimsical nature of language. Following the death of his first wife, in 1988 he married Karina Williamson, 'nee' Side ('b'. 1928), the widow of Colin Williamson, a fellow of Jesus College, Oxford. In the last years of his life McIntosh continued to enjoy the company of his friends and large, far-flung, extended family. He died peacefully at Liberton Hospital, Edinburgh, on 26 October 2005 of kidney failure and renovascular disease. His funeral in the kirk of the Canongate, Edinburgh, on 3 November 2005 was a glorious celebration of his life, character, and achievements. He was buried in the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his second wife, Karina, and the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 96513


Hill, Albert Edwin (1927-2005), equestrian and farmer, was born on 7 February 1927 at Birch Farm, Swimbridge, Devon, the son of Hubert Hill, farmer, and his wife, Margery Evelyn, 'nee' Thorne. His involvement with horses began at an early age. He is said to have followed the Devon and Somerset staghounds as a four-year-old, ridden his pony to Swimbridge primary school from the age of five, and competed regularly in local gymkhanas and showjumping classes throughout his childhood. He attended secondary school at West Buckland. He left full-time education during the Second World War, at the age of fifteen, and thereafter helped his father on the family farm. Wartime conditions meant that all available land was under the plough and Bertie (as he was always known) took charge of the shire horse team. The war impinged on the young man in other ways: as a member of the Home Guard he undertook night patrols of Exmoor on horseback. An accomplished horseman, he became an amateur jockey when the war ended, riding successfully in local point-to-point races. 
Hill's exploits on the race field brought him to the attention of Captain Tony Collings, owner of the Porlock Vale Riding School in north Devon and the man charged with assembling and training the British three-day event team for the Olympic games in Helsinki in 1952. Originally a discipline closely associated with the cavalry, eventing, or combined training as it was then known, had finally been opened to British civilian riders. Bertie Hill already had the riding skills to compete in the cross-country and showjumping phases and an intensive schooling in dressage enabled him to join the Olympic team, one of the first two civilians to do so (the other was Reg Hindley). Riding Sir John Miller's Stella, he finished seventh. 
The next four years established Hill as one of the top equestrians in Europe. With Major Laurence Rook and Major Frank Weldon he formed the British team that won gold medals at the European championships in 1953 and 1954, picking up the individual gold at Basel on Crispin on the latter occasion. In the same year he began to compete in events on Countryman, the horse with which he became most closely associated. Purchased for $90 in 1952 as an ostensibly unbreakable Irish-born colt, Countryman proved to be a good hunter and point-to-pointer under Hill's patient tuition, and made his international eventing debut in 1955. Once again the British team of Hill, Weldon, and Rook won gold at the European championships held at Windsor, their third consecutive triumph: Hill and Countryman won individual bronze. The horse was then sold to a syndicate that included the queen, the queen mother, and the tenth duke of Beaufort, but Hill continued to partner him, gaining fourth place at the Badminton horse trials in spring 1956. The pair then became part of the British team that won gold at the Olympic games, the equestrian events of which took place in June at Stockholm. 
During this period Hill began to farm in his own right at Great Rapscott, South Molton, less than 10 miles from his childhood home; he is said to have purchased half of his stock with the proceeds from the sale of Countryman. On 3 February 1954 he married (Clarice) Mary Holland, a 22-year-old farmer's daughter from the nearby parish of Fremington. They had a son, Antony, and a daughter, Sarah. In between major international events Hill continued to hunt, to exhibit horses at shows, and to compete in national horse trials. He never won at Badminton, a surprising omission from such a fine equestrian career. 
In 1960, when the Olympics were held in Rome, Hill was again selected for the eventing team, the first British rider to compete in three Olympiads. Partnering Wild Venture, he rode a clear round in the showjumping but bad luck and misjudgements in the earlier cross-country phase left the British competitors 0.5 points outside the bronze medal position. Errors in the preparation and management of the British team in 1960 would provide valuable experience for Hill during a later stage of his life. 
Following his retirement from international competition Hill, with his wife, set up the Rapscott School of Equitation at their farm. The first of its kind in north Devon, it became the training ground for countless British riders, sometimes to the detriment of his own equestrian success. Lying second after the cross-country in his final three-day event at Badminton in 1970, he was so concerned with supporting the ten students he had brought with him that he jumped the wrong fence and was eliminated. Among those who benefited from his tuition were Princess Anne, the princess royal, and Mark Phillips. In 1967 he was appointed official trainer to the British international eventing team, bringing to the post his experience gained through competition at the highest level. Major successes under his guidance included the European championships of 1967 and 1969, the world championships in 1970, and, most significantly, the Olympic games of 1968 in Mexico, where the British team of Derek Allhusen, Jane Bullen, Ben Jones, and Richard Meade won gold. 
Bertie Hill -- a horseman, a racing enthusiast, and a countryman who was passionate about traditional rural pursuits -- lived his entire life on and around Exmoor. From 1975 to 1997 he was master of the Dulverton West foxhounds. A continued involvement with horses also led to judging classes at the same local shows in which he had competed as a young man. Having handed over the running of Great Rapscott to his son Antony, he died of heart disease on 5 August 2005 at Eastleigh, 91 East Street, South Molton, after a long battle with Parkinson's disease. He was survived by his wife and children. In June 2006 he was inducted into the British Horse Society's equestrian hall of fame. 


@@@@@


doc= 96567


Muir, (Isabella) Helen Mary (1920-2005), biochemist, was born on 20 August 1920 at Naini Tal, India, the daughter of G. B. F. (Basil) Muir, a member of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Gladys Helen Mary, 'nee' Stack. Always known as Helen, she was educated by her mother in India up to the age of ten and then at boarding schools in Montreux, Switzerland, and in England, including Downe House in Berkshire. She gained entry to Somerville College, Oxford, to read medicine in 1940. Influenced by her tutor, Dorothy Hodgkin, she switched to study chemistry, and graduated with a second-class degree in 1943 then DPhil in 1947 for a thesis supervised by Sir Robert Robinson on the chemical synthesis of penicillin. After a year at the Dunn School of Pathology in Oxford (1947-8) she moved to the National Institute of Medical Research in Mill Hill, where she worked in the biochemistry department with Albert Neuberger from 1948 to 1954, on the metabolic origin of carbon and nitrogen atoms in haem and later in collagen. Her work on collagen led her to develop an interest in connective tissues and arthritis, and she moved to the department of medicine headed by Stanley Peart at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, from 1954 to 1966, where her work on cartilage identified the link between chondroitin sulphate and protein and established the basic structure of proteoglycan, which is a major component of joint cartilage. This area of research formed the focus of her scientific career. 
Muir was of striking appearance and matched the description of a fiery redhead. She had many male admirers, but was never married. In addition to scientific research the other strong interest of her life was horse riding. She was a member of the Bedale hunt in Yorkshire, where her parents had an estate and had built a house, Langlands, near Bedale. She suffered a bad riding accident in the 1950s, but this never detracted from her enthusiasm for riding and she continued until ill health forced her to stop when she was seventy-five. In London, where she worked for most of her career, she lived for many years in East Sheen and rode in nearby Richmond Park. 
Much of Muir's career was spent at the Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology in Hammersmith, which was the world's first specialist rheumatology institute, funded by the Arthritis Research Campaign. She was recruited as head of the biochemistry division in 1966 and went on to become director from 1977 until her retirement in 1990. Her group at the Kennedy carried out fundamental work on cartilage function, with novel work on the supramolecular organization of proteoglycans and studies on cartilage degeneration in experimental osteoarthritis. This work was fundamental in establishing that degenerative joint diseases were not just the product of 'wear and tear' associated with old age, but involved an active disease process. Muir's major achievement was thus in moving research in joint diseases from an era of observational descriptive pathology to the molecular and cellular analysis of the processes underlying these diseases. 
Muir's work at the Kennedy Institute on cartilage degeneration and osteoarthritis was internationally recognized. She was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1977 and a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1989. She was appointed CBE in 1981 for her contribution to medical research. She also received many other prestigious awards, including the Heberden medal of the British Society for Rheumatology (1976), the Feldberg Foundation award (1977), the Bunim medal of the American Rheumatism Association (1978), the Neil Hamilton Fairley medal of the Royal College of Physicians (1981), the Ciba medal of the Biochemical Society (1981), and the Steindler award of the American Orthopaedic Research Society (1982). She was also made a DSc of Oxford in 1973 and received honorary degrees from Brunel and Strathclyde universities and the University of Edinburgh, where her great-grandfather Sir William Muir had been principal. 
Muir was well known for speaking her mind in a clear and objective way and she became the first woman member of the council of the Medical Research Council (1973-7). She was also later appointed a trustee of the Wellcome Trust (1982-90) and played a major part developing the trust's role in the support of UK biomedical research. She was able to promote the development of research on the role of extracellular matrix in health and disease, including the formation of the Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research at the University of Manchester, which she opened in 1995. 
Muir continued her interest in science and medicine into her retirement in Yorkshire, where ecological and environmental concerns led her to fit solar panelling to her house and to work to conserve the habitats of local wildlife. She suffered from spinal stenosis later in life, which restricted her mobility, and she survived breast cancer over several years before succumbing to it on 28 November 2005, at her home, Langlands House, Hornby, near Bedale, Yorkshire. She was buried in the local church at Hornby. 


@@@@@


doc= 96568


Fisher, Sir Henry Arthur Pears (1918-2005), barrister, judge, and college head, was born at The Hall, Repton, Derbyshire, on 20 January 1918, the eldest of six sons of the Revd Geoffrey Francis Fisher (1887-1972), then headmaster of Repton School, and his wife, Rosamond Chevallier, 'nee' Forman, daughter of the Revd Arthur Forman, a former master at Repton. Geoffrey Fisher later became bishop of Chester, bishop of London, and finally, in 1945, archbishop of Canterbury; he was made a life peer, as Baron Fisher of Lambeth, on retirement in 1961. On both sides of the family Fisher was descended from long lines of clerics and schoolmasters. His paternal great-great-grandfather, great-grandfather, and grandfather were all rectors of Higham on the Hill, Leicestershire, in continuous succession from 1792 to 1910. His great-grandfather on his mother's side was Steuart Adolphus Pears, the dynamic headmaster of Repton from 1854 to 1874, who created the modern school, and his great-great-grandfather was the Revd James Pears, headmaster of Bath grammar school. It might have been expected that with such an ancestry Harry Fisher would himself have gone into the church or become a schoolmaster. In the event, in his public life at least, he manifested a total lack of religious belief. Nor did he feel any call to be a schoolmaster. The fact that three of his brothers did become headmasters of public schools sufficiently perpetuated the family tradition. 
Fisher was educated at Marlborough College (where his father had also been a pupil and, for a short period, a master) then Christ Church, Oxford, where he won the Gaisford Greek prose prize in 1937 and obtained a first in classical moderations in 1938. The advent of the Second World War compelled him after one and a half years to take a war-shortened (unclassified) degree. In 1940 he joined the Leicestershire regiment. While an officer cadet he displayed his characteristic independence of mind by refusing to attend church parade on the ground that he was an agnostic. He was posted to India and served also in Burma and Malaya. He went to the Staff College in Quetta in 1943, became a GSO2 in that year and GSO1 at the headquarters of the Fourteenth Army in 1945. He was mentioned in dispatches 'in recognition of gallant and distinguished services in Burma' ('London Gazette', 9 May 1946). 
Demobilized in 1946 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, Fisher decided to read for the bar and was called by the Inner Temple in 1947. The previous year he had entered the prize fellowship examination at All Souls College. He applied as a candidate in law, notwithstanding the fact that he had not read for a law degree. (A college tradition holds that he received from an Oxford law don a reading list and expert advice as to the type of questions that might be put by the law examiners.) His successful election in November 1946 began a long connection with the college, in various different categories of fellowship. Between 1961 and 1966 he held the office of estates bursar, an appointment that coincided with most of the period when he was heavily engaged as a silk, appearing regularly in court, and giving advice in weighty matters. On 18 December 1948, at the Church of Our Most Holy Redeemer, Chelsea, he had married Felicity Sutton, a 26-year-old artist, and daughter of Eric Sutton, author. They had one son and three daughters. The marriage was extremely happy and Felicity gave Harry continuous support in all his activities. 
Fisher was a junior counsel from 1946 to 1960. Much of the work was of a standard commercial type, though some specialist cases came his way. Thus when the coal industry was nationalized he became involved in claims for compensation for expropriation. Another unusual area in which he was briefed concerned the liability of the Air Ministry as the owner of rectorial property to pay a share of the costs of repairing the chancel of the local parish church ('Chivers & Sons Ltd v. Air Ministry', 1955). Fisher, who was briefed by the Treasury solicitor, always claimed that he was instructed in this abstruse matter because he was the son of the archbishop of Canterbury and could be assumed to be a master of ecclesiastical law. Sadly this was not true and Fisher had to carry out much antiquarian research in his attempt (ultimately unsuccessful) to protect the Air Ministry from the claim. 
In 1960 Fisher took silk. His first major brief arrived out of the blue in January 1961. He had about ten days in which to prepare for a case in the restrictive practices court on behalf of the cement manufacturers. He was ready to open the case on time and after a three-week hearing won the case. It brought Fisher's name to the attention of solicitors, and he became much in demand. However, he did not confine himself to his own work but deployed his energy and skills on behalf of the profession. After service on the Bar Council he was chairman of the bar from 1966 to 1968. He was also recorder of Canterbury from 1962. He was asked to act as counsel in one case where two senior silks had in succession returned the brief on accepting appointment to the bench (first Fred Lawton, next Stanley Rees). When Fisher met the client he observed: 'You have been unfortunate in your choice of counsel', to which came the reply, 'We don't have to worry with you. Your clerk says you will never be a judge' (private information). Though true for the particular case this prophecy was not fulfilled. 
At the beginning of 1968 Fisher accepted appointment as a High Court judge, in the Queen's Bench Division. He did not take the oath on appointment. Instead he affirmed. His tenure of office was short and there was hardly time for him to make his mark on the law. He was in any event unsympathetic to innovative decision-making by judges. Law reform he thought was a matter for the Law Commission and parliament. However, in July 1968 he was the junior member in a Court of Appeal decision that quashed the conviction for obscenity entered against the publishers of 'Last Exit to Brooklyn'. This case sounded the death knell for prosecutions on the ground of obscenity of books with literary merit (real or plausibly claimed). 
As a judge Fisher spent much of his time out of London on circuit. During the day he would try criminal cases and in the evening he was expected to entertain official guests in the company of his fellow judges. This lifestyle proved to be totally unsatisfying for him. In particular he sorely missed the intellectual challenge of arguing complex cases as counsel. He concluded that he had made a mistake and resigned from his judicial appointment at the end of July 1970. There is reason to believe that his first preference would have been to return to practice at the bar but there was a convention at the time that prevented this, so instead he took up a directorship of J. Henry Schroder Wagg, the merchant bankers, at the invitation of his friend Gordon Richardson (later governor of the Bank of England). Ignoring the traditional advice, 'Never explain, never apologize', he wrote a letter to many of his friends to explain his decision: 'I am not resigning on the ground of ill health. I am not resigning in protest about anything. I have not been asked to resign. Nothing disreputable has occurred. I am resigning because I find judicial work uncongenial, and I do not enjoy the life which Judges are expected to lead... I find a Judge's life a dull life, and I have found myself becoming dull as a result. The art of advocacy is a fascinating one to practise, but to sit and listen day after day to other people's advocacy I find a wearisome ordeal.' He had given much consideration to the question: 'Ought I in the public interest to disregard my own personal feelings and stay on the bench?', and had concluded that 'there is no sufficient reason' (letter of 1 August 1970). 
Within the legal profession Fisher's resignation caused emotions ranging from shock and surprise to indignation and hostility. A critical article in the 'Solicitors Law Journal' deplored the precedent Fisher's move created and concluded that 'It should not be too much for the country to ask that, in return for the invaluable constitutional guarantee of security in their appointments, High Court judges should themselves refrain from resigning to take other jobs unless circumstances are exceptional' ('Current topics', 'Solicitors Law Journal', 114/32, 7 Aug 1970, 593). By contrast the 'New Law Journal' reacted with calm and restraint, observing that 'A judge is entitled like anyone else, to make his life where he honestly believes he can best be himself' ('On retiring from the High Court bench', 'New Law Journal', 120, 13 Aug 1970, 746-7). The controversy took some time to die down, however. As late as 19 November 1970 Viscount Dilhorne, a former lord chancellor, took the opportunity of a debate on the 'Courts Bill' to criticize as 'inexcusable' the action of any judge who resigned in order to take up a career in business: 'having embarked on a judicial career, one is under a moral obligation to do the job and not to give it up in favour of one that appears more attractive' ('Hansard 5L', 312.1288, 19 Nov 1970). 
Fisher remained with Schroders for five years, also serving on the board of Schroder International and other companies, including Thomas Tilling and Equity and Law Life Assurance. Later in his career he returned to the City as chairman of the appeal committee of the Takeover Panel (1981-7). He was also involved in self-regulation in the City in his capacity as founder chairman of the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation. 
Notwithstanding the disfavour with which Fisher continued to be regarded by much of the legal establishment after he left the bench, the government was quick to appreciate that there was now available an individual of exceptional skills who could be called upon to undertake the role of chairman in difficult inquiries. The first such appointment came the year after Fisher ceased to be a judge. In March 1971 he was asked by the ministers for social services and for employment and productivity to head a committee to investigate and report on abuse of social security benefits. By October 1972 the committee had produced a painstaking report that included eighty-eight recommendations aimed at minimizing the number of benefit frauds. Although, as with any committee report, it is difficult to spot the fingerprints of any particular member, a couple of the recommendations may be noted as exemplifying Fisher's approach in public affairs. The committee recommended that the departments should not be inhibited in their efforts to detect those working while drawing benefits 'by fear of criticism for excessive zeal', but that the departments 'should not take any positive steps to encourage the general public to inform' ('The Independent', 14 April 2005). The first recommendation advocated right conduct by public officials notwithstanding the risk of criticism; the second abhorred the creation of a Stasi-like informer society. 
In the Confait inquiry (1975-7) Fisher was asked by the crown to examine a gravely flawed prosecution that had resulted in the conviction of three young men, all for arson, one for murder, and another for manslaughter. On a reference by the home secretary the Court of Appeal, presided over by Lord Scarman, had quashed all the convictions. In the ensuing investigation Fisher heard evidence from numerous witnesses and scrutinized a mass of documents. He concluded that there had been blatant disregard by the police of the 'judges' rules' (designed to secure fair procedures for the interrogation of suspects). His cogent report recommended radical changes in the system. This led directly to the appointment of a royal commission under Sir Cyril Philips and thence to the enactment of the 'Police and Criminal Evidence Act' 1984 and the 'Prosecution of Offences Act' 1985. The following year the Crown Prosecution Service was established. Fisher's report laid the groundwork for all these reforms. However, it did not satisfy all who read it. Sir Louis Blom-Cooper QC, who had represented the three young men at the Fisher inquiry, commented after his death that Fisher should have held on the facts that there had been no sustainable case against any of the accused. 
In 1979 Fisher was asked by Lloyd's of London to conduct an inquiry into self-regulation at the institution. The following year he produced a seminal report recommending the adoption of a new constitution he had drafted. One aspect of this was the creation of a new governing council. Effective disciplinary machinery was also put in place. A novel feature was a clause protecting council members from claims of negligence; liability was made to depend on bad faith. However, the recommendation to which the greatest financial consequences attached was one to the effect that all Lloyd's brokers should over a five-year period divest themselves of their underwriting interests, on the ground that there was an inherent conflict of interest between the two roles. When Lloyd's presented a private bill to parliament to implement what Fisher had proposed this particular recommendation was omitted. But the House of Commons insisted on its inclusion and the necessary amendments were made before the bill was enacted. 
In 1975 a new opportunity for service had presented itself. On the retirement of Sir Isaiah Berlin, the first president of Wolfson College, Oxford (a college for graduate students, many of them from overseas and many married), Fisher was elected as his successor. This proved to be a brilliant appointment. The Fishers got to know all the students by name and what each was studying. It was a point of pride with Fisher to acquire sufficient knowledge of such subjects as mathematics and physics that he was able to discuss the research projects being undertaken by all members of the college. An exceptional degree of pastoral care was displayed by the Fishers to these students and their families. No visitor to the college could fail to be struck by the warmth of these relationships. 
Fisher also had a lifelong interest in scientific developments. It was very appropriate that Lord Sherfield should in 1973 have introduced him to Imperial College as a member of the governing body. From 1975 to 1988 he was its much-respected chairman. Another role he undertook was the presidency of the Howard League for Penal Reform (in succession to Lord Gardiner) from 1983 to 1991. He was a successful fund-raiser on behalf of the league and a gracious host at its annual September conference in Oxford. 
Fisher was one of the most brilliant lawyers to appear in the generation after the Second World War. His time on the bench was short, but his career also straddled the City, public service, and the world of academe in a manner for which it would be hard to find a parallel. Such leisure as his restless spirit allowed him was spent with his wife, Felicity, and children and friends, or at the keyboard. His passion was J. S. Bach, whose works he performed with great ability and affection. The music of the romantic composers generally received a cool reception. 
For the last few years of his life Fisher lived quietly in retirement at Marlborough, Wiltshire, where he had been a member of the governing council of the school for many years. He walked on the downs, read, listened to and played music, and with his wife travelled abroad. She supported him with the help of the children during his last painful illness. He died at his home in Marlborough on 10 April 2005, following a stroke, and was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96582


Medawar, Jean Shinglewood, Lady Medawar (1913-2005), campaigner for family planning, was born the single survivor of twins on 7 February 1913 at 36 Earls Court Square, Kensington, London, the first of three surviving children of Charles Henry Shinglewood Taylor (1882-1935), general practitioner, and his wife, Katherine Leslie, 'nee' Paton, who came from a family of cotton traders based in Liverpool and Washington, DC. She was brought up in Cambridge. Her father had a distinguished military record as a medical officer at Gallipoli. Her mother had been deaf since childhood and was described as reclusive yet suffering periods of hyperactivity. Jean's aunt, Mary (her mother's elder sister), had inherited a large part of the Paton cotton fortune, and was a dominant influence on Jean's family and her upbringing and paid for her schooling: middle-class Edwardian values were inculcated and adhered to. After attending Benenden School in Kent she won a scholarship to read zoology at Somerville College, Oxford, where Solly Zuckerman was her tutor. She graduated with a third-class degree in 1936. 
At Oxford Jean Taylor met Peter Brian Medawar (1915-1987), a brilliant, good-looking zoology student, the Brazilian-born son of a Lebanese commercial agent and his English wife. Jean's declared intention to marry him evoked strong, prejudiced resistance: Peter had neither 'background' nor money, and would not be received into society; her mother warned of the danger of having 'coloured' babies; Aunt Mary stopped her personal allowance. They nevertheless married in Oxford on 27 February 1937, and during the war Jean kept house in Banbury Road, where the first of their four children was born. In the summer of 1940 a twin-engine bomber crashed into their neighbour's garden, a devastating experience for the whole family. The pilot survived with 60 per cent burns and Peter, who was then working in Howard Florey's laboratory, was asked to see the patient, to offer any bright ideas to save his life. He later admitted that this striking event turned him towards transplantation biology. That sudden change of academic direction permanently changed Jean's life too: until his illness in 1969 her husband's compulsive commitment to research in immunology and to science (which won him a Nobel prize in 1960 and a knighthood in 1965, besides many other honours) gave him relatively little time for his family. His promotion to professor at Birmingham in 1947 and University College, London, in 1951 brought Jean a busy social life among a rapidly expanding circle of scientists who came to work with him, and she undertook many foreign visits with him. 
Following an insightful tour to Russia in 1955 Jean Medawar started work in a family planning clinic in Islington and subsequently as public relations officer for the Family Planning Association (FPA). She got to know Margaret Pyke, the chairwoman, and her son David Pyke, intimately, the latter a productive relationship that continued for more than forty years. On Margaret Pyke's death in 1967 Jean Medawar succeeded her as the second chairwoman of the FPA. Influenced by her friend Barbara Ward, she brought to the field a new emphasis on sustainable development, conservation, and population control in the face of 'the natural conspiracy in favour of fecundity' (P. Medawar and J. Medawar, 'Aristotle to Zoos', 1983, 218). Her primary message was that exponential population growth would cause overcrowding, drought, and starvation, that people had to act responsibly to control birth rates, and that this message had to be taught at all levels of society, starting with the children. 
Jean Medawar had unusual skill in enlisting famous and influential supporters of the FPA. One vote of thanks began, 'As all of you know, Jean is remarkably good at letting other people get her own way' (private information). By 1967 she and David Pyke had set up the Margaret Pyke Centre for Training in Family Planning. In 1981 she founded Common Ground International, 'a group of leaders who work... towards keeping a balance between people and resources' ('The Guardian', 10 May 2005), which hosted a major exhibition in the Natural History Museum. For 'Lifeclass', an audio-visual pack based on Ward's 'Only One Earth' (1972), she quickly persuaded a galaxy of bishops, scientists, artists, and naturalists to back the project, and the commentary was spoken by Sir Peter Scott, David Bellamy, and David Attenborough. On a trip abroad, while planning an updated videotape for 'Lifeclass', she 'accidentally' tripped over the outstretched legs of John Cleese, whom she then persuaded to support the production of the tape, and to appear as lead actor in it. She retired from the chair of the FPA in 1975. 
In 1969 Peter Medawar suffered a physically incapacitating stroke, the first of several which eventually caused his death in 1987. For nineteen years she supported him and fought for him as he continued writing a series of seminal books and lectures on immunology and the philosophy of science. At international conferences and in their large circle of friends the pair were revered for their tenacious determination, he a tall figure, bent but dignified, she a graceful yet resilient helpmate, always clearing his path, organizing his transport, and helping him prepare and deliver his lectures. They both continued to enjoy the company of many leading intellectuals and musicians at their home in Hampstead and abroad. Together they wrote several publications, including 'Aristotle to Zoos: a Philosophical Dictionary of Zoology' (1983). Jean Medawar described her life with Peter in her remarkable autobiography, 'A Very Decided Preference' (1990), which complemented his own life history, 'Memoir of a Thinking Radish' (1986). Together the stories described a rare personal and intellectual synergism. They were united by a conviction of the need for progress (a theme that recurred constantly in their writings) and a steadfast refusal to bow to adversity. 
After her husband's death Jean Medawar continued to write, and in 2000 published, with David Pyke, 'Hitler's Gift: Scientists Who Fled Nazi Germany', which illustrated vividly the loss to Germany and gain to Britain and other countries that resulted from Hitler's antisemitic policies. She died at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, on 3 May 2005, of bronchopneumonia following a stroke, and was survived by her four children (two sons and two daughters). She was buried at Alfriston churchyard, Sussex, on 17 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 96583


Jenifer Margaret Hart (1914-2005), civil servant and historian, was born on 29 January 1914 in Chelsea, London, the third of five daughters of Sir John Fischer Williams (1870-1947), barrister, and later a member of the British panel on the permanent court of arbitration at The Hague, and his wife, (Eleanor) Marjorie Hay, 'nee' Murray (1880-1961), a descendant of John Murray, third duke of Atholl. She was educated at the Lycee Moliere and then the Cours Fenelon in Paris, at Downe House, Newbury, and at Somerville College, Oxford, where she graduated with a first-class degree in 1935. She joined the Communist Party later that year. In 1936 she entered the civil service, having been placed third out of 493 candidates. She chose to work in the Home Office, initially in the children's division, before becoming private secretary to Sir Alexander Maxwell in 1939. She subsequently worked as secretary to the committee hearing appeals against detention orders. She was given special dispensation to remain in the civil service after her marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 96589


Mills, Sir John Lewis Ernest Watts (1908-2005), actor, was born at Watts Naval Training School for Boys (a branch of Dr Barnardo's Homes) in Bintree, North Elmham, Norfolk, on 22 February 1908, the son of Lewis Mills (1867-1953), schoolmaster, and later headmaster of the village school at Belton, Suffolk, and his wife, Edith Catherine, 'nee' Baker (1868-1935). He had one sister, Edith Mabel, who later changed her name to Annette ['see 'Mills, Annette (1894-1955)]. Fourteen years older than John, Annette was a dancer and it was she who first encouraged his desire to be an actor. He was educated first at his father's school in Belton, then at Balham grammar school, London, followed by Sir John Leman High School, Beccles, Suffolk, and finally Norwich High School for Boys, where at first, being small for his age, he was bullied. On leaving school, where he had distinguished himself more on the playing field than in the classroom, he was forced to supplement family finances by taking a job as a clerk in Ipswich. During this time he joined both the Felixstowe Players and the local amateur dramatic society. With limited support from his father, now separated from his mother (who, like Annette, was enthusiastic about his chances in the theatre), he set off for London and what eventually became one of the longest careers in British show business; not, however, before a brief, unsuccessful stint as a door-to-door salesman for Sanitas Company, toiletry suppliers. 
Mills began his stage career as a dancer, first appearing at the New Cross Empire with Frances Day, then in the chorus of 'The Five O'Clock Girl' at the London Hippodrome in 1929. (Over forty years later, in 1973, he delighted theatre audiences with a complicated tap routine in a production of 'The Good Companions'.) Joining a travelling company called The Quaints, he embarked in the same year on a tour of the Far East that would introduce two very influential people into his life. In Tientsin, China, he met Mary Hayley Bell ['see below'], his doubles partner at tennis and, twelve years later, his second wife. The other meeting was professionally crucial: in Singapore, Noel Coward saw the company's performance of 'Journey's End', and was impressed enough with the young actor playing Raleigh to have him in mind for roles in 'Cavalcade' (1931) and the musical revue 'Words and Music' (1932). 
Mills retained a lifelong love of the theatre and returned to it throughout his career, but it is as a film actor that he made a greater mark. It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that he became the quintessential British film star. In the 1930s he appeared in twenty films, starting with the Jessie Matthews musical 'The Midshipmaid' (1932), and perhaps most notably including 'Brown on Resolution' (1935; reissued as 'Forever England'), a naval adventure derived from C. S. Forester, and Mills's first major starring role in films. Most of his other films of the decade were unmemorable, though he was a likeable hero in 'The Ghost Camera' (1933), drew engagingly on his song-and-dance skills in 'Car of Dreams' (1935), and touchingly partnered Nova Pilbeam in the historical drama 'Tudor Rose' (1936). On 12 March 1932 he had married the actress Aileen Cynthia Raymond (1910-2005), with whom he had acted on the Far East tour. She was the daughter of George Raymond, medical practitioner. By the late 1930s the marriage had failed, and Mills re-met Mary Hayley Bell, now in England and recovering from a broken romance. They eventually married on 16 January 1941, after Mills and his first wife had divorced. 
The Second World War made Mills a star. He had been coming along quite agreeably in the 1930s without making a great impression: pleasant-looking rather than handsome, shorter (at about 5 feet 6 inches) than most leading men, adept across several genres rather than a compelling hero in any particular one. Invalided out of the Monmouthshire regiment with an ulcer in 1941, he was lucky enough to be in a series of popular, prestigious films in which he established a new sort of Everyman hero in British cinema. He may have lacked the dash of Robert Donat or the suavity of David Niven or the sensual menace of James Mason, but what he did convey was an essential decency and loyalty, a reliability in crisis that was especially reassuring in the early 1940s, a modesty of bearing (making his slight frame work for him), and a courage that was the more impressive for being so understated. There was a chap-next-door ordinariness about his persona that struck some very responsive chords. 
Noel Coward, whom Mills claimed to have dubbed the Master, wrote the role of Shorty Blake with Mills in mind when he was preparing 'In Which We Serve' (1942), a tribute to Lord Mountbatten's ship the 'Kelly', which had been sunk in the eastern Mediterranean. Mills's working-class boy who becomes a hero struck a true note in a film whose restraint later came to seem somewhat theatrical, and this was also true of his Billy Mitchell, who becomes a naval officer in the film of Coward's 'This Happy Breed' (1944). Mills co-starred to convincing effect in both with Kay Walsh, then the wife of David Lean, who directed both and who would be a continuing influence in Mills's career. There were several other wartime films for Mills, including the submarine adventure 'We Dive at Dawn' (1943) and the air force drama 'The Way to the Stars' (1945), both for the director Anthony Asquith. The latter film, in production during the last months of the war but not released until after its end, was one of the most affecting films of the period, with Mills's reading of John Pudney's poem 'For Johnny' to a comrade's widow (Rosamund John) a quietly emotional highlight. In 'Waterloo Road' (1945), he played a soldier who goes absent without leave to protect his wife from the unwelcome attentions of a spiv-like lothario and cemented his reputation as the ordinary man who can rise to the occasion. In a very cleverly staged fight, short, slight Mills convincingly dealt with the much taller and heavier Stewart Granger. 
It was as though these wartime roles had been preparing Mills for the post-war British cinema in which a new realism would predominate, at least in those films that brought most prestige to the industry. Mason and Granger would shortly defect to Hollywood but Mills remained a British star, only rarely venturing into American films. In his first post-war role, he was a definitive Pip in Lean's classic version of 'Great Expectations' (1946). When, at the film's end, he rips down the curtains in Miss Havisham's decaying mansion, this can be seen as symbolic of shedding new light on ossified traditions -- and announcing a new sort of hero, not merely one who has risen in society but also one who will not be satisfied merely to perpetuate the past. In his next (and contrasting) post-war role, in 'The October Man' (1947), Mills played Jim Ackland, a brain-damaged man who fears he may have killed someone: the murder inquiry is secondary to the 'internalised battle involving Jim's psychological problem' (Mayer, 102). Mills's versatility was being subtly confirmed in such roles, which allowed mutations on the Everyman persona without obliterating it. He might have made 'Scott of the Antarctic' (1948) a less ponderous paean if he had been allowed to explore Scott's character in more human detail, but it was a high-profile film of its day and chosen for the royal film performance of the year. He was more interesting as Bassett, the groom, in 'The Rocking Horse Winner' (1950), and as the meek little protagonist in 'The History of Mr Polly' (1949), both of which he produced. Years later he said, 'I wasn't a very good producer because I was always trying to get on the floor and I didn't really like the office work' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema', 415). 
The 1950s are often regarded, perhaps unfairly, as a dullish decade in British cinema, with too many films dealing in 'Boy's Own' fashion with the war. Certainly Mills came in for his share of these, but he nevertheless brought his effortless-seeming authority to bear in such wartime adventures as 'The Colditz Story' (1955), 'Above Us the Waves' (1955), 'I Was Monty's Double' (1958), and 'Dunkirk' (1958). During this period he was unobtrusively shading into character roles, in such films as 'The Long Memory' (1952), as a man released after twelve years in prison for a murder he didn't commit; 'The End of the Affair' (1955), as a shabby private detective; 'Tiger Bay' (1959), the film that made an instant star of his younger daughter, Hayley, and in which he played the police superintendent; and, best of all the war-based adventures, 'Ice Cold in Alex' (1958), as the captain battling alcoholism and north African minefields. Earlier in the decade his association with David Lean reached another peak with his perfect incarnation of the bootmaker Willie Mossop in 'Hobson's Choice' (1954): in this Mills most effectively married the twin aspects of his screen image, as both little man and hero of a kind. 
The British 'new wave' of the late 1950s and early 1960s passed Mills by, but he managed to give some of his most subtly honed performances in the character roles that prolifically did come his way. Two studies in resentful military types further attested to his protean abilities: his twitchy by-the-book lieutenant-colonel who clashes with the boisterous extrovert played by Alec Guinness in 'Tunes of Glory' (1960) was a masterly study of neurotic repression; and two years later he mined some of this neurosis for social comedy in 'Tiara Tahiti' (1962). His daughter Hayley's career was burgeoning rapidly and he directed her, though not with much success, in 'Sky West and Crooked' (1966), from a screenplay by Mary Hayley Bell. Much more successful was 'The Family Way' (1966), in which he played Hayley's father-in-law, and most movingly suggested that no relationship in his life had meant as much to him as that with his long-lost friend Billy. 
Mills was in some poor films (with appearances in more than 100 films this was inevitable) and was sometimes miscast, as he was in 'War and Peace' (1956), as a Russian peasant, or as an Australian cane-cutter in 'Summer of the Seventeenth Doll' (1959). Some would also say that his Oscar-winning turn as the village idiot in Lean's Irish-set romance, the tedious 'Ryan's Daughter' (1970), was a triumph that owed more to cosmetic than to histrionic art. Nevertheless, he could give stature to such modest films as 'The Vicious Circle' (1957) and could imbue cameo roles in 'big' films with a momentary presence, as he did in Kenneth Branagh's 'Hamlet' (1996), as Old Norway, for whom Shakespeare had carelessly failed to provide dialogue. In his last film, 'Bright Young Things' (2003), at the age of ninety-five, he was briefly vivid as a coke-snorting socialite. Throughout his long career in the British film industry he also continued to act on stage. Most memorably he and John Gielgud caused both outrage and hilarity with the profanities of their roles in Charles Wood's 'Veterans' in 1972, the reactions to which he amusingly described in the television talk shows in which he frequently appeared in the 1990s and 2000s. No physical infirmity, including near-blindness towards the end, was allowed to stand in his way. 
'The family way' might well describe the other path by which John Mills came to occupy such a secure place in filmgoers' affections and esteem. Both daughters, Juliet ('b'. 1941) and Hayley ('b'. 1946), went on to notable acting careers; his son Jonathan ('b'. 1949) was a screenwriter; while 
Mills had predeceased his wife on 23 April 2005, also at Four Gables, following a stroke. He had been made a CBE in 1960 and knighted in 1976; his memoir, 'Up in the Clouds, Gentlemen Please', was published in 1980, followed by 'Still Memories' in 2000; but his greatest achievements are fortunately preserved in the films in which he made his name and on which he conferred such distinction. 


@@@@@


doc= 96598


Banks, Joseph Ambrose (1920-2005), sociologist and historian, was born at 66 Montague Road, Edmonton, Middlesex, on 5 January 1920, the only child of Joseph William Banks, a boot and shoe dealer who later became a master tailor, and his wife, Louisa Mary Ann, 'nee' Wellman. He was educated at Enfield grammar school, where his mathematics teacher persuaded his father not to take him out of school for a cutter's apprenticeship in tailoring. During the Second World War he was a conscientious objector (as his father, an atheist socialist, had been in the First World War). On 22 June 1944 he married Olive Lucy Davies (1923-2006) ['see 'Banks, Olive Lucy], also from a 'respectable' working-class background. (She was the daughter of Herbert Davies, builder and contractor.) Although there were no children, their lifelong partnership was fruitful in every other way. Both became leading sociologists of their generation, and shared enthusiasms for dancing, hill-walking, gardening, cinema, and the opera. They each went to read sociology at the London School of Economics in 1947, both excelling sufficiently to qualify for a master's degree under David Glass's supervision. Banks then embarked on the study of the Victorian family, which was to lead to 'Prosperity and Parenthood' (1954). 
Banks's early intellectual and personal formation was profoundly influenced by his participation in the co-operative movement, through which he and Olive had met. From July 1942 for three years he was on the first editorial board of the British Federation of Young Co-operators' monthly magazine, 'Comrade', and a member of the education committee of the Enfield Highway Co-operative Society, subsequently serving as secretary of the Southern Co-operative Education Committees Association. The first issue of 'Comrade' contained a short article, prophetically entitled 'Invitation to the Dance' by a certain Olive Davies (they met the following year at the Enfield Co-operative youth group and she taught him ballroom dancing during their courtship). Banks's lifelong local friend Harold Campbell, later national secretary of the Co-operative Party from 1964, was their best man at Enfield register office. 
In 1952 Banks was appointed lecturer in the sociology department at Leicester, headed by Ilya Neustadt. Joe -- as he was known -- was insistent that Olive should also have the career she merited and in 1954 this became possible when both took up posts in the sociology and social work department at the University of Liverpool. They stayed until 1969 when Banks returned to the chair of sociology at Leicester and Olive became reader in sociology (in 1973 she became the first female professor at Leicester). They both took voluntary early retirement in 1982, thereby saving five posts for younger scholars in their department. 
Banks became the leading authority of his generation on the fertility decline that took place in Britain between about 1870 and 1914. He was the first to read beyond official statistics into the diverse literary, pamphlet, and newspaper primary sources of the Victorian era and produced a trilogy of contextualized studies that transformed understanding of late nineteenth-century demographics. 'Prosperity and Parenthood' became a much-republished classic and the starting point for all serious students of the subject. Through a brilliantly innovative analysis of such sources as the changing guidance on etiquette set out in the seven successive editions between 1861 and 1906 of 'Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management' Banks documented the phenomenon of rising aspirations for 'the paraphernalia of gentility' among the middle classes. He showed how escalating costs of secondary education became a crucial element, leading to greatly delayed marriage and ultimately the resort to birth control within marriage. 'Feminism and Family Planning' (1964, published jointly with Olive Banks) argued that Victorian feminism was wary of association with the subject of contraception and so did not promote family planning. 'Victorian Values: Secularism and the Size of Families' (1981) explored how respectable upper- and middle-class Victorians squared their religious sensibilities with family limitation. 
Banks's inaugural lecture, 'Sociology as a vocation', eloquently echoed Weber and exemplified the 'Leicester school' of Norbert Elias and Ilya Neustadt: sociology's specific disciplinary role was the ambition to provide a causal explanation of the current and future course of social change. This was to be through an interpretative understanding of social action, striving to integrate and evaluate all relevant historical and comparative knowledge to arrive at these carefully weighed insights and predictions. Specialization of knowledge of all kinds in commerce, science, professional life, and the academy had, he argued, rendered sociological skills of communication ever more valuable and valued throughout society and the economy. A stream of publications ensued, many based on his collaborative research with the industrial sociology research team led by W. H. Scott in Liverpool, applying a Weberian methodology to industrial relations and technological change. With his schooling in voluntarist co-operation, Banks was critical of Marxist class reductivism and also published widely on the importance of associations and social movements. 
In accord with these views, Banks played a leading role in sociology's own professional body, the British Sociological Association. His exceptionally open, warm, and entirely unaffected personality helped enormously -- all who came into contact with him found him instantly likeable. Joining as a student at its foundation in 1951, he became an executive member from 1956, secretary from 1964, and chairman in 1971. These were certainly not easy times for a discipline experiencing break-neck institutional expansion and acquiring a reputation for radicalism and subversion. Nevertheless Banks was remembered as a particularly effective leader of his profession. Indeed, his inaugural lecture had characteristically offered a penetrating sociological analysis of precisely these troubling issues in relation to a careful, interpretative evaluation of the significance of the sit-in of March 1967 at the London School of Economics. 
In retirement Banks and his wife lived at 30 Lismore Grove, Buxton, Derbyshire. He died on 13 November 2005 at Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport, following a heart attack. 


@@@@@


doc= 96602


Durham, Sir Kenneth (1924-2005), businessman, was born on 28 July 1924 at 104 Stanley Street, Blackburn, Lancashire, the son of George Durham, house painter, and his wife, Bertha, 'nee' Aspin. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Blackburn, and briefly read physics at Manchester University before serving in the Royal Air Force between 1942 and 1946, during which he qualified as a pilot and attained the rank of flight lieutenant. On 29 June 1946, while still an RAF officer, he married Irene Markham, a 22-year-old shop assistant from Blackburn, daughter of James Markham, overlooker. They went on to have a son and a daughter. 
After leaving the RAF, Durham returned to Manchester, where he won a Hatfield scholarship and graduated with first-class honours in physics. He then briefly joined the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell as a theoretical physicist before joining Unilever's Port Sunlight research laboratory in 1950. Port Sunlight was then the largest research laboratory owned by Unilever. This company had been formed in 1929 through a merger between the British-owned Lever Brothers and the Dutch-owned Margarine Union. It remained a highly unusual case of a business owned ultimately by two parent companies located in different countries, Britain and the Netherlands. Its chief executive was the three-person special committee consisting of the British and Dutch chairmen and a third executive. It was probably the largest European company at the time of its creation, and during the post-war decades it remained the leading European manufacturer of margarine and of soap and detergents. The giant global business also sold processed foods, ice cream and frozen products, tea, toothpaste and other toiletries, animal feeds, and chemicals; it owned vast plantations in Africa and elsewhere, and operated extensive shipping and other transport facilities. Unilever's research laboratories supported this vast enterprise, and were widely regarded as a major source of scientific innovation. 
Durham's career flourished at Port Sunlight. He was recognized as not only a first-class scientist but also someone who understood that his company needed to commercialize its basic research by utilizing it to create products consumers wanted to buy. This was a major weakness of Unilever, a sprawling colossus noted for its inability to take decisions quickly and without innumerable internal discussions. In the late 1940s Unilever had faced the decimation of its large American laundry business after its American rival Procter and Gamble launched synthetic detergents. In 1961 Durham was appointed head of the Port Sunlight laboratory, and in the following year he was sent to attend the advanced management programme at the Harvard business school, the best executive educative programme in the world at the time, to which Unilever sent its potential future leaders. In 1965 he was appointed to head Unilever's fast-growing laboratory at Colworth in Bedfordshire. In 1970 Unilever transferred him to line management. He joined the large animal feeds business, which was performing poorly. In the following year he became chairman of BOCM Silcock, Unilever's British affiliate that made oilseed cake and other compound feeds for animals. Durham rapidly reduced the workforce from 10,000 to 3500, rationalized the product line, and moved production from the large oil mills located at ports which were dominated by confrontational trade unions to smaller mills scattered around the country. Durham's decisive, even aggressive, personality brought success within Unilever. He was appointed to the boards of the British and Dutch parent companies in 1973. 
In 1978 Durham became the 'third man' on the special committee. His years on Unilever's special committee coincided with a time of crisis for the firm. Its financial performance in Europe had deteriorated sharply earlier in the decade following the oil price rises of 1973, while poor local management had led to a catastrophic decline in market share and profitability in its American business. The company was so diversified that managerial attention was spread too thinly. The special committee functioned primarily as a reactive rather than proactive force. Durham became one of the major forces behind change. Crucially he helped force through shifts in Unilever's American business. In 1978 Unilever acquired the well-run National Starch Company in the United States, which became a catalyst for change. Durham was instrumental in the sacking of the chief executive of its largest American affiliate, long protected by ties of loyalty and friendship. 
As the American business slowly turned round, Durham became chairman of the British company in 1982. Over the following four years he formulated, with his other colleagues on the special committee, Floris Maljers and Michael Angus, a radical programme of divestment of so-called non-core businesses, enabling the company to focus managerial time and financial resources on a narrower range of categories led by detergents, foods, personal care, and chemicals. The new strategy resulted in improved financial performance by a company that had looked like a potential target for takeover at the end of the 1970s. 
Durham was knighted in 1985, and appointed commander of the order of Orange Nassau the same year. Following his retirement as chairman of Unilever in 1986 he went on to hold several other senior positions in British business. He served as chairman of Woolworth Holdings between 1986 and 1990, and as deputy chairman of British Aerospace between the same years (having been a director since 1980), and was also a director of the electrical components maker Delta (1984-2004) and the merchant bank Morgan Grenfell (1986-90). He served on various industry and government bodies, for example as chairman of the economic development committee for the food, drink, and packaging machinery industries (1981-6), the economic policy committee of the Confederation of British Industry (1983-6), and the Ministry of Agriculture's priorities board (1984-7). He was also a trustee and later chairman of the Leverhulme Trust from 1974 to 1998. He devoted considerable time to charitable causes, and led a $6 million fund-raising campaign for the charity Help the Aged. As president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1986-7) he was a strong supporter of scientific research, and criticized governments for insufficient funding. He was made an honorary fellow of the British Academy in 1997, and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Manchester and Loughborough, and Queen's University, Belfast. He lived latterly at Dove Cottage, Middle Entrance Drive, Storrs Park, Bowness-on-Windermere, Cumbria. He died on 17 February 2005 at Westmorland General Hospital in Kendal of myocardial infarction and acute renal failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 96606


Elvin, (Herbert) Lionel (1905-2005), educationist, was born on 7 August 1905 at 2 Laurel Villas, Hills Road, Buckhurst Hill, Essex, the eldest of the three sons of Herbert Henry Elvin (1874-1949), engineer's clerk, trade unionist, and lay preacher, and his wife, Mary Jane (Dolly), 'nee' Hill (1874-1962). There was an older sister, who died in infancy. He was educated at elementary schools and from 1917 at Southend high school where, still known as Herbert or Bert, he achieved academic and sporting success and was the author of a new school song. A scholar at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, from 1924 to 1928, he gained first-class honours in history and English and an athletics blue, and was president of the Union and chairman of the Labour Club. After two years as a Commonwealth fellow at Yale he returned to Trinity Hall as the college's first fellow with responsibility for the teaching of English. On 3 April 1934 (by which time he was using the forename Lionel) he married a 24-year-old schoolteacher, Mona Bedortha (Margaret) Dutton (died 1997), at the Hampstead register office. She was the daughter of Dr Caleb Samuel Simeon Dutton, minister of religion, of San Francisco. They had one son, (John) Mark Dutton Elvin ('b'. 1938). 
Although unsuccessful as Labour candidate for Cambridge University in the parliamentary election of 1935, Elvin served on the town council and its education committee. He also became an active member of the Workers' Educational Association and treasurer of its eastern district. War service in the Air Ministry (1940-42) and the Ministry of Information (1943-5) was followed by appointment as principal of Ruskin College, Oxford, which reopened in September 1945. His chief rival for the post was Richard Crossman. Elvin was firmly committed to Ruskin and fully in accord with its educational, political, and social principles. Moreover there were family connections, and the Elvin room at Ruskin was named not for Lionel but for his father, Herbert, general secretary of the National Union of Clerks, who had served on the college's governing council. The Ruskin post involved a considerable drop in salary, but in his autobiography Elvin recorded that 'I do not think any five years in my career were more enjoyable than those I spent at Ruskin' ('Encounters with Education', 96). Elvin taught courses in English literature and politics and oversaw the acquisition of new premises and the introduction of students from the USA. His educational experience was further broadened by appointments to national bodies, including the Secondary School Examinations Council and the University Grants Committee (1946-50). 
In 1950 Elvin took up a less congenial but more lucrative post as director of the UNESCO department of education, based in Paris. There he encountered new challenges of education in the developing world and of international diplomacy. In 1956 he returned to England as professor of education in tropical areas at London University's Institute of Education. Two years later, following the death in post in 1957 of G. B. Jeffery, he was appointed director of the institute. At this time the Institute of Education comprised not only the 'central' institute but also a 'wider' institute or area training organization of some thirty colleges of education. Elvin thus found himself head of an organization at a peak of power and influence that was training one-quarter of the teachers in England. Though he had neither trained as a teacher nor taught in a school, Elvin's broad experience and numerous contacts within the worlds of education and politics made him uniquely fitted for the role. Expansion was in the air and he played a crucial role in securing a new building in Bedford Way and in overseeing the introduction of the BEd degree. Nevertheless, by 1973 when he retired with the title of emeritus professor, a sharp decline in the projected numbers of teachers had led to crisis in the colleges. William Taylor, Elvin's successor, would oversee the ending of the area training organisation. 
Elvin was active in numerous causes, for example as president of the English New Education Fellowship and of the Council for Education in World Citizenship, as chairman of the Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee, and as a member of the Central Advisory Council for Education (England) and the government of India education commission. He also played a major role on the committee on higher education chaired by Lord Robbins, which reported in 1963. His publications included 'Men of America' (1941), 'An Introduction to the Study of Literature (Poetry)' (1949), 'Education and Contemporary Society' (1965), 'The Place of Commonsense in Educational Thought' (1977), and his autobiography, 'Encounters with Education' (1987). 
Throughout his career Elvin remained a man of the left, a humanist, and a champion of 'peace and the making of a more just society' ('Encounters with Education', 191). Adherence to his principles led him to refuse many honours, but he did accept the honorary fellowships awarded by Trinity Hall and the Institute of Education, in 1980 and 1993 respectively. His final years were spent at 4 Bulstrode Gardens, Cambridge. Suffering from bronchial cancer and heart disease, he died at Midfield Lodge nursing home, Oakington, Cambridgeshire, on 14 June 2005, less than two months before his 100th birthday. He was survived by his son, Mark, a distinguished scholar of Chinese history. 


@@@@@


doc= 96607


Campbell, Gordon Thomas Calthrop, Baron Campbell of Croy (1921-2005), diplomatist and politician, was born on 8 June 1921 in Quetta, India, one of two sons of Major-General James Alexander Campbell (1886-1964), army officer, and his wife, Violet Constance Madeline, 'nee' Calthrop (died 1978), artist and writer. Educated at Wellington College and, at the outbreak of the Second World War, the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Campbell served briefly as an instructor, then with the 15th Scottish division. He was promoted captain at nineteen, and major at twenty-one. As the Germans retreated after D-day, he commanded the 320 field battery in the 15th Scottish division and became embroiled in some of the fiercest fighting of the war. Having earned the nickname Lucky following close shaves on the Siegfried line and in Normandy, he found himself on 29 April 1945 with one more river to cross, the mighty Elbe. Just minutes after his division set off in assault boats, a bullet smashed through Campbell, severing his sciatic nerve and disabling him for life. 'Here's another bloody Jerry!', shouted one of his rescuers as they carried him to a padre, failing to recognize Campbell beneath the blood and mud. 'That's not a bloody Jerry,' replied the padre, having spotted his MC and bar, 'it's Major Gordon Campbell!' ('The News', Nov 2002). He survived, unlike his brother Ian, a Spitfire pilot who was shot as an escaping prisoner in 1943 after baling out over Italy. 
Campbell was flown back to Britain where he spent more than a year in hospital. He took the entrance examination for the Foreign Office while still on crutches, and began his diplomatic career with a desk job covering eastern Europe. He got to know the foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, and would often wake him during the Berlin blockade to pass on telegrams. During this period the so-called 'Campbell solution' was adopted over Trieste, marking the border between Italy and Yugoslavia. At the Foreign Office Campbell formed a close friendship with Anthony Montague Browne, later Churchill's last private secretary, who remembered Campbell being 'in pain a good deal of the time and partially disabled' (his left leg was in a calliper), although it 'did not stop him being both remarkably efficient and the most jolly and humorous of companions' (Browne, 68-9). Browne was Campbell's best man when on 21 July 1949, at St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London, he married Nicola Elizabeth Gina Madan, a 28-year-old Foreign Office colleague. She was the daughter of Captain Geoffrey Spencer Madan, and a descendant of Isambard Kingdom Brunel. They had two sons and one daughter. Shortly after his marriage Campbell was transferred to New York as part of the UK delegation to the United Nations. His regime of daily hospital care continued in the United States, and three years later he returned to London, first as Foreign Office liaison officer with MI5, MI6, and Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), and then as private secretary to the cabinet secretary, Sir Norman Brook. 
It was apparently Brook who suggested Campbell to the former Conservative Scottish secretary James Stuart as the latter's successor in the Moray and Nairn constituency. He was duly adopted, resigned from a diplomatic posting in Vienna, and worked in the Conservative research department until the general election of 1959, when he was elected to parliament. After two years on the back benches he became a Scottish whip, and in 1963 joined the Scottish Office as parliamentary under-secretary for local government and housing. In opposition from 1964, he joined Edward Heath's front bench (despite voting for Reginald Maudling in the 1965 leadership contest) as a shadow defence spokesman before replacing Michael Noble (to whom Campbell's wife was also related) as shadow Scottish secretary in February 1969. He earned a reputation as a stickler, often contesting Hansard's grammatical corrections of his speeches. 
In 1970 Campbell became secretary of state for Scotland in Heath's government, arriving at St Andrew's House to applause from civil servants, something that reportedly infuriated his predecessor (and successor) as Scottish secretary, Labour's Willie Ross. From Ross, Campbell inherited the report of a royal commission on local government in Scotland. He broadly supported its recommendation for two-tier local authorities, and stood firm despite opposition from Conservative activists fearful that a Strathclyde regional council would consolidate Labour dominance in the west of Scotland. Always uncomfortable with the political aspects of his cabinet post, Campbell also faced hostility because of his refusal to overrule Scottish councils that wanted to abolish selective schools. But there were some successes. The NHS in Scotland was overhauled through the creation of individual health boards, while Campbell was especially proud of fast-tracking construction of the A9 road. Industrial relations, however, were not so smooth. Campbell infuriated the Scottish Trades Union Congress when he described the upward trend of unemployment in Scotland as 'worrying, though not unexpected' ('The Times', 18 Feb 1972), while the Upper Clyde Shipbuilders forced Heath into a disastrous economic U-turn. Campbell also faced growing discontent over Heath's lack of commitment to a devolved Scottish assembly, a proposal that was not implemented despite a report from the Kilbrandon commission in October 1973. The Scottish National Party was then on the march with its compelling cry of 'It's Scotland's oil'. Unfortunately for Campbell, voters in Moray and Nairn largely agreed and he was beaten by the Scottish Nationalist Winnie Ewing at the general election of February 1974 and jeered when, uncharacteristically, he claimed his defeat was a vote against the disabled. Campbell was unfailingly courteous, but what John Biffen remembered as 'an engaging lack of flamboyance' ('The Guardian', 30 April 2005) did not serve him well as a politician and he was one of the weakest post-war Scottish secretaries. 
Appointed to the House of Lords as Baron Campbell of Croy, he served as opposition spokesman in the upper house on Scottish affairs, and spoke on rather esoteric subjects reflecting his interests in ornithology and nature, including a campaign to exterminate the highland midge. More fruitful was his long campaign on behalf of disabled people. In the 1960s he had campaigned against discrimination and succeeded in strengthening the statutory duty of employers to provide access for disabled workers. He resumed his championship of the disabled after leaving the Commons. His work was recognized with the Nuffield Trust's first Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, fellowship in 1980, after which he published 'Disablement: Problems and Prospects in the UK' (1981). He also campaigned for greater understanding of schizophrenia. 
Campbell was active in the upper house until the early years of the new millennium, but the constant travelling between his home in Nairnshire and parliament eventually took its toll. He moved, with his wife, to the St George's Nursing Home at 61 St George's Square, London, and died at St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth, on 26 April 2005, of a pulmonary thrombo-embolism. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96608


Roll, Eric, Baron Roll of Ipsden (1907-2005), economist, public servant, and banker, was born Erich Roll on 1 December 1907 in Nowosielitza, near Czernowitz, in the duchy of Bukowina, Austria, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Mathias Roll (1872-1954), banker, and his wife, Fany, 'nee' Frendel (1878-1934), daughter of a grain trader. 
Roll was one of a remarkable group of men who emerged from the mayhem of pre-war central Europe to play key parts in Britain's economic and academic life after the Second World War. His parents were intellectuals and social democrats, who kept two huge German encyclopaedias in their dining room so that any argument over dinner could be instantly resolved. His early education was at the village school and at home; his mother was a trained teacher. Czernowitz, where the economist Joseph Schumpeter once taught, was at the meeting place of Austria, Romania, and Russia. It was to change nationality three times by the end of Roll's long life (finally becoming part of independent Ukraine in 1991). Roll's childhood was interrupted by the outbreak of the First World War, during which his parents fled to Vienna, where Roll's schooling continued, at the Piaristenschule then the Piaristengymnasium. Back in Czernowitz, now part of Romania, he attended the Liceul Emanoil-Grigoroviza, where the language of his education switched from German to Romanian. He also learned French at school and English privately, including large passages of Shakespeare by heart. 
In 1925 Roll left for Birmingham University. His father particularly admired Britain's social and political system and cultural climate. Roll expected to work in Romania's thriving oil industry, and enrolled in the school of oil engineering and refining, then the only one of its kind. However, he discovered he had little enthusiasm for chemistry and quickly switched to economics. He graduated BCom in 1928, then PhD two years later, finding time to win both the Gladstone memorial prize and ballroom dancing competitions. In 1930 his thesis, on the manufacturing and marketing of steam engines in Britain, 1775-1800, became his first published book. His university days already revealed his enduring knack for accumulating a remarkable network of friends and acquaintances, many of whom either were or became distinguished figures in their field. Even before he had finished his first degree he took a motoring holiday with Hilary Marquand, a future Labour cabinet minister, and met the economists Austin and Joan Robinson. 
Meanwhile the economy in central Europe was growing bleaker. In the spring of 1931 Roll became a British subject. From then on he saw himself as English. When Sir Denis Hamilton, editor of 'The Times', once asked him which language he dreamed in, Roll promptly replied, 'English'. He later added, 'I make Shakespeare responsible for that. I've long concluded that the essence of national identity is language' ('Desert Island Discs', Aug 2001). Roll's English was almost without accent -- as indeed were his French and German. 
In the autumn of 1930, and with the backing of John Maynard Keynes, Roll took a teaching post at the new University College of Hull under George Cyril Allen. When, three years later, Allen departed for University College, London, Roll was given the task of running the economics department, but it was two more years before he achieved the title (and salary) of professor of economics and commerce. Within his first few weeks at Hull he met Winifred (Freda) Taylor (1909-1998) at a bus stop. The daughter of Elliott Taylor, a Yorkshire railway official, she was president of the students' union at Hull. She later recalled that they had looked so similar, both with fair hair and blue-grey eyes, that they were occasionally mistaken for brother and sister -- a confusion that occasionally proved useful during their four-year courtship. They married on 22 September 1934 at Sculcoates register office, and had two daughters, Joanna and Elizabeth. 
In old age Roll still thought of himself as very much a product of the 1930s. As his parents had done in Czernowitz, he became part of a group of like-minded intellectuals in Hull. He was aghast at the economic impact of the depression. He and his wife organized relief work during the Spanish Civil War, and wrote and circulated a pamphlet attacking Britain's policy of appeasement. In the course of the 1930s he also produced two successful textbooks, one of which, 'About Money' (1934), was extensively annotated by T. S. Eliot, one of the directors of Faber and Faber. He wrote his most famous book, 'A History of Economic Thought' (1938), in the summer of 1938, dashing off the first draft in six weeks. He worked in the garden of a cottage in Wendens Ambo, near Cambridge, rented with Jacob Bronowski and Eirlys Roberts. With its accessible prose and its strong emphasis on Marx in the early editions, the book was initially disdained by other academic economists. However, it remained in print, in many languages and editions, earning good royalties throughout his life. Even in his mid-nineties Roll was wondering whether to write one more edition. In his final career, as a merchant banker, the book became his greatest passport to international eminence: finance ministers had frequently read the book and were flattered to meet its author. 
In 1939, on a Rockefeller fellowship, Roll and his wife sailed for the United States, where they were to stay until 1946. He visited Harvard and Princeton and taught in Austin, Texas. 'You should have stayed,' Lyndon Johnson said to him many years later. 'We might have made something of you' (E. Roll, 36). He also met a galaxy of up-and-coming economists, including J. K. Galbraith, Wassily Leontief, Fritz Machlup, Gottfried von Haberler, Paul Samuelson, and Robert Triffin. Not only were they part of a great flowering of economic thought; most were or became deeply involved with public policy. But within two years Roll's first career, as an academic, was effectively at an end and he had embarked upon the second, as a public servant with the British food mission in Washington. 
J. K. Galbraith once described Roll as the most accomplished negotiator in public affairs in the post-war era (Stormonth-Darling, 97). He arrived in Washington just before the signing of the 'Lend-Lease Act'. He was plunged into the international politics of food and agriculture, and the problems caused by the chronic shortage of dollars -- two issues that were vital to the British war effort, and that continued to dominate the early years of the post-war era. Through them, Roll discovered the art that he later called 'alliance politics': how to conduct negotiations with a number of parties who shared the same basic objectives but operated under different constraints (E. Roll, 40-41). Linking international negotiations with the government machine was to be Roll's main task for the following two decades. It was the career of a diplomat, undertaken by an economist, working not in the Foreign Office but in one or another of Whitehall's economic ministries. He remained with the British food mission for five years, latterly as deputy. 
In 1946, with his rather reluctant wife and two small daughters, Roll returned to Britain, which he had now come to regard as home. Urged by John Maynard Keynes, he decided to stay in the civil service. Almost immediately he was once more negotiating. This time it was the Marshall plan. Roll commuted to and from Paris initially as an assistant secretary in the Ministry of Food and later as an under-secretary in the Treasury, attached to the central economic planning staff, where he met many of those who were to dominate Whitehall in the 1960s and 1970s. He also became a close friend of Robert Marjolin, the first secretary general of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation, the body that would oversee the administration of Marshall aid. 
Negotiations were sometimes hampered by a shortage of solid statistics. When this led Roll to complain to Whitehall about the difficulties of making bricks without straw, the reply was 'Goldman expert strawless brickmaker is on the way' (E. Roll, 54). On another occasion, delegates were requested at short notice to ask their capitals to fill out a detailed questionnaire on requirements for reconstruction. Roll found one delegate filling it out himself. 'I think I know better what to put in than they do back home', he said. Another delegate, scanning the elaborate document, exclaimed, 'On fera de la poesie' (ibid., 56). Roll subsequently became one of the so-called four wise men responsible for the initial allocation of aid. 'I cannot think of many operations I have been involved in, before or since, that equalled it in complexity' he later recalled (ibid., 61). Britain emerged with the largest tranche, a triumph for which Roll deserved much of the credit. 
As these negotiations came to an end, Roll became part of the permanent British delegation to the Organization for European Economic Co-operation with the title of minister, and moved his family to France. In her autobiography Freda Roll calculated that she had moved at least sixteen times during her married life. The move gave Roll a close view of the institutions that shaped post-war European integration. In 1952 he became deputy head of the British delegation to NATO, with responsibilities for its economic work. He was one of Britain's observers at the Franco-German talks that led to the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community. In his autobiography he recounted a curious secret visit with Stafford Cripps, then chancellor of the exchequer, to the French finance minister to discuss the creation of an alternative to the steel community. That scheme got nowhere. Roll felt that Britain's early ambivalence towards European integration shaped long-term relations with Europe. Whitehall's search for a perfect solution, that would square the three circles of Europe, the Commonwealth, and the relationship with the United States, led to inaction or dangerous delay. 
Roll's return to London in 1953 meant reduced living standards (deprived of duty-free tobacco, he gave up smoking). It also meant a return to the Ministry of Food, soon to be uncomfortably amalgamated with the Ministry of Agriculture. But in 1957 he was negotiating again, to create a new world sugar agreement. He was then for a year the executive director of the new International Sugar Council. The experience persuaded him that a 'realistic and pragmatic approach' was preferable to the unrestricted supremacy of the free market. Rather, government intervention could often be combined with market forces to secure 'politically accepted economic and social goals' (E. Roll, 94). 
Back in London from 1959 as deputy secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Roll was once more involved in Britain's tortured relationship with Europe. In 1960, as Britain dithered about an application to join the Common Market, he chaired a working party on the emerging common agricultural policy. It concluded that most of the problems were manageable, that the policy was not yet set in stone, and that a speedy application was therefore essential. Britain formally submitted a bid in 1961 -- but speed was not to be had. 
Edward Heath included Roll (who was knighted KCMG in 1962, having been made CMG in 1949 and CB in 1956) in the high-powered group of civil servants -- the 'flying knights' -- who masterminded Britain's part in the Brussels negotiations. Roll's skills, Heath later recalled, included 'seven languages and the ability to lip-read in both French and German' ('The Times', 1 April 2005). Roll later felt that those negotiations were perhaps the high point of his work as a public servant, in their complexity, technicality and 'the pressures to which I and my fellow negotiators were subjected' (E. Roll, 103). On holiday with Robert Marjolin before the talks began, he realized that the concessions available to Britain would be limited by the commission's desire not to undermine the community. In the event, the structure of the negotiations caused problems just as great as the substantive issues under discussion. The six countries of Europe, in the throes of reaching their own agreement on the common agricultural policy, insisted on negotiating as a bloc, and the British frequently found themselves facing a spokesman merely expounding a common position. When de Gaulle finally torpedoed talks in January 1963, Roll expressed surprise to Olivier Wormser, of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 'Indeed', said Wormser, 'You don't know how close to success you were' (ibid., 128). 
In 1963 Roll returned to the United States as economic minister at the embassy and head of the UK Treasury delegation in Washington. It was a vibrant time, with John Kennedy and then Lyndon Johnson in the White House and many of Roll's academic friends in public life. He built a new set of enduring friendships with America's bankers, many of them through Siegmund Warburg, who was to shape the final third of Roll's long career. But with the election in 1964 of a Labour government, Roll was recalled early for what proved to be his final stint in public life. 
Before he had taken up his embassy post, Roll had lunched with George Brown, then in opposition. Brown had asked Roll whether he thought the economic work of government would be improved by having a Department of Economic Affairs. Roll had replied cautiously that it might be so, adding that the power of the Treasury was so great that such a department would find it hard to assert itself. Later that year, Roll bumped into Brown again, who urged him not to put down deep roots in America. In 1964 Roll reluctantly became permanent secretary of the new department. 'I was even at the time very sceptical about the exaggerated hopes for the DEA entertained by many others', Roll subsequently wrote (E. Roll, 164). 
For much of the autumn Roll shuttled between London and Washington, where no successor was appointed for three months (Alec Cairncross having refused the post). It was a bad beginning. Douglas Allen, moved from the Treasury, had to handle recruitment for the new department and most organizational matters. Indeed, much of Roll's public service had been in international negotiations, in roles more typical of the Foreign Office than of the other parts of Whitehall. He had little effective experience of departmental management. He also had to cope with a floundering economy, a prime minister whose economic training reinforced his reluctance to relinquish control of economic policy, a hostile and entrenched Treasury, and a tempestuous minister. 
One of Roll's most endearing characteristics was a desire always to emphasize the best in others. Even to George Brown, Roll was kindly in retrospect, despite Brown's inebriated bullying: within a month of taking office, Brown had already 'sacked' Roll once (Cairncross, 14). Much later, pressed by the broadcaster Sue Lawley to describe Brown's tantrums, Roll recalled Brown storming into his office shouting furiously at his permanent secretary to 'Find my car!' Roll demurred: 'I'm always ready to serve you, but not to find your car', and generously remembered that Brown had apologized the next morning, 'which he usually did after a row'. He was, reflected Roll, a highly intelligent man, with good instincts, frustrated by losing the battle for the party leadership to Harold Wilson ('Desert Island Discs', Aug 2001). 
When Brown moved to the Foreign Office in the summer of 1966 he tried to persuade Roll to follow him. Roll refused, pointing out that the Foreign Office would never accept an outsider. But Roll by then had decided to leave the civil service, two years before the official retirement age. There had been talk of making him governor of the Bank of England (he was later on the court), but in the end he embarked upon his third and -- as it turned out -- his longest career, as a merchant banker. 
In the spring of 1967, after spending the enforced six-month period of 'decontamination' at Harvard, writing 'The World after Keynes' (1968), Roll joined S. G. Warburg & Co. Ltd as deputy chairman. He became a devoted admirer of Siegmund Warburg, one of the most influential figures in the post-war City. Other merchant banks had wooed Roll, but Martin Gordon, who also joined the bank in the 1960s, recalled that Warburg had told Roll that he would probably 'have more fun with us' (Gordon). He was to spend the next thirty-eight years at Warburgs. He became chairman in 1974, joint chairman with David Scholey from 1983 to 1987, president from 1987 to 1995, and finally senior adviser to what had by then become, first, part of Swiss Bank Corporation, and then part of UBS (Union Bank of Switzerland). 
When Roll joined Warburgs the influence on financial markets of that middle-European intellectual hothouse was at its height. The merchant bank had created the eurobond market four years earlier by issuing the first eurodollar loan. It had also, thanks to Warburg's partner Henry Grunfeld, won the first great post-war British takeover battle, for British Aluminium in 1958, and now dominated the market. 
Roll's first months were unpromising. Others resented the seniority Warburg conferred on his new deputy chairman, who clearly knew little of the banking business. Some, irritated by his transparent hero-worship of the charismatic Warburg, named him Sir Echo. Sometimes Warburg would tease Roll by unexpectedly changing his position and leaving him stranded. Ian Fraser, one of the inventors of the eurobond, described an occasion when Roll chaired the bank's morning meeting and refused to accept a majority view on whether to issue more bonds in a certain deal. 'There is someone whose opinion I particularly admire and whom I should like to consult before we minute this decision', he explained. There was a chorus of laughter: all knew that he wanted Warburg's clearance (Fraser, 277). However, Roll had a good teacher, and learned quickly. He and Warburg would walk at weekends round the silent squares of Belgravia, talking less about theory than practice: the quirks of particular companies, banks and, above all, people. When Warburg died in 1982 it was Roll with Grunfeld, dubbed the 'uncles', who handled Scholey's succession. 
Warburgs were eager to extend their eurobond business, notably to Japan and then to China. Roll's greatest assets were his charm, his astonishing address book, and his instinctive internationalism. He embarked on a tremendous programme of travel on the bank's behalf, generally accompanied (until her death in 1998) by his wife. At his ninetieth birthday party, Scholey said that Roll had never knowingly passed an airport without going into it. Were someone from London to land on an iceberg in Antarctica, said Scholey on another occasion, one of the penguins would be likely to ask how Eric Roll was. He knew everyone by name; was not thrown by Japanese or Chinese names; and had a phenomenal memory for people and for what they had done. His ability to quote reams of Shakespeare endeared him to one head of the Bank of Tokyo, his experience in government to another. He was instrumental in encouraging his friend Yoshitoki Chino, chairman of Daiwa Securities, to set up the Daiwa Anglo-Japanese Foundation, of which he served as founding chairman from 1988 to 2001, and which soon became the major British charity supporting links between Britain and Japan. In cultivating Japanese financial institutions, his advancing years were often a positive advantage. He was also one of the first bankers to go to China, where he impressed his hosts with his knowledge of Marx. S. G. Warburg issued the first eurobond in London for the Bank of China. 
In other areas of public life Roll's charm was also a continuing asset. He sat on the boards of several companies, mostly Warburgs' clients, including Times Newspapers and the Rootes car company. From 1971 to 1980 he was also on the National Economic Development Council. Ronald McIntosh, its director-general from 1973, found him a shrewd adviser on cabinet and Treasury machinations against the council. In his diaries McIntosh recalled a fraught lunch of politicians, industrialists, and trade unionists in the thick of a miners' strike that had reduced Britain to a three-day week, with 'Eric working hard to keep the conversation light and interesting... In fact, it was all quite enjoyable' (McIntosh, 31). 
In the final decade of his life Roll continued to travel and to draw on his immense network. Like Grunfeld, who continued to work until his death at the age of ninety-five in 1999, Roll came regularly to work at about 10 a.m. until the week of his death. He would spend the morning in his office close to Scholey's, moving on after lunch to attend the House of Lords (he had become a life peer, as Baron Roll of Ipsden, in 1977 and was a reliable member of the economic affairs committee). Global financial leaders such as Alan Greenspan would ring him up, and he would knowledgeably quiz young colleagues and visiting journalists. 
Roll also continued his prolific output of books, academic papers, and speeches. He wrote a rather bland autobiography, 'Crowded Hours' (1985), with not a single harsh word or unkind revelation. His economic views remained essentially Keynesian and interventionist, although with some subtlety. In 1938, in the first issue of the 'Modern Quarterly', a journal whose editorial council included not just Roll but left-wing intellectuals such as Harold Laski and Joseph Needham, he had given warning of the danger that fascist regimes were misusing Keynes's precept of interventionism for militarist ends. Four decades later, in his Stamp memorial lecture of 1976, he chastised those who believed the myth that there had once been a golden age of the market economy. He spoke of the inevitability of more formal channels of intervention in managing the economy. But he also attacked the 'cliches of collectivism' coming from the other side of the political divide. 
Roll also remained a committed European all his life. He deeply regretted the Thatcher government's refusal in 1979 to join the European exchange rate mechanism. Indeed, he had always been an enthusiast for a common currency, having toyed in the early 1960s with the idea of a unit called the 'moneta'. 'I suppose it would have been the forerunner to the euro', he reflected (Moore). In the early 1990s he chaired a committee that examined the case for giving independence to the Bank of England. It came down strongly in favour of independence. It might seem surprising that a man with Keynesian leanings should have favoured the separation of authority for fiscal and monetary policy, but he was probably moved mainly by the desire to see Britain position itself to participate in the euro. He wrote two more books on political and economic matters: 'Where Did We Go Wrong?' (1995) and 'Where Are We Going?' (2000). In both cases, the main answer to the question lay in Europe. Roll feared that the Conservative government would become increasingly anti-European and xenophobic, with a 'disagreeable type of demagogic appeal to lower middle-class instincts' ('Where Are We Going?', 163). Speaking privately of Margaret Thatcher, he abandoned his usual bonhomie: 'that terrible woman' was his phrase at a lunch in the 1990s (private information). 
In one sense Roll's long life was a history of might-have-beens, and not just in terms of his long disappointment over Britain's half-hearted involvement with Europe. He was several times considered for, but never held, one of those offices at the head of an international organization like the World Bank, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, for which his background would so ideally have prepared him. As an economist, he was a brilliant expositor but not an original theorist. Moreover, he came to believe that the 'limits within which economics can be relied on for precise guidance are very narrow indeed' (E. Roll, 239). But Roll was never a disappointed man. 'He had a sunny nature and a spontaneous gaiety which endeared him to many people', recalled his wife, looking back on their early years together (W. Roll, 35). Moreover, Roll also left monuments in all his three careers, any one of which would have been a life's achievement for most people. His 'History of Economic Thought' continued to sell, seventy years after it first appeared; his success in the Marshall plan negotiations helped to set Britain on the slow path to post-war recovery; and he helped to hold Warburgs together in the years after Siegmund Warburg's death. He made more friends in each career than many do in one; and he had not an ounce of malice. He went to work at Warburgs for the last time in the week of his death, which occurred at King Edward VII's Hospital, Westminster, on 30 March 2005. He was survived by his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 96609


Beresford, Maurice Warwick (1920-2005), economic historian, was born on 6 February 1920 at 403 Boldmere Road, Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, the only son of Harry Bertram Beresford, a manager in a warehouse supplying chemists' shops, and his wife, Nora Elizabeth, 'nee' Jefferies. He had a particularly close relationship with his mother, and later dedicated a book to her. He attended local elementary schools and Bishop Vesey's Grammar School in Sutton Coldfield. He went to Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1938 to take a history degree, and was drawn to aspects of the subject that did not belong in the conventional syllabus. He was interested in maps and visual evidence, and was encouraged by excursions from Cambridge led by John Saltmarsh to observe the historic landscape. After graduating with first-class honours in 1941, having been exempted from military service as a conscientious objector, he did social work, to which throughout his life he was passionately committed. He was warden of an adult education centre in Rugby in Warwickshire from 1942 to 1948. 
In 1948 Beresford published an article that demonstrated, using maps and aerial photographs, that 'ridge and furrow' preserved the outlines of the medieval open fields. This was based on part-time research without formal training: in later years he gave a lecture, 'On never being a research student'. When planning the remains of fields in Leicestershire he came upon an area of mounds and hollows, which he realized marked the site of the medieval village of Bittesby. He then discovered 100 deserted villages in Warwickshire, expanded the work to the rest of the country, and published 'The Lost Villages of England' in 1954. He argued that there had been a phase of deliberate depopulation by profit-conscious landlords in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries to create enclosed sheep pastures. 
By the time 'Lost Villages' appeared Beresford was well established as a lecturer in economic history at the University of Leeds, a post to which he had been appointed in 1948. Investigating deserted villages in Yorkshire, he discovered the site of Wharram Percy hidden in a valley in the wolds. He began to dig there with the help of friends, to find and date the foundations of houses. J. G. Hurst, newly graduated from Cambridge, who was keen to develop medieval archaeology, took over the excavations, which were henceforth conducted on a larger scale, using the latest techniques. Beresford and Hurst made an effective team, though they were very different in personality. Beresford talked and enthused, while Hurst, an inspector of ancient monuments, quietly exercised his influence. Together they recruited a group of collaborators who listed and mapped all known deserted medieval villages in England. The fruits of their labours appeared in 1971 as 'Deserted Medieval Villages: Studies'. Deserted villages had a great impact on the general public; they set archaeologists and geographers on a quest to answer questions about the origins of villages, village planning, and peasant houses. The new discipline of 'landscape history' developed out of these enquiries, inspired by Beresford's writings as well as those of W. G. Hoskins. In 1957 came 'History on the Ground', in which Beresford showed the potential of studying parks and planned towns as well as villages. He published, with Kenneth St Joseph, a collection of aerial photographs with a commentary in 'Medieval England: an Aerial Survey' in 1958. His main contribution to village studies in the next three decades was organizing the camp for the Wharram Percy excavators. When the digging ended he wrote with Hurst 'Wharram Percy: Deserted Medieval Village', which appeared in 1990. 
In the mid-1950s Beresford's research on medieval towns began, focusing on the new generation of planned towns of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, which led him to visit south-west France as well as all parts of England and Wales. His 'New Towns of the Middle Ages' was published in 1967 at the very beginning of a new wave of academic interest in urban history. Beresford investigated the past of his adopted town of Leeds, and wrote a history of its chamber of commerce soon after his arrival. This interest culminated in his study of the modern growth of the town, 'East End, West End' (1988), in which he traced the advance of streets and houses. 
Beresford's well-written and much read books influenced both landscape history and urban history. His striking phrases drew the readers' attention: 'Lost Villages' and 'New Towns' were typical choices of apt and attractive titles. He lectured with enthusiasm and wit, using illustration, and he frequently gave talks to adult education classes and local societies as well as audiences in universities and academic conferences. He contributed generously his time and energy to the Yorkshire Archaeological Society and the Thoresby Society. He was active in university administration, holding a chair from 1959 until retirement in 1985, and serving as dean and chairman of the school of economic studies. In the university senate those critical of the management relished his contributions to debate. His conversation could be waspish, but he was always engaging and wide-ranging. Music, opera, ballet, theatre, and cinema were all enthusiasms of his, and he was addicted in later years to continental travel. He had remarkable powers of persuasion, so he relied on others to take him to sites, as he did not drive. From student days he had taken an interest in prisoners and young offenders, and devoted a great deal of time to befriending, advising, and educating them. His well-attended evening class in Wakefield prison ran for many years. He was actively engaged in public life, serving on many committees and advisory bodies: these ranged from the parole review committee of Leeds prison to the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England). His achievement was marked with honours, including four honorary degrees, two volumes of essays written in his honour (presented in 1989 and 2000), and election as a fellow of the British Academy in 1985. 
From the late 1990s Beresford's health deteriorated, but he was able to attend conferences well into his eighties. He died on 15 December 2005 of a chest infection and septicaemia in St James's University Hospital, Leeds. He never married and had no surviving relative, but his numerous friends visited him in hospital, attended his cremation ceremony on 30 December, and took part in a subsequent memorial meeting on 4 July 2006 at Leeds University. 


@@@@@


doc= 96610


Faulkner, (Herbert Gustavus) Max (1916-2005), golfer, was born at 36 Havelock Road, Bexhill, Sussex, on 29 July 1916, the eldest son of Gustavus Kirkham (Gus) Faulkner, a professional golfer then based at Selsey, and his wife, Eliza Ellen, 'nee' Hussey. His early education was in Wales, while his father was the professional at Pennard on the Gower peninsula, then in Surrey when he moved to Bramley. Max Faulkner worked first as his father's assistant, then became the professional at Leamington Spa. As a player he first came to prominence in 1937 when he won both the Berkshire championship and the Addington foursomes. On 20 August 1938 he married Joan, the 21-year-old daughter of William Frederick Weller, farmer, of Amberley Farm, Milford, Surrey. They had three children, Guy, Hilary, and John. 
Like so many sportsmen of his generation Faulkner was deprived of some of his best competitive years by the Second World War. During the conflict he served as a physical training instructor with the RAF, concentrating on boxing far more than on golf (he claimed later to have played only one round during the entire war). None the less after demobilization he returned to his first love, and victory in the west of England professional championship of 1947 helped secure his selection in the British Ryder cup team of that year. In all he played in five Ryder cup matches (1947, 1949, 1951, 1953, and 1957), although his personal record was disappointing and he won one solitary point from eight games played. In 1949 he won both the Penfold and Lotus tournaments, and tied for sixth place in the open championship, four strokes behind the winner, Bobby Locke. In the following year Locke won again, with Faulkner coming fifth. 
These experiences of contending at the highest level paved the way for Faulkner's greatest triumph, and the feat for which he is best remembered, his victory in the open championship of 1951, held that year for the first (and at the time of his death only) time at Royal Portrush in Northern Ireland. Three opening rounds of 71, 70, and 70 gave Faulkner a substantial lead of six strokes with eighteen holes to play, and, although the Argentinian golfer Antonio Cerda chased him hard on the final afternoon, Faulkner held on to win by two shots with a score of 285. This proved to be the only home win in the open championship between Henry Cotton's third and final victory in 1948 and Tony Jacklin's triumph of 1969, which ushered in an altogether different era in the history of British, and indeed European, golf. In all Faulkner won sixteen European professional tournaments, including the Dunlop masters of 1951, the Spanish open championship three times (in 1952, 1953, and 1957), and the Portuguese open title of 1968. In 1953 he won the 'News of the World' tournament (then effectively the Professional Golfers' Association match-play championship) at Ganton, defeating Dai Rees in the final. 
Faulkner's style was distinctive, elegant, and powerful, with immense ball-striking ability. He regularly won long-driving competitions, and always maintained a high level of physical fitness. He was an inveterate fixer and manipulator of golf clubs, and was rumoured to possess more than 300 putters, many of his own design. That said, Faulkner never forgot that golf was a game, and that paying spectators deserved to be entertained. He was a 'personality' before the term was invented, and something of a flamboyant dresser, in contrast to many of his fellow competitors, whose often austere demeanour reflected the prevailing drabness of the years after the war, when many golf clubs were struggling for survival. 'Faulkner stories' abounded among golf journalists, for whom he was always good copy, and Henry Longhurst always claimed that he witnessed Faulkner signing autographs at Portrush in 1951 with the appendage 'open champion 1951' when two rounds still remained to be played. 
In later life Faulkner received several honours, including being appointed OBE (2001) and being made a freeman of the City of London. He played numerous exhibition matches for charitable causes, and was involved in both personal and professional ways in nurturing young golfing talent. In particular he headed the 'Butten boys' initiative of the businessman Ernest Butten, who wanted to develop a cohort of British golfers capable of challenging the very best American and international players. Among these was Brian Barnes, who not only married Faulkner's daughter, Hilary, but later followed his father-in-law as champion of Spain and Portugal, played in the Ryder cup on several occasions, and in 1995 secured a memorable triumph in the British seniors open, watched in person by Faulkner over the same Portrush links where the latter had won the open forty-four years previously. Barnes also shared with Faulkner a love of fishing. Having lived latterly at Pulborough, Sussex, Faulkner died on 26 February 2005 at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, of pneumonia. 


@@@@@


doc= 96612


Charlot, Monica (1933-2005), historian and political scientist, was born at 6 Maitland Park Villas, St Pancras, London, on 31 May 1933, the second of three children of Joseph Jacob (Jack) Huber, consular official, and his wife, Doris May, 'nee' Fickling. Her Swiss father had met her English mother while he was working in London for a Swiss tourist association. He was subsequently Swiss consul in London, New York, and finally in Australia, where he died. Monica was brought up in London and Manchester before moving back to London as an undergraduate student at Bedford College. Her father had encouraged her to study German but she had other plans. She took a BA degree in French before transferring to Paris at the age of twenty-one, where she was employed as 'English assistante' in a French lycee. She then met Jean Charlot (1932-1997), a French political scientist whom she married in 1956. They had three daughters. When Jean was called up to serve in Algeria at the height of the uprising there, the whole family followed him across the Mediterranean. 
Monica Charlot was already thinking of making her way through the French academic qualification system. This meant sitting the 'agregation' exam, a highly selective and competitive process that turned out qualified lycee teachers. On becoming 'agregee' in English, she spent a couple of years teaching English in two Paris lycees before being recruited as lecturer by the University of Nanterre, where she watched the hatching of the 1968 student protest that started there with the setting up of the Mouvement du 22 Mars. During these years she had been working on a doctoral thesis, which she eventually defended at the Sorbonne in 1971. Devoted to the study of the general election campaigns in Britain between 1933 and 1970, it was published the following year by the Presses de la Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques under the title 'La democratie a l'anglaise'. Retrospectively this seminal book was seen as a turning point in the tradition of British studies in France, which until then had been almost exclusively identified with literary studies. 
Appointed professor of British civilization -- the French umbrella term encompassing political and social culture as well as cultural studies -- at the Sorbonne Nouvelle University, also known as Paris III, Monica Charlot set out to win British and American political and social studies official recognition as a legitimate branch of British and American studies in general. This she achieved by convincing the higher education department to create a 'civilization' paper, alongside linguistics and literature papers, in the 'agregation' exam with a view to giving future lycee teachers a proper grasp of British (and American) politics and society. A born organizer, she brought together the university civilization specialists within a national research centre called CRECIB (Centre de Recherches et d'Etudes en Civilisation Britannique), which by the time of her death had some 250 members spread across France. She also provided inspiration and support to the numerous students -- over a hundred of them -- who wrote their doctoral dissertations under her supervision. 
Charlot was also a prolific writer. She published some fifteen books in her own name and contributed to seventeen collective works on various aspects of British politics and society. Her textbooks on British government and politics became standard fixtures on students' reading lists in France but her own preferred productions were 'La democratie a l'anglaise' (1972), 'Le temps des incertitudes', a hefty account of Britain's political history between 1945 and 1980, published in 1981 by the prestigious Imprimerie Nationale, and 'L'Angleterre, cette inconnue: une societe qui change' (1980). It is regrettable that none of her books was translated into English except the first volume of her biography of Queen Victoria, 'Victoria: le pouvoir partage' (1989), which was published two years later by Blackwell's under the title 'Victoria: the Young Queen'. The second volume was never completed. 
A longtime member of the Franco-British Council, a bilateral think-tank created by Edward Heath and Georges Pompidou, in 1984 Charlot was appointed director of the Maison Francaise at Oxford. The perfect candidate to fill this post, she remained there until 1991, and with the support of two Oxford political scientists in particular, David Butler and David Goldey, fulfilled her passion to be a mediator between the two countries. Her outstanding contribution in this field was rewarded with the highest distinctions both in France (Palmes Academiques, ordre national du Merite, Legion d'honneur) and in Britain, where she was appointed OBE. 
Monica Charlot retired from academic life in 2002, seven years after the death of her beloved husband Jean. She died of a stroke in Rennes on 20 May 2005 and was cremated. Her ashes were subsequently scattered over the Channel, as those of Jean Charlot had been. She was survived by her three daughters, two of whom followed in their parents' academic footsteps. 


@@@@@


doc= 96631


Hill, Mary Eglantyne (1914-2005), economic anthropologist, was born on 10 June 1914 at 35 Park Side, Cambridge, the eldest child of Archibald Vivian Hill (1886-1977), physiologist, and his wife, Margaret Neville, 'nee' Keynes (died 1970), social reformer. She was the progeny of a formidable Cambridge academic dynasty. Her father won a Nobel prize in 1922. Her maternal grandparents were (John) Neville Keynes, logician and economist, and Florence Ada Keynes, social reformer and local politician, while her uncles were John Maynard Keynes, the founder of macroeconomics, and Sir Geoffrey Keynes, surgeon and literary scholar. 
Polly Hill read economics at Newnham College, Cambridge, but her scholarly ambitions were thwarted by the rule that only those with a first were eligible to do doctoral research. Her first employment was as an editorial assistant for the Royal Economic Society, and then as a researcher for the Fabian Society between 1938 and 1939. During the Second World War she worked successively for the Treasury, the Board of Trade, and the statistics department of the Colonial Office. Given her artistic and literary aspirations -- she knew Henry Moore, and had a book of poetry published in 1945 -- she felt she 'languished' during these eleven years. In 1951 she was employed as commercial editor of the weekly publication 'West Africa', and her life was 'forever changed' by her posting to the Gold Coast in 1952 (Macfarlane). Back in England, at Hampstead register office on 20 July 1953, she married Kenneth Albert Curwood Humphreys (died 1985), registrar of the West African Examinations Council, based in the Gold Coast, and son of Arthur Curwood Humphreys, schoolmaster. He was two years younger than Polly, and a widower. 
The year following her marriage Polly Hill (who always published under her maiden name) finally entered academia, taking up a research fellowship in economics at the University College of the Gold Coast, and beginning research into the lives and economic strategies of migrant cocoa farmers. While her marriage lasted only eight years, she had the 'extraordinary good fortune' to give birth, aged forty-two, to her only daughter, Susannah, an event that she felt 'profoundly' improved the quality of her work (Macfarlane). She gradually abandoned the traditional social survey techniques that informed 'The Gold Coast Cocoa Farmer: a Preliminary Survey' (1956), and crafted a pioneering new role as an engaged, empirical 'field economist'. She began to conduct village-level studies, painstakingly collecting life-histories, reconstructing inheritance patterns, and relating them to documentary and archival sources (especially nineteenth-century land maps). She remained in the Gold Coast following its independence (as Ghana) in 1957 and the re-naming of the University College of the Gold Coast as the University of Ghana in 1961. 
In 1961-2, at the invitation of Meyer Fortes, Hill spent a year as a Smuts fellow at the department of social anthropology at Cambridge, analysing her data and writing her seminal work 'The Migrant Cocoa-Farmers of Southern Ghana' (1963). She was awarded a PhD in 1967 for this work, and it was republished in 1997. Eschewing economic abstractions or Marxist generalizations, the book carefully documented how some migrant farmers formed collectives (called 'companies') to purchase parcels of farmland for subsequent investment and redistribution, while others relied on the wealth of their matrilineal group to purchase 'family' land as individuals, over which descendants had use-rights. The particular accumulation strategies of these dynamic rural entrepreneurs demonstrated the different economic rationalities they deployed. Her empiricism, and her sensitivity to geography, history, and social structure, led her to challenge homogenous depictions of an African subsistence 'peasantry', and the notion that the west African cocoa industry had been created by the colonial authorities, rather than the farmers themselves. The quality of her field research was visible in the rich narrative case-studies appended to each chapter. The approach defined all her subsequent work. 
On returning to Ghana, Hill moved to the Institute of African Studies and began work on cattle rearing in northern Ghana, publishing 'Rural Capitalism in West Africa' (1970). Concerned about her daughter's health, she left Ghana in 1965 for a non-stipendiary fellowship at Clare Hall, Cambridge. Ever independent and just as resourceful, she eked out a series of research grants to continue field research in Hausaland, northern Nigeria, and later in Kano, publishing the acclaimed 'Rural Hausa: a Village and a Setting' (1972) and 'Population, Prosperity and Poverty: Rural Kano 1900 to 1970' (1977). 
Recognition for Hill's contribution to an emergent field of economic anthropology came eventually, with her election in 1973 as Smuts reader in Commonwealth studies at Cambridge. A sabbatical in 1977 took her to Karnataka in India, which led to 'Dry Grain Farming Families: Hausaland (Nigeria) and Karnataka (India) Compared' (1982). In all she completed thirteen years of field research, more than most anthropologists. Her reputation grew with the expansion of development studies and the waning hold of structural Marxism on anthropology. Mounting frustration at the economists' 'ignorance' of the realities of rural poverty led her to write what she called a 'constructive' polemic (Macfarlane). 'Development Economics on Trial: the Anthropological Case for the Prosecution' (1986) went into six editions. 
After what she called her 'slow start' Polly Hill's commitment to scholarship (which resulted in nine books and some fifty articles) continued into her eighties, along with her passion for poetry, sculpture, and modern art. Yet her last project on the history of female students at Cambridge was rejected by publishers. This reinforced her sense that, as a woman living for much of her career in the academic 'hinterland', her contributions had been overlooked. Undaunted, she wrote 'The History of the Isleham Fens' (1990), and co-edited 'Lydia and Maynard: Letters between Lydia Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes' (1989). Cared for by her daughter and her family in her last years, she died at 4 Coates Drove, Isleham, Ely, Cambridgeshire, on 21 August 2005, of bronchopneumonia. A memorial celebration was held at Clare Hall on 28 May 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 96649


Selwyn, Victor (1917-2005), journalist and literary editor, was born Victor Solomin at 19 Northcote Road, Battersea, London, on 11 January 1917, one of five children of Leon Solomin, later Selwyn, fur trader, and his wife, Sophia, 'nee' Melnick. His parents had emigrated from Lithuania. Educated in London, he graduated BSc from the London School of Economics shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War. 
During the war Selwyn served in the Surrey regiment in north Africa and Italy as a navigation officer. But it was in Cairo in 1942 that he found his mission in life when, in Music for All, a meeting place for servicemen, he and two other men, David Burk and Denis Saunders -- none of them with a higher rank than corporal -- wondered why there seemed to be no poetry about the Second World War as there was about the First. Within four months, with the help of General Sir Henry Maitland (Jumbo) Wilson, the commander-in-chief in the Middle East, they appealed in newspapers and on the radio for poetry from men serving in the region. More than 3000 poems from 800 would-be contributors arrived, and a substantial selection was published under the title of 'Oasis' by Salamander Productions in Cairo in 1943. 
When he returned from the war Selwyn worked for a time as a market-research statistician. On 20 October 1946, at the synagogue in Singers Hill, Birmingham, he married Irene Rebecca Cohen, the 26-year-old daughter of Philip Cohen, tailor. They had two daughters, Trixie ('b'. 1949) and Louise ('b'. 1957). Selwyn's interest in writing eventually led to a successful career as a freelance journalist, and he wrote on a wide variety of subjects -- including athletics, economics, and medical topics -- for such newspapers as the 'Daily Telegraph', 'The Guardian' and 'The Times'. He also published several books, 'Investment Guide Western Europe' (1972), 'Guide to National Practices in Western Europe' (1973) and 'Plan your Route: the New Approach to Map Reading' (1987). In 1955 the family moved from Acton to Hove and then in 1960 to 7 Lenham Avenue, Saltdean, where they remained until his death. 
During the 1970s the idea of collecting and publishing the poetry of the Second World War was revived. Selwyn and several of the original Cairo poets established the Salamander Oasis Trust in 1976, and advertised for poetry from British servicemen everywhere. This appeal attracted thousands of poems and related items, and Selwyn and the trust began to seek publication. The first post-war anthology, 'Return to Oasis: War Poems and Recollections from the Middle East, 1940-1946', was published with an introduction by Lawrence Durrell in 1980. It was followed in 1983 by 'From Oasis into Italy: War Poems and Diaries from Africa and Italy 1940-1946', with a preface by Field Marshal Lord Carver. Both books were published by Shepheard-Walwyn. As more wartime writing was discovered, J. M. Dent published 'Poems of the Second World War: the Oasis Selection' in 1985 and 'More Poems of the Second World War: the Oasis Selection' in 1989. An anthology, especially edited (with Dennis Butts) for schoolchildren, 'Schools Oasis: Poems of the Second World War', was published by Nelson in 1992, and, fifty years after the end of the war in Europe, Penguin published 'The Voice of War: Poems of the Second World War, the Oasis Collection' in 1995. Selwyn edited or co-edited all these works. 
The Salamander Oasis Trust gradually expanded its interest during these years, trying to find, preserve, and, where possible, publish the poetry and diaries from all theatres of the war by men and women from the Commonwealth as well as Britain, including the famous, such as Keith Douglas's 'Elegy for an 88 Gunner' (''Vergissmeinicht''), as well as Elsie Cawser's less well-known comic 'Salvage Song' and the anonymous ballad 'The D-Day Dodgers'. There were poems about Dunkirk, Arnhem, and Belsen but also about air-raids, monotonous food, and missing letters. This was the stuff of a people's war. Selwyn, who eventually became editor-in-chief of the Salamander Oasis Trust, defined the character of its publications in his introduction to the 'Schools Oasis': 'In contrast to many anthologies, the 'Oasis' series includes only poems by those serving in World War Two and written at the time. This gives the poems their immediacy. Poems, especially from the unknowns, smell of war, an authenticity ensured by the compilers having also been participants in that War, both serving and writing. That is how it was. We were there.' Apart from helping to collect and edit the material, Selwyn laboured tirelessly on behalf of the trust. Money had to be raised somehow, from charities and private donations, and often by public readings and the sale of books and audio-tapes. Hundreds of letters had to be written and numerous phone-calls made. Selwyn called upon the support of former servicemen, including Ian Fletcher, Denis Healey, and Spike Milligan, and was also able to persuade gifted performers, like Dirk Bogarde, Barry Humphries, and Martin Jarvis, to help with public performances. 
Selwyn's energy and (often stubborn) determination undoubtedly made him the driving force behind the Salamander Oasis Trust and all its works. He remained indefatigable, despite numerous ailments, and successfully resisted throat cancer in his later years. The trust lodged more than 17,000 poems and related documents in the Imperial War Museum, and thus made an invaluable contribution to an understanding of the Second World War. Selwyn was appointed MBE in 1996 in recognition of his contribution to Second World War literature. He died of aspiration pneumonia at Ireland Lodge, Lockwood Crescent, Brighton, on 26 October 2005, and his body was cremated at Woodvale crematorium, Brighton, on 4 November. He was survived by his wife and their two daughters. A memorial poetry reading held at the Imperial War Museum on 7 December ended with a spirited rendition of 'The D-Day Dodgers', led by Lord Healey. 


@@@@@


doc= 96666


Obote, (Apolo) Milton (1925-2005), prime minister and president of Uganda, was born on 28 December 1925 at Akokoro in Lira district, Lango, northern Uganda, the son of Stanley Opeto Anyanga, a farmer who eventually became a minor chief, and his second wife, Priscilla Acen Eyer. 
Obote was educated in Church of Uganda (Anglican) schools. Starting his schooling in 1936 at Ibuje elementary vernacular school for boys, he went on to an elementary school at Boroboro, thence to Gulu high school, and finally to Busoga College, Mwiri, where he took his school certificate. At each stage he strove, almost obsessively, to come top of the class. From Mwiri he gained entrance to Makerere College, Kampala, where he wanted to study law, which Makerere did not then teach. He therefore took a general arts course studying English, geography, and general studies. He was at Makerere for the years 1948 and 1949, but he then left after an apparent mix-up over an offer of a place to study law abroad that the protectorate government would not fund. This left him with a grudge against the colonial authority. He went to Kenya briefly before returning to Uganda and finding employment with the construction company Mowlem, and in 1952 joined the newly formed Uganda National Congress. When sent to Kenya for the second time by Mowlem he was active in the Kenya African Union. 
There was less popular pressure for independence in Uganda than in Kenya and Tanganyika: there were hardly any white settlers and protectorate rule had been relatively benign. The country faced two main problems on the road to independence. The first was the ambition of the Buganda kingdom to retain the privileged status it had enjoyed under protectorate rule, even if that meant secession. The second was the religious divide between the Roman Catholics and the protestants (the Anglican Church of Uganda). There were virtually no other Christian denominations in Uganda. A plethora of political parties emerged, fissured, and merged again until only two remained: the Democratic Party, identified with the Roman Catholics, and the protestant Uganda People's Congress (UPC), of which Obote emerged as the leader. The parties strove to overcome this sectarian identification but in the pre-independence elections of 1961 the Democratic Party defeated the UPC largely because the mainly protestant Ganda boycotted the election. Benedicto Kiwanuka then became Uganda's first prime minister. When new national elections were held in April 1962 Obote forged an alliance with the royalist Kabaka Yekka ('the king alone') party of Buganda, in order to win, and succeeded Kiwanuka as prime minister. At independence on 9 October 1962 Obote remained prime minister, as he did following the declaration of a republic exactly a year later, when the 'kabaka' of Buganda, Frederick Mutesa, became president. On 11 November 1963 Obote married Miria Kalule ('b'. 1936), with whom he had four sons. 
In January 1964 Obote faced his first challenge in the shape of a mutiny in the over-rapidly expanded army at the main barracks at Jinja, Uganda's second city and the site of the only bridge over the Nile. No one has ever fully explained why the armies of all three east African countries should have mutinied in the same month, though dissatisfaction with pay and promotion were issues. The presidents of all three countries called in British troops to quell the mutinies. Before these could arrive in Uganda, Obote sent Felix Onama, minister of defence, to negotiate with the mutineers. He was taken captive by them and gave in to most of their demands, including huge pay rises and rapid promotions. A contingent of 450 British soldiers then put down the mutiny without a shot being fired. Obote made the mistake that neither of the other east African presidents did, of failing to discipline the mutineers, for which he was later to pay dearly. Among those too rapidly promoted was Idi Amin, who had escaped court martial for a massacre committed under his command. He was one of only two Ugandan commissioned officers and neither the governor nor Obote felt it would be wise to court-martial him on the eve of independence. Obote came to regret this decision. The following April, Obote set up the General Service Unit, dedicated to countering insurgency and under the command of Akena Adoko, a close associate. 
Having used the Kabaka Yekka to gain power Obote now worked to render this alliance unnecessary and establish a one-party state. By July 1964 sufficient Democratic Party and Kabaka Yekka members of the national assembly had been induced to cross the floor and join the UPC to render the alliance unnecessary. The pretext for Obote to take over the presidency occurred two years later. He was secretly aiding the Simba rebels against President Moise Tshombe of Congo on the grounds that Tshombe was a puppet of Western capitalist interests. Obote kept this secret, even from his cabinet, not all of whom would have approved. Amin was entrusted with gold and ivory by the rebels to be used in payment for arms; he later deposited the equivalent of $24,000 sterling into his personal bank account. Early in 1966, when Obote was away from Kampala, an MP, Daudi Ocheng, who was dying of cancer and knew he would therefore be secure against victimization, accused Amin in the national assembly of embezzling the money and called for an inquiry into the actions of Amin, Obote, and two other government ministers who, he claimed, had taken their share of the proceeds. This call had the overwhelming support of MPs and provided a focus for their distrust of Obote. On his return to Kampala, Obote detained five ministers whom he suspected of plotting to overthrow him, and appointed a judge of the court of appeal of eastern Africa, Sir Clement Nageon De Lestang, to hold an inquiry, whose findings, however, were not published until after Obote had been ousted from power. Obote then introduced a new constitution, which he forced the national assembly to accept unseen (it was known as the 'pigeonhole constitution': MPs were told they could collect it from their pigeonholes after the debate was over). Obote went on to declare himself president with full executive powers and appointed Amin head of the army, which was recruited mainly from the supposedly warlike peoples of northern Uganda, as had been colonial practice. 
The 'kabaka' refused to accept Obote's usurpation of power, and on 20 May the Buganda parliament ordered the Ugandan government off Bugandan soil within ten days. Obote's response was to impose a state of emergency and on 24 May he ordered the army under Amin to investigate reports that there was a cache of arms in the 'kabaka''s palace. The troops overran the palace in a day-long bloody battle in which many Ganda were killed or wounded. The 'kabaka' escaped over the back wall, eventually finding refuge in Britain. The Ganda elsewhere rose in the 'kabaka''s defence, and were violently suppressed: the army high command had difficulty in restraining the troops. These events left the Ganda with a lasting hatred of Obote. A state of emergency was imposed in Buganda that remained in force as long as Obote remained in power. In September 1967 Obote abolished all the pre-colonial kingdoms of southern and western Uganda. Because the army had been used to resolve a political matter, Obote and all successive Ugandan governments became dependent on it. 
In the next two years Obote moved to restrict the Asians who dominated the import-export trade (this was a popular move), and towards the end of 1969 announced the 'move to the left', to be expounded in five documents. The first, announced in October, was the 'National service proposal', and the second in December was 'The common man's charter'. A few days later, on 19 December, an assassination attempt was made on Obote in Lugogo stadium. There was no one but soldiers in the area of the stadium from which the shots were fired. Obote was not seriously hurt, but was rushed to hospital through streets where his army escort shot at bystanders. Responsibility for the attempt was never firmly placed, but Amin fled Kampala and was believed to be implicated. Throughout 1970 further policy initiatives were taken to implement the 'move to the left'. In April and May many companies were nationalized, investors took fright, and an economic crisis followed, with imported goods ceasing to be available and supermarket shelves emptying while the value of the Ugandan currency fell against both sterling and the dollar. In November 1970 Obote expelled 33,000 Kenyan workers, which damaged the economy further, though some began filtering back fairly soon. 
While Obote was attending a Commonwealth heads of government meeting in Singapore, Amin seized power in a coup on 25 January 1971. The immediate cause seems to have been an attempt by Obote to curb military expenditure. His failure to exert control over the army now proved to be his undoing. It had been a disastrous mistake not to court-martial Amin for the pre-independence massacre and then to promote him. Obote had other shortcomings as well. He lacked the charisma of the other east African leaders, Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya and Julius Nyerere of Tanzania. He was a tactician and manipulator rather than an orator and populist. Uganda lacked any common language in which he could address the nation, nor did Uganda have any slogan around which support could focus, like Kenya's 'Harambee' ('togetherness') and Tanzania's 'Ujamaa' ('familyhood'). The 'move to the left' and 'The common man's charter' were attempts to fill this gap, but they came too late and failed to capture the popular imagination. 
Throughout the period of Amin's rule Obote was given sanctuary in Tanzania by President Julius Nyerere, who shared his socialist views. The chance of making a comeback occurred in 1978-9 when Amin tried to divert attention away from the murderous factions forming within his army by invading Tanzania's Kagera salient, a triangle of land adjacent to south-west Uganda, in response to alleged provocations by Tanzanian troops. Tanzanian forces, together with a small contingent of Ugandan exiles loyal to Obote, counter-attacked. Finding no serious resistance, they fought their way on foot to Kampala, which they reached on 10 April 1979, and thence pushed through to the Sudan border. Obote had been sidelined at the Moshi unity conference held in March 1979 by exiled Ugandan leaders to plan their next moves. His return to fight elections in early 1980 was engineered by Paulo Muwanga, who had emerged as the strong man, after the two disastrous, but short-lived, presidencies of Yusufu Lule and Godfrey Binaisa. The 1980 elections were shamelessly rigged after the Commonwealth observer group had left so as to return Obote and the UPC to power, a result that was not accepted by a large part of the Ugandan population. 
Obote's second presidency was marked, not mainly by what he did, but by what he omitted to do. His overriding failure was shared with Muwanga: between them they failed to bring the largely untrained Uganda National Liberation Army under control or to prevent tribal factionalism developing within it. Acholi and Langi troops, who had suffered most from Amin, took early revenge against West Nile, the district from which Amin and many of his followers had come. By mid-1983 there were nearly 100,000 refugees from West Nile in Zaire and Sudan. By 1984 a few had returned under a scheme operated by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, but many remained in exile until Obote had been overthrown. 
In order to halt the economic decline Obote's government dropped all pretensions to socialism, accepting World Bank and International Monetary Fund advisers. As a result the West, and Britain in particular, turned a blind eye to reports of atrocities. In the context of the cold war, Yoweri Museveni, whose well-disciplined Uganda Resistance Army and Movement was winning popular support in western Uganda, was seen as dangerously left-wing, whereas Obote's new dedication to capitalism aligned Uganda with Western interests in this part of Africa and helped provide a bulwark against socialist Tanzania and Sudan. 
The undisciplined forces of the Ugandan army having driven many Ugandans into exile, Obote now turned against those who had taken refuge in Uganda, blaming them for atrocities committed by Uganda's unruly troops. The Rwandese were popular targets, accused of taking land. In 1982 members of the UPC youth wing in Ankole in south-western Uganda turned on those who had been settled on land near the border with Rwanda, and eventually against all Rwandese, no matter how long they had been in Uganda or whether or not they were Ugandan citizens -- and many of them were. Many were driven back into Rwanda, where they were not permitted to leave the border areas, or were trapped on the border. All speakers of Kinyarwanda who remained in Uganda were eventually moved to refugee camps elsewhere, whether they were refugees or not. The expulsion of Rwandese and their subsequent mistreatment had long-term consequences. Rwandese naturally turned to support Yoweri Museveni's insurgency and joined the National Resistance Army, which eventually ousted Obote from power. These were the people who subsequently defected from the National Resistance Army and invaded Rwanda in 1990, and it was in the context of this invasion that the Rwandan genocide of 1994 was sparked off. 
When Museveni's forces moved to the Luwero Triangle to the north-west of the capital in 1982-3, the Uganda National Liberation Army responded by rounding up the civilian population, placing them in camps, and shooting them as insurgents if they ventured out to find food or water. The Uganda government eventually had to call in the international aid agencies to deal with what the agencies considered an emergency of the government's own making, but one so acute that they felt bound to assist. The atrocities committed by the Uganda National Liberation Army alienated the civilian population and provided support for the well-disciplined National Resistance Army soldiers. Torture was documented by Amnesty International in a report dated 18 June 1985, which shook Britain and Uganda's Western allies. This included a report of the totally unprovoked massacre at Namugongo, not even in the conflict area, of 100 persons including the principal and students of a theological college, and the imam of a nearby mosque. 
Divisions within the army were Obote's eventual undoing. In 1985, in a belated attempt to exercise control over the army, he promoted a clan-relative, Brigadier Smith Opon Acak, as commander-in-chief over the heads of more experienced generals. This act precipitated a putsch led by Bazilio Olara-Okello and Tito Lutwa Okello in which he was ousted from power for the second time. In January 1986 Yoweri Museveni captured Kampala and was proclaimed president. 
No neighbouring country would give Obote sanctuary: he eventually found refuge in Zambia, where he was forced to live in semi-isolation but was politically active in supporting the UPC. He only resigned from the chairmanship of his much depleted party early in 2005. His wife, Miria, succeeded him. He died of kidney failure in a Johannesburg hospital a few months later, on 10 October 2005. He was given a state send-off from South Africa when his body was returned to Uganda, and a controversial eight-day lying-in-state and state funeral at All Saints' Cathedral in Kampala, on the order of his old foe, Museveni; he was, after all, the person who had finally led Uganda to independence. His body was then taken to Lango and buried on 22 October at Akokoro, where he had been born. 


@@@@@


doc= 96669


Aitken, Laurel (1925-2005), singer, songwriter, and record producer, was born on 22 April 1925, in Jamaica, one of six children of a Jamaican father and a Cuban mother. His early years were spent in Havana, Cuba, but the family moved to Kingston, Jamaica, in 1938. When fifteen years old he reputedly won a talent show at Kingston's Ambassador Theatre with his rendition of 'Pennies from Heaven'. Later he worked for the Jamaican tourist board, welcoming arrivals from the incoming cruise ships with currently popular songs. By the early 1950s he had assumed the name Laurel, or sometimes Lorenzo, Aitken, becoming a regular feature on the island's entertainment circuit, performing songs drawn from the popular hits of the American charts as well as jump blues, boogie, rhythm and blues, and indigenous material from the genres of mento and calypso. 
Laurel Aitken first recorded at the Motta Recording Studios of Stanley Motta, based at 93 Hanover Street in Kingston. Just around the corner was Motta's store on Harbour Road, where the records were sold. Aitken sang his own composition in the popular mento style 'I Met a Senorita', coupled with a merengue entitled 'Merenguita'. Going on to secure a residency at the Colony Club in Half Way Tree, he was able to finance the production of more songs in the studio. His first hit record was a rhythm and blues based calypso-spiritual, 'Roll Jordan Roll', released by another local entrepreneur, Dada Tewari. 
Reflecting the common practice of many of the American artists who influenced him, Aitken had two distinct sides to his recorded output. On the one hand he dealt with secular subject matters, usually based around the themes of women, alcohol, and good times; on the other he recorded material that reflected a different context. 'Ghana Independence' and 'Nebuchanezer' were released about 1957 on Caribou 78s, and he recorded a series of gospel songs for a number of different producers, including 'Zion' and 'Judgement Day' for Duke Reid, and 'What a Weeping' and 'Zion City Wall' for Leslie Kong. One unusual element that distinguished many of these recordings was the use of a trio of drums known as the 'burro' -- bass drum, funde, and repeater -- that would later be popularized by Prince Buster's recording of the Folks Brothers' 'Oh! Carolina', the work of Count Ossie and the Mystical Revelation of Rastafari, and eventually too in many examples of the most widespread of Jamaican musical genres, roots reggae. 
In 1958 Aitken began recording for the producer Chris Blackwell's newly created Island label. His single 'Boogie in My Bones', backed by 'Little Sheila', was the label's debut release and also one of the earliest examples of the emerging genre that was to become known as 'ska' -- a music indigenous to Jamaica but based on the shuffle blues originating in New Orleans. Aitken had taken a step in this direction the year earlier with the release of 'Aitken's Boogie' on Ken Khouri's Federal label. But 'Boogie in My Bones' was a huge breakthrough hit in Jamaica and topped the Jamaican Broadcasting Company chart for almost three months. Its success warranted a domestic release in Britain, thereby gaining the distinction of the first Jamaican pop record to be issued there. 
In 1960 Emil Shallit's Kalypso label released 'Aitken's Boogie' in Britain, and in that year Aitken emigrated to England, settling in Brixton, where there was an established Jamaican community. He was prominent in the development of Shallit's Blue Beat label, a name that became synonymous with the music it showcased, releasing a further sixteen titles on the label over the following few years. Through this decade, as ska changed into rocksteady and rocksteady to reggae, Aitken established himself as a producer. He worked with such bands as the Bees, the Cimarons, and the Rudies, all of whom acted as backing and support bands for Aitken's own material, as well as with the singer Winston Groovy and the all-white reggae band Inner Mind. He also occasionally recorded under the pseudonym King Horror on a number of comedy talk-over deejay tracks such as 'Loch Ness Monster', 'Dracula, Prince of Darkness', and 'The Hole'. 
Laurel Aitken, Jamaica's first genuine recording star, became famous not only for his groundbreaking and popular records but also for his snappy dress sense, Italian-styled mohair suit, pork pie hat, and shades. His appearance earned him the sobriquets Godfather of Ska and Boss Skinhead, and created an icon that lived on through the 2 Tone era when the sound of ska was revived across Britain by bands like the Specials, Madness, and the Beat. During this period Aitken's career went through a resurgence when he had a hit with 'Rudie Got Married' as an answer to the Specials' 'A Message to You, Rudie'. In the 1980s he regularly toured the UK and recorded with the British act Potato 5. In 1986 he appeared alongside David Bowie in the film 'Absolute Beginners'. He also recorded with Japan's Ska Flames, Germany's Busters, and America's Toasters. 
In 2003 Aitken was treated for double pneumonia but recovered and went on to perform again; his last concert was in January 2005. Having lived in Leicester since the 1970s, he died at Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, on 17 July 2005, of chronic respiratory failure and heart failure. He was survived by his wife, Sandra Olga Stephens, and his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 96671


Charles, Dame (Mary) Eugenia (1919-2005), prime minister of Dominica, was born on 15 May 1919 at Pointe Michel, near Roseau, on the south-west coast of Dominica, the daughter of John Baptiste Charles (who died in 1983, at the age of 107), businessman, and his wife, Josephine, 'nee' Delauney. Her father was a successful fruit exporter and the founder of the Dominica Co-operative Bank, a 'penny bank' for small savers. She was educated at the Convent High School, Roseau, and St Joseph's Convent, Grenada, and remained a devout Roman Catholic throughout her life. She read law at the University of Toronto and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, London, in 1947. She began private practice in Dominica in 1949. She wrote anonymous articles for 'The Herald' and later 'The Star' newspapers that were highly critical of the ruling Dominica Labour Party. She was in the vanguard of those who founded the Dominica Freedom Party in 1968 following demonstrations against the passing of a 'Seditious and Undesirable Publications Act' in July by the Dominica Labour Party, then under the premiership of Edward Oliver Le Blanc. She failed to win the Roseau North seat in the general election of 1970, contesting it against the future prime minister, Patrick John, but entered the House of Assembly as a nominated member that year. 
In the general elections of 1975 Charles contested and won the Roseau Central seat and became leader of opposition in the new parliament. She was a delegate at the constitutional conference held at Marlborough House, London, in 1977, and was an active spokesperson in the public meetings related to the constitution in the run up to independence in November 1978. During political upheavals and a constitutional crisis leading to the resignation of Patrick John in 1979 she served as a member of the Committee for National Salvation that brokered the creation of an interim government under the premiership of the Dominica Labour Party's Oliver Seraphine to administer Dominica until a general election could be organized. She became the first Caribbean woman prime minister when she led the Dominica Freedom Party to victory in the 1980 general election. During this time she was given the nickname Mamo, by which she was popularly known for the rest of her life. Regionally she immediately became part of a formidable team of Caribbean leaders including Edward Seaga of Jamaica and Tom Adams of Barbados, who dominated Caribbean public life in the 1980s. 
Charles's first term was dedicated to the reconstruction of housing, roads, and other infrastructure destroyed by Hurricane David, which had hit Dominica on 29 August 1979, and in getting the business of government and foreign relations back into order. This was made more difficult by destabilization and the attempted coups to overthrow her government in 1981 and the court cases that followed. (Patrick John was jailed for twelve years for his part in one such attempted coup, in conjunction with North American white supremacist groups.) Her government was re-elected in 1985 with a reduced majority and again in 1990 when the United Workers' Party, formed in 1988, became the main opposition in parliament. 
In 1991 Charles was made a DBE by Elizabeth II at Harare, Zimbabwe, during the Commonwealth heads of government meeting. She retired from the House of Assembly in 1995 and her Dominica Freedom Party lost the general election of that year after fifteen years in power. During that time the country rose to an economic peak in 1988 but the momentum was not maintained and by 1993 there was evidence of the beginning of an economic decline, due mainly to changes in international trade affecting the banana industry, the reduction of foreign aided projects, and the economics of scale in relation to small independent island states. Conflict over her domination of the cabinet and her views on a successor marred the last two years of her leadership. Her firm and forthright character and clear-cut opinions were seen by some to be abrasive and she made many enemies, but her admirers cited these as the only means by which to accomplish results in difficult circumstances. She was best known outside Dominica for her staunch anti-communism during the last years of the cold war in the Caribbean and, as chairman of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, for leading the invitation to the United States government under President Ronald Reagan to invade Grenada in October 1983. For this she was often referred to as the Iron Lady of the Caribbean. 
Following her retirement in 1995 Charles watched from the sidelines as the fortunes of the Dominica Freedom Party rapidly declined under new leadership, eventually losing all of its seats in the House of Assembly at the general election of 2005. By then Charles's memory and mental capacity to absorb what was going on around her were fading and in the opinion of those close to her she had lost the will to live by the time she fell and fractured her left hip on 27 August 2005. She was flown to Martinique for treatment, but died of a pulmonary embolism in Fort de France, Martinique, on 6 September. She was buried in Pointe Michel on 14 September, after a funeral service at La Sallette Roman Catholic church. She never married and had no children. Her death removed another of the core group of regional leaders, including Tom Adams of Barbados, Sir John Compton of St Lucia, Sir Vere Cornwall Bird of Antigua, and Sir James Mitchell of St Vincent and the Grenadines, who dominated the politics of the eastern Caribbean during the latter part of the twentieth century, when the islands attained independence from Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 96674


Cleland, William Paton (1912-2005), cardiothoracic surgeon, was born on 30 May 1912 in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, the only son and third of five children of Sir John Burton Cleland (1878-1971), pathologist and naturalist, and his wife, Dora Isabel, 'nee' Paton. His father became professor of pathology at the University of Adelaide in 1920 and his dedication to the environment was recognized by the naming of Cleland Conservation Park in the Mount Lofty Ranges in South Australia. The Cleland family had been involved in law, viticulture, and medicine in Australia since 1852. 
Cleland was educated at Scotch College and graduated in medicine from the University of Adelaide in 1934. After junior appointments at the Royal Adelaide Hospital he worked his way as a ship's doctor to England at the age of twenty-seven in order to specialize as a physician in chest medicine. He gained a post at the Brompton Hospital for Diseases of the Chest, from where he obtained membership of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1939 (becoming a fellow in 1967). But encouraged by the senior surgeon, Tudor Edwards, who thought that he would make a good surgeon, he then became the resident surgical officer at the Brompton. His mother did not approve, commenting, 'Bill was never any good at carpentry'. Cleland was later to say, 'Little did mother know that cardio-thoracic surgery owes more to plumbing than to carpentry' ('Courier Mail', 4 May 2005). During the Second World War he served in the Emergency Medical Service at the Horton Hospital, Epsom, where he operated on both military and civilian patients, removing bomb fragments from the heart and lungs and also operating for pulmonary tuberculosis. Meanwhile on 18 May 1940, at the Church of St Mary the Virgin, Hampstead, he married Norah Goodhart (1914-1994), daughter of George Elijah Goodhart, a stockbroker. They had a daughter, Janet, and two sons, Peter and John. 
In 1946 Cleland became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England and started out on his lifetime's work as a consultant cardiothoracic surgeon, gaining appointments concurrently at King's College Hospital and the Brompton Hospital (from 1948) and Hammersmith Hospital, at the Postgraduate Medical School of London (from 1949). The appointment at Hammersmith was to prove the highlight of his surgical career. He also served as civilian consultant to the Royal Navy and adviser in thoracic surgery to the Department of Health and Social Security. 
Cardiac surgery developed rapidly after 1945 when the first 'blue baby' operation was carried out in America, but such operations were all done with an intact beating heart and there was an urgent need to be able to open the heart and fully correct the defects. For this a heart-lung machine was needed and at Hammersmith Hospital Denis Melrose invented a pump oxygenator in 1952, with which Cleland performed the first such open heart operation in Britain in 1957. Having seen the apparatus, Alexander Bakulev from Moscow was keen to buy one and start open heart surgery in the Soviet Union. He invited Melrose to bring the Hammersmith team, with Cleland and Hugh Bentall as the surgeons, and four others, to visit Moscow in May 1959. Four children with congenital heart disease were selected for surgery. Two of them were very blue children with the tetralogy of Fallot, a condition on which the team had never before operated. But all four operations were successful and the deputy prime minister, Anastas Mikoyan, embraced the theatre sister, Phyllis Bowtle, saying, 'Doctors are clean, but politicians are dirty' ('Daily Mail', 16 May 1959). This was probably the first time that a foreign medical team had actually worked in the Soviet Union, as distinct from just being shown around. 
In 1968 an article by Cleland and his colleagues in 'The Lancet' entitled 'A decade of open heart surgery' gave details of 1200 operations, which showed the safety of using extra-corporeal circulation, and he published a landmark paper in 'Thorax' in 1983, 'The evolution of cardiac surgery in the United Kingdom'. He wrote chapters on heart surgery for several textbooks and over seventy papers. He continued to do pulmonary operations and his paper in 'The Lancet' in 1963 comparing surgery with radiotherapy remained throughout his lifetime one of the very few randomized trials in lung cancer surgery. He edited the 'Journal of Cardiovascular Surgery' from 1978 to 1983. 
Cleland was an unflappable and meticulous surgeon, and the theatre was always calm when he was operating. Although he was seemingly unhurried, quite suddenly an operation would be finished. Many surgeons and physicians from Britain and abroad came to Hammersmith to learn new techniques and Cleland lectured and performed heart operations in Europe and the Middle East. For his work in their countries he was made a commander of the order of the Falcon of Iceland and a commander of the order of the Lion of Finland. He was the first director of surgery at the Institute for Diseases of the Chest at the Brompton Hospital, London, where one of his colleagues was the pioneer chest and cardiac surgeon Russell Claude Brock. Cleland was an extremely hard worker and outside the operating theatre he was very active in promoting his specialism by teaching, writing, and lecturing, and he trained many young surgeons from abroad who later themselves became leaders in their own countries. 
Cleland, known to all as Bill, was a strongly built man with a soft Australian accent. He was warm hearted, always a pleasure to be with, and someone who others felt instinctively could be completely trusted and reliable. Latterly he and his wife lived in Green Meadows, an eighteenth-century mill house in Goodworth Clatford, near Andover in Hampshire, with a trout stream running through the property. He was an outstanding angler, fishing being his main hobby, and the salmon of the River Spey, Lapland, and Iceland were magnets for him. At home he was a keen gardener and beekeeper, and he usually won top prizes in the annual village show at Goodworth Clatford, where he was much loved for his modesty, wisdom, and wit. Second only to fishing was his great love of opera, with Angela Gheorghiu latterly his favourite diva. He was proud of his ancestry and he became the twenty-sixth head of an ancient Scottish family that traced its history back to a cousin of William Wallace. In his nineties he was physically frail but as alert as ever. He died comfortably and peacefully at home in his own bed on 29 March 2005 after only a short illness. A lifelong friend remarked, 'How typical of Bill to have arranged his death so well' (private information). The main cause of death was malignant neoplasm of the prostate. He was cremated at Salisbury and survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 96677


Inman, William Howard Wallace (1929-2005), medical researcher and pharmaco-epidemiologist, was born on 1 August 1929 at Braehead, Higher Drive, Cuddington, near Epsom, Surrey, the eldest of three sons of Wallace Mills Inman, industrial chemist, and later chairman of ICI's alkali division, and his wife, Maude Mary, 'nee' Andrews. He was educated at Ampleforth College, where he excelled at sports and broke the school junior mile cross-country record. He went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, to read medicine, but at the age of twenty-one, just as he was about to start his clinical training, he contracted poliomyelitis, which left him in hospital for three years and in a wheelchair for the rest of his life. Cambridge had no medical clinical school at that time, the usual arrangement being to move to a London hospital for clinical training. Sensitive to Inman's disability, the university arranged for him to have individual tuition and training at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge, and so he became the first Cambridge medical graduate. After qualifying he spent three years as a junior hospital doctor at Addenbrooke's, before moving to his father's old company, ICI, but in the pharmaceutical division as a medical adviser. On 21 July 1962 he married June Evelyn Halfpenny, a 35-year-old shorthand typist, daughter of Stewart Arthur Maggs, electrical engineer, and widow of Douglas Halfpenny. Friends carried him in his wheelchair up the steps to the registry office in style. They had four daughters, one of whom died in infancy. 
In 1964, in the wake of the thalidomide disaster in which many thousands of children were born deformed as a result of their mothers taking thalidomide in pregnancy, Inman joined the Department of Health, to work with the newly formed committee on safety of drugs, chaired by Sir Derrick Dunlop. Inman's remit was to develop an early warning system to recognize adverse reactions to medicines. His solution was what came to be known as the 'yellow card scheme', so called because of the yellow forms on which doctors reported any problem experienced by patients suspected to be caused by taking a drug. This scheme stood the test of time as a means of generating signals of drug safety, and Inman used its database to investigate, among other problems, the relationship between oral contraceptives and venous thromboses, and that between the anaesthetic halothane and liver damage. But the yellow card system also suffered drawbacks, the main one being under-reporting. One of the most important examples of this was with the 'beta blocker' practolol, which caused severe eye complications, including blindness, in several hundred patients, but there was no signal of this from yellow cards. 
Inman believed that a second drug safety alert system was needed to supplement the yellow card scheme, but he found little support for his proposals in the Department of Health. So in 1980 he left the department to set up the Drug Safety Research Unit in Southampton, affiliated to the university there, with Inman as its first professor of pharmaco-epidemiology. He established a new monitoring system for recently introduced drugs, known as prescription event monitoring, in which general practitioners' prescriptions were used to generate a questionnaire to be completed by doctors on some 10,000 or more patients prescribed a new drug, thus providing information on adverse effects. This scheme proved to be complementary to the yellow card scheme, as Inman had hoped, and both formed important parts of the UK's programme to monitor drug safety. His concern for drug safety had an international dimension too. With collaborators he was influential in persuading the World Health Organization to set up its own drug safety monitoring programme. 
Perhaps predictably, Inman did not have a comfortable relationship with the industry whose products he was monitoring. He regarded many of its post-marketing safety schemes as being no more than promotional exercises, and he was very critical of the involvement of industry with post-graduate medical education. Equally, his contacts with the Department of Health were not always easy, as he saw the relationship between government and the pharmaceutical industry as being too close. Thus he frequently had problems raising funds for his projects, since both the usual sources were unhelpful. 
Inman's immobility from his poliomyelitis did not interfere with a range of physical activities that would have been daunting to an able-bodied person. He learned to fly gliders, continued his earlier passion for fowling, and drove motor cars both in the UK and abroad. He travelled extensively and was in great demand both nationally and internationally on lecture platforms, where he commanded great respect and affection. He retired from the Drug Safety Research Unit in 1994, and became medical vice-president of Remap, a charity run by engineers and physiotherapists that supplied free customized equipment to disabled people. In later years he developed post-polio syndrome, an affliction resembling motor neurone disease, and this led to his death at Southampton General Hospital on 20 October 2005. He was survived by his wife and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 96682


Kersh, Gerald (1911-1968), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 26 August 1911 at 18 High Street, Teddington, Middlesex, the son of Hyman Leon Kersh, born Chaim Kerszenblat (1877-1929), a Polish master tailor, and his wife, Leah, 'nee' Miller (1880-1962). He was brought up with his elder sisters Annette and Sylvia in a secular Jewish milieu in Teddington and Shepherd's Bush, and then in 1922 his father set up shop and home at 18 Blandford Street, near Marylebone, where his younger brother, Cyril, later a journalist and novelist, was born in 1925. He was educated at Christ Church School, Ealing, and won a scholarship to the Regent Street Polytechnic (1924-8). Kersh was a precocious child. At seven he wrote his first novel and published it privately in a limited edition of one copy, bound in his father's brocade waistcoat. He read his favourite writers, Guy de Maupassant and Charles Baudelaire, in French. After his father's death Kersh was unable to support his family and left so that he would not be a burden to them. He worked in London as a cinema manager, bodyguard, debt collector, cook in a fish and chip restaurant, travelling salesman, French teacher, and all-in-wrestler, among other trades, all of which contributed background and characters for his novels and short stories. At this time he frequently moved residence and his whereabouts were unknown to his family. 
In 1934 Kersh published his first novel, 'Jews without Jehovah' (1934), to positive reviews. However, four uncles and a cousin recognized unflattering portraits of themselves, sued the publisher, Wishart, and the book was withdrawn soon afterwards. His next novel, 'Men are so Ardent' (1935), was a critical and commercial failure, but this was followed by his most famous novel, 'Night and the City' (1938), which describes the exploits of a lowlife pimp, Harry Fabian, in 1930s Soho. Reviewers acknowledged the influence of contemporary American fiction, including Dashiell Hammett, John Dos Passos, and Ernest Hemingway, describing it as 'a brutal, ruthless piece of work' (Richard Church, 'John O'London's') that 'far surpasses anything of the kind recently published' (Frank Swinnerton, 'The Observer'). With the proceeds of this novel Kersh married Alice Thompson Rostron (1909-1986), daughter of Robert Rostron, farmer, on 12 December 1938, at Caxton Hall, London. In this period Kersh contributed numerous short stories and articles for newspapers and was credited as associate editor of the first seven issues of 'Courier Magazine' (1937-9) for which he wrote most of the content. Aspects of his early life form the basis of memoirs and stories in his autobiographical collection, 'I Got References' (1939), which included warm portraits of his family as his apology for his first novel. 
In 1940 Kersh joined the Coldstream Guards and published his training experiences anonymously in the 'Daily Herald' from September of that year, prior to their appearance as 'The Private Life of a Private' in 1941. These pieces were also rewritten and expanded as the novel 'They Die with Their Boots Clean' (1941), which became one of the best-sellers of the war years and led to a sequel, 'The Nine Lives of Bill Nelson' (1942). Having been buried alive during the blitz, Kersh was deemed unfit for combat. He therefore concentrated on writing -- often anonymously and pseudonymously -- for the BBC, Ministry of Information, and Ealing Studios, as well as for newspapers and magazines, among them 'The People' (as Piers England, which earned him a death threat from Adolf Hitler) and 'John Bull' (as Waldo Kellar). He estimated that he wrote over half a million words each year, a work rate that ruined his health. 
Kersh's first marriage was short-lived and, following a divorce, he married -- on 22 June 1943 at Caxton Hall, London -- Claire Alyne Boyle, known widely and simply as Lee ('b'. 1909), the Canadian-born daughter of Lucien Turcotte Pacaud, diplomat. The couple had lived together since 1939, with Kersh writing and Lee managing his career. He completed three more war novels: 'The Dead Look On' (1943), a chilling retelling of the Lidice atrocity; 'A Brain and Ten Fingers' (1943) about Yugoslav guerrillas, the proceeds of which went towards aiding their plight; and 'Faces in a Dusty Picture' (1944), about the North African desert campaign. These novels, in conjunction with three short-story collections, made him one of the best-selling authors of the war years, with print runs of his books limited only by paper restrictions. Having gained accreditation as a journalist with the United States army, Kersh covered the invasion of France, including the liberation of Paris, where he supplied food to his relatives, the Kershenblatt family. His wartime experiences are recounted in 'Clean, Bright and Slightly Oiled' (1946). 
Kersh first visited the USA in 1945, where he sold stories to major magazines including 'Cosmopolitan' and 'Esquire'. In 1946 'Night and the City' was published in the USA to acclaim, and eventually achieved a print run of over one million copies. The film rights were purchased and four years later Jules Dassin directed a film noir, atmospherically shot in the ruins of post-war London, starring Richard Widmark and Gene Tierney. Dassin's film bore little resemblance to Kersh's novel, in which he had no involvement. Heavily criticized by British reviewers as too seedy, Dassin's adaptation was subsequently praised as one of the best examples of its genre. In 1992 a remake, with Robert De Niro and Jessica Lange, transposed the action to New York and used Dassin's film as its source material. 
As the war ended Kersh published 'An Ape, a Dog and a Serpent', about a film producer-cum-con-artist, and 'The Weak and the Strong' (both 1945), a disaster novel about a group of people trapped in a cave, which was extraordinarily successful in Britain but failed in America. In 1947, after publication of his noir mystery 'Prelude to a Certain Midnight', Kersh left London for Perce on the Canadian east coast, where he finished 'The Song of the Flea' (1948), the story of a struggling writer in 1930s Soho; he subsequently moved to Florida and then purchased Ashton Hall in Barbados, which was destroyed by fire in 1949. Kersh's second marriage had been in trouble for some time, and divorce proceedings took five years. Throughout this period he wrote many short stories to pay for his medical treatments, travels, and debts. His novel about a Jewish man experiencing a nervous breakdown, 'The Thousand Deaths of Mr Small' (1950), was followed by a science fiction adventure, 'The Great Wash' (1953; 'Secret Masters' in the USA). After losing his divorce case in November 1954, Kersh married Florence Sochis ('b'. 1907), daughter of Morris Sochis of Philadelphia, on 11 January 1955, again at Caxton Hall, London. Originally a friend of his first wife, Sochis looked after Kersh from 1949, and they eventually began a personal relationship in 1951. 
In 1955 Kersh left England and took up permanent residence in upstate New York, becoming an American citizen four years later. There he wrote what has since become one of his best-known novels, 'Fowler's End' (1957), the story of a sly, cruel, and greedy Soho cinema proprietor, described by Anthony Burgess as 'one of the best comic novels of the century, with Sam Yudenow as superb a creation (almost) as Falstaff'. It was followed by 'The Implacable Hunter' (1961), the story of St Paul's conversion, which Burgess compared favourably with the work of Robert Graves. Kersh fought throat cancer to complete his last great novel, 'The Angel and the Cuckoo' (1966), based around characters at a London cafe, which his American publisher released without publicity. After a recurrence of the cancer Kersh died, in poverty, on 5 November 1968, at Horton Memorial Hospital, Middletown, New York. His last novel, 'Brock', was published posthumously the following year. Largely ignored by the critical establishment during his lifetime, Kersh's nineteen novels and twenty-one short-story collections are now much sought after, gaining their author a popular following, notably for his Jewish and London low life novels -- of which 'Fowler's End', 'Night and the City', and 'The Angel and the Cuckoo' were republished in the opening years of the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 96688


Hussey, Anna Maria (1805-1853), mycologist and botanical illustrator, was born at Leckhampstead, Buckinghamshire, on 5 June 1805, the eldest of seven children of John Theodore Archibald Reed (1758/9-1830), curate and later rector of Leckhampstead, and his second wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Dayrell (1777-1848). Nothing is known of Hussey's formal education, and she may have been educated at home. Her interest in natural history was perhaps encouraged by her father, a champion of vaccination. Her sisters Henrietta (1807-1860) and Frances (1810-1872) were keen botanists; Frances was also an accomplished botanical illustrator. Anna Maria's journal of a holiday in Dover, in 1836, written for Henrietta, suggests that her first love was geology, but on this holiday she developed an interest in botany, in order to answer the questions of her youngest sister, Catherine (1817-1852), who accompanied her. 
On 18 August 1831 Anna Maria married Thomas John Hussey ('b'. 1797), rector of Hayes in north Kent from 1831 to 1854, who was son of John Hussey, of Lamberhurst, Kent. They had six children between 1832 and 1842, only two of whom survived to adulthood. Her husband was both a theologian and an astronomer and corresponded with, among others, Charles Darwin, Charles Babbage, Sir John Herschel, William Henry Fox Talbot, and the jurist and mathematician John Thomas Graves. The Hussey family also knew the Darwins at Downe and one of Anna Maria's younger brothers, George Varenne Reed (1814-1886), who succeeded her husband as rector of Hayes, was tutor to Darwin's sons. 
Hussey's own interest was in the field of mycology, and from at least 1843 she corresponded with the clergyman and mycologist Miles Joseph Berkeley. These letters are the main source of information about her. She sent him specimens and drawings to comment on, often asking his help and advice. Although she regarded him as a mentor she was willing to disagree with him in the light of her own experience or observations. Berkeley, in turn, had a high regard for her abilities, naming the genus of fungi 'Husseia' 'after my friend Mrs Hussey, whose talents well deserve such a distinction' (Berkeley correspondence). Her other friendships among mycologists included Charles David Badham (1805-1857), to whom Berkeley introduced her. 
Hussey is best known for her 'Illustrations of British mycology: containing figures and descriptions of the funguses of interest and novelty indigenous to Britain', published in two series in 1847 and 1855 under the authorship of Mrs T. J. Hussey. The work consists of two series of coloured lithographic plates, numbering ninety and fifty plates respectively, both series being originally issued in parts. The second series was probably intended to contain sixty plates, but was cut short by her death; the final plate was contributed by Berkeley. Hussey herself expressed dissatisfaction at the work of the lithographers, regarding engraving as better suited to ensuring the 'great exactness' needed for her subject matter (Berkeley correspondence). The plates are prefaced by an introduction on collecting and studying fungi, accompanied by detailed commentaries. These combine scientific description with information from history, literature, and folklore, and also contain advice on cooking fungi together with personal observations and anecdotes, all written in a lively and amusing style. The work was intended especially for mothers wanting to teach their children about the study of fungi. She felt strongly that children should be taught to appreciate the natural world at an early age, and that the study of natural history was a particularly appropriate pursuit for young women. 
In addition to her mycological writing and illustration Hussey contributed in 1845 and 1846 to 'The Surplice', a Church of England periodical edited by her husband, and which from October 1846 carried advertisements for her series on British mycology. Only a few of her contributions have been identified, though she probably wrote the anonymous romantic serial 'Leaves of Life'. In May and June 1849 'Fraser's Magazine' published her anonymous story 'Matrimony', which, she explained to Berkeley, was written as a way of relieving 'personal feeling of the most painful kind' (Berkeley correspondence); it is a strange tale of illegitimacy, bigamy, and adultery. 
Hussey's last years were clouded by the sudden death, in 1852, of her sister Catherine, whose husband, Benjamin Hill, took up a chaplaincy at Valparaiso, accompanied by his children and Hussey's two remaining sisters. She died in Paris on 26 August 1853, where she was said to have been 'left alone by her husband, the Revd Dr Hussey, who was last heard of in Algiers' (biographical note, diary of a holiday to Dover, 2). Thomas Hussey resigned the living of Hayes in 1854. 
Reviewers praised the beauty, detail, and accuracy of 'Illustrations of British Mycology', though the work's cost, and quarto size, made it an impractical companion for field work. In 1886 William Phillips described the text as 'suggestive of the drawing-room', but rated the illustrations as standing 'in the first rank of excellence' ('Journal of Botany', 24 1886, 252). Hussey never claimed to make a serious scientific contribution to the study of fungi, but her work deserves to be better known, both for the beauty of the illustrations and for the lively and entertaining text. 


@@@@@


doc= 96694


Belville, (Elizabeth) Ruth Naomi (1854-1943), horologist and merchant, was born on 5 March 1854 at 9 Hyde Vale Cottages, Greenwich, Kent, the only child of John Henry Belville (1795?-1856), horologist and assistant astronomer at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, and his third wife, Maria Elizabeth Belville (1811/1812-1899), school teacher, from Lowestoft, Suffolk ['see below']. Between them John, Maria, and Ruth Belville offered a time-selling service to London subscribers for over a century, despite growing competition from providers of technologically more advanced time services such as telegraph and wireless signals. 
John Henry Belville was probably born on 21 July 1795 and baptized on 16 August at the church of St Pancras, London, the son of John and Jane Belville (parish register, LMA, P901/PAN1). His place of birth may have been Bath, Somerset; however, since his mother had recently fled to England from revolutionary France, he may have been born before she crossed the Channel. In England, Belville and his mother settled in Somerset, where they met the astronomer John Pond, who had established an observatory at Westbury and who took an interest in the boy's education. In April 1811 Pond was appointed as the new astronomer royal, at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, where he brought Belville in his capacity as the boy's guardian. As Belville's daughter later wrote: 'for many years Mr John Pond thought it advisable for my father to drop his surname Belville and to be known as Mr Henry as the horrors of the French Revolution combined with the wars in France would have prevented my father from obtaining a post under Government if of French origin. (CUL, RGO, 74/6/2)' Only later in life did he begin to use his full name again. On 22 June 1819 at St Paul's, Deptford, Belville married Sarah Dixon (1798/9-1826), and the couple had three sons and two daughters. Sarah died in December 1826 and on 22 July of the following year, at St Alphege's, Greenwich, he married Apollonia Slaney (1810/11-1851), with whom he had a daughter, Cecilia ['see 'Glaisher, Cecilia Louisa], who became a noted botanical photographer and who married the astronomer James Glaisher; their eldest son was the mathematician James Whitbread Lee Glaisher. 
In 1835 Pond retired as astronomer royal and was replaced by the strict disciplinarian George Biddell Airy. At this time, chronometers -- accurate portable timekeepers used on board ships for navigation -- had come into widespread use, and an industry manufacturing and setting them had grown up in London. Makers and users of these instruments required regular time-checks against Greenwich time, for which they made regular visits to the observatory. Incensed by these interruptions, Airy asked Belville to inaugurate a service in which a specially corrected pocket chronometer (made in 1794 by John Arnold and now at the Worshipful Company of Clockmakers, Guildhall, London) was carried from the observatory to London subscribers every week. It was an immediate success, and Belville went on to run this service -- supplying some 200 London clock and instrument makers with the correct time -- for twenty years. 
Following the death of his second wife, Belville married, on 22 December 1851, at St Andrew's, Holborn, Maria Elizabeth Last, the daughter of Bartholomew Barcham Last, a Lowestoft merchant. She was then living on Cross Street, Hatton Garden, London, and may have met John Belville during his visits to customers. Two years after the birth of their daughter Elizabeth Ruth Naomi, known as Ruth, John Belville died at home in Greenwich on 13 July 1856, following a long illness. He was buried on 18 July in St Margaret's churchyard, Lee, Kent, near the tomb of his former guardian, John Pond. With Belville's death, the hand-carried time service might have come to an end for, by then, Airy had instituted an automated time-distribution service which used electric clocks to send time pulses by telegraph wires to railway stations and post offices. However, some of Belville's subscribers were keen to retain the personal touch. Maria Belville was asked by about 100 customers to continue her husband's weekly visits and, following approval from Airy, she started plying time herself, alongside other work as a school teacher. 
As a child Ruth Belville may have been educated at home in her mother's boarding school -- 23 Crooms Hill, Greenwich, where she later worked as a governess. From an early age she also accompanied her mother on the weekly time visits across London. About 1890 the women gave up this school and moved to nearby Charlton where, at 29 Elliscombe Road, Ruth took up teaching in earnest, being described as a 'professor of French and Music' (census 1891). In the following year her mother, now partially blind, retired from the time-selling business whereupon Ruth requested, and was granted, permission to check the Arnold chronometer weekly at the observatory. Maria Belville died at the family home on 29 December 1899 and was buried on 3 January 1900 in Charlton cemetery. 
By the close of the century Belville faced competition for her service, not just from the observatory but also from the Standard Time Company, a commercial enterprise which supplied hourly electric time pulses to automatically corrected clocks for about half the cost of Ruth Belville's weekly visits. Many existing customers switched to the new service, but some sixty remained loyal. Ruth stayed in Charlton until 1907, latterly at 25 Wellington Road, before moving to 43 St Luke's Road, Maidenhead, Berkshire, where, in the following year, she was the subject of intense press attention following a lecture by the new chairman of the Standard Time Company, St Andrew St John Winne. In his lecture, Winne damned the work of the Belvilles with the faintest of praise, suggesting that 'no mere man' could have got the women's privileged weekly access to the observatory (CUL, RGO 7/96). The lecture, which formed part of a campaign to gain new business, failed and Winne's efforts to undermine Belville's reputation actually led to her gaining customers. In an interview from 1908 she described a routine that involved checking her chronometer at Greenwich every Monday and visiting, at least once every two weeks, forty customers located between the docklands and Mayfair ('Maidenhead Advertiser', 11 and 25 March, 22 April 1908). 
Belville faced greater challenges in the final decades of her life. In July 1916 British summer time was inaugurated, bringing new attention to the standardized setting of clocks and watches, while from February 1924 the BBC broadcast the 'Greenwich time signal' of six pips to mark the hour. By the mid-1930s telephones were in widespread use, and in July 1936 the General Post Office introduced the 'speaking clock', known as TIM after the dialling code used to access the service, and recorded by the Croydon telephonist Ethel Cain (1909-1996). None the less, Ruth Belville continued her personal time service in the face of these mass competitors. At the outbreak of the Second World War she was living in a cottage near Croydon airport, a target for enemy bombing. In 1940 an explosion at the Royal Observatory prompted the relocation of the time department to a safe house in Surrey. Working life had become too precarious for Belville, who retired that year, living off a pension provided by the Worshipful Company of Clockmakers. She died from carbon monoxide poisoning, caused by fumes emitted from a faulty gas lamp, on 7 December 1943, at her home, 57 Plough Lane, Beddington, Surrey, and was cremated on 15 December at the South London crematorium, Streatham. The 'News of the World' reported her death with an article entitled, 'Human 'T.I.M.' Found Dead' (12 December 1943) while 'The Times' noted how for 'half a century' she had 'taken the correct Greenwich time to business houses in London on a watch 100 years old' (13 December). Unmarried, she left no heirs and with her death the Belvilles' unusual business came to an end. 


@@@@@


doc= 96708


Alison Margaret Smithson (1928-1993), architect and writer, was born on 22 June 1928 at 3 Clarkehouse Road, Broomhall, Sheffield, the only child of Ernest Gill (1887-1980), graphic artist and principal of the South Shields School of Art from 1929 to 1950, and his wife, Alison Jessie, 'nee' Malcolm (1901-1989), who trained as a weaver. She attended South Shields High School for Girls, Sunderland Church High School, and, briefly during the war, George Watson Ladies' College in Edinburgh, while staying with relatives. She studied at the King's College School of Architecture, University of Durham, in 1944-9, meeting Peter when he was a studio assistant. She later wrote a semi-autobiographical novel indebted to her childhood, 'A Portrait of the Female Mind as a Young Girl' (1966). 


@@@@@


doc= 96711


Ellis, Sir Albert Fuller (1869-1951), mining engineer and phosphate commissioner in the south Pacific, was born on 28 August 1869 in Roma, Queensland, the third son of George Coxon Ellis, a chemist, and his wife, Anne Eliza, 'nee' Izod. Three months later the family left Australia to farm in New Zealand, settling in the Waikato district. Ellis attended primary school there, and spent two years at Cambridge high school. Meanwhile his father had forsaken farming to work for John T. Arundel, a London company trading in the Pacific. Ellis's elder brothers joined their father at Arundels and, once he was eighteen, Ellis did likewise. 
Ellis's first job was establishing coconut plantations in the Phoenix Islands but Arundels was involved in the guano trade as well as copra -- guano (bird and bat droppings) being a major source of phosphate, used as an agricultural fertilizer -- and Ellis, with an interest in chemistry acquired from his father, soon moved to phosphate analysis and management of phosphate workings on Baker and Howland islands. Following his temporary transfer to Sydney as an analyst his curiosity led to the discovery that was to make his the best-known name associated with the Pacific phosphate industry. An office doorstop, brought back from Nauru in 1896, was believed by colleagues to be a piece of petrified tree. In July 1899 Ellis's analysis revealed a 78 per cent content of phosphate of lime, a result that was to change not only his fortunes and those of the Pacific Islands Company, successor to Arundels, but the lives of Nauruans, Banabans, and Gilbert and Ellice islanders for the next hundred years. At the time a 30 per cent assay of phosphate of lime was typical of the guano islands and the trade was close to collapse because farmers wanted 60 per cent. 
Nauru was then under German jurisdiction from the Marshall Islands; mining rights were held by Jaluit Gesellschaft. One hundred and sixty miles to the east, Banaba, known to geographers as Ocean Island and outside German jurisdiction, resembled Nauru. Ellis joined a trading voyage calling at both islands, collecting samples unobtrusively, while action began to secure prospecting rights in Nauru and to persuade Britain to annex Ocean Island. Ellis saw his prospects brightening and on a visit to New Zealand to meet customers married Florence Christina (Flo) Stewart (1875-1909), daughter of Andrew Stewart, in Auckland on 31 January 1900. Ellis arrived at Ocean Island on 3 May and lost no time not only in determining that the deposits were very valuable but in making an agreement with the person he mistakenly believed to be the 'king' to extract phosphate at the rate of $50 a year for 999 years. The agreement, later notorious, was dated 3 May 1900. In fairness to Ellis, $50 was the standard rental paid to the imperial government for guano islands and imperial history has worse examples of exploitation. 
Ellis remained on Ocean Island, formally annexed to the crown on 26 September 1901, as mining manager, the company changing its name again to the Pacific Phosphate Company in 1902. When rights were secured he began mining also in Nauru in 1907. The phosphate-rich deposits in both islands were the result of ancient marine sedimentation, not of bird droppings as in the other phosphate islands. Their extraction required mining engineering skills much in advance of the brooms and wheelbarrows used to sweep up guano. Their scale required purpose-built ships and moorings at great depth. Technically and financially the enterprise soon outgrew Ellis, who was without formal qualification. Although Florence had joined him on Ocean Island and given birth in 1903 to a daughter, Joan, she never enjoyed good health and lost another baby, who might have survived had appropriate treatment been available. Florence died there in 1909 and in 1911 Ellis gladly assumed a newly created local directorship of the Pacific Phosphate Company, based in Auckland. There, on 19 February 1913, he married Nellie Isabel Stewart, sister of Florence. They had no children. 
Dominion politics after the First World War and the impending Nauru mandate resulted in 1919 in the establishment of the three-power British Phosphate Commission, located in Melbourne. The commission bought the rights of the Pacific Phosphate Company and subsequently extended its operations to Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean. Ellis represented New Zealand throughout the difficult years of negotiation. Appointed commissioner formally in 1920, Ellis held the position until his death, providing an unrivalled thread of continuity. He made use of the long sea voyages the job entailed to write several books about the history of the phosphate industry and the Pacific islands; these were published as 'Ocean Island and Nauru: their Story' (1935), 'Adventuring in Coral Seas' (1936), and 'Mid-Pacific Outposts' (1946). As a phosphate commissioner his primary duty may have been to New Zealand farmers but his heart was in the phosphate islands and with their inhabitants, to whom he was deeply, if paternalistically, committed, and about whom he wrote with affection. A sincere evangelical Christian, he believed that the industry was to their advantage. He was a regular visitor to the islands and represented New Zealand at the surrender of the Japanese on both Nauru and Ocean Island at the end of the Second World War. Thus, although New Zealand was in many respects the junior partner, Ellis's experience and fair-mindedness gave him a pivotal role in disputes both between Britain and Australia and between the commissioners and their management, his achievements recognized by appointment as CMG in 1928 and a knighthood in 1938. Having lived latterly at Motirawa, 9 Argyle Street, Herne Bay, Auckland, he died in Auckland on 11 July 1951. To mark the sixtieth anniversary of Ellis's discovery of phosphate deposits a memorial to him was dedicated on Ocean Island in the presence of all three commissioners. The British Phosphate Commission was finally wound up in 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 96713


Thomas, John (1797-1881), Wesleyan missionary and Tongan scholar, was born at Lower Clent, near Stourbridge, Worcestershire, on 7 November 1797, the second child and eldest son in the large family of William Thomas, blacksmith, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Hyde. His parents were devout members of the Church of England. Despite severe childhood illness and being taken from school at the age of eleven, Thomas was driven to succeed at his apprenticeship and to better himself educationally. For a time he returned to school while working as a blacksmith, and even when fully employed from six in the morning until eight at night he found time to read the 'Bible', the 'Whole Duty of Man', and pious tracts. 
A chorister and a flute-player, Thomas was persuaded by a friend to help with the singing at the Methodist services in the village and was soon drawn into their worship. In 1819 he began a private journal dating his 'conversion' to a solitary experience at Hagley, Worcestershire, confirmed by 'outpourings of the Spirit' at successive 'love-feasts' (Luckcock, 17). On becoming a member of the Methodist society he began a prayer meeting, engaged in open-air preaching (opposed by rector and squire), and became an accredited local preacher in September 1820. Exposed for the first time to approved Methodist literature, he became rigid in his adherence to the Wesleyan canon. At the same time 'The Life of Henry Martyn', and other missionary narratives, led him to think of 'sharing the blessing of the Gospel with some dark and Idolatrous people' (Rowe, 6). 
After being examined in London in December 1824 Thomas was accepted as a candidate for the ministry and instructed to marry. He already had an understanding with Sarah Hartshorne, who also had missionary ambitions, and they were married at Hagley on 27 January 1825. Sarah was the half-sister of Stephen Rabone (1811-1872), afterwards a missionary in Tonga, who married Thomas's sister Eliza. After a crash course in mission management in London, Thomas was ordained for the Friendly Islands (Tonga) mission. He and Sarah left Gravesend in April 1825, arriving in Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania) in September and Sydney in October. After some difficulties there (the Sydney committee preferring their own candidate, John Hutchinson, as superintendent of the Tongan mission), the missionaries arrived at Tonga in the 'Elizabeth' on 28 June 1826 and were received by the chief Ata at Hihifo. 
The Wesleyan mission party was not the first mission in Tonga (having been preceded by the London Missionary Society in 1797-1800, the Wesleyan Walter Lawry in 1820-22, and London Missionary Society Tahitian missionaries in Vava'u in 1822 and Tongatapu in 1826), but Thomas has always been regarded by Tongans as the father of the mission and founder of their church. He was the first to learn the language and preach in Tongan, and he and Sarah formed schools soon after their arrival. After a difficult start the situation improved with the arrival of Nathaniel Turner, chairman of the New Zealand and Friendly Islands district. While the Thomases were continually frustrated by Ata at Hihifo, Turner and his colleague William Cross had the full backing of 'Aleamotu'a at Nuku'alofa. 'Aleamotu'a's nephew, Taufa'ahau, king of Ha'apai, fresh from victories in Samoa and Ha'apai, was already convinced that the future of his country lay with Christianity. 
Between 1829 and 1831 Thomas oversaw the nominal conversion of Ha'apai and the partial conversion of Vava'u. In December 1829 'Aleamotu'a was installed as Tu'ikanokupolu and a month later was baptized as King Josiah Tupou. Taufa'ahau was baptized as King George (Siaosi) of Ha'apai in 1831 and shortly thereafter Finau of Vava'u was consecrated as King Zephaniah of Vava'u. When Finau died in 1833 Taufa'ahau succeeded him as king of Vava'u. Many converts were made throughout the island group and Thomas imposed strict Methodist discipline. By 1834 the emotional intensity was such that a full-scale religious revival erupted. 
The speedy Christianization of the islands alarmed the principal opposition chiefs and a showdown was inevitable. Christianity was largely identified with the Tupou lineage while important rival lineages held to the traditional Tongan religion. In 1837 the recalcitrant chiefs announced their determined opposition and built fortifications. When war broke out in 1837 and again in 1840 the opposition chiefs were speedily crushed and their followers were indiscriminately massacred. There is no doubt that Taufa'ahau's victorious troops felt justified in the light of 'Old Testament' translations and sermon texts against heathenism, giving credence to one of the charges brought against Thomas by Captain Peter Dillon, that he had incited the war. Dillon's charges led to controversy in missionary circles and Thomas was eventually cleared of blame by his colleagues. Thomas was appalled by the excesses of the Christian party, distanced himself from the missionaries who supported the war, and told the people: 'religion is not to be defended... by murder, cruelty and wickedness, but by perseverance, patience and faith' (Luckcock, 124). When 'Aleamotu'a died in 1845 Taufa'ahau became Tu'ikanokupolu. Thomas thus had the pleasure of seeing his illustrious pupil crowned as king of the entire Tongan archipelago. 
In March 1832 Thomas read 'Polynesian Researches', the seminal work of the London Missionary Society missionary William Ellis, which appeared to legitimize for pious authors the collection of indigenous traditions. Until he left Tonga in 1850 Thomas took detailed notes from his informants, later copying them into notebooks. He had access to the highest chiefs in the land, not only Taufa'ahau, but also the last Tamaha (highest ranking royal person), who became a Christian in 1834. On returning to England in 1850 Thomas began 'to write out my scraps of Tongan history', hoping to provide 'a more full, and correct account of the 'Mythology', Wars, &c. of the Tongan People, than has yet appeared' (journal, 8 Nov 1850, SOAS). By mid-1854 he had completed a history and mythology in four manuscript volumes. 
Having re-established his relationship with the mission committee in London, Thomas and his wife returned to Tonga in 1855. Almost immediately he visited Samoa on behalf of the Sydney committee to ascertain whether there was sufficient cause to justify reviving the Wesleyan mission there. A few years later the Thomases retired from the mission altogether, arriving back in England in June 1860. 
At Stourbridge Thomas continued to work on his Tongan history, but became increasingly convinced that the work should be more didactic in tone. It was not sufficient to give the history of the people 'when heathens' without showing 'the effects of the Gospel upon them' (Thomas, 'Hints in the history', Mitchell Library). In 1865 he began to revise the manuscript, incorporating a large portion of his journal, and the four volumes became seventeen. A much shortened history was completed in 1879, but Thomas was still working at the revision of his longer manuscript at the time of his death. 
Sarah Thomas died at Stourbridge on 9 December 1867. A woman of forceful character, who had been as dedicated a missionary as her husband, she had suffered much, including numerous miscarriages and the death of the Thomases' only child, John, in 1843, aged seven. Thomas subsequently married, on 23 October 1872 at Old Swinford, Stourbridge, Esther Matthews (1839/40-1929), with whom he had a son, John William Thomas, who died from pneumonia in November 1884 aged nine. Thomas himself died at Stourbridge on 29 January 1881. A Wesleyan Methodist chapel at Lower Clent to honour John and Sarah Thomas's missionary service contained a memorial plaque. 
Thomas was inflexible in his social attitudes and his adherence to Wesleyan discipline and lacked administrative and interpersonal skills. Privately self-deprecatory and conscious of his own shortcomings, he was intolerant of weakness and inadequacy in others. Despite his lack of training it was his intellectual curiosity and constant application that enabled him to achieve his missionary objects and lay the groundwork for preserving Tongan language, history, and culture. The true pioneer of the Methodist denominations in Tonga, he was a major figure in the Christianization of the islands. 


@@@@@


doc= 96715


Bromilow, William Edward (1857-1929), missionary, was born at Geelong, Victoria, Australia, on 15 January 1857, the son of Thomas Bromilow, bricklayer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Owen. He matriculated at the age of fourteen from Grenville College, Ballarat, then taught at the Queenscliff state school in 1876-7. While teaching he also enrolled at the University of Melbourne, but the double strain on his health meant that he did not take a degree. At the age of twenty-one he was accepted as a probationer for the ministry of the Methodist Church of Australasia and while serving in the Wimmera district in western Victoria he volunteered as a missionary. He married Harriet Lilly Thomson, daughter of American immigrants to Geelong, in Sydney, on 9 April 1879. In the same month he was ordained and sailed with his wife on the 'John Wesley' from Sydney to Fiji. He spent ten years in Fiji -- at Taveuni, Lomaloma, and Rewa -- learning Fijian and becoming skilled in scripture translation. 
In 1889 Bromilow returned to work in Victoria, but after two years as a circuit minister and foreign mission secretary he again volunteered for mission work. This time it was as leader of the new Australian Methodist mission in the eastern archipelagoes of the recently annexed possession of British New Guinea. On 19 June 1891, accompanied by the administrator, William MacGregor, Bromilow's party landed from the 'Lord of the Isles' at Dobu Island in the D'Entrecasteaux group in eastern New Guinea. The six pioneer Australian and New Zealand missionaries, including Bromilow's wife and his daughter Ruve, were augmented by forty-one Fijian, Samoan, and Tongan teachers, wives, and children. The sanguinary reputation of Dobu was well known: Dobuans were said to roast their captives, whose blood they would drink from coconut shells. A fortified prefabricated mission house was aboard the 'Lord of the Isles', and some of the party were armed with revolvers and Winchester rifles. In the event there was no bloodshed. 
As chairman of the Methodist New Guinea district, Bromilow took on a difficult task. At a theological level he was undogmatic; at a moral level he was rigid. While his outlook was softened by his university education as well as by his decade of Fijian experience, he had to deal with agents who did not share his intellectual range and who regarded many indigenous customs with disapproval. Bromilow thus veered one way and then another, not able for long to make up his mind about what he thought of Melanesian customs. He declared that he condemned all customs that were evil and encouraged all others, but he did not define which customs he thought were evil. His address at the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Melbourne in 1911 had a eulogistic quality. Land laws on Dobu, he declared, were 'perfect', property was inalienable, gardens scrupulously clean, dancing wonderfully elaborate, and hunting efficiently organized. Kiriwina chieftainship in the Trobriands, he said, 'always struck the visitor with wonder'. Notwithstanding cannibalism and infant burial, Bromilow felt that a large part of Melanesian custom was 'much deserving of admiration and encouragement' (W. E. Bromilow, 'Dobuan (Papua) beliefs and folklore', 'Report of the Thirteenth Meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science', 1911, 413-26). Nevertheless, away from the rostrum Bromilow was forced to admit that there was much to condemn, and he helped undermine traditional custom whenever it conflicted with his own moral standards. A visiting Anglican bishop of New Guinea, Montagu Stone-Wigg, observed that there was very persistent opposition by the Methodists under Bromilow to many native ways, but 'ill will against the mission for changing the Dobuans' habits was gradually dying down' (M. Stone-Wigg, diary, 13 Nov 1901, Anglican archives, University of Papua New Guinea). 
The Edugaura language of Dobu was chosen by Bromilow as the lingua franca of the mission, and his interest in language and his skill as a translator brought him close to the Dobuan people and enabled him to communicate easily with them. His first Edugaura translation was finished seven years after his arrival. By 1908 he had published a 'New Testament'. This was revised in 1925. In 1910, on MacGregor's recommendation, he was awarded an honorary doctorate of divinity by the University of Aberdeen. He published a translation of the whole 'Bible' in 1927, an achievement described by the Australian lieutenant-governor J. H. P. Murray as 'colossal in scale' (Murray to A. H. Scrivin, Port Moresby, 4 June 1927, United Church archives, University of Papua New Guinea). 
Bromilow's demeanour of benign paternalism towards Papuans was helped by the Dobuans' deference towards him: he seems to have been regarded as a clan elder or a father ('tamagwao'). In the Massim society of eastern New Guinea old men were credited with esoteric power, and it was believed that Bromilow's barometer caused, rather than forecast, rain. His occult reputation increased when the rumour circulated that he could take out his teeth, a feat which, demonstrated to gaping villagers, earned him the lifelong sobriquet of Saragigi ('he who twists out his teeth'). 
In 1907, soon after Australia's formal assumption of sovereignty over British New Guinea, Bromilow joined other protestant mission leaders in signing a letter to the Australian press, protesting against the Australian government's proposed compulsory purchase of Papuan land for commercial development. However, he differed from some of his London Missionary Society neighbours in pursuing harmonious relations with government officials. He was more of a diplomat than a warrior. 
Retiring from the mission for health reasons in 1908, Bromilow became minister of several suburban circuits in Sydney and was elected president of the Methodist conference of New South Wales in 1911. He also continued his interest in Papuan Methodist work by serving on the Australasian Methodist mission board as clerical treasurer between 1908 and 1920. Because of staff shortages in the post-war period he offered to rejoin the Papuan mission, arriving at the new headquarters on Ubuia Island in mid-1920 and becoming district chairman for two years. He finally retired in 1924. 
Though accompanied by his superior George Brown at the inauguration of mission work in 1891, Bromilow was the true founder of the Methodist mission in British New Guinea. For this work he seems to have been particularly well chosen. Early in his chairmanship he and his wife adopted a Dobuan boy, Gideoni, as their own son, and the Bromilow family were accepted as members of a Dobuan clan, with their own land. He himself became a member of the kula ring. In his second term of office he withdrew from the kula ring on the grounds that it had deteriorated into little more than a trading concern. His autobiography was published under the title 'Twenty Years among Primitive Papuans' shortly after his death in Sydney on 24 June 1929. He was buried at Gore Hill cemetery, Sydney. His description of Sir John Thurston, fourth governor of Fiji, as 'paternal but always discerning, benevolent but never weak' applied equally to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 96716


Abel, Charles William (1862-1930), missionary, was born at 509 Oxford Street, Bloomsbury, London, on 25 September 1862, the youngest of three sons of William Edward Abel, a cashier at Mudie's Circulating Library, and his wife, Harriett Agnes, 'nee' Dobson. He was brought up in his parents' Congregational faith. After an education at Wandsworth Boys' School, at the age of sixteen he followed his father to a clerk's stool at Mudie's Circulating Library, working there until he accepted an agricultural cadetship in a New Zealand firm in 1881. He then lived for a time among the Maori near Auckland. After deciding to become a missionary he returned to Britain and in 1884 entered Cheshunt College in Hertfordshire, as a candidate of the London Missionary Society (LMS). A member of the Hertfordshire county cricket eleven, his education at Cheshunt was more distinguished for sporting prowess than scholarship; he tended to reject recondite theologizing and place his trust in the rough-hewn truthfulness and honour of the healthy, sporting Englishman. He was ordained in 1890, and arrived in British New Guinea on 23 October of that year. 
After eight months' preliminary work, including teaching at Port Moresby, and briefly relieving the pioneer missionary James Chalmers at Motumotu, Abel joined F. W. Walker at Suau Island off eastern mainland New Guinea, moving the head station 25 miles further east to Kwato Island near the government station on Samarai Island in August 1891. By mid-1892 the island was habitable and a cricket field laid on the site of a swamp. On 22 November 1892 Abel married Elizabeth Beatrice Emma Moxon (1869-1939), daughter of a Yorkshire brewer whose family had migrated to Sydney on the same ship as Abel in 1890. They had four children. 
Walker resigned from the LMS in 1896 after a dispute with the directors. Abel, left in charge, took a keen interest in building up a model station on Kwato equipped not only with a chapel but also with a workshop, boat-building factory, and later a printing works. Elementary subjects such as 'Bible' study were supplemented by carpentry for boys and fine lacework for girls, with cricket, croquet, and tennis after school. Abel conducted the mission on the 'settlement system', in which Papuan children, segregated from infancy from their parents and from village language and culture, were trained to become lay evangelists. They also engaged in the business of copra making, boat-building, and furniture making for sale to Europeans in Papua. The concentration of effort upon a few Papuans in the hothouse atmosphere of a mission-owned island rather than returning educated converts to infuse their own communities drew opposition from such LMS missionary pioneers as W. G. Lawes. In 1897, however, Abel succeeded in winning the support of R. W. Thompson, visiting foreign secretary of the society. 
In the prelude to Australia's taking over the administration of British New Guinea in 1906, Abel took advantage of gifts totalling $1200 from the Australian philanthropist J. H. Angas to install, in 1902-4, a slipway, boat-building workshop, and sawmill on the island. During this time he enjoyed the confidence of Alfred Deakin, three times prime minister of Australia; he also had direct contact with J. C. Watson, leader of the Australian Labour Party. He also became known as a champion of Milne Bay people in criminal cases against Europeans. His disclosures in 1901 forced the government of British New Guinea to transfer one official and charge a miner with murder. When the acting administrator, Christopher Robinson, was denounced by Abel in the Australian press for conducting an affray at Goaribari in 1904, Robinson wrote to the governor-general of Australia repudiating Abel's 'untruthful and vindictive statements' and committed suicide beneath the Government House flagstaff on 20 June by shooting himself. Many were convinced that Robinson had been hounded to his death. A monument was erected by Robinson's supporters in the main street of Samarai, and for a time Abel could enter the township only under the cover of night. 
During Abel's leave in 1909 he managed to persuade the LMS directors to let him plant coconuts in Milne Bay. Known as the Enesi (an acronym of his Australian supporters' names) this venture allowed him to employ Papuans on plantations managed by his converts. Within two years he had 500 acres planted on land given to him by Australian sympathizers. The LMS, which was retrenching, was unable to afford the maintenance of the properties; and his fellow missionaries objected to the society becoming an employer of Papuan labour in competition with secular businesses. 
When another deputation from London visited the Papua district of the LMS in 1916 with instructions to reduce financial commitments and disband large children's settlements such as Kwato, Abel felt he had little choice but to resign, which he did the following year. However, he remained an honorary missionary of the society and rented the Kwato properties on an annual basis for ten years. Abel then established the Kwato Extension Association, which was made up of influential businessmen in Britain and with three former administrators of Papua (British New Guinea) as patrons. Some capital was collected, but the depressed state of the Papuan economy after 1918 and the worldwide slump in copra prices made another visit to Britain necessary. In 1921 Abel embarked with his family on a fund-raising tour, leaving Kwato in the hands of Margaret Parkin (1865-1939), his wife's cousin, who had been in the mission since 1896, assisted by Tiraka Anederea, the Papuan head tradesman. Wider support was won by Abel in 1922 among a group of evangelical businessmen in the USA, including Samuel R. Boggs, a founder of the Gideons, businessmen who had pledged themselves to place a 'Bible' in every hotel room in the nation. As a result an American auxiliary, the New Guinea Evangelization Society, was formed with a permanent council, a regular magazine, and a promise to raise $100,000 within five years. By 1927 the American auxiliary was able to arrange the purchase of the Kwato properties from the LMS. 
Abel was planning a new venture on the Fly River in 1929 when he visited America and Britain to settle his affairs and expand the Kwato evangelistic and business venture to the Fly. He was fatally injured in a motoring accident near Tolworth, Surrey, on 10 April 1930, and was declared dead at Woolwich Memorial Hospital. His ashes were interred at Kwato. His widow, Beatrice, ran the Kwato Extension Association until her own death in 1939. Her successor was her elder son, Cecil (1903-1994), who remained with the mission until 1951. As a founder of the pro-independence Pangu Pati of Papua New Guinea, Cecil (Seselo) Abel was the author of the preamble to the constitution of the independent nation in 1975; he was knighted in 1982. 
Charles Abel's robust, freewheeling protestantism derived from the late nineteenth-century England of the nonconformist press and free trade. His rejection of traditional culture was a consequence of a social Darwinist's evolutionary outlook. His intense belief in the virtues of metropolitan British society and lack of empathy with traditional culture meant that he advocated swift change among Papuans -- spiritual, industrial, social, and recreational -- to prepare them to compete under the strenuous conditions of the modern world. Unlike his Anglican missionary neighbours, he viewed the passing of Melanesian customs without regret. 


@@@@@


doc= 96719


Aislabie, William (1699/1700-1781), landscape designer and landowner, was probably born at Studley Royal in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the son of John Aislabie (1670-1742), politician, and his first wife, Anne (died 1700), daughter of Sir William Rawlinson of Hendon, Middlesex. Details of his education are unknown, beyond that he went on a grand tour in 1720. In 1721 he was returned as an MP for Ripon in the by-election following his father's expulsion from the Commons after the elder Aislabie was voted guilty of corruption in promoting the South Sea Bubble, and he represented the borough until his death. On 21 May 1724 he married Lady Elizabeth Cecil ('bap'. 1706, died 1733), daughter of John Cecil, sixth earl of Exeter; they had two sons and five daughters. 
John Aislabie had initiated work on the water gardens at Studley Royal about 1716, and after his disgrace in 1721 retired to Yorkshire and for the rest of his life concentrated on his gardens. William Aislabie's own landscape gardening began at the estate of Kirkby Fleetham, which he had purchased in 1724. By the 1740s the main feature had been developed, a curving woodland terrace a mile and a half long with a prospect in the manner of the terrace walks at Duncombe Park and Rievaulx. There was a temple in the centre of this terrace from which the best view was obtained and, further along the terrace, another summer pavilion on each side. Two pavilions stood north of the house, so the grounds were well ornamented. Considerable planting took place, and Kirkby seems to have been an essay in an adventurous, free style, which Aislabie brought to the formal gardens planned by his father when he inherited in 1741. 
Aislabie had consistently voted against Walpole's government in the Commons during his father's lifetime, even after succeeding to the sinecure office of auditor of the imprest in 1738, though it may have been his tenure of that office that caused him to be absent from the vote on the 'Place Bill' in 1740. Soon after his father's death Aislabie sent his father's memorandum on the South Sea Bubble to George II, apparently in an attempt to convince the king that John Aislabie had not defrauded George I of over $40,000 as was believed, but this seems to have been unsuccessful as despite wavering Aislabie remained in opposition. On 6 September 1745 he married as his second wife Elizabeth Vernon ('c'.1722-1780), daughter of Sir Charles Vernon of Farnham, Surrey, and niece of his stepmother, Judith; they had one son and one daughter. He also had three illegitimate children with Catherine Knightley, probably in the period between his two marriages. In 1749 he became registrar of the consistory court at York, a post he held until his death. 
Some of Aislabie's work at Studley embellished or added meaning to his father's formal design. Thus a funerary pyramid to commemorate his father was erected on the summit of the mile-long lime avenue in 1743, while the pondside Temple of Hercules was rededicated to (filial) piety and redecorated by 1748. Later Aislabie had a miniature Quebec constructed close to the ponds to celebrate Wolfe's victory in 1759. On the amphitheatre hill above the ponds Aislabie, in the year of his death, built the Temple of Fame from parts of his father's dilapidated Temple of Venus. 
More significant was Aislabie's exploitation of the Mackershaw valley to the north of the water gardens, an area purchased by his father in 1731. On the steep sides of the valley was a 'Roman monument', based on that dedicated to the Horatii and the Curiatii, known alternatively as the Devil's Chimney. The scene was cultivated in the 1740s as an early example of a 'picturesque' landscape, with rocky crags and woods on top, a complete contrast to the geometry of the Moon Ponds. A Chinese garden was developed, made from bare rock surmounted by a Chinese temple. This exercise in a wilder, freer way of gardening can be seen as a forerunner of what Aislabie was to achieve as his masterpiece. 
Aislabie's magnum opus was Hackfall, seven miles north of Studley Royal. Used as a summer retreat by the Aislabies, Hackfall seems to have been developed seriously from about 1750. It had, however, been purchased by John Aislabie in 1731 for agriculture and later quarrying. One of the greatest picturesque landscapes evolved, often called sublime for its wild and mountainous effects. A great half-bowl swept down to the River Ure, chattering at its foot. Water was omnipresent: where one could not see it, it could still be heard. Apart from a formal plain with a pool and fountain Hackfall was thickly wooded, with dramatic gorges, steep paths, dells, and cascades. Three grottoes, a rustic temple of massive blocks, and Fisher's Hall, an alum-encrusted pavilion named after Aislabie's head gardener, William Fisher, all sat within the bowl. Nature was given a helping hand -- the Forty-Foot Fall and other cascades were enhanced by adding shelves of rock. On the rim of the bowl were further buildings contrasting with those below. Mowbray Point appeared to be a triple-arch classical ruin from within the bowl, but viewed from the fields behind it had a Gothic form. The kitchen nearby was also Gothic. Further round was a substantial mock ruin, Mowbray Castle, the name again evoking local medieval associations. The views from the rim revealed a panorama of hills, woods, and rocks. Overall the impression was that of a wild, romantic scene, where nature apparently ruled, though the effects of perilous narrow ascents and spectacular waterfalls were managed and heightened by art. Though the vegetation grew considerably after Aislabie's time, Hackfall remained an epitome of the picturesque until the 1930s, when decline set in; restoration was undertaken about 2000. 
Aislabie had been a subscriber to Samuel and Nathaniel Buck's series of views of antiquities, published between 1726 and 1742, perhaps influencing his interest in the ruined Cistercian abbey on the neighbouring Fountains estate. Aislabie and his father had long sought the acquisition of Fountains from the Messenger family. The abbey had probably become part of Aislabie's garden scheme before he was able to purchase the estate, a transaction achieved in December 1767 for $18,000. Aislabie removed the monastic field walls and took land along the river out of agricultural use, canalizing the River Skell, building a new carriage drive on its north side, and grassing or wooding the south bank. The Messenger family, who were Roman Catholics, had locked visitors out of the ruined abbey but had not attended to the decaying fabric. Aislabie had parts of the structure repaired and rubble remaining from earlier demolition levelled. Decorations, ornaments, and tiles were retrieved from the rubble and added to the retained fabric or stored. Interior floors, such as the church, cloister, refectory, and cellarium, were turfed in the spirit of making the abbey ruins conform to Aislabie's taste, and likewise some parts of the complex were demolished, including what was left of the medieval cloister arcade and the lay brothers' cloister. There is some evidence that Aislabie had the medieval floors protected under the turf rather than removing them as was once thought. In contrast to the prevailing taste for overgrown ruins, the walls were cleaned and the lawns laid around the abbey maintained. 
Like the gardens at Studley Royal the abbey at Fountains and its grounds were opened to the public, although access was carefully regulated through the system of gates begun by the Messengers. Aislabie's actions at Fountains were criticized as unnatural by William Gilpin, who thought the introduction of new human activity into abandoned buildings whose purpose was obsolete offensive; but Aislabie's actions in securing the ruins, regulating access, recording and preserving items of archaeological interest found on the site, and providing an environment intended to minimize further damage to the abbey have been interpreted as anticipating twentieth- and twenty-first century principles of visitor management. 
Aislabie remained a presence in the House of Commons: in 1750 the earl of Egmont told Frederick, prince of Wales, that he had 'allways understood that any Administration might have him for a peerage' (Newman, 'Leicester House politics', 134), the prince replying that he hoped Aislabie might be won to their party with the offer of an army post for his younger son. After 1754 he generally supported the duke of Newcastle's administration. He spoke against Henry Fox's conduct as paymaster-general in 1763, citing Fox's failure to pass his accounts to Aislabie (as auditor of the imprest) on time. He voted against the use of general warrants in 1764, and for the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in 1765. Afterwards he almost always supported the government, but is last recorded voting in the house on 26 April 1773. From 1768 he was father of the house, the longest-serving member of the Commons. 
From about 1773 Aislabie held Hendon Place, Middlesex, on a long lease. He laid out $10,000 on the house and grounds, but no details of his garden work are known. He died on 17 May 1781 at his town house in Grosvenor Square, London. He had outlived his three sons, and his estates passed to his daughter. Aislabie's descendants sold the Studley Royal estate to West Riding county council in 1966; its successor, North Yorkshire county council, transferred it to the National Trust in 1983. The gardens created by Aislabie and his father, much restored since 1966, and declared a world heritage site in 1987, formed in the early twenty-first century the National Trust's most visited pay-for-entry property. 


@@@@@


doc= 96720


Beaton, Donald (1802-1863), gardener, was born on 8 March 1802, 'about sixteen miles from the then parish church of Urray, in Strathconon, Rosshire' (Beaton, 'Autobiography'), the son of Donald Beaton. While Beaton was small his father moved the family to Inverness, where he was acting manager for a cattle dealer, grazing animals on lands rented from Lord Lovat around Beaufort Castle. In the summer months the family migrated up to summer pastures at Corycharbie, where highland sports like deer stalking, grouse shooting, and fly fishing took place. 
Beaton, an intelligent boy who spoke Gaelic and learned Latin before he could speak English, was often too far from schools to benefit from regular education in summertime, instead learning how to tan leather and make fishing lines, to dye yarns with lichens, and to clean rifles and shoot deer. He acted as a young gamekeeper for Lord Lovat. An interest in the history of the highlands encouraged him to want to become a cavalry officer, but his mother wanted him to enter the church. She died when Beaton was seven, and his father employed a tutor for the five children; Beaton was determined to join 'the kirk or the camp' and to become a gentleman. A series of hard winters and harvests bankrupted many of the cattle dealers, and, as his father was now short of money, for a brief period Beaton acted as a tutor to the children of Lord Lovat's manager at Beaufort Castle. He attended Inverness Academy for two sessions, intending to try for a bursary to King's College, Aberdeen. Though clever, he was still not a fluent English speaker and, owing to the curious manner in which the top of the class was selected, he was unable to gain a bursary. 
Beaton was set to work in the gardens of Beaufort Castle until 'something cast up', and he was allowed to work with the gamekeepers from 12 August every summer (Beaton, 'Autobiography'). Abandoning his dream of becoming a gentleman, he decided to embrace the career of horticulture. The castle gardeners resented his fast track to the brotherhood of gardeners, since they had had to be apprenticed. But he learned about vine growing from Niven of Bothwell Castle, and the Linnean system; he joined the staff of Sir William Cumming Gordon of Altyre, near Forres, where within a year he had gained sufficient knowledge of the plants to be put in charge of them. Probably under the influence of Lady Cumming Gordon, he began one of his two main interests in gardening -- that of crossing (interbreeding) bedding plants and bulbs. The other interest lay in colour. 
Beaton then went to Perth, 'the best neighbourhood in Scotland for good gardening', where he joined the staff of the nursery of Dickson and Turnbull for two years, and then to the gardens of the Caledonian Horticultural Society in Edinburgh. Deciding to go south, he set off by boat, but was disappointed by the sight of London, where he worked for six weeks at Clapton nursery, before moving west to Haffield, near Ledbury in Herefordshire, where his employer encouraged both his interest in botany and his absence to see as many gardens as he could. Young gentlemen of the time ventured on the grand tour of Europe; Beaton, unable to become a gentleman, visited gardens instead. In 1832 he 'travelled 3,000 miles in England alone' and saw: 'all the Crinums at Wentworth House, the number of pot plants at Chatsworth... the best Orangery in England, near Prescot; the first Petunia that flowered in England, at Lower Boughton, near Manchester; the celebrated rock garden of Lady Boughton, near Chester; the first of the Calceolarias in the Epsom Nursery; the Geranium houses of Sir Richard Hoar, near Bath... a wagon load of dried bulbs, and the Pinetum, at Dropmore. (Beaton, 'Autobiography')' After that he made his way round Scotland. At the same time he managed to continue his work crossing 'all sorts of plants', and cultivated forty-six sorts of grapes. 
After the death of Gordon, his employer at Haffield, Beaton was taken on in the early 1830s as head gardener of Shrubland Park in Suffolk by Sir W. F. F. Middleton, baronet, whom he thanked for encouraging his flower gardening; Beaton later wrote articles in 'The Gardeners' Chronicle' (1856) and 'The Cottage Gardener' (1850, 1853, and 1855) describing his work there. He married at Eastnor, Herefordshire, on 8 November 1837 Lydia, 'nee' Penn (died 1850). Following her death he married, as his second wife, on 1 February 1851, Jane (died 1861), daughter of Thomas Parfett, horse dealer. There were no children. 
Shrubland Park was Beaton's last position as a head gardener; he retired in 1852, aged fifty, and moved to Surbiton in Surrey, where a well-wisher gave him a garden. He continued to write a weekly column in the 'Cottage Gardener' (which became the 'Journal of Horticulture', and in 1861 'Cottage Gardener and Country Gentleman'), and contributed to the 'Gardeners' Magazine' until his death, becoming 'the main publicist of the bedding system' of planting (Elliott, 'Victorian Gardens', 89). Beaton's comments on the flowers he noticed in his tour of gardens -- geraniums (pelargoniums), petunias, calceolarias -- suggest his interest in colour. In the 1850s he contributed to the debate about bedding plants and colour; he suggested that it was wise to look at different colours in different lights to see which arrangements worked best, and that there should be a neutral colour in the centre of a group. When Michel-Eugene Chevreul produced his theory of complementary colours in 1839 and 1849 for the Gobelin tapestries ('De la loi du contraste simultane des couleurs') John Lindley picked up the theme to relate it to the garden and the massing of plants of different colours next to each other. Beaton, however, argued that green would cancel out the so-called effect of complementary colours, and after much debate in the journals this was accepted. 
Beaton had successfully hybridized scarlet pelargoniums, among others. However his writing on the cross-breeding of plants, and especially his criticism of the hybridization experiments of the German botanist Karl von Gartner, 'evidently knowing nothing of his work', led Charles Darwin to describe Beaton as 'a clever, but d-d cocksure man' whose own experimental results were unlikely to be reliable (Darwin to Hooker, 14 May 1861, 'The Correspondence of Charles Darwin', ed. F. Burkhardt and S. Smith, 16 vols., 1985-, 9.127). Beaton's apology to Darwin for inadvertently upsetting him was published posthumously in the 'Journal of Horticulture' (3 Nov 1863). Beaton died at his home in Victoria Road, Surbiton, Surrey, on 31 October 1863, following a stroke. 


@@@@@


doc= 96721


Peto, Harold Ainsworth (1854-1933), architect and garden designer, was born at 12 Palace Gardens, Westminster, London, on 11 July 1854, the fourth son and sixth of the ten children of Sir (Samuel) Morton Peto, first baronet (1809-1889), civil engineering contractor and politician, and his second wife, Sarah Ainsworth (1821-1892), eldest daughter of Harry Kelsall, a Rochdale textile manufacturer. (Peto's father had two sons and three daughters by his previous marriage.) He spent much of his early childhood at Somerleyton Hall, his father's estate in Suffolk, and was sent to Harrow School for three years from 1869 to 1871 before commencing architectural training with J. Clements of Lowestoft. 
In 1874 Peto moved to London to the architectural firm of Karslake and Mortimer before going into partnership with Ernest George in 1876. The firm became one of the most successful in London during the 1880s, building prestigious mansions in Mayfair and at Collingham Gardens in Kensington. They also had a very successful practice as country house builders. In 1881 Peto was elected as an associate of the RIBA and then became a fellow in 1884. During the years of the partnership he travelled widely abroad, with frequent visits to Italy and then in 1887 to America where he made particular note of innovations in design and technology, including elevators, steam heating, ventilation, pneumatic tubes for messages, and sanitation. This new technology was later introduced into some of the commissions which he and George carried out in England. 
In the early 1890s Peto's diaries refer to his increasing distaste for life in London and his desire to live in the country and make a garden. In 1892 he resigned from his partnership with George and moved to Kent, and then in 1896 to a house near Salisbury, Wiltshire. In these and the following years he continued to travel on the continent and then further afield, to Egypt in 1892-3, Sicily in 1895, and then the Far East in 1898. His descriptions of his itinerary reveal a growing enthusiasm for gardens and plants; in particular, his stay in Japan provides a vivid account of flowers, gardens, and his experience of flower arranging. This voyage to the East was, he declared in his diary, going to be his last major journey outside Europe. 
On his return Peto bought Iford Manor near Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, in 1899, which became his home until his death. When he left the partnership with George he had agreed not to practise as an architect in England; that left him free to design the gardens and garden buildings that were to become his enduring legacy. It is unclear which was his first commission but it seems likely that he agreed to carry out designs for his friend Henry Seymour Trower (1843-1912) at Bridge House, Weybridge, Surrey, in the late 1890s. New projects developed rapidly. Easton Lodge in Essex for the countess of Warwick was one of the earliest major schemes: commissioned in 1902 and under construction by 1903, it constituted a most ambitious programme with a hundred foot long balustraded lily pool at the centre of a sunken Italian garden forming the central feature. In addition the approach from the house led through a yew walk, across games lawns, bordered by elaborate wooden pergolas in the seventeenth-century French style ('treillage'), and beyond the pool he designed wooded walks in a wilderness or 'bosquet' that included an elaborate tree house in the branches of an ancient oak. A Japanese tea house on the lake completed the ensemble. By the mid-twentieth century the garden had largely gone, but restoration began in the 1970s. 
Another of Peto's early designs, dating from 1903, was for Sir John Dickson-Poynder MP at Hartham Park, near Chippenham, Wiltshire. This scheme incorporated architectural features that have become synonymous with Peto's classic style. The long canal at Hartham, traversing the old walled garden and opening into a semicircular water basin in front of an Italian style pavilion, echoed the layout for Bridge House. Crichel House in Dorset, Buscot Park in Oxfordshire, and Heale House in Wiltshire were other major schemes of Peto's under construction in this period. Alongside these he was engaged with the development of his own garden at Iford Manor. 
Two major commissions at the end of the Edwardian period were Ilnacullin (Garinish Island) in Bantry Bay, Ireland, for the businessman and politician (John) Annan Bryce, and West Dean, near Chichester, Sussex, for the American millionaire William James. Garinish Island was purchased in 1910 from the War Office and work began there shortly afterwards based on Peto's plan and continued until 1914. The main axis extended from a classical pavilion, similar to the one at Hartham, over a sunken pool towards the tea house and then continued across lawns to the walled garden. A parallel axis, called Happy Valley, ran through a wild garden that is now famous for its subtropical planting. West Dean, begun in 1912, was very different, the project consisting of one three hundred foot long pergola, with a flint chequered garden house at one end and a pool at the centre. 
Peto's own garden at Iford Manor, developed throughout the early 1900s, included a grand colonnaded terrace, steps, garden rooms, a lily pool, and a Romanesque style cloister to display his collection of early sculpture; it remains one of his outstanding achievements. His 'Boke of Iford' says much about the making of the garden and his attitude to landscape design: 'I had always felt that for a garden to contain the highest development of beauty it must have a combination of Architecture and plants. Old buildings or fragments of Masonry carry one's mind back to the past in a way that a garden entirely of flowers cannot do. Gardens that are too stoney are equally unsatisfactory; it is the combination of the two, in just proportion, which is the most satisfying.' In addition to his work in England Peto developed an important practice on the French riviera near Nice, building some five sumptuous villas in what he called the style of the early Renaissance in Italy, surrounded by terraces, pools, and classical pavilions. The garden writer Avray Tipping said of one of these villas 'Mr Peto has had the opportunity of showing us exactly what his conception was of a complete place: of the unity of a house and garden where every part is correlated to every other and where the position and character of every fraction... are as much part of a definite plan as are the rooms in the house itself' ('Country Life', 16 July 1910). After 1918 he continued to advise on earlier work, and in particular spent time on the riviera staying with his clients, but no new commission seems to have been undertaken. This was in part because of post-war economic and social changes, and also because Peto was now in his mid-sixties and the exuberance of life before the war had gone. 
Peto, who never married, died at Iford Manor on 16 April 1933 and was buried in Chedington, Dorset. Although his achievements as an architect in the partnership with Ernest George are considerable, he is now best known for designing some of the quintessential Edwardian gardens. 


@@@@@


doc= 96722


Lane, Joseph (bap. 1717, d. 1784), grotto maker, the son of Thomas Lane, was born at Ashley Wood cottage on the Fonthill estate in Wiltshire, but moved to nearby Tisbury, Wiltshire, where he was baptized on 28 August 1717. When he married, on 22 July 1747, Mary Flippen of Swallowcliffe, his occupation was recorded as stonecutter. It is likely that he learned his stonecraft in the quarries of Fonthill, and that in the 1750s he hewed stone for the building of Fonthill Splendens, the great house built by the planter and London alderman William Beckford, who bought the Fonthill estate about 1744. He probably did not turn to grotto construction before 1760, when it is thought that he worked on at least one grotto for Beckford at Fonthill and the cascade at Loakes Manor, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. 
Lane built and decorated the lavish cave grotto at Painshill Park, near Cobham, Surrey, owned by Charles Hamilton. With its astonishing decoration of spar and other crystals on the walls and dripping from the ceiling as stalactites, the grotto was substantially complete by 1765, though work continued for a few years. This was highly innovative work. Although Italian grottoes had some stalactites, usually of 'spugne', the satin spar stalactites that sparkled in Painshill grotto were something new, as was the extensive use of what is commonly, though incorrectly, known as 'tufa', a pitted limestone (spongestone or honeycomb) that gave a somewhat eerie effect and was used as dressing over a brick core. 'Tufa' was used not only on the grotto but also on numerous alcoves and outcrops all over the grotto island, including, most spectacularly, an arch to invite the visitor on to the island. 
It is possible that Joseph Lane's son 
The Lanes' practice was centred on Wiltshire and Surrey. Perhaps from the late 1770s came another Surrey commission, the grotto at Wimbledon House, said by J. C. Loudon to be by the same mason as at Oatlands and Painshill and to have borne some resemblance to the Oatlands structure. Wimbledon House belonged to Benjamin Bond Hopkins, who had purchased Painshill from Hamilton in 1773. There is also one commission which is likely to date from somewhere between 1780 and 1790 but where there is no evidence other than style to attribute it to one or both of the Lanes. That is the grotto at Ascot Place, Berkshire, which is considered by some to be the greatest grotto in England. It has a variety of decoration, ranging from large stalactites to patterns picked out in pebbles, both of which were features in the earlier Lane grottoes. 
Joseph Lane died in January 1784 and was buried at Tisbury parish church on 28 January. His son undertook the next commission of importance in Wiltshire, the cascade and grotto complex at Bowood, seat of the earl of Shelburne, who became marquess of Lansdowne in 1784. The complex was designed by Charles Hamilton of Painshill in 1781 and executed by Josiah Lane and others from 1785. This composition, consisting of a spectacular cascade with a grotto and tunnels behind it, a hermit's cell further back, and a series of rockwork alcoves and niches stretching in front of the cascade along the stream, shows a new direction and evidence of Josiah's distinctive style -- no spar or crystals, but primitive, naturalistic stonework. Josiah is entered in the accounts as a 'rock mason'. In 1790 the two-storey tea-house grotto at St Anne's Hill, Chertsey, Surrey, appeared. There is no direct evidence that Josiah was involved, but stylistically it represents a throwback to the stalactite days of Painshill and the stone patterns of Oatlands and Ascot Place. In 1792 the impressive grotto at Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, was put up by Josiah Lane. It sits on a formal turf platform but is very primitive in its construction, though there may have been some waterfall effects inside. 
A lack of documentary proof casts doubt on four other possible Lane projects in Wiltshire. An early grotto (thought to have been built about 1750) at Lacock Abbey exhibits some of the Lanes' naturalistic stonework of a later period, while Belcombe Court has a double-decker grotto where the upper level is a sort of open balcony with a jagged stone parapet, and is likely to be post-1777. One of the two grottoes at Wilbury has also been said to resemble Lane work. At Bowden Park the grotto is dated to the 1790s, but has crystals and spar, and like St Anne's Hill harks back to the Lanes' earlier style. In the adjacent county of Dorset the grotto at Duntish Court, formerly Castle Hill, is a candidate for attribution to the Lanes. 
The most extensive of Josiah Lane's commissions was also his last definitely known work. This was the unparalleled suite of grottoes around the lake at Fonthill. In all there are seven grottoes (nine if one is divided into three separate units), and there is some mystery as to their dates and how far Josiah was responsible for creating, or at least modifying, all of them. It is probable that Joseph Lane created at least one for Alderman Beckford, but in their present state the grottoes bear the 'primitive' trademark of Josiah's later work, and in one case an inscribed signature of Josiah dated 1794. He would have worked for the arch-fantasist William Beckford, son of the alderman. The grottoes range from the semi-formal boathouse-cum-plunge pool through a two-storey 'cromlech', with a staircase, to two heavily natural caves simply carved out of the quarry. 
It is unlikely that Josiah Lane worked on any grotto after 1800, although one account states that he was responsible for the bath-and-cavern grotto built at Norbiton Place, Surrey, about 1819. By that time he would have been sixty-six and the strenuous labour involved would have been challenging for his age, particularly if he had not done such work for twenty years. His end was sad: after a career of creating splendour for others at handsome wages he sank into poverty and died in the workhouse at Tisbury in January 1833; he was buried at the parish church on 28 January. 
Little is known of Josiah Lane's life or character apart from the fact that he and his wife, Rebecca, had at least three daughters. Some personal information comes from J. C. Loudon in his account of the gardens at Wardour Castle in the 'Gardener's Magazine' in 1836: 'He was a native of the adjoining parish of Tisbury, in the workhouse of which he died... at a great age. He was perfectly ignorant, but certainly had a genius for this kind of construction. He used to do all the work with his own hands, and be paid at the rate of about two guineas a week; but, like other money-getting men with ill-regulated minds, he never thought of making provision for age. (Loudon, 504)' For well over a century the Lanes were hardly mentioned except occasionally as labourers who worked on one or two specific grottoes. It was only with the publication, in 1976, of an account of their partnership that serious attention was drawn to them. As a result of recent interest in makers rather than, as traditionally, in designers, both Lanes, and Josiah in particular, are receiving recognition and celebration that are long overdue. 


@@@@@


doc= 96724


Kemp, Edward (1817-1891), landscape gardener, was born at Streatham, Surrey, on 25 September 1817 and baptized at the Independent chapel, Tooting, on 26 October, the son of Charles Kemp ('b'. 1785/6), tailor, and his wife, Ann. During the 1830s he was a garden apprentice alongside Edward Milner under Joseph Paxton, superintendent of the gardens at Chatsworth in Derbyshire. Kemp and Milner learned about planting an arboretum and a pinetum, how to construct a massive rockery that appeared to be natural, how to install a fountain, and the importance of greenhouses to a large estate. 
Along with Paxton and Milner, Kemp became a leader in park and garden design in mid-Victorian England. As part of the movement to provide green recreational spaces for industrial populations, Birkenhead's improvement commissioners had obtained a private bill empowering them to use public funds to build and maintain a public park across the River Mersey from Liverpool's expanding boundaries. Between 1842 and 1845 the park was planned by Paxton who, from 1843, entrusted its development to Kemp, making him head gardener (superintendent), a post he held for forty years. 
Birkenhead Park was drained by the creation of two lakes, and the spoil was artfully contrived to look like low hills around the lakes, which, with their islands, helped to provide views across the water. The hills were made craggy with stone from the excavation of the lakes, and trees were planted to separate the views; all the additions gave a feeling of the park as a 'natural' phenomenon. A plan of about 1845 shows sinuous paths, as John Claudius Loudon used, winding around the outer rim of the park, with shrubs and trees at the junctions of the paths as well as the boundary. Showy flowering plants were recommended by Kemp round the park borders. There were large areas of grassland in the centre, which could be used for sport. These features were to be repeated in other parks by Kemp, and Birkenhead Park was sufficiently influential to attract visits in 1850 and 1859 from F. L. Olmsted, the American designer of Central Park, New York. When the park was opened in 1847 both cricket and archery had been introduced, and Kemp was later to oversee the introduction of further sports, including football in 1861. Paid $1000 a year for the park's maintenance, he lived in a lodge in the park, so that he could manage and protect it, with his wife, Sophia (1817/18-1887), daughter of Henry Bailey of Croydon, whom he had married on 5 September 1845. 
Kemp's work at Birkenhead led to further commissions. He made a flower garden in 1849 for James Barratt in Warrington, followed by others for Samuel Job at Aigburth near Liverpool and for Sir Edward Smythe near Shrewsbury in 1851. Kemp's flower gardens were made on the sunniest sides of a house, and were to be simple and symmetrical, with beds divided by grass, gravel, box or stone. Sunny sites were for rose gardens, with ferneries where it was shady. Kemp designed winter gardens and American gardens, water features with dams and islands, and planned summerhouses, greenhouses, and statuary in appropriate positions. 
In 1850 Kemp produced the first of three editions of 'How to Lay Out a Small Garden', referring in its preface to the 'humanising and elevating influence about everything that is really beautiful, whether in Art or Nature' (p. vi), which would cheer and benefit the observer, and, of course, the owner of the estate. On reaching its second edition (1858) it was hailed as 'the best book on pure garden design in the English language', though 'it may not always be able to endorse Mr Kemp's opinions' ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 19 June 1858, 496). The book's third edition (1864) set out his division of the styles of landscape gardening into three: 'the old formal or geometrical style, the mixed, middle or irregular style, which Mr. Loudon called the gardenesque; and the picturesque' (p. 91). In fact Loudon's term was intended to mean the making of a style that separated art from nature, giving garden plants space to develop their own distinctive characteristics, and where natural features were set apart from man-made ones. Kemp interpreted his mixed or irregular style as 'a blending of Art with Nature', with rounded lines and no irregularity. Kemp's third style was only in part influenced by Uvedale Price's 'Essay on the Picturesque'; Kemp saw it as harsh and angular, with wildness, ruggedness, broken ground and dashing water. But he agreed with Price in his condemnation of clumps and lines of similar trees, which Lancelot Brown had introduced. 
Much of what Kemp had written about the 'mixed or middle' style appeared in the landscape of Biddulph Grange in Staffordshire. In the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' of 1862 he wrote five articles describing the landscapes of this extraordinary garden, made by James Bateman and Edward Cooke, combining a number of themed parts including Egyptian and Chinese, with horticultural spaces such as a stumpery of upturned tree roots, flower borders, and an avenue of deodars. 
Kemp's 'The Parks, Gardens etc. of London and its Suburbs' (1851) was a guide to the landscape features, horticulture, and ornamental structures relevant to the garden architect, compiled from visits to eighty-one public parks, public gardens, private gardens and nurseries and florists' gardens, within a 20 mile radius of St Paul's. He noted the villas with their gardens springing up, 'some of the finest' at Roehampton, Putney Heath, and Wandsworth; the Spanish chestnut as a first-rate park tree, and the occidental plane as one of the best and most serviceable London trees in parks and squares. He remarked on the spread of London, and its 'lack of breathing places or means of open-air recreation', though he was critical of the low standard of work at Victoria Park, opened in 1845 for the large and crowded districts of Bethnal Green, Whitechapel, and Shoreditch. At Kensington Gardens he found fault with the avenues and vistas, but admired the collections of plants; and he had nothing but praise for the old-fashioned flower garden at Holland House and the specimens of old exotic trees on the lawn. His interest in plants extended to London's nurseries, which specialized in indoor exotics, among them Loddiges of Hackney, with many 'first-rate specimens' in its well-constructed orchid house. 
Kemp went on to work on Anfield cemetery in Liverpool (1856), Hesketh Park in Southport (1864), Stanley Park in Liverpool (1868), and Saltwell Park in Gateshead (1876). His private commissions included the grounds of Shendish, Hertfordshire, in 1854, for Charles Longman, an 'architectural' layout of P. S. Humberston's estate at Mollington, Cheshire, in 1856, and John Naylor's pleasure grounds at Leighton Hall, Welshpool, in 1858. He also laid out part of the garden at Knightshayes in Devon in 1874, working from designs by William Burges. He retired in the 1880s, and died at Birkenhead Park, Cheshire, on 1 March 1891. His work influenced others, including Thomas Hayton Mawson, whose Hanley Park, Stoke on Trent (1897), followed Kemp's shaping of Birkenhead. 


