@@@@@


doc= 96728


Page, (Montague) Russell (1906-1985), garden designer and landscape architect, was born on 1 November 1906 at Kirkstead House, Kirkstead Road, Tattershall, Lincolnshire, the second son and middle child of the three children of Harold Ethelbert Page (1876-1966), solicitor in Lincoln, and his wife, Ida Flora, 'nee' Martin (1875-1963). During three years of boarding at Charterhouse, Surrey -- where his uncle, Thomas Ethelbert Page, was on the governing body -- he showed no particular distinction in sports or academic subjects except English, but excelled in art. From the age of fourteen, after buying a 'campanula pulla' at a local agricultural show, he spent his holidays in Lincolnshire making rock gardens, reading about them, and spending pocket money on plants. At seventeen he was accepting commissions to design and build rock gardens and learning from those who shared his passion. He also started visiting gardens, including those of Mark Fenwick at Abbotswood, Stow-on-the-Wold, Lawrence Johnstone at Hidcote Manor, and Gertrude Jekyll at Munstead, Surrey; Jekyll's writings, especially on colour, were a major influence. 
After studying fine art at the Slade School in London (1923-5) he spent most of the next three years in Paris studying painting, travelling, and working on various gardens. It was a formative period in his career. He met Andre de Vilmorin, the son of a family of horticulturists and seed merchants in Paris, who became a lifelong friend. He also met the Americans Ogden Codman, a retired architect with an extensive photographic library of French chateaux, and Amos Laurence, who owned a chateau at Boussy St Antoine, south-east of Paris, and a fine library of old garden books. On his return to Britain he started gardening professionally early in 1929, gaining experience at Exton Park and North Luffenham Hall, Rutland; Longleat Park, Wiltshire, where he worked with Viscount Weymouth, simplifying the much landscaped grounds and revising the planting of the deer park and drive; and Greenways in Warminster. He also undertook work for the Mildmay family at Flete House, south Devon. He spent the summer of 1932 at Boussy St Antoine, where he started drawing garden plans. His rigorous self-discipline of making sketches of objects which he came across was 'not so much to accumulate a formal documentation, as to train my eye and mind to look and register more carefully' (Page, 24). 
In London later in 1932 Page worked briefly for Richard Sudell, one of the founders of the recently formed Institute of Landscape Architects, designing plantings for the blocks of inexpensive flats being built in the London suburbs. A further commission from the Longleat estate rescued him from these tasks, as Viscount Weymouth sought a design for a museum and restaurant at Cheddar Gorge. Page needed architectural expertise and approached Geoffrey Jellicoe, who proved an enthusiastic collaborator. The project was successful; they both enjoyed the stimulus of developing ideas together and they attracted other important clients including Ronald Tree at Ditchley Park, Oxfordshire, the duke of York at the Royal Lodge, Windsor Great Park, and Gordon Russell at Broadway, Worcestershire. In 1937 he was elected a fellow of the Institute of Landscape Architects, to whose journal, 'Landscape and Garden', Sudell had enlisted him as a frequent contributor. 
During the Second World War Page was attached to the political warfare executive, working with the BBC in setting up various foreign language services, and in propaganda, travelling and working mainly in Cairo, but also in the United States and Ceylon. After the war a chance meeting with the exiled Austrian artist Oskar Kokoschka gently guided him back into the discipline of observing, drawing, and painting. He decided to return to Paris to become a disciple of the philosopher and mystic George Gurdjieff, and in 1947 he married Gurdjieff's niece Lida at St Germain-des-Pres, Paris. In Paris he met up again with Vilmorin and Stephane Boudin, a French interior designer whom Page had known from Ditchley Park and whose work he admired. They provided him with office space and commissions in France. On the recommendation of the Institute of Landscape Architects he was commissioned by the British Council to design new and existing parks and gardens for the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company in Abadan. 
While Page was developing work overseas, attention in Britain was focused on preparations for the 1951 Festival of Britain. Frank Clark was given overall responsibility for the landscape on the South Bank section, but Hugh Casson said that the Festival Gardens at Battersea Park needed 'something fairly chichi' (private information). Clark, who recalled working with Page (and Jellicoe) before the war, recommended him for the Festival Gardens. Page was appointed with sole responsibility for landscape and worked closely and successfully developing the site plan with the chief designer, James Gardener. Budgets had been halved, work was eighteen months delayed, and the site was subject to tidal flooding, but Page demonstrated that he could harness his skills to create the right effects and was not perturbed by the scale of operations. He mass-planted semi-mature shrubs: rhododendrons were hand-picked from the Exbury estate, and were fronted with 10,000 hostas, sourced from nurseries and private gardens throughout Europe. For 'frivolous planting' in free-flowing beds between the pavilions he employed every available device 'so that texture, colour, size and shape would combine to make all the flower plantings sparkle, shimmer and seem to move in contrast to the bright, flat and static surfaces of paint' (Page, 327). He relied greatly on the experienced and unflappable E. R. Janes, formerly of Suttons, the Reading seedsmen, who was responsible for collecting and raising all the plants. Page was honoured for this work by appointment OBE in January 1952, the first British landscape architect to receive this award. 
Moving back to his office at Vilmorin's in Paris, Page built up a prestigious client base including the duke and duchess of Windsor, William and Suzanna Walton on Ischia, and Giovanni Agnelli of Fiat. An array of challenging projects in France, Switzerland, Belgium, and Italy developed and refined his ideas on colour, water, and the interplay of objects in space. He designed the area adjacent to the French pavilion at the International Exhibition at Brussels in 1958, and in the same year he won a gold medal at the Chelsea flower show for his French garden. In 1959 he designed Vilmorin's garden at the Paris 'floralies', for which he won the grand prix d'honneur. His marriage was dissolved in 1954 and, on 30 December 1954, he married Vera Milanova Daumal (died 1962), a widow, who encouraged him in writing a book to elucidate his approach to garden design. 

'The Education of a Gardener' appeared in 1962, the year of his return to London, and was extremely well received. Perceptive and clearly written, it is an accumulation of sound wisdom offering relevant and timeless design principles. A particular 'hobby horse' of his, as he had earlier put it, was 'real understanding of scale': 'once arrived at all the rest can fall into its place' (Landscape Institute, Page membership file). Over the last twenty-three years of his life he devoted his attention to larger projects, with commissions mostly in mainland Europe, but also significant public and corporate projects in the United States -- the courtyard of the Frick Collection in New York, the sculpture garden at the Columbus Museum of Art, the Donald M. Kendall sculpture gardens at PepsiCo world headquarters, and the Temple of Flora at the National Arboretum, Washington. In Britain he worked at Howletts and Port Lympne, and Leeds Castle in Kent; Badminton, Gloucestershire; and the Victoria and Albert Museum garden, also assisting Roy Strong with the museum's 'Garden' exhibition in 1978. He was awarded the medal of the French Academie d'Architecture in 1977. Lady Walton received the Italian Torsanlorenzo prestige prize in 2007 for implementing his design at La Mortella on Ischia. Page died at 10 Bryanston Square, Westminster, London, on 4 January 1985 and was buried in an unmarked grave in Badminton, Gloucestershire, on 11 January. 
Page was constantly on the move between homes, jobs, and countries, and invariably worked on his own. Each composition represented his acute response to the dynamic medley between client, landscape, architecture, history, and location, so he would sometimes spend much time with his clients, getting to know them and walking the site. His aim was to produce for them 'gardens of aesthetic pleasure and emotional satisfaction', but remarkable clients are essential to the creation of remarkable gardens, and those were the ones he sought out. 'Russell had a larger than life character, even in appearance, he was very tall, bald with round blue eyes. He was awe-inspiring. His expression was the mirror of a very private character. He was reserved, basically shy, generous with others and frugal with himself' (Boyden and Vinciguerra). Except for expenses he invoiced clients once in the year and only after a job had been completed. Throughout his life he showed a consistent integrity towards his work, and was never swayed by money or celebrity. 
The range of Page's work, often undertaken during periods of economic austerity, was remarkable. Most of his gardens were for private clients so few people will have experienced them first hand. A number have since been lost, or significantly modified (though the Battersea Festival Gardens were restored in 2004). No one trained under him, but through his writings and particularly his book -- which is much quoted and very quotable -- he gained many disciples. As a landscape architect, garden designer, and plantsman the quality of his thinking, in addition to his skills, placed him on a par with the best of his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 96730


Thomas, Francis Inigo (1865-1950), architect and garden designer, was born at Warmsworth, near Doncaster, Yorkshire, on 25 December 1865, the fifth son of Charles Edward Thomas (1823-1901), rector of Warmsworth, and his wife, Georgiana Mary (1828-1921), daughter of Colonel Henry Hely-Hutchinson of Weston Hall, Northamptonshire. For several generations the gentrified Thomases had been settled at Ratton Park, Willingdon, Sussex, and through marriages were related to a number of aristocratic families, a circumstance that was to be useful to F. Inigo Thomas, as he became known, at the outset of his career. 
Thomas was educated at Haileybury College, Hertford, and in 1884 went to Pembroke College, Oxford. Later that same decade he joined the London office of the Gothic revival architects G. F. Bodley and Thomas Garner. During this apprenticeship he lived with his elderly uncle William Brodrick Thomas (1811-1898), a sometime successful designer of landscape gardens who had been obliged to accommodate himself to the developing taste -- driven by an army of ambitious professional plantsmen and the new horticultural magazines -- for ahistorical gardens replete with imported specimen plants and other foreign novelties. It was this unwelcome drift that Thomas and other young architects confronted. Identifying Tudor and seventeenth-century houses and gardens as the zenith of English design, and inspired by the aims and values of William Morris and the arts and crafts movement, they sought to recover the native character and style of the smaller country house and its surroundings. 
In 1889 Thomas made the first of a series of study tours on the continent, compiling a portfolio of his own drawings, watercolours, and etchings of old houses and gardens in France, Germany, and the Netherlands. He also travelled in Britain to the same end, and in 1892 he and his fellow architect Reginald Blomfield published 'The Formal Garden in England', an illustrated historical survey that promoted designs featuring masonry gazebos and pavilions, balustrading, dipping wells, rectilinear and circular pools, lead and stone statues, and geometrically clipped yews. Most of its pen-and-ink drawings were by Thomas. The book went into a third edition in 1901, and many years later Blomfield remembered that he largely owed to it 'the growth of his practice in early days' (Fellows, 46). It also helped Thomas's career. Alfred Cart de Lafontaine (died 1944) had already commissioned Thomas in 1891 to construct vast Elizabethan-style gardens for Athelhampton Hall, Dorset, for which Thomas borrowed from those at Montacute House, Somerset, but in 1892 he was asked to supply an equally ambitious scheme for Barrow Court, Barrow Gurney, Somerset, by Henry Martin Gibbs (died 1928), who had made his fortune in Peruvian guano. Both sixteenth-century houses were run down and lacked gardens, and both were cheap recent purchases due to a glut in the estate market. Five years on, Lindsay Lindsay-Hogg (1853-1923), later baronet (1905) and Conservative MP (1900-06), chose Thomas to extend Rotherfield Hall near Crowborough, Sussex, another decayed sixteenth-century house recently purchased, and to add terraced gardens, pavilions, and a 'nymphaeum' -- a grotto with pool and attendant sculptured nymph. 
During the 1890s Thomas was also involved with the Art-Workers' Guild, C. R. Ashbee's School of Handicraft, the Royal Society of Painters and Etchers, and the Society of Arts. He gave illustrated lectures on architectural gardens for the Society of Arts (published in the 'Gardener's Magazine', February 1896) and wrote a series of articles 'Of garden making' for 'Country Life' (February-April 1900). He exhibited paintings at the Royal Academy of Arts in London (1894), at the Architectural Exhibition held at the Carnegie Art Gallery, Pittsburgh (1900), and elsewhere. At the end of the decade he served in South Africa as a government official during the South African War, and was for a time incarcerated there. Following his return to England commissions were infrequent and insubstantial (a terraced riverside garden for Drakelow Hall near Burton upon Trent in 1902; extensions to Ffynone, a John Nash villa near Manordeifi, Pembrokeshire, in 1904). But in 1910 he was contracted to design gardens for Chantmarle, another Dorset manor house, for Frank Ewart Savill (1869-1916). Chantmarle was Thomas's last substantial layout, and its canal, pools, and balustrading owe much to the influence of the Renaissance and baroque gardens he had explored years before in Italy. (In 1893 he had taken measured surveys and photographs of Italian gardens in the Campagna and elsewhere in the hope of interesting a publisher back in Britain, but none was found and the project was abandoned.) 
In 1912 Thomas published his slim 'Keystones of Building', a dry, self-deprecating account aimed at providing the layman with 'a description of such situations as arise in the progress of building... in terms that he can understand' (p. v). Two years later the outbreak of hostilities forced Thomas to close his London office at 44 Piccadilly and work from home at 2 Mulberry Walk, Chelsea, where he made his last-known garden designs the following year for Captain Somerset Arthur Sherston and his wife, Dorothy (only daughter of General Sir William Parke), of Otley Hall, Suffolk. Sherston's death in action in May 1915 curtailed further work there. That same year Thomas was sent to Russia, and in 1916 to Scandinavia, the Netherlands, and Spain in connection with his occasional employment as a liaison officer between government departments and the Federation of British Industries. He continued in this role until his retirement in 1928. A lecture, 'Gardens', that he gave to students in the month before the general strike of May 1926, afterwards published, contains both undiminished enthusiasm for Italianate classicism in design and plangent nostalgia for a world that had passed: 'Surplus funds, a cultivated aristocracy, security of tenure and electric power... are all that is wanted for old England to blossom out again with garden schemes equal to any she has known in the past' ('Journal of the RIBA', June 1926, 439). In 1930 a valedictory exhibition entitled 'The Spell of England' of fifty-one of his paintings was shown in London and Doncaster. 
Thomas never married. He died at his home, 2 Mulberry Walk, Chelsea, London, on 27 March 1950, and at his request he was cremated, his ashes joining those of his brother George and sister Frederica in their grave in Putney Vale cemetery. He left the bulk of his real and personal estate to his nephew and sole executor, Major Reginald Brodrick Freeman-Thomas, a land agent, of Hankerton Priory near Malmesbury, Wiltshire. 
Thomas was a leading figure in the brief revival of architectural gardens that was effectively brought to an end by the First World War. His work was photographed for articles in 'Country Life' and other periodicals, and it was known in Germany and Austria via Hermann Muthesius's influential three-volume 'Das englische Haus' (1904-5). Thomas's major gardens -- Athelhampton, Barrow Court, Rotherfield, and Chantmarle -- survive intact. A portrait in chalks of 1889 of his cousin, the talented composer Arthur Goring Thomas (1850-1892), in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and the Tirah campaign obelisk of 1900 in Bonn Square, Oxford, a memorial to the Oxfordshire light infantry's losses on the north-west frontier in 1897-8, are accessible examples of his other undertakings in art and design. 


@@@@@


doc= 96736


Sadler, Sir James Hayes (1851-1922), army officer and colonial governor, was the eldest son of Sir James Hayes Sadler (1827-1910), army officer and consular official, and his wife, Sophia Jane (died 1902), daughter of James W. Taylor of the East India Company. His father, after reaching the rank of colonel in the Royal Artillery, joined the consular service in 1879, serving successively in Boulogne, Caen, La Rochelle, Panama, Chicago, Valparaiso, and Santiago; he retired in 1897 and was made a KCMG in 1899. A younger son, Arthur Hayes Sadler (1863-1952), reached the rank of admiral in the Royal Navy. 
Little is known of Sadler's early life, until in July 1870 he was commissioned into the Sussex artillery militia. His early postings included the 61st foot (in Canada and Ireland), the 33rd Bengal native infantry (in India), the Indian staff corps, and the government of India's foreign department. In 1875 he married Rita Annie (died 1918), daughter of Colonel Wemyss Smith, of the Bengal staff corps. In July 1877 he joined the government of India's political department and in May 1881 became assistant agent to the governor-general in Baroda. He then served as assistant secretary in the legislative department. In April 1891 he was appointed political agent in Kotah and Jhallawar. In February 1892 he was on special duty with Prince Damrong of Siam, and in November 1892 he became political agent and consul in Muscat. In June 1893 he was promoted agent in residence and consul-general to the Persian Gulf. In April 1895 he became assistant secretary of the foreign department of the government of India. 
Sadler's first major east African posting was as political agent and consul-general in the Somaliland protectorate (1898-1901). On 12 April 1899 he informed the War Office that a mullah named Haji Muhammad 'Abdallah Hasan had started collecting weapons and recruiting fighters in hopes of establishing control over the south-eastern part of the protectorate and launching an expedition against Abyssinia's Christian-dominated government. In early 1899 the mullah carried out his first military operation in the Somaliland protectorate by attacking Burao. His force included about 3000 irregular fighters who were armed with daggers and spears; they also had some sixty modern rifles and a small quantity of ammunition. However, Sadler's fear that the mullah's guerrilla force would attack Berbera, an important sea port for the British, and other strategically important towns, proved to be unfounded. On 30 July 1899 Sadler reported to the Foreign Office that the 'Mullah has gone off his head' and had fired twice at his nephew. In the aftermath of these incidents, Muhammad became known as the Mad Mullah. His followers subsequently raided many tribal camps and attacked rival religious sects. The mullah and some of his followers then retired to the wells at Odwein, located south-west of Burao, to await the spring rains. By August 1899 he had occupied Burao with a force of some 5000 fighters, 1500 of whom were mounted. On 30 April 1901 Sadler issued a proclamation that supporters of the 'mullah' 'will be considered as hostile to the government and will be treated as such'. Despite his warning, competing interests in London between the Colonial Office, the Foreign Office, and the War Office prevented immediate action against the mullah, and it was not until 1920 that he was finally defeated. 
On 1 January 1901 Sadler became commissioner of Buganda, with responsibility also for the kingdoms of Bunyoro, Ankole, and Toro. He was assisted by a staff of four sub-commissioners, eight collectors, and fifteen assistant collectors. Despite this small staff the protectorate had a high court, secretariat, treasury, public works office, survey offices, and a military headquarters, all of which were located in Entebbe. Their most important duties included magisterial and judicial work, police force supervision, hut tax collection, and the promotion of agriculture and trade. 
In April 1901 a sleeping sickness epidemic spread around Lake Victoria's northern shore and eventually claimed the lives of 250,000 people. In January 1902 Sadler started drafting a report on the epidemic. He also authorized the establishment of sleeping sickness isolation camps on islands in Lake Victoria. In 1903 the Royal Society sent David Bruce to Uganda to investigate the disease. He confirmed that the bite of the tsetse fly transmitted the disease. Some of Sadler's other accomplishments in Uganda included the transfer in March 1902 of the government stations at Baringo, Fort Ternan, Kisumu, Mumias, Naivasha, Nakuru, Nandi, and Ravice (al-Dama) to British East Africa. In November 1902 a fire destroyed Mengo Hospital; Sadler dispatched 400 men to help build a temporary hospital. In 1903 he sought to facilitate Uganda's economic development by distributing 1.5 tons of cotton seed to African farmers. In April 1904 he opened the new law courts at Entebbe, and in November that year he presided over the newly built Mengo Hospital. He acknowledged that Uganda would never be a 'white man's country' like British East Africa or South Africa. 
In early 1904 Sadler received a report that a large Ethiopian force, which included 415 soldiers and 600 camp followers, had raided northern Uganda for cattle and slaves. This deployment challenged British claims north of Mount Elgon. To deter future raids Sadler wanted to send a company of troops to Manimani in Karamoja and to establish permanent police posts at Sebei and Mount Kadem. However, the Foreign Office vetoed these proposals as it feared a harsh Ethiopian reaction. Despite this setback Sadler tried to control ivory raiders by moving the government station in Budaka to Mbale and by introducing legislation to control their activities. He also restricted the number of firearms carried by caravans. Near the end of his tenure he realized that British authority in northern Uganda -- which was limited to stations in Gondokoro, Nimule, and Wadelai -- exerted very little authority over the tribes in these regions. He also observed that the territory north of Mount Elgon was 'destitute of any sign of our authority'. 
On 12 December 1905 Sadler became commissioner of British East Africa (Kenya), his title being upgraded to governor as of the end of that year. His most immediate challenge concerned difficulties with the Nandi people, who had been attacking the Uganda railway line and a nearby road. His predecessor, Sir Donald Stewart, had authorized the creation of a field force that included six companies of the King's African rifles and 200 armed police, supported by more than 1000 Maasai and Somali auxiliaries. By November 1905 hostilities had been nearly terminated. The Nandi field force had lost forty-two soldiers killed while forty-eight others had sustained wounds. The Nandi had lost 626 killed. Government forces had also captured 10,300 cattle and 18,000 sheep. In December 1905 Sadler presided over peace talks with the Nandi. He decided that the two most violent sections of the Nandi -- the Kamelilo and the Kapchependi -- would be moved to a reserve north of their traditional lands. The Colonial Office received the news with satisfaction. In June 1906 Sadler ordered two columns of troops, one from Fort Hall and another from Nyeri, to enter Embu territory around Mount Kenya. Among other things Embu warriors had attacked the pro-British M'bee. Within a month government forces had broken all resistance; only two soldiers were killed, while the Embu had lost 407 warriors, as well as 3180 cattle and 7150 sheep and goats. In January 1908 the Kisii revolted at the urging of a local witch doctor. Sadler responded by again deploying government forces. During the fighting the Kisii lost ninety warriors, 4800 cattle, and 2500 goats and sheep. Sadler also extended colonial administration into northern areas inhabited by the Samburu, Suk, and Turkana. 
However, Sadler's firmness with Africans was not matched in his dealings with the colony's European settlers. According to Alfred Claud Hollis, a trader and colonial official, Sadler was 'very industrious, kind and hospitable, but weak and vacillating, and quite unable to cope with the unruly settlers'. Charles William Hobley, another colonial official, characterized him as 'a charming old gentleman'. Although there were only some 600 European settlers in British East Africa, their political influence was substantial. Such leading personalities as Lord Delamere and Ewart W. Grogan were determined to turn Kenya into a 'white man's colony'. Lady Delamere called Sadler 'flannelfoot' because of his perceived weakness and his failure to accommodate the European settler community (Bennett, 26). In November 1907 Hollis became secretary for native affairs and drafted new labour rules that provoked a confrontation between Sadler and the European community. According to the document employers were required to build housing and to provide blankets, food, medical care, and water for African labourers. In addition Hollis prohibited chiefs from compelling labour and instituted regulations to control recruitment. In March 1908 the Colonists' Association immediately attacked Sadler, claiming that the new regulations would raise the cost of labour by 25 per cent. An acrimonious dispute prompted Sadler to suspend Lord Delamere and Arthur Ballie from the legislative council. However, he made some modifications to the new regulations: food would be provided only if African labourers could not find provisions locally, and blankets did not have to be provided to workers who did not regularly use them. 
Sadler's final posting, to Grenada as governor of the Windward Islands, a relative backwater, from April 1909 to September 1914, reflected London's displeasure with his inability to quell the incessant demands of the European settler community in Kenya. His time in Grenada was uneventful, and he retired to England in 1914. He had been made a CB in 1902 and knighted KCMG in 1907. He died at St Briac, Brittany, on 21 April 1922 and was survived by a son, his wife having predeceased him and two sons having been killed in the early stages of the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 96737


Williams, Peggy Eileen (1909-1958), writer and artist, was born on 17 March 1909 at Rush Holt, Uxbridge, Middlesex, the second daughter of Godfrey James Whistler (1866-1936), an insurance clerk, and his wife, Katherine Isabel, 'nee' Wood ('b'. 1873/4). Peggy Whistler's deep love for the Herefordshire countryside was kindled during her stays at her aunt's farm near Ross-on-Wye, from 1918 onwards. By 1921 the family had settled at nearby Bridstow and Peggy was educated at Ross high school. After a brief period teaching at a French school near Tours she attended classes at Hereford School of Art and later spent a few months painting in Brittany in 1926. After short-term jobs in England as a governess and a housekeeper she was commissioned by Basil Blackwell to provide the striking black-and-white illustrations for Alfred Williams's 'Tales from the Panchatantra' (1930). However, writing soon became her main medium of expression. Her 'nom de plume', Margiad Evans, was partly inspired by her stay at Pontllyfni in Caernarvonshire, where she worked on her first novel, 'Country Dance' (1932), which evokes tensions in a nineteenth-century Welsh border community. The tightly constructed narrative brings to life the voice -- silenced by male violence -- of the young daughter of a Welsh mother and English father, torn between conflicting identities and suitors. The author relished reviewers' ignorance that the Peggy Whistler who provided the illustrations was also the author Margiad Evans. 
After the success of 'Country Dance' three further novels, 'The Wooden Doctor' (1933), 'Turf or Stone' (1934), and 'Creed' (1936), followed rapidly. All are based in Ross and the surrounding district and draw on her own life and circumstances. Although partly influenced by writers such as the Bronte sisters and Mary Webb, the novels are highly original in the treatment of their strong narratives. Again they featured her own visual images, as frontispieces and book-jackets. After her father's death in 1936 the family home was sold and for the next three years she ran the Springherne guest house at Bull's Hill, near Ross, together with her younger sister Nancy and her friend Helen Blackwell, the daughter of her publisher. While at Springherne she met a Welshman, George Michael Mendus Williams, whom she married on 28 October 1940 at Gloucester register office. By January 1941 they were living at Llangarron, five miles from Ross, where her husband worked on a farm. Since a projected fifth novel, 'The Widower's Tale', had proved intractable, between domestic tasks, gardening, and occasional farm work, she turned instead to keeping a journal. This formed the basis of 'Autobiography' (1943), a poetic and spiritual exploration of the relationship between the human individual and the natural world. During this period, while her husband was in the armed forces, she also wrote and published poetry and short stories: 'Poems from Obscurity' appeared in 1947, and 'The Old and the Young', an impressive collection of stories reflecting life in rural Herefordshire, in 1948. 
The years 1948-9 brought worries about work and housing, but in March 1950 Peggy Williams moved to Elkstone, Gloucestershire, while her husband trained as a teacher at Cheltenham six miles away. At Elkstone she suffered her first epileptic fit, and shortly afterwards, in late July 1950 she discovered that she was pregnant. Her response to this crisis was to write, and her attempts to understand her epilepsy and come to terms with it are analysed in 'A Ray of Darkness' (1952), a remarkable volume combining factual narrative with poetic and spiritual meditation on her condition. 
In 1953 the couple moved with their young daughter, Cassandra, to Hartfield in Sussex, where Michael Williams took up a teaching post. Here Peggy struggled not only with her worsening physical condition but also with a keen sense of exile from her beloved Herefordshire countryside. Her correspondence, from 1949 onwards, with the American writer Winifred Ellerman ('pseud'. Bryher) reveals how much she valued the latter's moral as well as financial support. Still impelled to write, she recorded her life in journals and letters and produced a stream of literary works in verse and prose. However, publishing her work had become more difficult, perhaps as much because of changes in fashion, and the demise of such magazines as the 'Welsh Review' and 'Life and Letters', which had published her, as for any decline in quality. 
In 1953 Williams was diagnosed with a brain tumour and many of the writings of these last difficult years, still mainly unpublished, reflect her condition. 'The Nightingale Silenced' (1954) is a moving account of the progress of her illness. A strong vein of nostalgia for her former life runs through her lyrical radio script 'December Day', broadcast in 1956. Her second volume of poetry, 'A Candle Ahead' (1956), won a prize from the Welsh committee of the Arts Council a few weeks before she died at the Royal Kent and Sussex Hospital, Tunbridge Wells, on 17 March 1958, her forty-ninth birthday. She was buried at St Mary's Church, Hartfield, Sussex. 
As a writer Margiad Evans defined herself as neither English nor Welsh but 'of the border', and the interrelation of two contrasting communities or personalities is a constant theme in her work. Although limited in geographical setting, and often reflecting personal experience, her writing touches concerns not restricted to a particular individual, time, or place. Both her prose and poetry, richly varied as they are in theme and treatment, are characterized by a keen sense of place and by strongly visual imagery, the latter informed by the graphic skills she continued to exercise in drawings and paintings, in her books and for friends and family. Since the 1990s courses in women's writing and in the English literature of Wales have revived interest in her work, leading to a new edition of 'The Old and the Young' in 1998, and, in 2005, of 'Country Dance' and 'The Wooden Doctor', as well as a centenary research conference in Aberystwyth in 2009. 


@@@@@


doc= 96849


Sir Henry Meux, second baronet (bap. 1817, d. 1883), had an early and distinct aversion to business. Born at North Cray, Kent, he was baptized at St Giles's, Holborn, London, on 28 December 1817. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford (BA, 1838), and groomed for the life of a country gentleman. Always a man of few words, he possessed a hot temper. He was passionate about three things: horses, shooting, and what his contemporaries described as 'the pleasures of the table'. His attendance at the brewery appears to have been confined to four occasions a year when the quarterly rests were taken to monitor the brewery's product and sales and to distribute profits. In the 1850s the brewery was run by three men: two partners, Berridge and Marjoribanks, and Sir Henry's brother-in-law, William Arabin, who was retained on a salary of $1200 to keep an eye on his majority interest, reckoned to be worth half a million pounds. 
By far the most forceful of the trio was the wealthy and wily Dudley Coutts Marjoribanks (1820-1894), a director of the East India Company and MP for Berwick upon Tweed almost continuously from 1853 until 1881, when he was created Lord Tweedmouth. Under Marjoribanks's direction the brewery ticked along in the wake of its larger rivals, who, to accommodate the shift in beer tastes away from porter, began to brew pale and mild ales. Meux was the last major London brewery to stick solely to porter production, delaying any attempt to brew other beers until the early 1870s. When, almost two decades later, Alfred Barnard compiled his entry on Meux in his four-volume 'Noted Breweries of Great Britain and Ireland' he left the distinct impression that, although it brewed 200,000 barrels a year and employed 250 men and 70 horses, the Horseshoe brewery did not match its principal rivals either in output or in the state of the brewery. It was, even for a London brewery, cramped in its site and outdated in its equipment. 
Yet the brewery's profits brought the second baronet great riches. This was revealed to the world by a sensational commission of lunacy case in the summer of 1858. The commission came about through two events. First, Sir Henry Meux, who had represented Hertfordshire in the Conservative interest since 1847, was pressed by a number of leading Conservatives in the county, including the marquess of Salisbury and Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, who had already noticed his strange, taciturn behaviour, to stand down at the general election of 1857. They seem to have assumed his consent, but he repudiated any arrangement and to their chagrin was returned unopposed, despite barely being able to string half a dozen words together (and he formally retained the seat until 1859). 
More sensational was the decision of his sisters to contest a codicil Meux had recently made to his will. On 19 January 1856 he had married, at the British embassy in Paris, Louisa Caroline, the nineteen-year-old daughter of the impecunious Lord Ernest Bruce (later third marquess of Ailesbury). A son and heir, Henry Bruce Meux ['see below'], was born later that year. Sir Henry's health seems then to have sharply deteriorated. At a shoot in Cambridgeshire just before Christmas 1856 no fewer than six members of the party reputedly sustained wounds from Meux's gun. It was in early July 1857 that he altered the terms of the will he had made shortly after the birth of his son. He now added a codicil by which, should the son die and there were no further children, the whole of his $700,000 estate, generating an income of some $40,000 a year, would pass on his own death to his young widow absolutely. The earlier arrangement was that she would receive a generous $15,000 jointure for life. The codicil effectively removed his sisters from their reversionary interest, had that of Lady Meux remained for life only. 
In June 1858, during the nine days of the lunacy hearing, reported in the press, the details of Sir Henry's life and riches were revealed. Succeeding to a $200,000 share in the brewery, this had grown to 'upwards of $600,000'. The attorney-general, representing the Meuxs, maintained Sir Henry 'always lived very, very far within his income' ('The Times', 11 June 1858). The evidence did little to support his claim. Theobalds was run by at least two dozen servants grandly headed by a groom of the chambers and a French cook; Sir Henry had recently completed a $15,000 lease of a house in Belgrave Square; the purchase of the vast Knoydart estate in north-west Scotland had only come adrift because he could not get possession for three years, thus scuppering his intention immediately to convert it into a deer forest. The Bruces (the parents-in-law and wife of Sir Henry) came badly out of the affair as a determined trio of gold diggers. But two of Sir Henry's sisters and their husbands fared little better. Sir William Bowyer-Smijth, eleventh baronet, husband of the second daughter, had borrowed substantial sums interest-free to underwrite his building schemes; the third daughter, Lady Malden, who had kept house for her brother before his marriage, had decamped from Theobalds with several waggon loads of furniture, a set of Sevres china, and over $2000 in cash. 
A formidable team of lawyers was engaged by the parties; many eminent doctors gave irreconcilable evidence; a number of servants attested to Sir Henry Meux's increasingly strange behaviour since his marriage. All hinged on whether he was insane on 3 July 1857, the day he completed the codicil. Counsel for his sisters maintained this state had been reached several months before: those for Lady Meux and the Bruces countered with the claim that he had suffered a paralytic stroke while shooting in Scotland on 23 September 1857 (at dinner he claimed to have shot 57 deer earlier in the day), but until that moment had been perfectly able to execute any business placed before him. The jury, sensibly 'The Times' opined (21 June 1858), decided that Henry Meux was indeed insane, but 'could not come to any agreement as to the particular time when the insanity first showed itself' ('The Times', 18 June 1858). 
The lack of a decision did not matter. Sir Henry Meux, against all the predictions made by the medical men in 1858 (he was probably suffering from syphilis), survived for another twenty-five years. Totally incapacitated, he had been cared for by his sister Elizabeth, wife of Richard Arabin, and an army of servants and attendants in London and at East Sheen House, Surrey. Lady Meux fled to the continent and, often fuelled by drink and always by self-pity, lived a rackety life, mainly in Paris, until her death there on 6 December 1894. Crucially her only son survived to manhood. Moreover, Sir Henry Meux's great fortune had not been very seriously depleted: on his death at his London home, 36 Grosvenor Square, on 1 January 1883, he left an estate valued at over $600,000. 
His son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 96867


Theodore Rathbone Hubback (1872-1944?), engineer and conservationist, had less talent and more of a disposition for controversy than his brother Arthur. Born on 12 December 1872, he studied civil engineering at University College, Liverpool, before joining his brother in Selangor in 1895. For a quarter of a century he had short spells, terminated by 'resigning on principle', as a government engineer, a contractor, and a rubber planter in Malaya and north Borneo (Hawkins, 78). In 1920 he settled in north-eastern Malaya, and was prominent in the campaign that led to the establishment of the King George V National Park (later the Taman Negara National Park). In his younger days a keen hunter, he came to be remembered as the ardent conservationist of his later years. He was a prolific author both on hunting big game and later on conservation. Described as 'the handsomest man who ever came to Malaya' (ibid.), he was a viking born out of his time. For two years (1942-4) he was on the run in the jungle, pursued by the Japanese; the exact circumstances of his death (probably in 1944) are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 96868


George Clay Hubback (1882-1955), bishop of Assam and of Calcutta, was born on 7 April 1882, five months before his father's death. He was educated at Rossall School and University College, Liverpool, where he studied engineering; he graduated shortly after the college received its charter raising it to the status of a university. After working as a civil engineer on the Admiralty Harbour, Dover, and then for the Port Trust, Calcutta, he joined the Oxford mission to Calcutta in 1908, and was ordained a deacon. He remained in Calcutta until 1924, with the exception of the years 1910-12 as curate of St Anne's, Lambeth, and 1916-17 as war hospital chaplain in Bombay. He became bishop of Assam in 1924 and received a Lambeth DD in 1929. In 1945 he succeeded Foss Westcott as bishop of Calcutta and metropolitan of India. He retired five years later, living first at Salisbury and latterly in Guildford. He died in hospital at Guildford on 2 November 1955 after a fall in the street. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 96885


Flavius Cerialis (fl. AD 97-105), are well attested by documents and personal letters. Both were probably from the Batavian aristocracy, from which, Tacitus records, commanders were still chosen for the regiments they provided for Rome. Also recorded are many soldiers from the regiment as well as slaves and freedmen from the prefects' households. Several tablets also record Cerialis's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 96886


Aelius Brocchus (fl. AD 97-105), a fellow officer stationed elsewhere in the frontier region, and his wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 96887


Flavius Genialis (fl. AD 97-105) and 


@@@@@


doc= 96888


Sulpicia Lepidina (fl. AD 97-105), and the couple's close friends, 


@@@@@


doc= 96916


Frederick Lewis Maitland Moir (1852-1939), trader in Africa, was born in Edinburgh on 20 February 1852 and baptized there on 8 April 1852. After attending school and some university classes in Edinburgh the brothers embarked on commercial careers. Evangelical Christians, brought up in the Free Church of Scotland, they were inspired not only by the death of David Livingstone but also by the American crusaders Dwight L. Moody and Ira D. Sankey. Their first contact with Africa came when they were recruited in 1877 to work on William Mackinnon's ill-fated scheme to build a road from Dar es Salaam to Lake Tanganyika. In the following year they transferred their attention to the alternative, river route into central Africa, becoming the founding managers of the Livingstonia Central Africa Company, known from 1881 as the African Lakes Company, and from 1894 as the African Lakes Corporation. The company was sponsored by a group of Glasgow businessmen to provide logistical support to the Livingstonia Mission of the Free Church of Scotland, which had put a steamer, the 'Ilala', on Lake Nyasa in 1875. The company was intended to run steamers on the Zambezi and Shire rivers, and on lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika, and to put into practice Livingstone's idea that the slave trade could best be combated by a combination of 'commerce and Christianity'. 


@@@@@


doc= 96936


Karamchand Premchand (d. 1834), whose firm, Karamchand Premchand ni phedi, financed indigenous manufactures and advanced loans to the peshwas, the gaekwads, and other Indian rulers. It operated an all-India network of offices, bought opium from Malwa in central India, exported it to China, and in return purchased Chinese silk and tea which was sold in England. This trade was at first extremely profitable but by the mid-nineteenth century, because of growing competition from Chinese producers and also from Indian merchants, it was no longer so. Under the East India Company's rule the indigenous 'sarafs' started losing business as bankers and as moneylenders. The finance that became available from this dwindling business now found its way to the mechanized textile industry. 
Karamchand died when his son 


@@@@@


doc= 96937


Maganbhai Karamchand (1823-1864) was only eleven years old, and the young Maganbhai had to take charge of the business. Among Maganbhai's investments was a share in the first textile mill in Ahmadabad, founded by Ranchhodlal Chhotalal in 1861. Apart from being a successful entrepreneur, Maganbhai was a philanthropist who donated Rs 20,000 for the first girls' school in Ahmadabad. He also contributed towards the funding of Gujarat College. A devout Jain, he founded a 'pathshala' (school) for the study of Jainism and donated money for building Jain temples. Shortly before his death he donated a lakh of rupees (Rs 100,000) for different religious and charitable purposes. It is said that when his 'haveli' (house) caught fire, diamonds and other precious stones tumbled out of the beams. 
As Maganbhai had no son, he adopted his daughter's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 96938


Sarabhai (1864-1895). When Maganbhai died Sarabhai was still an infant and was cared for by his trustees, among whom were Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy, second baronet, and Sheth Umabhai Hathisingh, who also nurtured the family business. In 1876 the first mechanized cloth printing factory in Ahmadabad, the Ahmadabad Calico Printing Company Limited, was established as a small venture by eight promoters, among whom was the firm of Karamchand Premchand. The factory ran into financial difficulties and in 1880 was taken into voluntary liquidation. Karamchand Premchand, which was the largest lender, acquired the printing works from the liquidators and floated a new company, adding cotton spinning and then weaving to cloth printing. Thus the Ahmadabad Manufacturing and Calico Printing Company was established. It soon developed into the thriving concern popularly known as Calico Mills, on which the Sarabhai family fortune was built. In 1881 Sarabhai left his studies to take charge of the family business. In his short life, apart from managing Calico Mills, he served as a member of the Ahmadabad municipality and was for some time secretary of the Maganbhai Kanyashala, the girls' school founded by his adoptive father. In his will he donated a substantial sum for distribution to foundlings' homes. 
Only three months after Sarabhai's death his wife, Godavariba, died, leaving behind three children -- Anasuya ['see below'], then nine years old, Ambalal ['see below'], aged five, and Kumud Kishore, known as Kanta, who was still an infant. They were brought up with great affection but under strict discipline by their uncle Chimanbhai, Sarabhai's younger brother. 
It was Chimanbhai who in 1904 built what became the Sarabhai family home, The Retreat, built on 21 acres of farmland in Shaibag, near Ahmadabad, and remodelled in 1935 by Suren Kar, the architect who designed Rabindranath Tagore's house in Santiniketan. The palatial house had a beautiful garden adorned with replicas of Greek and Roman statues, fountains, and ponds with fish and lotuses; exotic flowers, trees, and bushes were planted, and there were peacocks and birds of various kinds. 



@@@@@


doc= 96939


Ambalal Sarabhai (1890-1967) reached his majority at the end of 1908, the same year that Chimanbhai died, and took all affairs pertaining to family, caste, and business into his own hands. Ambalal was an entrepeneurial industrial magnate, who very successfully managed Calico and Jubilee Mills and started Swastik Oil Mills, Sarabhai Chemicals, Suhrid Geigy, Sarabhai Merck Ltd, and several other businesses. He believed in professional management. He had a wide range of intellectual and cultural interests and was fond of reading; about 50,000 books on a wide variety of subjects were collected in his library. He loved intelligent conversation and meeting talented people in different fields. Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru and the Nobel laureates Rabindranath Tagore and Sir Venkata Raman all stayed at The Retreat at one time or another; indeed, the guest list there read like an Indian 'Who's Who'. Ambalal was a liberal rationalist and a believer in individual freedom and women's equality. In 1910 he married Rewa, later named Sarladevi (1896-1975), daughter of Harilal Gosalia, an advocate from Rajkot. When Ambalal met her he asked her if she wanted to marry him of her own free will, and only when she answered in the affirmative did they agree to marry. It proved to be a very happy marriage. Sarladevi had a tremendous sense of family duty and devoted her early years to looking after her husband and children and managing a huge home. Ambalal insisted on taking her and his sisters wherever he went socially, a courtesy he extended to his cousins, Indumati and Vasumati, Chimanbhai's daughters. Ambalal also fully supported his sisters when their marriages failed. When the marriage of Kanta proved disastrous, she returned to her brother's home, but she died at a young age. 



@@@@@


doc= 96940


Anasuya Sarabhai (1885-1972) had an unfortunate child marriage and refused to live with her husband. An independent and rebellious woman, she wanted a life of her own. Supported by her brother, she went to England in 1911 to study medicine. When she realized that this would involve animal dissection, however, being a Jain and a vegetarian, she gave up her medical studies. Instead she attended lectures at the London School of Economics and was influenced by Fabian socialism and the suffragettes. After her return to India, she worked among the textile labourers in Ahmadabad, led the first textile workers' strike in 1917, and called on Gandhi to mediate. She set up the Ahmadabad Textile Labour Union (Majoor Mahajan Sangh) in 1920 on Gandhian lines. 
To learn more about the English textile industry Ambalal, accompanied by his family, went to England twice, and the family became somewhat Anglicized. Ambalal wore suits tailored in Savile Row and Sarladevi wore French chiffon saris. They bought European furniture and imported crockery and silver cutlery from England. But then came Gandhi, and the Sarabhai family's life was transformed. Ambalal rescued Gandhi's ashram at Kochrab, near Ahmadabad, from a financial crisis when other funding dried up because Gandhi had admitted an 'untouchable' family. The Sarabhai family came under Gandhi's spell and by the 1930s all foreign goods were boycotted and many members of the family took to wearing 'khadi', participated in the freedom struggle, and went to jail. 
Ambalal and Sarladevi were devoted to their eight children, Mridula (1911-1974), Bharati (1912-1986), Suhrid (1913-1942), Leena ('b'. 1915), Gautam (1917-1995), Vikram (1919-1971), Geeta ('b'. 1921), and Gira ('b'. 1923), and deeply interested in their education and upbringing. Sarladevi was influenced by the educational ideas of Maria Montessori and Tagore. Finding no suitable school, Sarladevi and Ambalal started one for their children in The Retreat and appointed the best teachers available, including two Cambridge graduates, Edwin Standing and a Miss Williams. Each child was taught individually, with the result that each of them developed his or her own talents and interests. Mridula, the eldest, joined the freedom struggle, was close to Gandhi and Nehru, went to jail several times, and served on the All-India Congress Committee as a delegate from Gujarat. At the time of the partition of India in 1947 she took up the cause of abducted women, and later became involved in the Kashmir issue. Her sister Bharati was a poet and writer. Suhrid entered his father's business, but died young. Leena's interest was in education and she started Shreyas School in Ahmadabad, providing education based on the Montessori method and the educational ideas of Tagore. Gautam was interested in mathematics, philosophy, and art. Vikram was a physicist, instrumental in establishing the Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmadabad, and widely regarded as the father of the Indian space programme. (His wife, Mrinalini, and daughter, Mallika, achieved equal fame as exponents of Indian classical dance). Geeta was interested in classical Indian music and Gira's interest was in art, textiles, and architecture. Bharati and Suhrid went to Oxford, Gautam and Vikram to Cambridge, Leena to Santiniketan, Mridula to the Gujarat Vidyapith, Geeta to a music school, and Gira to Frank Lloyd Wright's school in the USA. The diverse interests of Ambalal's children led to a gradual decline of the family business. Nevertheless the family's connections with Ahmadabad remained strong, and Ambalal and Sarladevi's children contributed to the building of some leading institutions there, including Jyoti Sangh and Vikas Griha (social welfare organizations founded by Mridula), the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmadabad, the Ahmadabad Textile Research Association, the Nehru Centre for Science and Development (founded by Vikram), the Calico Museum of Textiles, and the Sarabhai Foundation (founded by Gautam and Gira). 


@@@@@


doc= 96961


George Blackall Simonds (1843-1929), sculptor, was achieving fame in an altogether different field. Born in Reading on 6 October 1843, the second of the three sons of George Simonds and his wife, Mary Anne Boulger, he had been educated at Bradfield College, which his family had helped to found. Having decided on an artistic career in preference to joining the brewery, he studied sculpture under Johannes Schilling in Dresden, and later with Louis Jehotte in Brussels. During a twelve-year stay in Rome, in 1877 he married (Emily) Gertrude Prescott (1859-1940), an American citizen whom he had met there. George Prescott Simonds (1881-1914), their only child, was killed very early in the First World War. 
In Italy Simonds displayed the family's scientific aptitude by pioneering the Victorian effort to reintroduce the Renaissance technology of casting bronzes from wax moulds. The 'lost wax' ('cire perdue') method involved fashioning a wax model, forming a mould, and then melting away the wax before pouring in metal between the core and the mould. Simonds used that technique to make what is widely hailed as his finest work in that genre, 'The Falconer' (1868). That represents a life-sized youth in steel breastplate, jerkin, tights, and cap slipping, or unleashing, a peregrine falcon of impressive wing span, at least half the young man's height. 
Following its display at the Vienna International Exhibition of 1873 a massive bronze replica, over 11 feet high and cast at Florence in a single piece, was commissioned for New York's Central Park, where it was dedicated in 1875; after weathering and constant vandalism, it was repaired and repatinated in 1982. The trouble Simonds took over its creation reflected his abiding recreational interest in falconry, a sport he worked hard to revive in the UK, becoming founder president of the British Falconry Society. 
Simonds made a number of statues for his native town of Reading, most notably one of the largest bronzes hitherto cast, which took him two years to design and execute, the 31 foot long Maiwand lion (1886) in the Forbury Gardens. It commemorates the 328 officers and men of the Royal Berkshire regiment who died at Maiwand during the campaign of 1879-80 in Afghanistan. His bust of the engineer Sir Joseph Bazalgette was erected on the Victoria Embankment in London, one of more than 200 works in an unusually wide range of materials, including marble, bronze, plaster, terracotta, silver, brass, wood, and cast iron. 
Having returned to Britain, an imposing figure with the widest of moustaches, George Blackall Simonds achieved celebrity in London's art world. There he became in 1884 a founder and the first master of the Art-Workers' Guild, which provided a forum where artists, architects, and craftsmen could share their views: an organization familiar to the studio life of Rome, but not found hitherto in northern countries. In 1879 he and a relative by marriage patented their invention of an iconograph, which allowed the dimensions of sculptures and other solid objects to be magnified or reduced. 
In 1903, aged sixty, Simonds retired from sculpting, and became a director of the brewery company. Two years later, on the death of his brother Blackall, he took the name of Blackall-Simonds. In 1910 he succeeded Henry Adolphus Simonds as chairman of the brewery, and remained in that office until his own death, at his home, Bradfield House, Bradfield, Berkshire, on 16 December 1929. He was buried at Bradfield. Shortly before his death the company received for the first time the royal warrant for supplying its products to the royal households. His family remembered him as not having much of a head for the intricacies of business, but he related well to the brewery staff and was a ready mediator at company meetings. He led the company through the five-month general strike and other industrial disputes of 1926. Despite crippling shortages of raw materials and transport, he refused to lay off any of the 1200 employees. After its close the grateful workforce subscribed to buy the directors a long-case clock for the boardroom. 
A succession of elderly chairmen did not seriously hold back the brewery's more recent progress, thanks to the activities of some very dynamic younger directors. The most noteworthy during George Blackall-Simonds's reign was 


@@@@@


doc= 97049


Louise Mikel Henrietta Marie Curram (1967-2006), actress, was born in London on 27 May 1967. She was educated at Macaulay Church of England primary school in Clapham, Furzedown School in Wandsworth, Alleyn's School in Dulwich, and Camberwell School of Art. She then worked in a variety of jobs (including as assistant to the theatrical agent Jeremy Conway) before embarking on a career as an actress. Her first professional role was in Grigory Gorin's 'Forget Herostratus!' at the White Bear Theatre, Kennington. Subsequent stage roles included Helen Carver in Sean Mathias's revival of Noel Coward's 'Design for Living' at the Donmar Warehouse (1994), Marge in Phyllis Nagy's adaptation of Patricia Highsmith's 'The Talented Mr Ripley' at the Watford Palace (1998), Ann in Denis Lawson's production of David Halliwell's 'Little Malcolm and his Struggle against the Eunuchs' at the Hampstead Theatre and subsequently in the West End (1998-9), Helena in John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' at the Bristol Old Vic (2001), and the title role in John Webster's 'The Duchess of Malfi' at the Salisbury Playhouse (2002). In each of these roles she was applauded by critics for her intelligence and her ability convincingly to portray complex characters. On television she appeared in such popular series as 'Game On', 'Holding the Baby', 'Coupling', 'Casualty', 'The Vice', and 'EastEnders'. She was also a talented artist, and in 2004 held an exhibition of line drawings and watercolours at a gallery in West Hampstead. She was first diagnosed with cancer in 1999, and fought it with the same heroic and ferocious determination as her mother. Her last stage role was as Goneril in Steven Pimlott's version of 'King Lear' at the Minerva Theatre, Chichester (2005), in which her sister played Cordelia; they had agreed to return to Chichester in part as a tribute to their mother, whose last stage performance had been there. Lou Gish died at St Mary's Hospital, Westminster, on 20 February 2006. She was survived by her partner of six years, the actor Nicholas James Sebastian (Nick) Rowe ('b'. 1966). 


@@@@@


doc= 97088


Pauline Emily Gregg (1909-2006), historian, was born on 17 July 1909 in Palmers Green, London, the daughter of Thomas James Nathaniel Gregg, Post Office sorter. She became a socialist while at school, after reading the works of William Morris, and joined the Labour League of Youth and later the Independent Labour Party. She took a short secretarial course at the Pitman's Institute and worked briefly for Longmans, the publishers, and then for the Scottish Office before returning to education at the London School of Economics, where her teachers included Harold Laski and R. H. Tawney. She stayed on to write a thesis (for which she was awarded a PhD in 1939) on John Lilburne, the Leveller; this formed the basis of her later book 'Free-born John' (1961). In 1939 she was offered a post at Hillcroft College, Surbiton, but the Second World War intervened and she was recruited to work for the Ministry of Supply. After her marriage she combined the role of an Oxford don's wife with her own research and publication (the latter under her maiden name, Pauline Gregg). Her most successful book was 'A Social and Economic History of Britain, 1760-1950' (1950), which was revised and extended for subsequent editions, the eighth and last appearing in 1982 and taking the story up to 1980. Her other books included a history of the welfare state (1967), a companion volume to her 'Social and Economic History' entitled 'Black Death to Industrial Revolution' (1976), and biographies of Charles I (1981) and Oliver Cromwell (1988). Each was well received by academics and general reviewers alike, the 'Times' reviewer of her 'King Charles I' commending her 'devoted labour' and 'evocative turn of phrase' ('The Times', 22 Oct 1981). She died of a stroke on 11 March 2006 at Abbots Leigh nursing home, Abbots Leigh, Somerset, and was survived by her two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 97275


Sybella Catherine Nino Gurney (1870-1926), housing reformer, to whom he was married in a private ceremony in Philadelphia in December 1910. She was born in Paris, the only daughter (there were four sons) of Archer Thompson Gurney (1820-1887), chaplain to the British embassy and hymn writer, and his wife, Eliza Eleanor Hammet ('b'. 1833/4). After fleeing the siege of Paris the family settled in Oxford. Sybella studied at Royal Holloway College (1887-92), from where, as an external candidate, she obtained a second class in the Oxford University classical moderations examination. At Oxford, where her widowed mother had settled, she worked under Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse and became involved in the co-operative movement through Charlotte Toynbee, widow of Arnold Toynbee. She was active in the Labour Co-Partnership Association and co-operative housing schemes, working closely with Henry Vivian on schemes in Oldham, Letchworth, Kettering, Leicester, and near her home in the New Forest. She had a particular interest in reviving community life in villages, and in promoting modern cottage building. Through this work she was involved with Henrietta Barnett in the planning of Hampstead Garden Suburb. Gurney Drive in the suburb was later named in her memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 97441


Brech, Edward Francis Leopold (1909-2006), management consultant, theorist, and historian, was born Edward Franz Leopold Brech at 84 Brook Street, Kennington, London, on 26 February 1909, one of four children of Franz Josef, later Francis Joseph, Brech (1876-1933), an Austro-Hungarian restaurant manager, and his wife, Anna Maria Magdalene, 'nee' Bachmaier (1880-1961), originally from Bavaria. His family suffered considerably when his father was interned during the First World War. Educated at Clapham College, a Catholic grammar school, he seemed destined for the priesthood and was selected for a pilot scheme whereby priests took a degree before entering the church. But having obtained a London University BA (general) degree in 1929, he abandoned the church and worked briefly for a fur trader and at the Swiss Commercial College before joining the German Commercial School in Ealing in 1931. In the following year he graduated with a London University BSc degree in economics, and in January 1933 became the German Commercial School's director at the precocious age of twenty-three. On 1 September 1936, at the Roman Catholic church of Saints Peter and Paul, Northfields, London, he married Irene Ella Levien-Thompson (1912-2000), the daughter of Henry Levien-Thompson, commercial clerk. They had a son, Robert, and two daughters, Lorna and Wendy. 
Brech's interest in management and commercial education was nurtured during the difficulties of the great depression, and in 1938 he obtained the diploma of industrial administration from the Institute of Industrial Administration. However, it was his relationship with Lyndall Urwick that was to prove a key factor in his working life. In the same year Urwick, impressed by Brech's diploma results, asked him to undertake some unpaid research on the development of industrial management in Britain, then sponsored his appointment as research officer to the education research project of the British Management Council. The outbreak of the Second World War interrupted this work, and in December 1939 Brech joined the management consulting firm of Urwick, Orr & Partners as Urwick's personal assistant. He was subsequently co-author with Urwick of the pioneering three-volume 'The Making of Scientific Management' (1945-8). This was followed by his own major contributions, first 'The Nature and Significance of Management' (1946), then 'The Principles and Practice of Management' (1953), both of which ran to several editions (the former as 'Management: its Nature and Significance'). 'The Principles and Practice of Management' remained in print for thirty years, sold 90,000 copies, and was the standard text for management studies in the national curriculum. In 1957 Brech published 'Organization: the Framework of Management', which explored managerial delegation, and the second edition of which was the first in an eighteen-volume series in management studies edited by Brech for Longmans. 
A believer with Peter Drucker in the social and educative importance of management, Brech championed a professional, institutional response to management theory and practice. He also did much to create a central institute for management. His wartime work laid the basis for post-war management training, and the foundation of the British Institute of Management in 1947. At Urwick Orr he was an active consultant, providing services to companies like Lotus Shoes, John Laing, Macleans, BOAC, George Wimpey, and Unilever. He was also a founding director of MSL, a management recruitment agency, in 1955. From 1961 to 1963 he was a vice-president of the American firm Booz-Allen and Hamilton, and managing director of its London subsidiary, though he was less comfortable with the American approach to consultancy. After a period of part-time work, notably with Shell-Mex, he became chief executive of the newly established Construction Industry Training Board in September 1965. There he flourished for a time, making a major contribution to the training of the skilled and semi-skilled and editing a hefty volume, 'Construction Management in Principle and Practice' (1971), before a somewhat messy departure the same year: essentially he was sacked for having been too successful. In 1974 he was co-founder of Intex Executives, which provided an innovative executive leasing service. 
In 1964 Brech was offered, but turned down, the post of principal of Manchester Business School, one of the pioneering business schools in Britain. While these institutions gained momentum in the 1970s, he felt that the study of management and the institutional history of management remained neglected areas, and he proved to be a lively and enduring advocate. A man of indefatigable energy, he set new standards in his attitude to ageing. Embarking on an Open University doctorate in 1990 he completed his thesis, entitled 'The concept and gestation of Britain's Central Management Institute, 1902-1976', in 1994 and became, at the age of eighty-five, Britain's oldest doctoral graduate. He went on to publish a monumental series of five volumes for Thoemmes Press entitled 'The Evolution of Modern Management' (2002), which provided an institutional history of British management practice and knowledge. Making a significant contribution to the Open University's business school, he founded and led a management history research group in the 1990s. He was also a regular attender of the LSE business history unit's seminars. A modest and self-effacing man possessed of enormous integrity and humour, he was always provocative and constructive in debate, putting scholars half his age to shame. Many a speaker was disconcerted by his remark: 'I know the answer to this. You see, I was there'. 
Brech's contribution to the development of management science in Britain was significant but limited. The British Institute of Management did not achieve all that he had hoped, and his attempt to encourage business schools to embrace the history of management did not prove very successful. While he did much to encourage accounting, business, and economic historians to see management as a science, there were others who saw management as more intuitive and who did not share his interest in the detailed history of management institutions. He was appointed MBE in 2003, became an honorary freeman of the City of London in 2004, and a DLitt of the Open University in 2005. He died on 22 September 2006 at his home, 1 Littlemead, Esher, Surrey, of heart failure. He was survived by his three children. His papers and books were donated to the Open University after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 97442


Boyne, (Donald Arthur) Colin Aydon (1921-2006), architectural journalist and editor, was born on 15 February 1921 at Holnest, Farway, Honiton, Devon, the only child of Captain Lytton Leonard Boyne ('b'. 1887), formerly of the 3rd Royal Sussex regiment, and his wife, Millicent, 'nee' Nisbet ('b'. 1885). He was brought up by his mother and a spinster aunt after his father's early death, and attended Tonbridge School as a day boy. They determined that Boynes had to be farmers or military men, not architects, so when the war came Boyne joined the forces, choosing the Indian army as being far from his mother. An officer in the 8th battalion of the 13th frontier force rifles, he was badly wounded in Burma when a careless Pathan shot him in the ankle and his horse fell on top of him, wounds made worse in hospital. Invalided out, in 1943 he was awarded a scholarship to the School of Architecture of the Architectural Association, although standing over a drawing board aggravated the constant pain that he endured for the rest of his life. He qualified in 1947, and on 4 July the same year he married Rosemary Barnaschone, 'nee' Pater, a 27-year-old secretary, daughter of Richard Albert Macaulay Pater, sales manager, and former wife of Richard Barnaschone. They had a daughter and twin sons. 
Boyne turned to journalism at the suggestion of his wife, who spotted an advertisement for an editorial assistant at the Architectural Press. Originally rejected by the editor, Jim Richards, he was contacted two months later, the first appointment having been a disaster. Boyne proved an outstanding success, rising in two years to become 'de facto' editor in 1949 of the 'Architects' Journal', leaving Richards to concentrate on his first love, the 'Architectural Review'; he became executive editor of the 'Architects' Journal' in 1953. 
In the 1930s and 1940s there were only two serious architectural magazines. The monthly 'Architectural Review' was glamorous and glossy, with articles from John Betjeman, John Piper, Gordon Cullen, and Nikolaus Pevsner that mixed modernism with an appreciation of Britain's past. Boyne took the weekly 'Architects' Journal' from being its poor relation and made it essential reading for the profession: campaigning, perceptive, and presenting the latest technical information. It pioneered the promotion of cost analysis in case studies written by outside experts, and reinspected buildings after a few years to see if they had met their brief. Design guides, begun in 1961, boosted sales by a third in that year alone. By 1970, when Boyne became chairman of the editorial board of both magazines, the 'Architects' Journal' was supporting the 'Architectural Review'. He served as chairman until 1974, and continued as editorial director of the Architectural Press for another decade. 
Boyne was committed to modern architecture, but above all to architecture as a service for the public good. He never wavered from this social commitment, which dominated architecture in the late 1940s and early 1950s, and he regretted the subsequent return of what he termed 'conspicuous display' ('Architects' Journal', 5 Oct 2006, 16). He encouraged public sector architects, whose work was until then published anonymously and generally disregarded by the profession. One of Boyne's first campaigns was to return responsibility for London council housing to the architect's department after it had been passed to London county council's valuer. He succeeded in 1949, but more than fifty years later still remembered with embarrassment that the valuer, Cyril Walker, had tears in his eyes when they met to hear the council's decision. 
Boyne was astute, but his sense of justice was tempered with humility and warmth. His friends in the profession were the public-sector architects he championed. He did much to promote the revival of interest in the Hertfordshire prefabricated schools of the late 1940s when he brought together many of the architects who designed them as part of a team that briefed the historian Andrew Saint in the writing of 'Towards a Social Architecture' (1987). This was a history of the prefabricated school movement and in particular its driving force, Stirrat Johnson-Marshall, designer of the Commonwealth Institute, a leading member of the 'chain gang' of public architects who met regularly in the Architectural Press's own bar, the Bride of Denmark, and perhaps the architect Boyne most admired. 
When Boyne finally retired in 1984 the architect Hugh Morris wrote that 'behind the dry, quizzical, abrupt, sometimes paramilitary manner and the conservative dark suit hides the 100 per cent, unreconstructed, inveterate, unrepentant hair-shirted radical... that's about the highest praise I can think of' ('Gentlemen of the press'). Physically tough despite his disability, in 1959 Boyne had taken on management of a 40 acre wood in Kent, where he and Rosemary built themselves a house, designed with Robert Maguire. They sought an easier life in Wells in the early 1990s, but Boyne soon became chairman of the planning committee of the local civic society and of the local branch of the Council for the Preservation of Rural England, campaigning for Wells and its environs. He died on 28 September 2006 at West Mendip Hospital, Glastonbury, Somerset, of uraemia, lymphoma, and spinal stenosis, after a short illness, and years of pain that did not prevent him from being one of the kindest if sharpest of critics. His wife, Rosemary, died a week later. They were survived by their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97443


Bond, Derek William Douglas (1920-2006), actor, was born on 26 January 1920 at 17 Sandyford Place, Glasgow, the youngest of three sons of Frank Herbert Bond, commercial traveller, and his wife, Dorothy Blanche, 'nee' Pennington, beautician. His parents had married in London in 1912. The family moved back to London two years after his birth and he was educated at Holmwood preparatory school and Haberdashers' Aske's School, Hampstead. He left at the age of sixteen to become briefly a cub reporter on the 'Golders Green Gazette' and then a junior postal clerk with Brown Shipley & Co., merchant bankers. However, he was to find his true vocation as an actor, gaining some initial experience at the Finchley Amateur Dramatic Society alongside his mother. His father's grudging consent was eventually forthcoming and Bond picked up some work on an early BBC television play by Karel Capek, 'R.U.R' (1938), and as understudy and assistant stage manager on the pre-London tour of 'As Husbands Go'. He was promoted to stage manager and played a small role during the successful three-month London run at the Garrick Theatre. Afterwards he gained a permanent position as stage manager and juvenile lead at the Colchester Repertory Company, one of the leading repertory companies in the country. 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 Bond responded to a BBC announcement and applied to join the brigade of guards. He was quickly put forward for officer training and passed out of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, as a second lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards, eventually attaining the rank of captain. He first saw action in north Africa during the allied landings in 1942 and was wounded in the leg on 19 December leading a night attack on some German self-propelled guns near Medjez al-Bab. Invalided back to England, he was awarded the Military Cross and on recovery spent time training new recruits. In July 1944 he returned to active service in Italy and was captured by a forward German patrol while visiting what he believed to be the liberated city of Florence. He saw out the last eight months of the war as a prisoner of war at Stalag 7a, in Moosberg, Bavaria, where among other things he took responsibility for the camp shows. He later wrote a play, 'Sentence Deferred', which was broadcast on BBC Radio 4, addressing one of the troubling experiences he had during incarceration. In 1990 he published an entertaining account of his war experiences as 'Steady Old Man! Don't You Know There's a War On?' On 28 January 1942 he had married Grace Ann D'Eath, a 25-year-old widow whom he had first met at the Colchester Repertory Theatre. The daughter of Gilbert Edward Trubody, grocer, she had a son by her first marriage, Larry. A second son, Anthony, was born in 1944. 
During the period in England recovering from his wound Bond had met Diana Morgan, a scriptwriter at Ealing Studios. During the war the film industry was chronically short of young leading men and Bond gave an audition for a role in the historical film 'Champagne Charlie' (1944). Though he was successful, the War Office refused his release and he gained instead a contract with the studio that was to commence fully upon his demobilization. He was somewhat dismayed following his return to England after liberation to discover that his first role for Ealing was in 'The Captive Heart' (1946), a film about British prisoners of war. He was required to return to Germany immediately to film the location scenes in the former prisoner-of-war camp at Westertimke. In fact the experience laid to rest some ghosts and Bond was fortunate to play in an acclaimed and commercially successful film a sensitive musician who confronts the torture of discovering an unfaithful wife back home. 
Bond's big break came with Ealing's ambitious plan to film 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1947) with Bond cast in the lead. The film was only a modest success and suffered in comparison to David Lean's striking adaptations of Dickens's 'Great Expectations' (1946) and 'Oliver Twist' (1948). Bond continued to play in such Ealing films as 'The Loves of Joanna Godden' (1947), and as Captain Oates in 'Scott of the Antarctic' (1948), but no longer in the lead role. As his name began to appear further down the cast list in British films like the first Norman Wisdom comedy, 'Trouble in Store' (1954), Bond accepted more parts in the burgeoning television service, while continuing to act on the stage. Among his numerous television appearances were roles in episodes of 'The Vise' (1955), 'Errol Flynn Theatre' (1957), and 'William Tell' and 'The Invisible Man' (both 1959). Briefly, in 1956, he accepted the assignment, untypical for an actor, of television announcer for the BBC, and in the early 1960s he co-presented 'Picture Parade' and 'Tonight' for the service. 
Bond continued to act regularly on stage and television in the 1960s and 1970s, most memorably as one in a line of section chiefs in the popular spy series 'Callan' (1969), and his play 'Unscheduled Stop' was produced for ATV's celebrated 'Armchair Theatre' (1968). However, the later part of Bond's career was most notable for his controversial term of office as president of the actors' union, Equity, from 1984 to 1986. Deeply conservative and a believer in individual conscience, he clashed with more radical elements in the union following his stage appearances in South Africa. He narrowly escaped a vote of no confidence within the council, but later resigned after the membership voted for a total ban on working in South Africa. In 1989 he also resigned his posts within the council and executive. 
His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 11 November 1977 Bond married Margaret Ann (Annie), the 35-year-old daughter of Captain Philip Foster Glover, naval officer. They had one daughter, Belinda. Having lived latterly at 15 Chester Close, Queen's Ride, Barnes, London, he died on 15 October 2006 at St George's Hospital, Tooting, London, of bronchopneumonia following a fall. He was survived by his wife Annie, son, stepson, and daughter. A memorial service was held on 18 January 2007 at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 97446


Bell, Thomas George (1933-2006), actor, was born at 33 Ramsey Road, Allerton, Liverpool, on 2 August 1933, one of seven children of James Guthrie Bell, a ship's carpenter in the merchant navy, and his wife, Gladys May, 'nee' Smith. During the Second World War he was evacuated to Morecambe, Lancashire, where he lived with three different families and attended Euston Road secondary modern school. After acting in school plays he sought a career on the stage and joined a local repertory company before training at the Bradford Civic Theatre. He subsequently acted in rep in Liverpool, Swansea, and, with the Shannon Players, in Dublin. On 22 October 1960 he married Lois Dainty, a twenty-year-old actress (as Lois Dane), and daughter of John Dainty, civil servant. They had one son, Aran. 
Bell had made his television debut in 1959, as a boxer in an episode of the crime drama 'Dial 999', before being cast in two productions in ITV's groundbreaking 'Armchair Theatre' series of contemporary plays: as one of three sailors on shore leave in Liverpool in the writer Alun Owen's 'No Trams to Lime Street' (1959) and as the young clerk Albert Stokes, whose controlling mother worries about his leading an 'unclean' life with girls, in Harold Pinter's 'A Night Out' (1960). He also starred on stage in Owen's first full-length play, 'Progress to the Park', about four friends who pass from youth to manhood during a warm summer weekend in Liverpool, which was performed at the Saville Theatre in London's West End in 1961. These dramas were part of the revolution taking place in the arts, which were beginning to depict working-class culture as it really was, and Bell followed his first feature film, 'The Criminal' (1960), written by Owen, with 'The Kitchen' (1961), an adaptation of the Royal Court Theatre's production of Arnold Wesker's play set in the basement kitchen of a large restaurant and illustrating the dehumanizing nature of the workplace. 
Bell made his greatest impact in 'The L-Shaped Room' (1962), one of the landmark film dramas of the period, adapted by its director, Bryan Forbes, from Lynn Reid Banks's best-selling novel. Bell acted Toby, the brooding, bitter young writer in a seedy London boarding-house who falls for a pregnant, unmarried Frenchwoman, played by Leslie Caron. Great predictions were made for Bell, but he found that good starring roles in film were in short supply after his anti-establishment attitude led him to heckle the duke of Edinburgh at the 1963 British Film Academy awards dinner with the words, 'Make us laugh, tell us a joke!' ('The Guardian', 6 Oct 2006). He shone on the big screen as a cat-burglar in 'He Who Rides a Tiger' (1965), and appeared in another dozen films over the next twenty years, but won his best roles on television. 
Bell followed the single drama 'The Sailor's Return' (1978), in which he played a nineteenth-century seaman returning from his travels, with the role of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann in the epic American series 'Holocaust' (1978). Then came his most memorable small-screen performance, as Frank Ross in 'Out' (1978), the writer Trevor Preston's gangland drama about a bank robber being released from jail and obsessed with tracking down the informer responsible for his conviction. After playing Feliks Dzerzhinsky, the cold, amoral head of the Soviet secret police, in 'Reilly: Ace of Spies' (1983), he starred in 'The Detective' (1983) as Commander Kenneth Crocker, whose principles extended to reporting his own brother-in-law for a breach of the peace. He then acted an equally disliked, but far from principled, policeman in the original 'Prime Suspect' mini-series (1991). As the sexist Sergeant Bill Otley, he opposed the appointment of Detective Chief Inspector Jane Tennison (played by Helen Mirren) to take over a murder inquiry. After initially refusing to reprise the role, he did so for 'Prime Suspect 3' (1993) and 'Prime Suspect: the Final Act' (2006). He was twice nominated for a BAFTA television award as best actor, for 'Out' and 'Prime Suspect'. 
On television Bell also played the coalminer Walter Morel in 'Sons and Lovers' (1983) and Old Tom, Ursula's grandfather, in 'The Rainbow' (1988), as well as making a rare switch to comedy to star as Harry Nash, the cantankerous wax museum owner, in 'Hope It Rains' (1991-2). However, Bell was best known for acting menacing, sinister characters, particularly in his later film roles, such as that of Uncle Philip, the controlling toymaker, in 'The Magic Toyshop' (1987), and the petty thief Jack 'the Hat' McVitie, whose murder brought down the East End gangster brothers, in 'The Krays' (1990). Although his stage appearances were rare he won acclaim for his performance as Horst, companion of the promiscuous Max (played by Ian McKellen), in the world premiere of Martin Sherman's 'Bent' (at the Royal Court Theatre, 1979), an examination of Hitler's persecution of homosexuals, set in Dachau. 
Bell's marriage to Lois Dainty was dissolved in 1976, and his partner for the last thirty years of his life was the television and film costume designer Frances Tempest. He became stepfather to her daughter Nellie, and they had another daughter, Polly. Having lived latterly in College Terrace, Brighton, he died of bronchopneumonia, cirrhosis of the liver, and ischaemic heart disease at the Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton, on 4 October 2006 and was survived by his partner Frances, his two children, and his stepdaughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 97447


Barr, James (1924-2006), Old Testament scholar, was born on 20 March 1924 at 5 Melville Street, Glasgow, the son of Allan Barr, schoolteacher, later minister of religion and professor of 'New Testament' language and literature at the United Free Church college in Edinburgh, and his wife, Agnes Christina, 'nee' Dryburgh. His paternal grandfather was James Barr (1862-1949), United Free Church minister and Labour MP; Elizabeth Brown Barr (1905-1995), the first woman to be ordained as a Presbyterian minister in Scotland, was an aunt. He was educated at Daniel Stewart's College, Edinburgh, and from 1941 the University of Edinburgh, where he read classics, his studies being interrupted by war service from 1942 to 1945 in the Fleet Air Arm of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. He returned to Edinburgh in 1945 and took his degree in 1948. Following study at New College, Edinburgh, he was ordained in 1951 to the ministry of the Church of Scotland and served for two years as minister in Tiberias, Israel. On 10 February 1950, at Trinity Church, Perth, he married Jane Jackson Stewart Hepburn, a schoolteacher (and daughter of James Hepburn, postal inspector), whom he had met as a student of classics in Edinburgh. They had two sons and a daughter. 
From 1953 to 1955 Barr was professor of 'New Testament' literature and exegesis at the Presbyterian College, Montreal, and having embarked on an academic career was successively professor of 'Old Testament' literature and theology at Edinburgh University (1955-61), professor of 'Old Testament' literature and theology at Princeton Theological Seminary (1961-5), professor of Semitic languages and literatures at Manchester University (1965-76), Oriel professor of the interpretation of holy scripture at Oxford University (1976-8), and regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford University (1978-89). Following his retirement from Oxford he accepted the position of professor of Hebrew 'Bible' at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, a post he held until 1998. His university career was such that he was able to escape the worst of the financial constraints and need to meet government targets that increasingly diverted attention away from academic matters in universities in Britain, although he played an important part in helping the Oxford theological faculty to gain adequate administrative accommodation. 
Barr made a contribution to 'Old Testament' and biblical scholarship that was unrivalled in the latter part of the twentieth century. He was driven by a desire for clarity and accuracy and he brought to this task a competence in disciplines previously outside the normal range of 'Old Testament' scholars, including linguistics. He had a penetrating and searching intellect and expressed his criticisms formidably, if always fairly. The severity of some of his writing contrasted strikingly with his personal manner. He was a soft-spoken, diffident, almost shy man, who looked much younger than he was, and who seemed to be blessed with eternal youth and vitality. He spoke with a uvular 'r', which became especially noticeable in pronouncing words like 'retroversion'. His lecturing style was characterized by clarity and originality. 
Barr's first major work, 'The Semantics of Biblical Language' (1961), was an attack on a way of using the 'Bible' that assumed that it was a privileged medium of divine revelation accessible through studies of the Hebrew language, especially etymologies that underlay key theological concepts. This approach was known generally as 'biblical theology' and it had deep roots in some continental European scholarship as well as in Britain and North America. Barr showed that it was based on an inadequate knowledge of semantics, as understood in linguistics, and argued that theology had to take account of larger linguistic units than verbal 'roots'. He showed that biblical studies could not operate in ignorance of other disciplines pertinent to its study, and he opened the door to the later interdisciplinary study of the 'Bible', in the process rescuing the field from becoming moribund and introspective. His second major work, 'Comparative Philology and the Text of the Old Testament' (1968), was a critique of a method of understanding biblical Hebrew that used other Semitic languages to recover 'lost' Hebrew words. While Barr did not reject the validity of the approach he showed that in practice it assumed that there had been far too many homonyms in ancient Hebrew, which raised the question how the language could have been an effective means of communication. When the 'Old Testament' section of 'The New English Bible' was published in 1970 it was found to be so vulnerable to the criticisms that had been made in Barr's book that a revision was seen to be necessary. It appeared in 1989 in 'The Revised English Bible'. In between these two works appeared 'Old and New in Interpretation' (1966) based upon the Currie lectures. This book was addressed not only to academics, but indicated Barr's concern that students preparing for ministry should be enabled to use the 'Bible' effectively in their work and preaching. It reviewed ways in which Christian theology had sought to relate the 'Old' and 'New' testaments and was critical of what Barr called 'purist' approaches that argued that only principles derived from the 'Bible' itself could yield satisfactory criteria for interpretation. (He was later unsympathetic to B. S. Childs's influential 'canonical criticism' for this reason.) Barr argued for a readiness to interpret the biblical text in a way that involved exposure to other disciplines, including philosophy. Such ideas were unusual at the time and helped to shape future thinking on the subject. These books laid down the principles that were expanded in Barr's later works, notably the major studies 'Fundamentalism' (1977) and 'The Concept of Biblical Theology: an Old Testament Perspective' (1999, based on the 1968 Cadbury lectures), as well as 'Holy Scripture: Canon, Authority, Criticism' (1983), 'Escaping from Fundamentalism' (1984), and 'The Garden of Eden and the Hope of Immortality' (1992). In 2000 he published 'History and Ideology in the Old Testament: Biblical Studies at the End of a Millennium', based on the Hensley Henson lectures. This masterly survey evaluated the state of a discipline that Barr had helped to shape, while expressing trenchant criticisms of some of its developments. 
Barr was able to accept many invitations to lecture in Britain and abroad, and to deliver special series of lectures. He held visiting professorships at the Hebrew University, Jerusalem (1973), Chicago University (1975, 1981), Strasbourg University (1975-6), Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island (1985, 1994), Otago University, New Zealand (1986), the University of South Africa, Pretoria (1986), Vanderbilt University (1987-8), and, following his retirement from Oxford, at Heidelberg University (1993) and the Chinese University of Hong Kong (2003). Special lecture series included the Currie lectures (Austin Seminary, Texas, 1964), the Cadbury lectures (Birmingham University, 1968), the Croall lectures (Edinburgh University, 1970), the Grinfield lectures on the 'Septuagint' (Oxford University, 1974-8), the Sprunt lectures (Richmond Theological Seminary, Virginia, 1982), the Schweich lectures of the British Academy (1986), the Hensley Henson lectures, Oxford University (1997), and the Gifford lectures (Edinburgh, 1999). Many of these series became the basis for his books. Honours flowed to him from many parts of the world. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1969, and corresponding member of the Gottingen Academy of Sciences (1976), the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters (1977), and the Royal Society of Sciences, Uppsala (1991). Honorary degrees were conferred upon him by nine universities or colleges around the world. 
During the second part of the twentieth century there was no scholar who could match Barr's combination of mastery of the minutiae of biblical scholarship with his insights into the wider and theological implications of the use of the 'Bible'. Inevitably there were disappointments. In 1974 Barr took over the 'Oxford Hebrew Dictionary' project, which up to then had proceeded on principles not exactly those of Barr. There was no one better qualified to reorganize and direct the work, but in 1980 Oxford University Press decided that it could no longer fund the project and it was abandoned. Again, Barr's acceptance of so many visiting professorships and requests for special lectures necessitated absences from his institutions that perturbed some of his colleagues, and resulted in his having few research students. This was a price that had to be paid for the books and lectures that were such an important contribution to biblical scholarship. 
After his retirement from Vanderbilt Barr moved to Claremont in California, although he continued to travel and to accept invitations to lecture. In 2005 he sustained serious head injuries from a fall at a meeting of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. Another fall the following year was the prelude to his death in Claremont on 14 October 2006, although the cause of death was given as bone cancer. After the funeral in California his ashes were interred near Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97448


Barkworth, Peter Wynn (1929-2006), actor, was born at 26 Madeira Road, Margate, Kent, on 14 January 1929, the son of Walter Wynn Barkworth, a sales manager in the motor trade, of 56A High Street, Margate, and his wife, Irene May, 'nee' Brown. When his father took up a post in Manchester the family moved to Bramhall, near Stockport, Cheshire, and Barkworth was educated at Stockport School. Gaining a love of performing, he perfected an impersonation of Winston Churchill reciting 'Mary had a little lamb' as a party piece for friends, accompanied by his mother on the piano and father on the Swanee whistle. He also acted at school, once starring as Macbeth, and appeared at the Hippodrome Theatre, Stockport, in 'For What We Are' (1942), aged thirteen. 
On leaving school Barkworth won a scholarship to train as an actor at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) (1946-8) and made his professional debut as Jack Read in 'The Guinea Pig' (1948) with Folkestone Repertory Theatre, where he performed with the Arthur Brough Players (1948-9). After national service (1949-50) he joined the Sheffield Repertory Company (1950-51), then made his first appearance in London's West End, as Gaston Probert in 'Letter from Paris' (Aldwych Theatre, 1952). He followed it with the roles of Gerald Arbuthnot in 'A Woman of No Importance' (Savoy Theatre, 1953), Stefan in 'The Dark is Light Enough' (Aldwych Theatre, 1954), Bernard Taggart-Stuart in 'Roar Like a Dove' (Phoenix Theatre, 1957), Sir Benjamin Backbite in a revival of 'The School for Scandal' (Haymarket Theatre, 1962), which he also played on Broadway (Majestic Theatre, 1963), and Edward VIII in Royce Ryton's play about the abdication crisis, 'Crown Matrimonial' (Haymarket Theatre, 1972), a role he repeated in 1974 in a television adaptation, winning him a BAFTA best television actor award. Then came the roles of a government minister attending an old boys' reunion in 'Donkeys' Years' (Globe Theatre, 1976) and a corporate architect in 'Can You Hear Me at the Back?' (Piccadilly Theatre, 1979). 
Barkworth made his television debut in 1948, when he appeared in a live, twenty-minute BBC play while still studying at RADA. His first feature film was 'You Know What Sailors Are!' (1953), starring Donald Sinden, in which he acted a naval lieutenant. He took a similar role in 'A Touch of Larceny' (1959), alongside James Mason, and was in the political drama 'No Love for Johnnie' (1961). Although he later appeared in the films 'Where Eagles Dare' (1968), 'Mr Smith' (1976), and 'Escape from the Dark' (1976), and in 'Champions' (1984), as the racehorse owner Nick Embiricos in a film about Bob Champion, the jockey who conquered cancer to win the Grand National, television became the medium in which Barkworth had most success, usually playing professional types. 
After character parts in plays and episodes of popular series like 'No Hiding Place' (1963) and 'The Avengers' (1963), Barkworth became a household name in 'The Power Game' (1965-6, 1969), playing Kenneth Bligh, the son of the founder of a civil engineering company that was taken over by John Wilder (Patrick Wymark), whose success as an aerospace tycoon had been featured in a previous series, 'The Plane Makers'. The executive that Barkworth acted was typical of the middle-class, besuited roles for which he would become best known on television. After playing the British agent Vincent in the thriller series 'Manhunt' (1970), set in occupied France during the Second World War, and Tsar Nicholas II in Ronald Eyre's play 'Rasputin' (1971), he took a rare comedy role as the grumpy television executive Eustace Morrow in the sitcom 'The Good Girl' (1974), played Guy Foster in the three-part Francis Durbridge thriller 'Melissa' (1974), and won both BAFTA and Royal Television Society awards for best actor for his performance as the philosophy professor Anderson in Tom Stoppard's play 'Professional Foul' (1977). 
Barkworth again won BAFTA's award for best television actor for his role as the stockbroker turned country restaurateur Richard Elkinson in 'The Country Party' (1977). But his biggest screen success was as the international banker Mark Telford seeking a less stressful life by becoming a provincial bank manager in 'Telford's Change' (1979). The BBC series was Barkworth's own idea, and had originally been rejected by ITV eleven years earlier. On television he also acted Stanley Baldwin in 'Winston Churchill: the Wilderness Years' (1981) and Geoffrey Carr, a computer magnate raising the ransom for his kidnapped wife and stepchild, in the thriller series 'The Price' (1985), which again was his own idea. His final screen role was as the prosecutor Charles Gill in 'Wilde' (1997), a film about Oscar Wilde starring Stephen Fry. His last West End stage roles were in 'Hidden Laughter' (Vaudeville Theatre, 1990) and 'The Winslow Boy' (Globe Theatre, 1994). 
Barkworth taught at RADA from 1955 to 1963, when his students included Anthony Hopkins, Diana Rigg, and Simon Ward, and served as a RADA council member from 1985 to 2001. He wrote the books 'About Acting' (1980), 'More About Acting' (1984), and 'The Complete About Acting' (1991), based on insights gathered while he was teaching at RADA. He was also the author of 'First Houses' (1983), a memoir of his early years as an actor, and 'For All Occasions' (1997), collected poetry and prose for public speakers. For more than forty years he lived in an eighteenth-century house in Flask Walk, Hampstead, and he also had a seaside flat in Folkestone, Kent. He died of bronchopneumonia at the Royal Free Hospital, London, on 21 October 2006, ten days after suffering a stroke. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 97453


Harris, Ralph, Baron Harris of High Cross (1924-2006), economist and free-market polemicist, was born on 10 December 1924 at 88 Langham Road, Tottenham, London, one of four children of William Henry Harris (died 1941), bus inspector, and his wife, Lilian Maud, 'nee' Valle. He was educated at Tottenham grammar school, and won an exhibition to Queens' College, Cambridge, where he read economics, attaining a first in 1948. At Cambridge he was influenced by Stanley Dennison, a classical economist fighting against the Keynesian message of fettered markets and government macro-economic controls. 
After graduating Harris worked for Conservative central office, first as an education officer for the newly formed Conservative Political Centre and then for the Conservative research department. In 1949 he moved to St Andrews University, where he lectured in political economy with great success until 1956. On 5 November 1949 he married Jose Pauline Jeffery, the 22-year-old daughter of Roger Frederick Jeffery, manufacturer. They had a long, happy marriage, which produced two sons and a daughter. 
During his time in Scotland Harris unsuccessfully contested two parliamentary seats; the first in Kirkcaldy for the Liberal Unionist Party in 1951 and the second in Edinburgh for the Conservatives in 1955. It was also the beginning of a long association with the 'Glasgow Herald'; he started as a leader writer in 1956 and continued to contribute to the paper for the rest of his life. During his time in Scotland he wrote his first book, 'Politics without Prejudice', a political appreciation and biography of R. A. Butler, then thought of as a possible future leader of the Conservative Party. 
It was after a speech in 1949 given by Harris for the Conservative Political Centre in East Grinstead that Antony Fisher first mentioned to Harris his discussion with Friedrich Hayek on the setting up of an 'anti-Fabian' think tank. It was then clear to Fisher that Harris had the necessary persuasive powers to convince a wider audience of the free-market message. Nearly eight years later, in January 1957, Harris started work at the newly formed Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA), having resigned from St Andrews in the preceding spring. It was a risky move, with the IEA's influence and financial security yet to be established. In his typically self-deprecating manner, he later reflected on his decision to give up a secure academic career with a potential move across the River Tay to an academic chair at Queen's College, Dundee, in the offing: '[a] moment of thought was enough for me to conclude that, even if the Dundee job were offered me on a plate, I would have turned it down... I could not imagine I would ever be qualified for such a rarefied academic distinction. ('Harris in his Own Words', 19)' Harris's role as general director of the IEA from 1957 to 1987 was to publicize the work of the institute and to act as an intellectual salesman for the Hayekian message it was to propound so effectively for the next thirty years. The IEA needed an editorial director to promote the publication of articles. In February 1957 Harris met Arthur Seldon. It was the perfect match. They both came from working-class roots yet possessed different skills. Seldon was the 'embodiment of intellectual rigour: Harris was an enthusiastic spreader of their message' (Robinson, 'Seldon', 61). In a reflective piece, 'Living with Arthur', Harris later commented on his close relationship with Seldon: 'From our first days together in 1957 I recognised and deferred to Arthur's intellectual pre-eminence... Arthur was a quite exceptional teacher and I positively revelled in my good fortune for 30 years to be his favoured perpetual pupil... I increasingly found myself looking on Arthur as a second brother with whom it would be inconceivable to fall out very seriously or for very long. ('Harris in his Own Words', 14-16)' In the first few years of the IEA Harris and Seldon found it difficult to recruit like-minded writers due to the prevailing Keynesian paradigm with its emphasis on state intervention, so the two of them wrote many of the early publications themselves. Harris publicized the work by sending it to journalists for review and by inviting academics, journalists, and businessmen for lunch. It was through this network that he also later raised money for the continuing work of the institute. (The initial funding had been provided by Fisher, founder of the Buxted Chicken Company.) Seldon described Harris as 'a past master at selling, persuading and explaining... my salesman as it were' ('Conversation', 36). The IEA distanced itself from any political party, with Harris abandoning his association with the Conservatives. The IEA papers avoided the constraint of what was politically possible and instead focused on winning the intellectual case for free markets and capitalism. In conversation with Fisher Hayek had suggested: 'Society's course will be changed only by a change in ideas. First you must reach the intellectuals, the teachers and writers, with reasoned argument. It will be their influence on society which will prevail, and the politicians will follow' (Blundell, 17). 
The IEA's influence on the Conservative Party started after that party's defeat in the general election of 1964. Keith Joseph, later an architect of the 'Thatcher revolution', found in Harris and Seldon's IEA a theoretical underpinning for his own developing intellectual case for economic liberalism. Geoffrey Howe, later Margaret Thatcher's first chancellor, was also an avid reader of IEA publications, particularly on welfare reform. In a letter to Harris in 1977 Thatcher reflected on the contribution of the IEA to her 'assault on the post-war consensus': 'At times it must have seemed like bashing your head against a brick wall but political historians will, I believe, judge [the IEA] in proper perspective' (Cockett, 173). It was Harris who invited Milton Friedman to dine privately with Thatcher in 1978. Friedman's clear monetarist views on tackling inflation clearly helped to shape the Thatcher government's deflationary policies. Days after winning the general election of 1979 Thatcher asked Harris to take a seat in the House of Lords. The invitation came at a time of personal tragedy for Harris and his family as their son Simon had died suddenly at the age of twenty-six after a long battle 'with drugs and drink which he had at last shown signs of winning' ('Harris in his Own Words', 22). On a professional front Harris was worried about the implications for the perceived political neutrality of the IEA if he took up a political position in the Lords. Seldon's suggestion that he take a seat on the crossbenches and thus avoid any accusation of politicking allowed him to be Thatcher's first nominee to enter the upper chamber, taking the title Baron Harris of High Cross (the territorial designation derived from the brick monument in the centre of Tottenham). 
Harris had already become involved in a number of political campaigns and societies long before entering the Lords. He helped set up the Constitutional Book Club in 1970 with Rhodes Boyson, a state school headmaster and future Conservative minister, and Ross McWhirter, another aspiring Conservative MP. The club produced a series of pamphlets published by the Churchill Press, the most influential probably being the first, 'Right Turn' (1970), in which Harris wrote an essay entitled 'The morality of capitalism'. He also campaigned against comprehensivization, fighting a legal battle with other parents to prevent his daughter's school changing status. As chairman of the Wincott Foundation, founded in honour of the financial journalist Harold Wincott, from 1969 to 1995, he celebrated good financial journalism through the foundation's annual awards and lectures. As secretary of the Mont Pelerin Society from 1967, and president from 1982 to 1984, he had regular contact with the leading thinkers behind the classical liberal revival, including Milton Friedman, James Buchanan, George Stigler, Ronald Coase, and Gary Becker. Inspired by Friedrich Hayek, the society brought together the economists who were to inspire the IEA's thinking. In particular Buchanan's 'public choice theory' provided a theoretical framework for an attack on 'big' government in all its guises. The theory attacked the romantic notion that civil servants always act in the public interest and instead suggested that, like those making economic choices in the private sector, their decisions were guided by self-interest. Harris's access to these thinkers, many of them Nobel prizewinners, gave the IEA a willing selection of academic giants to write papers and give lectures. 
Harris was forever active in a wide variety of free-market causes. Opened in 1976, following a campaign by Harris, Seldon, and others in 1967-9, and given its royal charter in 1983, the University of Buckingham was Britain's first independent university. Harris served on its council between 1980 and 1995. In 1976 he was appointed honorary secretary of the Political Economy Club, founded in 1821 to support the principles of free trade. During the late 1970s and 1980s several liberal, right-leaning think tanks emerged, the most notable being the Centre for Policy Studies, started by Keith Joseph in 1974, the Social Affairs Unit, founded in 1980 as an offshoot of the IEA, and the Centre for Research into Communist Economies, founded in 1983 by Harris, Fisher, and Ljubo Sirc. Harris was involved in the influential, right-wing No Turning Back group founded after the Conservative election victory of 1983 and committed to continuing Thatcher's free-market reforms. As the first chairman of the Eurosceptic Bruges Group, established in 1989 by Patrick Robertson, Harris warned of the submersion of Thatcher's reforms by a growing EU committed to socialist rather than free-market solutions. He resigned in 1991 after Robertson attacked the Major government for its policy towards Kurdish refugees. Harris held several boardroom roles after his full-time involvement with the IEA finished, most notably as a director of Times Newspapers (1988-2001). 
Perhaps Harris's most controversial position was as chairman of Forest, the pro-smoking lobbying group, from 1989 until his death. An avid pipe-smoker, he abhorred the government's restrictions on smokers, and in one of his most infamous publications, 'Smoking out the Truth' (2005), challenged the chief medical officer to provide the supposed evidence that passive smoking seriously damages health. He wrote: 'The imposition of a ban on smoking in so-called public places would... represent a triumph of prejudice and propaganda masquerading as science' ('Smoking', 17). Harris also courted controversy in the late 1990s by assisting his long-standing friend Neil Hamilton in raising money to support his libel case against Mohammed Al Fayed. Harris refused to name the backers he had persuaded to contribute to the fund when Hamilton lost and Al Fayed demanded payment of his own legal fees by those backers, on the grounds that they had encouraged Hamilton in his action. Having promised confidentiality to the 400 or so contributors, Harris asserted: 'If it was a question of a week in jail for contempt of court then I suppose I'd have to do it' ('Evening Standard', 22 Dec 1999). In the event the High Court ruled that Hamilton's backers would not have to pay Al Fayed's costs. 
With over thirty years at the centre of liberal economic thinking, Harris's contribution to the political landscape of Britain was considerable. From its humble beginnings, the IEA grew to be the leading free-market think tank in Britain and among the most influential worldwide. At its epicentre stood the unshakeable ideological partnership of Harris and Seldon. Although Seldon was the more prolific writer of the two, Harris undoubtedly provided the crucial marketing prowess to get the message across to a decreasingly sceptical audience. In measuring the IEA's contribution to the intellectual battle of ideas Milton Friedman concluded that: 'As veterans of a major... intellectual battle dating back to the end of World War II, and in the phalanx of people who have promoted ideas of freedom and human liberty, Ralph Harris and Arthur Seldon deserve a place of honour. ('Conversation', 72)' Harris was of distinctive, and in later years somewhat old-fashioned, appearance, with a centre parting in thinning hair and toothbrush moustache, a blazer, fancy waistcoat, and deerstalker hat, and a meerschaum pipe hanging from his mouth (with several more bulging from a pocket). He was fond of bathing in the sea and was an accomplished conjuror. He was noted for his quick wit, and his speeches in the House of Lords always projected a consistent message with a persuasive eloquence and disarming humour. He died at Barnet General Hospital on 19 October 2006 of hypovolaemic shock following a ruptured aortic aneurysm, and was survived by his wife, Jose, and daughter, Angela, both sons having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 97460


Finnis, Valerie Margaret Steriker (1924-2006), gardener and photographer, was born on 31 October 1924 at Wyke Cottage, Crowborough, Sussex, the younger daughter of Steriker Finnis, a paymaster commander in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Constance Mary Katharine, 'nee' Barford. At the age of five she moved with her family to Earlswood, near Reigate, where she created her first garden, with encouragment from her mother. She attended the Kerry School in Reigate. From the age of thirteen she boarded at Hayes Court, Kent; when it was closed at the beginning of the Second World War she moved to Downe House School, near Newbury. In 1942 she enrolled as a student at Waterperry Horticultural School for Women, a rigorous but happy establishment founded by the redoubtable Beatrix Havergal, which trained young women, including Land Army girls. When the course ended she stayed on as a gardener and teacher, eventually becoming head of the alpine department. She became extremely knowledgeable on alpines and, in time, an internationally noted expert on Kabschia and Engleria saxifrages. She was a particularly good cultivator of plants, with a prodigious memory for names. 
In 1955 Valerie Finnis took up plant photography, partly as a means of making a little money to augment her modest salary. Her first images appeared in a learned article on crocus, but she soon started to sell them to Gordon Fraser for greetings cards and calendars, and to EMI for record covers. Later her pictures illustrated gardening magazines and books, such as the 'Collins Guide to Alpines and Rock Garden Plants' (1972). She maintained that she only ever took one exposure of a subject, as film was so expensive. Her plant portraits, especially her carefully assembled bouquets of seasonal garden flowers, were immensely appealing and became very popular. In 1961 she won a gold medal from the Royal Horticultural Society and exhibited her photographs at Kodak's headquarters. Her powers of observation, honed by the culture of small alpine plants, naturally disposed her to expertise in this field. She strongly influenced many of the garden photographers who appeared on the scene in the 1970s and 1980s to satisfy demand when gardening magazines began to be printed in full colour. She also gave illustrated lectures all over Britain and, after she was invited as a guest lecturer on a Swan Hellenic cruise in 1961, abroad as well. She appeared as a guest presenter on Percy Thrower's 'Gardening Club' programme on television. She constructed miniature rock gardens at Chelsea flower show and was a long-standing judge for the Royal Horticultural Society from 1962. She received the Victoria medal of honour of the Royal Horticultural Society in 1975. 
One day in 1968, while in the potting-shed in the alpine department at Waterperry, Finnis heard a visitor point out the unusual American woodland herbaceous plant 'Gillenia trifoliata' to his companion. She called out, 'You're the first person who's ever known that plant' ('The Guardian', 30 Oct 2006). The person was Sir David John Montagu Douglas Scott (1887-1986), a widower and retired head of the consular service, as well as an avid gardener. They married on 31 July 1970 at the parish church in Weekley, Northamptonshire; she was forty-five, he eighty-three. He lived at the Dower House, a wing of Boughton House near Kettering, Northamptonshire, renting it from his cousin, the eighth duke of Buccleuch and tenth duke of Queensberry. He had told Finnis that he lived in a semi-detached house outside Kettering, which was true -- in a way. He had already made a fine two-acre tree and shrub garden on a north-facing slope with his first wife, Dorothy ('nee' Drummond), who died in 1965. The year after Valerie Finnis (who continued to use her maiden name) moved to Boughton, Waterperry closed as a horticultural college for women, so she imported many thousands of alpine plants; 150 yards of raised beds were built for these against the north- and south-facing walls of the kitchen garden. For a number of years the Montagu Douglas Scotts opened the garden to visitors very successfully under the charitable National Gardens Scheme twice a year. As popular as the garden was the sale of unusual plants, mainly propagated by David, who worked all day in the garden until well into his nineties, usually accompanied by a pug dog. 
David Montagu Douglas Scott had, over many years, assembled an important collection of Victorian and twentieth-century paintings and drawings. His most famous acquisition was 'No Walk Today', by Sophie Anderson. Valerie Finnis fully shared his love of art, having herself a very good eye; she later curated the pictures. She and her husband were excellent company and entertained a wide variety of friends at the Dower House, until David became ill about three years before he died. Everyone who came to visit -- from the Aga repair man to Princess Alice, duchess of Gloucester -- was photographed and asked to write something about him- or herself in a succession of Smythson leather-bound scrapbooks, which chronicled the Montagu Douglas Scotts' life together, and which she later willed to the British Library. Valerie Finnis was full of fun, gossip, and practical jokes, and could be mischievous. She had a wide circle of friends and got on especially well with children. Although she had an attractive and lively personality, which drew people to her, she could also sometimes be a trouble-maker, which made them wary; she was said to enjoy a good row. 
In 1990 Valerie Finnis founded a charity, the Merlin Trust, to fund travel scholarships for young gardeners. It was named in memory of her husband David's only child, Merlin, who had been killed while serving as a second-lieutenant in the rifle brigade in the Middle East during the Second World War. In her seventies arthritis forced her to give up gardening, although she lived on at the Dower House. She remained a judge for the Royal Horticultural Society until 2002. On retirement from judging she selected pictures of plants and gardeners that she had known, from her collection of 50,000 transparencies; these were included with her reminiscences in a book published in 2007, 'Garden People: Valerie Finnis and the Golden Age of Gardening'. She died in Kettering General Hospital on 17 October 2006, of an upper gastro-intestinal bleed. Her brain was willed to scientific research, and her remains cremated at Kettering crematorium on 1 November. She directed that all her assets, including the picture collection, be sold for charitable purposes. The Finnis Scott Foundation was set up in 2007, with the purpose of giving grants to horticultural and art-related projects, reflecting the abiding interests of Valerie Finnis and her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 97463


Randle, Sir Philip John (1926-2006), biochemist, was born on 16 July 1926 at 99 Queen's Road, Nuneaton, Warwickshire, the son of Alfred John Randle (died 1952), master baker, and his wife, Nora Annie, 'nee' Smith (died 1968), music teacher. He attended King Edward VI Grammar School, Nuneaton, and went on to read natural sciences at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. He obtained a first-class degree in biochemistry in 1947 and then moved to University College Hospital medical school, London, where he completed his medical studies. On 27 September 1952, at the parish church in Nuneaton, he married Elizabeth Ann Harrison (died 2004), a 21-year-old library assistant, and daughter of Dennis Arthur Harrison, local government officer. They had three daughters and one son. 
After qualifying in medicine Randle returned to Cambridge to carry out post-graduate research on insulin under the supervision of Frank Young. He was awarded his PhD in 1955 for a thesis entitled 'Studies on the metabolic action of insulin'. This immediately led to his appointment as lecturer in biochemistry at the University of Cambridge, where in 1957 he was also appointed a fellow and director of medical studies at Trinity Hall. He established a research group in a basement laboratory in the Dunn School of Biochemistry in Tennis Court Road. The open drainage system for all the laboratory sinks in the building ran through Randle's laboratory, so that when, as often happened in those days, flammable organic solvents were poured down a sink somewhere in the building the Randle researchers had to beat a hasty retreat -- not least because Randle would almost certainly be smoking his pipe. 
In Cambridge Randle continued his studies of various aspects of insulin action and the control of metabolism, especially in muscle. These resulted in a series of highly influential papers published in collaboration with an outstanding group of talented young researchers, including Eric Newsholme, Nick Hales, Peter Garland, and Hal Coore. The papers focused on two distinct aspects of the control of mammalian fuel metabolism, both relevant to insulin-dependent diabetes. The first of these, the mechanisms involved in fuel selection by mammalian tissues, was encapsulated in the 'glucose-fatty acid cycle' hypothesis (reported in 'The Lancet' in 1963) often subsequently referred to as the Randle cycle; the second aspect, the way in which insulin-producing pancreatic greekLetterbeta-cells respond appropriately to changes in blood glucose concentration, became known as the 'substrate-site hypothesis'. Validation of these two models and elucidation of the underlying biochemical mechanisms led to decades of research, not only by Randle and his colleagues but also by many other workers in diabetes. 
The glucose-fatty acid cycle was based on a series of experiments showing that cardiac and skeletal muscle, when provided with both fatty acids and glucose as potential fuels, preferentially oxidized the fatty acids. This increased supply of fatty acids to muscle could, by diminishing glucose uptake, lead to hyperglycaemia and thereby be involved in the insulin resistance associated with type-2 diabetes and obesity. The fundamental importance of the glucose-fatty acid cycle in the normal physiology of muscle and other tissues soon became widely accepted. 
The substrate-site hypothesis for the control of insulin secretion emerged from two ground-breaking advances by the Randle group. The first of these was the development, with Nick Hales, of the radio-immunoassay for insulin (reported in the 'Biochemical Journal' in 1963), which permitted accurate and precise measurement of the concentration of insulin in biological fluids. The second was the introduction, with Hal Coore, of an 'in vitro' technique for studying the control of insulin release from isolated pieces of rabbit pancreas (reported in the 'Biochemical Journal' in 1964). Based on the specificity of the secretory response to various sugars and metabolic inhibitors, the novel hypothesis was proposed that rather than binding to some hypothetical cellular receptor, as had been supposed, glucose actually triggered insulin secretion through some product(s) of the metabolism of the sugar within the greekLetterbeta-cell. At the time this hypothesis was put forward it was not possible to test it directly since the greekLetterbeta-cells made up only a small part (roughly 1 per cent) of the pancreatic mass. However, when methods became available to separate islets of Langerhans (containing predominantly greekLetterbeta-cells) from the rest of the pancreas, evidence to support the substrate-site hypothesis was soon forthcoming from studies, published from 1970 onwards, with Steve Ashcroft in the Randle laboratory. Many decades of work were required to elucidate the biochemical mechanisms involved, but the essential role of greekLetterbeta-cell glucose metabolism in regulation of insulin secretion was firmly established. 
In 1964 Randle was appointed to the newly established chair of biochemistry at the University of Bristol. This was a period of expansion in British universities, but even in that context the rapid development of the department of biochemistry under Randle's leadership was remarkable. Bristol had had medical, veterinary, and dentistry schools for some time, but, although there were a few biochemists working in the departments of physiology, biology, and chemistry, there was no biochemistry department. Within seven years the new department of biochemistry under Randle had become one of the strongest in the country, both for research and for teaching. There were several reasons for this achievement. In the first place Randle made a series of inspired appointments over the entire field of biochemistry including mitochondriology, protein structure, molecular enzymology, and mammalian metabolism. Further, he was highly successful in acquiring sufficient space and funding for the new department from the university. Needless to say his plans did not always meet with whole-hearted support from entrenched interests in existing departments. However, Randle's physical presence (he was well over six feet in height), intellect, and booming voice (accompanied by copious pipe smoke) ensured that his expansionist plans were fulfilled at the critical stage in the development of the department. 
The rapidly growing Bristol department of biochemistry was an exciting place to work in during the twelve years that Randle headed it. His influence on the many research students he personally supervised there was immense. His intellectual rigour, his ability to identify and focus upon the essential aspects of important biochemical problems, and his quite remarkable memory for facts, left an indelible impression on all those who worked with him. The young department had a happy atmosphere and a flourishing social life. On Sunday mornings Randle and many of the department were often to be found at the then brand-new university swimming pool. This could occasionally prove hazardous for those who engaged in conversation with Randle while in the pool, since the conversation would usually take place in a part of the pool where he could comfortably stand but most others were required to swim round and round to avoid drowning. 
Shortly after moving to Bristol, Randle was invited to give the British Diabetic Association's Banting lecture (1965), and was the first recipient of the prestigious Minkowski prize of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (1966), in connection with which he wrote an important article, 'Carbohydrate metabolism and lipid storage and breakdown in diabetes', published in 'Diabetologia' the same year. In 1975 he moved to Oxford to found another new department, the Nuffield department of clinical biochemistry. Of his two most long-standing associates, Dick Denton remained in Bristol to continue work on insulin action in adipose and other tissues, while Steve Ashcroft moved with Randle to Oxford to pursue further studies on the substrate-site hypothesis for the control of insulin secretion. In contrast to the large Bristol department, the Nuffield department remained small and highly focused on diabetes-related research, for which it gained an international reputation. Randle continued his own active laboratory research, mainly on the regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase, a key regulatory enzyme in adipose tissue and muscle metabolism. 
In addition to his university activities Randle took on many other tasks. He was chairman of a large number of research committees and boards for the British Diabetic Association, the Medical Research Council, and the British Heart Foundation; he played a large part in the founding of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes and served as its president from 1977 to 1980; he also was president of the Biochemical Society (1995-2000) and vice-president of the Royal Society (1988-9), of which he was made a fellow in 1983. In the early 1980s he took on an advisory role to the government on aspects of food policy, chairing the influential food policy panel on diet and cardiovascular disease (1981-4). This panel developed recommendations, published in 1984, on lowering intake of unsaturated fats, simple sugars, and salt -- advice that remained highly relevant in subsequent years, when clinical obesity was on the increase. His work in all these spheres led to numerous further honours. He gave the Humphry Davy Rolleston lecture of the Royal College of Physicians in 1983, published in the college's journal the following year, was knighted in 1975, and became a founder fellow of the Academy of Medical Science in 1998. 
Randle's physical and intellectual stature made him a formidable opponent in scientific debate and he was held in some considerable awe by his colleagues. Nevertheless, beneath a somewhat forbidding exterior he was a warm and generous man who gave great encouragement to those under his wing. He was capable of great kindness and provided real help to his associates if they were in need. Throughout his life he took great pleasure in his family, especially his grandchildren, with whom he spent many happy holidays. He loved opera and the theatre, eating out, and watching television detective series such as 'Inspector Morse'. He was always a great traveller and made many trips with his wife, Elizabeth, usually when he was invited to give a keynote speech at a meeting in faraway, and often exotic, surroundings. 
Randle retired from his Oxford post in 1993. The major international scientific meeting held in his honour that year in Oxford was eloquent testimony to the affection and esteem in which he was regarded throughout the world. His death on 26 September 2006 in Oxford, from a sudden massive intracerebral haemorrhage, marked the end of an era in British diabetes research. He left behind, however, an enormous legacy, both in the Bristol department of biochemistry, which continued to go from strength to strength, and in a worldwide network of researchers whose careers had been substantially enriched by time spent under his supervision. A permanent collection of his published work and other memorabilia was established at the Oxford Centre for Diabetes and Metabolism. He was survived by two daughters, Rosalind and Sally; his son Peter had died in 1971 while still a teenager, and his daughter Susan died in 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 97465


Peacocke, Arthur Robert (1924-2006), biochemist and theologian, was born on 29 November 1924 at 221 Chester Road, Watford, Hertfordshire, the son of Arthur Charles Peacocke, butcher, and his wife, Rose Elizabeth, 'nee' Lilly. He was educated at Watford grammar school and Exeter College, Oxford, where he gained a first-class degree in chemistry in 1946 before undertaking research for the degree of DPhil (awarded in 1948) under the supervision of Sir Cyril Hinshelwood. He then lectured in biophysical chemistry at Birmingham University from 1948 to 1959. His early scientific interests focused on the physical chemistry of DNA, but later in his long scientific career he concentrated on the study of the general thermodynamics of biological systems. On 7 August 1948 he married Rosemary Winifred Mann, a 22-year-old schoolteacher, later an inspector of schools, and daughter of Edgar Mann, jeweller. They had a son and a daughter. 
Peacocke had been attracted to Christianity in his youth, but as an undergraduate he became an agnostic. However, a sermon preached in Oxford by William Temple persuaded him that religious belief could be approached with intellectual openness and scrupulosity. He also began to feel that the order and fruitfulness of the world, revealed by science, intimated the possibility of there being a divine mind and will behind the history of the universe. Influenced by the liberal theologian Geoffrey Lampe, a colleague at Birmingham University, he returned to religious belief and took first a diploma in theology (1960) then a degree in theology (1971), both from Birmingham. Later he was to have the unusual distinction of being both a DSc (1962) and a DD (1982) of Oxford University. 
In 1959 Peacocke returned to Oxford as university lecturer in biochemistry and a fellow of St Peter's College, combining this from 1964 with a lectureship in chemistry at Mansfield College. In 1971 he was ordained to the Anglican priesthood and began to make a name for himself as a careful and insightful writer on science and religion. His first book on this subject, 'Science and the Christian Experiment', was published in 1971. In 1973 he made a decision, which he subsequently described as not having been easy, to move to Cambridge to become the dean of Clare College. At Cambridge he gave lectures both in chemistry and in theology. The invitation to give the Bampton lectures at Oxford in 1978 led to a major work, 'Creation and the World of Science' (1979), which was widely influential on both sides of the Atlantic. In 1984 he returned again to Oxford to be the first director of the Ian Ramsey Centre, established in St Cross College for the interdisciplinary study of the relationship between theology and contemporary culture. He relinquished the directorship in 1988, but returned in 1996 for a second spell until 1999, in order to help in the establishment of an international programme of workshops in science and religion. In between he served as catechist at his old college, Exeter (1989-93), an appointment he greatly enjoyed. He was made an honorary chaplain at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1988, and an honorary canon in 1995. 
The invitation to give the Gifford lectures at St Andrews University in 1993 afforded Peacocke the opportunity to survey his mature position on the relationship between science and religion. The lectures formed the basis of his most important book, 'Theology for a Scientific Age' (1993). It was followed by 'From DNA to Dean' (1996), which contains a particularly interesting autobiographical chapter outlining the spiritual pilgrimage of his life. He continued to write on these matters right up to the time of his death, displaying, if anything, an increased anxiety that theology should have the boldness to take scientific insight seriously and be prepared in response to modify its own discourse in the ways that he believed had proved to be necessary. As a biologist he was able to give a positive theological interpretation of evolution, emphasizing that God is no cosmic despot keeping tight control of creation, but one, who in Charles Kingsley's phrase, allows creatures to be themselves and to 'make themselves'. The history of the world is to be understood theologically as an unfolding exploration and unending improvisation of great and continuing fruitfulness, in which creator and creatures both participate. Peacocke delighted to illustrate these insights with metaphors drawn from music, which meant much to him in his personal life. 
Although Peacocke quite often spoke in a revisionary mode about the need for modifications in theological discourse, he also had respect for the insights of the past, taking with great seriousness the importance of the 'New Testament' witness and expressing his admiration for the truth-seeking stance taken by such thinkers as Origen, Augustine, and Anselm. He was robustly critical of scientistic reductionism, remarking that 'atoms and molecules are not more real than cells, or populations of cells, or human communities, or human persons' ('From DNA to Dean', 'Zygon', 26/4, Dec 1991, 491). Like many scientist-theologians, he took a critical realist view of the nature of human knowledge, both in relation to science and to theology, a position that he defended in 'Intimations of Reality' (1984). 
In addition to his many personal contributions to the dialogue between science and religion Peacocke played an important part in founding a number of organizations that went on to play significant roles in facilitating that dialogue. In the early 1970s he was a leader in the discussions that led to the formation of the Science and Religion Forum in the United Kingdom, and he served as the forum's first chairman (1972-8). Later he participated in moves to found the European Society for the Study of Science and Theology. His most imaginative and fruitful achievement of this kind was the conception and foundation of the Society of Ordained Scientists, a kind of 'dispersed religious community', prayerfully linking together clergy with serious scientific concerns. He was the society's first warden (1987-92). A friendly and modest person, he was a courteous participant in many debates. Throughout his life he manifested a sincere desire to seek for truth without reserve. He received much international recognition for his achievements in the field of science and religion, including honorary degrees from DePauw University, Indiana, and Georgetown University, Washington. He was appointed MBE in 1993 and in 2001 was awarded the Templeton prize for progress in religion. He died of cancer of the prostate at the Westminster Beaumont Nursing Home, Bayworth Lane, Boar's Hill, Oxford, on 21 October 2006, and was survived by his wife, son, a professor of philosophy, and daughter, an Anglican priest. 


@@@@@


doc= 97466


Pattinson, Sir (William) Derek (1930-2006), church administrator and Church of England clergyman, was born on 31 March 1930 at Risedale Maternity Home, Barrow in Furness, Lancashire, the only child of Thomas William Pattinson (died 1970), a clerk in the Ministry of Labour and later a tax inspector, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Burgess (died 1986), a schoolmistress. He was educated at Whitehaven grammar school; this was followed by national service in the Royal Air Force, where he did not distinguish himself, staying in the lowest rank. He won an exhibition to Queen's College, Oxford, and was awarded the Stanhope historical essay prize in 1951. After graduating with a second-class degree the following year he entered the home civil service and served in the inland revenue department at Somerset House in London from 1952 until 1970. During that time he was seconded on two occasions (1962-5 and 1968-70) to the Treasury. 
Pattinson (who always used the name Derek rather than William) was a prominent member of the William Temple Association, serving for a time as its chairman, and in that capacity he came to the notice of Archbishop Michael Ramsey, who in 1966 invited him to become a member of the church and state commission chaired by Owen Chadwick. Pattinson was one of the more radical members of the commission, pressing for the church rather than the prime minister to have the final say in episcopal appointments. 
When in 1970 it was decided to replace the church assembly with a general synod Pattinson was an obvious candidate to follow Sir John Guillum Scott as secretary-general. He was persuaded to apply for the post much against the advice of his mother, who considered that he would become a permanent secretary if he stayed in the civil service. He did not heed her advice and was appointed associate secretary-general in 1970, becoming secretary-general on Scott's retirement in 1972. It proved to be an inspired appointment. Pattinson devoted all his energies to establishing the new general synod, ensuring that it had a high profile with the media. Without doubt he was the most influential layman in the church during his period of office. In its first twenty years the synod dealt with many controversial matters that often put the synod -- and the church -- at odds with the government of the day; 'The Church and the Bomb' (1982) and 'Faith in the City' (1985) were two reports that placed the general synod in the media spotlight and caused annoyance to the administration of Margaret Thatcher. 
During James Callaghan's time as prime minister the synod resolved to tackle the question of bishops' appointments and, with Pattinson as part of the negotiating group, concessions were made by Downing Street on the lines of the proposals of the Chadwick report. This gave satisfaction to Pattinson, who was now seen as a skilful political operator, but within the church he had critics who considered that he had too much power. Ramsey's successor at Canterbury, Donald Coggan, relied to a large extent on his own staff at Lambeth and consultation with Pattinson and his colleagues at Church House was kept to a minimum. This caused difficulties for Pattinson but a better relationship developed when Robert Runcie became archbishop in 1980. 
One of the most difficult events in Pattinson's career occurred in 1987 when Canon Gareth Bennett of New College, Oxford, was commissioned by Pattinson and his opposite number in the church commissioners to write the anonymous preface to 'Crockford's Clerical Directory', published annually by Oxford University Press. The preface contained paragraphs that were highly critical of Runcie's appointment of liberals to bishoprics and deaneries. The media clamoured for the author's identity. Pattinson refused to name him but others pointed the finger at Bennett, who denied authorship. Media attention became too much for Bennett and he committed suicide. Some called for Pattinson's resignation over the affair but the archbishop stood by him and he weathered the storm. Speaking in the general synod when Pattinson retired in 1990, Runcie said 'Where the Synod is, there is Derek; where Derek is, there is the Synod. It is not too much to say that Derek has been married to the Synod, and has loved and cherished it even in its most unpopular moments' ('Report of Proceedings of the General Synod', July 1990). Pattinson was knighted on retirement. 
In the early 1980s Pattinson's widowed mother moved to London and he was very attentive to her needs; there was a close bond between them. She died suddenly and Pattinson was much affected. Always a person who enjoyed the good things of life -- he was a City liveryman and a freemason -- it was noticed that he was drinking more and keeping questionable company. However, he followed his vocation to the priesthood and was ordained deacon by the bishop of London, Graham Leonard, in 1991. He became an honorary assistant curate at St Gabriel's, Pimlico, and was ordained priest the following year by Leonard's successor, David Hope. Unusually, he was allowed to call himself the Revd Sir Derek Pattinson, since he had been knighted before being ordained priest. He proved to be an excellent preacher and a good pastor although his liturgical sense was not so well developed. About this time a gay rights activist and former member of the general synod, Barnaby Kemp Graham Miln, moved into Pattinson's Westminster flat, causing some scandal when this was revealed by the newspapers. Miln later nursed Pattinson when the latter's health deteriorated, until it was necessary for him to have professional care. He died on 10 October 2006 at St Johns Wood Care Centre, Camden, London, of dementia and obstructive hydrocephalus, and was cremated on 7 November. He was survived by Barnaby Miln, who was described in Pattinson's final 'Who's Who' entry as his partner. 


@@@@@


doc= 97467


Newby, (George) Eric (1919-2006), travel writer and adventurer, was born at 3 Castelnau Mansions, Barnes, Surrey, on 6 December 1919, the son of George Arthur Newby, a partner in a firm of wholesale dressmakers, and his wife (Minnie) Hilda, 'nee' Pomeroy, a former dress model at Harrods. A strain of adventure ran in the family: his father had run away to sea as a boy before settling into his career as a couturier, and Newby himself was influenced at an early age by hearing a lecture at school about Scott's expedition to the south pole and reading about exotic foreign places. He was educated at St Paul's School in London, and left at sixteen -- having already established himself as something of a school joker -- to join an advertising agency; but after two years (inadvertently following his father's footsteps) he signed on to join a four-masted Finnish barque that was setting out on a 30,000 mile round trip carrying grain between Ireland and Australia. He was later to write an account of this in 'The Last Grain Race' (1956), in which he described the hazards of climbing masts 'as high as Nelson's column'. 
With his taste for adventure already awakened, it was not surprising that at the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Newby promptly enlisted in the London Scottish regiment, being later sent to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and after a spell in the Middle East being transferred to the Special Boat Section (later to become the Special Boat Service). It was with them that he was sent in 1942 on a commando-type raid against a military airfield in Sicily that was proving a serious menace to allied convoys attempting to supply and reinforce Malta. The operation was ill-prepared, and Newby was landed at night with a party of six men on an unreconnoitred coastline to attack a heavily defended position; almost inevitably the intruders were discovered and forced to retreat to the beach where they had landed. They failed to make the rendezvous with their submarine, were decanted into the water from their fragile canoes, and were eventually picked up by some Italian fishermen who handed them over to the authorities. 
Newby then began a series of escapades and escapes. He was initially in a prisoner-of-war camp in Italy (having survived threats of being shot as a saboteur), but when the Italians surrendered in 1943 he was smuggled out of the camp hospital -- where he was suffering from a broken ankle -- to a more sympathetic hospital run by Italian nuns. It was there that he met Wanda Skof, a Slovene girl, who taught him some Italian, brought him treats in hospital, and encouraged him to escape before the Germans arrived. When writing about these experiences many years later in 'Love and War in the Apennines' (1972) he compared her to the gaoler's daughter who befriends Toad in 'The Wind in the Willows' and confessed, 'I had begun by thinking her a very good-looking girl... then I had begun to admire her courage and determination... now I was in love with her' (p. 65). She arranged for him to be sheltered by Italian peasants in the Apennines, but he was eventually betrayed and sent to a prisoner-of-war camp in Germany. At the end of the war he was awarded a belated Military Cross for his part in the Sicily raid and -- more importantly -- managed to return to Italy and propose to Wanda. They were married in Florence in 1946 and had two children, Sonia and Jonathan. 
Returning to civilian life Newby entered his father's profession and worked in the family business and later with the couture house Worth Pasquin. He appreciated the humorous side of the fashion industry and later recorded this in his book 'Something Wholesale' (1962). But his heart was not in it, and he dreamed of returning to his wartime days of adventures abroad. He brought these dreams into reality in 1956 when he sent a telegram to his friend the diplomat Hugh Carless ['see below'], enquiring 'Can you travel Nuristan June?' The prompt reply -- 'Of course, Hugh' -- resulted in the hilarious and seminal travel book, 'A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush' (1958), in which he recounted his amateurish exploits, first in a brief attempt to come to terms with mountaineering in Wales and later in attempting serious climbing in northern Afghanistan. Carless is presented as a solemn and responsible foil to Newby's own fecklessness. The book ends with a report of a memorable encounter with the veteran explorer Wilfred Thesiger who, on seeing the intrepid couple inflating mattresses before sleeping on the bare rocks, allegedly declared, 'God, you must be a couple of pansies' (Newby, 'A Short Walk', 2008 edn, 248). The book, for which Evelyn Waugh had been persuaded to write an introduction, was an instant success, and following this Newby -- after a few years as a fashion buyer for the John Lewis group -- changed the course of his life to one of literature and travel. 
In 1964 David Astor was expanding the scope of 'The Observer' and Newby was appointed as travel editor. During the decade in which he held this appointment he brought imagination and a high standard of writing in the travel pages, but he had little interest or aptitude for the administrative side of the job, for which he leaned heavily on his colleagues. He deplored the degeneration of independent travel and exploration into tourism and tried to resist this in the columns of 'The Observer'. It was said that without the dedication of his staff to the day-to-day routine of producing this section of the paper the travel pages might sometimes have failed to appear altogether. This was partly because much of Newby's energy and concentration during these years was on planning and carrying out further adventurous travels himself. Many of his trips were made in the company of Wanda, and they resulted in such books as 'Slowly Down the Ganges' (1966). It was during these years that he wrote of his wartime experiences and also a number of less celebrated titles. None of his later books received nor warranted quite the acclaim of his Hindu Kush and Apennine books. 
Newby and his wife had always maintained their affection for Italy, and in 1967 they acquired a derelict farmhouse near Lerici in Liguria, which over the years they restored to a degree of comfort; he wrote about the experience in 'A Small Place in Italy' (1994). They spent part of the year there and part at their home in Dorset; they subsequently moved to Surrey. He continued writing travel books until well into his eighties, but the quality of his later work (he wrote some twenty-five books in all) inevitably reflected his diminishing energy. He was appointed CBE in 1994 and had long been a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and of the Royal Geographical Society. In his last years Wanda supported him as actively and loyally as she had done during their first encounters in wartime Italy. He died at Birtley House care home, Birtley Road, Bramley, near Guildford, Surrey, on 20 October 2006 following a stroke, and was survived by his wife and their two children. 
Eric Newby did for travel writing after the Second World War a service similar to that which Peter Fleming had performed for the genre between the wars. He brought a genuinely daring spirit of adventure to his travels, but he wrote about them in a light-hearted and self-deprecating way -- often including passages of riotous joking. His sense of fun infected his readers. In this way he inspired younger travellers to seek out remote corners of the world on their long vacations and gap years, in the same way as his near-contemporary -- and fellow war hero -- Patrick Leigh Fermor inspired them to explore the remoter corners of Europe. His distinctive mixture of courage in the face of danger, irreverence in the face of authority, and good humour in the face of discomfort and adversity, appealed to a whole generation as being quintessentially British. 
Newby's travelling companion in Nuristan, Hugh Michael Carless (1925-2011), diplomatist, was born on 22 April 1925 in Naini Tal, India, the elder son of Henry Alfred Carless (1894-1976), Indian civil servant, and his wife, Gwendolen Mary, 'nee' Pattullo (1900-1989). He was educated at Sherborne School, and briefly at the School of Oriental Studies, University of London, where he studied Farsi with Vladimir Minorsky before being commissioned in the intelligence corps in 1943 and being posted to Tehran. Towards the end of the Second World War he transferred to north-west Europe and served with the army in Germany, remaining there during the early years of peace. Demobilized in 1947, he went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he read history, graduating in 1950. He joined the foreign service later the same year, and in 1951 was posted to Kabul as third secretary. While there he undertook his first forays into the remoter parts of the country. In 1953 he was transferred as second secretary to Rio de Janeiro, where he met Rosa Maria Frontini (1921-2013), artist and journalist, daughter of Martino Frontini, banker, of Sao Paulo. They married in 1957 in Tehran (where Carless had been transferred) and had two sons. 
Meanwhile in 1956, before taking up his post in Tehran, Carless undertook the expedition to Nuristan with his friend Newby, whom he had met through their mutual friend Paul Rolo. He returned to London in 1958, and was private secretary to the minister of state, Lord Dundee, for two years from 1961. His subsequent postings included Budapest (1963-6), Luanda (1967-70) as consul-general, Bonn (1970-73) as counsellor, London (1973-7) as head of the Latin America department (where he supported Anthony Crosland in his policy of seeking functional co-operation with Argentina in the Falklands, in order to reduce tensions over sovereignty), Buenos Aires (1977-80) as minister and charge d'affaires (from where he warned of the increasingly belligerent attitude of the military junta), and, after a spell seconded to industry, Caracas, where he was ambassador to Venezuela (1982-5) at a time when anti-British feeling was running high. He was appointed CMG in 1976. After retiring from the diplomatic service he was executive vice-president of the Hinduja Foundation (1986-97) and vice-chairman of the South Atlantic Council (1987-97). From 1994 to 1996 he was chairman of the British committee of the Argentine-British Conferences, which laid the groundwork for the restoration of diplomatic relations between the two countries following the Falklands conflict. He was admired by Newby for his determination, unflappability, and sense of humour, and by others for his wide learning and charming modesty. Throughout his career he was much helped by his vivacious and talented wife. They lived latterly in Bryanston Square, London, and he died on 20 December 2011. He was survived by his wife and one son, Ronnie, the other, Roger, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 97469


Megarry, Sir Robert Edgar (1910-2006), judge and jurist, was born on 1 June 1910 at 25 Woodstock Road, Croydon, Surrey, the elder son of Robert Lindsay Megarry (died 1952), civil servant, and his wife, Irene Marion Edgar, 'nee' Clark (died 1929), daughter of Major-General Edgar Gibson Clark of the Bengal staff corps. His father, whose family came from Belfast, read law at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, and briefly practised as a barrister in Lincoln's Inn before becoming a civil servant, first at the Board of Education and then in the Air Ministry, ending his career as an assistant secretary. 
Megarry, known to his friends as Ted, was educated at Lancing College, to which he remained devoted throughout his life, later serving as president of the Lancing Club and long-standing chairman of the Friends of Lancing Chapel. Before going to Trinity Hall in 1929 he taught briefly at a preparatory school, where he discovered his liking for teaching and innovatively required his pupils to answer questionnaires about his effectiveness as a teacher. He read law at Cambridge, but found the course dull and uninspiring, gaining only a third in part one, a lower second in part two of the law tripos and a third in the LLB, preferring such wider pursuits as playing football and tennis for his college, learning to fly, and being 'Varsity''s first music critic (writing under a pseudonym to hide his activities from his supervisor). In 1935 he qualified as a solicitor after studying with the law 'crammers' Gibson and Weldon, who took pride in the quality of their teaching and whose staff he joined as a lecturer. In 1939 he published his first book, 'An Introduction to the Rent Acts', in later much expanded editions (eleven were published) renamed 'The Rent Acts'. In 1939-40 he taught undergraduates as a member of the Cambridge law faculty. Rejected for military service on medical grounds he spent the Second World War as a civil servant, rising to assistant secretary in the Ministry of Supply. On 14 November 1936 he had married Iris Davies, a local government official, and daughter of Elias Lawson Davies, wholesale clothing merchant, of Neath, Glamorgan. They had three daughters. 
In 1941 Megarry chose a new career. He had his name removed from the roll of solicitors and joined Lincoln's Inn. In 1944 he was awarded a certificate of honour in his bar finals and was called to the bar. From 1946 (when he left the civil service) until 1967 he practised as a chancery barrister, acquiring a substantial practice in new areas of the law such as town and country planning. However, he also continued teaching and writing. From 1944 to 1947 he was director of the Law Society's refresher courses. In 1946-7 he was a sub-lector at Trinity College, Cambridge, and from 1946 to 1967 he taught bar students as reader in equity for the Council of Legal Education. He lectured solicitors and civil servants on planning law. He was a visiting professor and lecturer at numerous universities in the USA and Canada. Among his many lectures in England, in 1962 he gave the Hamlyn lectures, published as 'Lawyer and Litigant in England'. In 1946 he had produced 'A Manual of the Law of Real Property'. It was primarily intended for 'the examination candidate whose main anxiety is not whether he will head the list but whether he will appear in it at all'. It was popular with students: by 2002 eight editions had been published. His other writings reached a wider readership. In 1947 he became the editor of the twenty-third edition of 'Snell's Equity'. Having never seen a book on equity bring a happy smile to a reader's lips, he hoped to 'smooth away some frowns' by reorganizing and enlivening that standard textbook. He co-edited (with Paul Baker) five further editions. Even the index grabbed attention, with entries such as 'Fornication, pre-marital' and 'O.K., meaning of'. In 1957 he produced with William Wade his most famous textbook, 'The Law of Real Property'. As was explained in the preface this attempted to state the English law of real property in a form both intelligible to students and helpful to practitioners. The book was user-friendly: it contained a glossary and stated clearly the principles on which the law had developed. It was an immediate success, frequently cited forensically in the authors' lifetimes, despite the rule that books only become authoritative after their authors' deaths. They produced four further editions before relinquishing responsibility for the sixth edition. From 1939 Megarry wrote numerous articles and case notes, many brilliant in their succinct analysis, for the 'Law Quarterly Review', of which he was assistant editor and book review editor. One critical review of a Court of Appeal decision in 'Hankey v. Clavering' (1942) was relied on more than fifty years later by a law lord, Lord Steyn, to overrule that decision. All his writings were distinguished by their scholarly exposition and their comprehensibility. Such was his reputation as a legal scholar that in 1965 he was elected president of the Society of Public Teachers of Law and in 1970 a fellow of the British Academy. 
Megarry's overbusy life nearly led to his professional ruin. He was prosecuted in 1954 for making false income tax statements, having omitted to declare some of his sources of income. This was a high-profile case, with the solicitor-general leading for the prosecution, Megarry's defence counsel being Gilbert Paull. The Old Bailey judge directed the jury that the case should be stopped unless they were certain that Megarry had known that the returns were false. The case was duly stopped and Megarry acquitted. 
This brush with the law did not stop Megarry's progress in the profession. In 1956 he was appointed queen's counsel and in 1967 he was elevated to the High Court bench as a chancery judge, receiving the traditional knighthood. He had no qualms about hearing cases involving points on which he might have expressed views as an author. He was always prepared to be persuaded. As he put it, 'argued law is tough law'. In 1976 he became the vice-chancellor of the Chancery Division, and was sworn of the privy council in 1978. In the late 1970s he was offered promotion to the Court of Appeal but declined. By reason of a statutory rearrangement of the courts in 1982 he became the vice-chancellor of the Supreme Court and an 'ex officio' member of the Court of Appeal, but chose not to sit in that court. He retired in 1985 on reaching the statutory retirement age but sat in the judicial committee of the privy council until he reached the age of eighty. 
As a judge Megarry dealt with many of the important cases of the day brought in the Chancery Division. In addition to the standard fare for chancery judges of that time relating to trusts, tax, company law, bankruptcy and property, he resolved disputes involving trade unions (for example 'Chappell v. Times Newspapers', 1975), the domicile of Errol Flynn ('Re Flynn deceased', 1968), equitable remedies for breach of confidence '(Coco v. Clark', 1969), telephone-tapping before the incorporation into English law of the European convention on human rights ('Malone v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner', 1979), the exercise of investment powers by the National Union of Mineworkers' pension fund trustees ('Cowan v. Scargill', 1985), and land rights of the Banaban inhabitants of Ocean Island, from which phosphate was extracted ('Tito v. Waddell, no. 2', 1977). His conduct of the hearing of the Ocean Island case, which lasted a then record 206 days, exemplified his patience as a judge and his belief that the most important person in court was the litigant who would leave the court unsuccessful. At the islanders' request he went on a gruelling journey to the Pacific to view Ocean Island. He delivered his judgment, written in his small, neat hand, orally for two and a half days. It occupies over 240 pages of the law reports and is a repository of erudite learning. A traditionalist by nature, he was no bold innovator in the law. Thus, in 'Uppal v. Home Office' (1978), he was resistant to the logic of the procedural rules relating to judicial review that required the Chancery Division to relinquish its jurisdiction as an occasional forum for administrative law cases. However, in one case, 'Ross v. Caunters' (1980), his strong instinct for justice led him to fashion a remedy for a testamentary beneficiary, the gift to whom was defeated through the negligence of the testator's solicitor; the House of Lords in a subsequent case ('White v. Jones', 1995) was to support the result but by a different route. He sought by his judgments to bring clarity and order to the law. Written in a style commanding attention, they were notable for their lucidity, their scholarly treatment of precedent, their meticulous findings of the facts, and their careful analysis of the arguments. He was rarely reversed. 
Lord Scarman, in introducing Megarry delivering the 1977 Child & Co. lecture (on judges and judging), described him as 'the legal universal man', being a 'teacher... a writer... a judge, and above all... a wit'. A humorous man, Megarry enjoyed collecting legal anecdotes to produce in 1955 'Miscellany-at-Law', 'a diversion for lawyers and others'. A 'Second Miscellany' followed in 1973 and in 2005 he produced a third in the series, 'A New Miscellany-at-Law' (with the help of Bryan Garner). In 1969 he also published 'Arabinesque-at-Law', containing utterances of the eccentric Serjeant Arabin at the Old Bailey in the 1840s. In 1972 for the Selden Society he wrote 'Inns Ancient and Modern'. Of particular delight to him in the Ocean Island case was the chance discovery of a judgment of Sir Salathiel Lovell, to whose judicial career Megarry enjoyed referring; Lovell, when appointed a baron of the exchequer in 1708, was nearly eighty. 
Megarry's professional distinction led him to be appointed a member of the lord chancellor's law reform committee from 1952 to 1973 and a consultant to the BBC's 'Law in Action' series from 1953 to 1966, his broadcast talks evidencing his ability to communicate to the ordinary man. He was chairman of the Notting Hill Housing Trust in 1967-8, treasurer of Lincoln's Inn in 1981, and, as an enthusiastic and knowledgeable oenophile, chairman of the inn's wine committee for over twenty years. His inn's affection for him was demonstrated by the commissioning (from Anthony Morris) of a portrait of him in 2001. His high standing in and services to the law were recognized by the University of Cambridge in making him an LLD in 1959 and by his college in appointing him an honorary fellow of Trinity Hall in 1973. He also received honorary doctorates from London and several other universities. He died at the Royal Free Hospital, London, of heart failure, on 11 October 2006 at the end of a career described by a reviewer of his last book as 'unmatched in its distinction, breadth and diversity' (S. Cretney, 'Law Quarterly Review', 123, 2007, 165). He was survived by his three daughters, his wife, Iris, having predeceased him in 2001. 


@@@@@


doc= 97470


Mayne, Michael Clement Otway (1929-2006), dean of Westminster, was born on 10 September 1929 at the rectory, Harlestone, Northamptonshire, the only son of Michael Ashton Otway Mayne, rector of Harlestone, and his wife, Sylvia Clementina Lumley, 'nee' Ellis. Reduced to penury by the sudden suicide of the father when Mayne was aged three, the family moved to London and then to Torbay, whence his mother was enabled by clergy charities to send him to King's School, Canterbury. There he disclosed his gift and enthusiasm for acting, and indeed stayed for an extra year in order to be able to play Hamlet in a school production. After national service in the RAF, in 1951 he went to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where his passion for the theatre found abundant scope, though to the detriment of a good class in English and theology. In fact he would have followed a career on the stage had not his former headmaster, Canon John Shirley, steered him towards ordination. Accordingly Mayne went to Cuddesdon Theological College in 1955 and was ordained priest in 1957. 
After a curacy at the church of St John the Baptist, Harpenden, Mayne was appointed domestic chaplain to Mervyn Stockwood, who had recently become bishop of Southwark. There he encountered some of the progressive movements that were seeking to revive the parochial life of the Church of England. There too he met 28-year-old Alison Geraldine McKie, daughter of Henry E. McKie, whom he married at Southwark Cathedral on 16 October 1965 and with whom he had a son and a daughter. In the same year he was appointed vicar of Norton, near Letchworth, Hertfordshire. In 1972 he was offered the post of head of religious programmes, BBC Radio. To this he brought his love of poetry and English literature, his enthusiasm for drama, and an instinctive concern for quality of editing and production. This experience in religious broadcasting made him a favoured candidate to be the vicar of Great St Mary's, the university church in Cambridge, where he worked from 1979 to 1986, developing a significant ministry, not just to undergraduates but to his clerical and lay colleagues in the university. He also compiled and published a small book for clergy, 'Prayers for Pastoral Occasions' (1982). 
The end of Mayne's time at Cambridge was deeply affected by the onset of chronic fatigue syndrome (ME), which forced him to take a year's leave, but which was also to inspire his first substantial book, 'A Year Lost and Found' (1987), in which he chronicled the spiritual journey he had been forced to travel during this time. Meanwhile he had been offered appointment as dean of Westminster, and the ME was sufficiently in remission for him to be able to take it up in 1986, just in time to conduct the marriage of the duke and duchess of York. 
Mayne's predecessor at Westminster, Edward Carpenter, had made the abbey well known for (sometimes controversial) ecumenical and inter-faith events. The changes Mayne made were, by contrast, primarily to do with the worship and pastoral ministry of the abbey: he devoted much attention to strengthening the 'family' sense of the large community of paid and unpaid workers, and he rearranged Sunday morning services so as to make the sung eucharist the principal service, conducted at a moveable altar below the sacrarium steps with (eventually) full eucharistic vestments. He also used to the full the opportunity the abbey offered to exploit and strengthen his ties with members of the acting profession, not only through their contributions as readers at memorial services, but by inviting them to choose and read their favourite poems at evening gatherings in the Jerusalem Chamber, thereby raising large sums of money for AIDS charities, a cause to which Mayne was deeply committed, along with work for refugees and the promotion of human rights. Shortly before his retirement he brought to completion the project that had been closest to his heart, the creation of a monument outside the west front of the abbey to all innocent victims of oppression, violence, and war, which was unveiled by the queen in 1996 in the presence of a poignant group of surviving victims. 
While at Westminster Mayne had written another book, 'This Sunrise of Wonder' (1995), in the form of reflective letters to his grandchildren. After his retirement in 1996 (when, as was customary, he was appointed KCVO) he moved to Salisbury, where he continued to raise money, often through theatrical ventures, for the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture and other charities. He also wrote 'Pray, Love, Remember' (1998), Lenten reflections based on experiences at the abbey, 'Learning to Dance' (2001), the metaphor of dancing applied to literature, the natural world, and religion, and 'The Enduring Melody' (2006), a deeply spiritual chronicle of his struggle with terminal cancer of the floor of the mouth, which was published shortly before his death at his home, 37 St Mark's Road, Salisbury, on 22 October 2006. The funeral was held at Salisbury Cathedral, and he was cremated at Salisbury crematorium on 3 November 2006, and survived by his wife and children. A memorial service was held on 1 February 2007 at Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 97471


Marwick, Arthur John Brereton (1936-2006), historian, was born on 29 February 1936 at the Elsie Inglis Maternity Hospital, Edinburgh, the younger son of William Hutton Marwick (1894-1982), economic historian, and his wife, Maeve Cluna, 'nee' Brereton. His parents, who lived at 5 Northfield Crescent, Edinburgh, were Quakers, caring and earnest intellectuals, but also austere. Marwick was educated at George Heriot's School, Edinburgh, and at Edinburgh University, where he won the gold medal for being the outstanding history student of his year. He moved to Balliol College, Oxford, where he undertook research on the Independent Labour Party. His thesis was awarded a BLitt instead of a doctorate but, undeterred, in 1959 he moved back to Scotland to take up an assistant lectureship at Aberdeen. After a year he returned to the history department at Edinburgh, where he taught for most of the 1960s, and where he built a reputation as a prolific author and an inspirational tutor. In 1969 he was appointed the first professor of history to the newly established Open University. He remained there until his retirement in 2001, serving as dean and director of studies of the arts faculty from 1978 to 1984. He also spent sabbatical leave as a visiting scholar at various American and European universities. 
Marwick's move to the Open University in 1969 was a bold one. The new institution was designed to offer a university education to those who had missed the opportunity on leaving school. It was expected that many students would be in full-time jobs and that all would study in their own time through correspondence texts and educational broadcasts transmitted by the BBC. Marwick seized the opportunity to develop ideas that he had formulated at Edinburgh about the skills of the historian and the analysis of primary source material. In this he pre-empted ideas that were to become central to the teaching of history in both schools and universities later in the century, and he did so with much more humanity than many of those that followed. He also saw the Open University's link with the BBC as providing the opportunity for demonstrating the value of film as a historical source. 
For many years Marwick's research interests focused on the relationship between war and social change. 'The Deluge: British Society and the First World War' (1965) argued that war fostered domestic, as much as international change; by implication it was critical of the traditional perspective that saw war as an interruption to social and political development and a topic best reserved for military historians. It became a seminal text, going through many editions, and was still in print at the time of his death. Other work in this area was less successful, notably 'War and Social Change in the Twentieth Century' (1974), which compared the impact of the two world wars on Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and the United States: this book made much of a conceptual model for the study of war and society which seemed rooted in the unique British experience. There were to be more books on British history, the most successful of which was 'British Society since 1945' (1982); this also went through several editions. But, curiously for a solid empiricist, Marwick was also keen to develop international comparisons about perceptions and understandings. 'Class in the Twentieth Century' (1986), 'Beauty in History: Society, Politics and Personal Appearance since c.1500' (1988), and 'It: a History of Human Beauty' (2004) were not well received. More successful was 'The Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France, Italy and the United States' (1998), a 900 page discussion of what he saw as the revolution in attitudes, living standards, and relationships during the period from roughly 1958 to 1974. 
Running throughout Marwick's teaching and publications was his fervent belief that history was a social necessity, enabling individuals and societies better to appreciate and understand their present. This went together with his insistence that historians eschew meta-narratives and take particular care over their analysis of source material and the presentation of their findings. These ideas underpinned 'The Nature of History' (1970), the one book that he significantly rewrote for successive editions, becoming increasingly strident in his condemnation of what he understood as post-modernism. He took a similar combative line when he became co-editor of the 'Journal of Contemporary History' in 1995, first with an article (1995) and then with a manifesto (1997). At the same time he changed the direction of editorial policy to include many more articles dealing with the period since 1945. 
Marwick reflected his parents' earnestness and commitment to hard work; he also rebelled against them by indulging in lively hedonism when the day's work was over. He was an enthusiastic football and tennis player well into his fifties. He wore long hair and a beard and had a flamboyant style of dress. He enjoyed fine wine, and could be an embarrassment to friends and colleagues when in his cups. He never married, but had a daughter, Louise, on whom he doted, and was extremely proud when he became a grandfather. From the 1960s he lived in Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead. In 2006, following a stroke, he was forced to move to Devon, to be close to his daughter. He died of a further stroke in the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, on 27 September 2006. His daughter survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 97473


Roth, Sir Martin (1917-2006), psychiatrist, was born on 6 November 1917 in Budapest, in the dying days of the Austro-Hungarian empire, the second of the three children of Samuel Simon Roth, cantor in a synagogue, and his wife, Regina. In 1925 the family moved to England, before settling in the East End of London. There Roth attended the Davenant Foundation School, where he excelled both academically and as a pianist. For a time he considered a career as a musician but decided instead on medicine. He obtained a place at St Mary's Hospital, London, but had to delay his studies because of illness. At St Mary's he worked hard, rowed for the hospital, and qualified in 1942. After a further period of ill health, he began work as a doctor at Park Prewett Hospital, then a military hospital. In 1943 he moved to Maida Vale Hospital to train in neurology under Russell Brain. In the following year he passed the examination for membership of the Royal College of Physicians of London, and in 1945 was awarded the London MD. On 18 August the same year, at Hampstead register office, he married Constance Heller, a 26-year-old civil servant, and daughter of Samuel Heller, businessman. They had three daughters. 
At Maida Vale Roth gained experience in clinical neurology and also learnt the basics of neuropathology -- knowledge that was to inform his later research. He enjoyed neurology and spent nearly three years at Maida Vale but found that he was increasingly interested in the psychological problems of his patients. Encouraged by Brain, he decided to specialize in psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital. There he worked with Aubrey Lewis, Eliot Slater, and other leading psychiatrists of the day and was introduced to the renowned refugee German psychiatrist Willie Mayer-Gross. Mayer-Gross was impressed by Roth and offered him a post at the well-known Crichton Royal Hospital in Dumfries. Roth, who was not entirely happy at the Maudsley, accepted. 
Roth moved to Dumfries in 1948 and soon set up a new laboratory where he began research into the changes in electroencephalography associated with electroconvulsive therapy. The research went well and Roth was awarded a prize by the Royal Medico-Psychiatric Association, at that time the professional organization for psychiatrists. In Dumfries he also became interested in the psychiatric disorders occurring in elderly people, which at that time were thought to be varied manifestations of a single ill-defined and untreatable condition known as senile psychosis. At the same time he accepted an invitation from Mayer-Gross to collaborate on a new textbook that he was writing with Eliot Slater. However, neither the research nor the book was completed in Dumfries because in 1950 Roth was appointed director of research at Graylingwell Hospital, near Chichester, Sussex. 
At Graylingwell Roth continued to investigate the psychiatric disorders of old age and, in a landmark follow-up study, produced evidence that they were not all of one kind, as had previously been supposed, and did not all have the same outcome. This work was the first of a long series of groundbreaking studies of the psychiatric disorders of late life which continued well into Roth's retirement years. The research laid the scientific foundation for the specialty of old age psychiatry and thereby to much-needed improvements in the care of elderly psychiatric patients. At the same time Roth continued work on the textbook with Mayer-Gross and Slater, which was eventually published in 1954. The book, 'Clinical Psychiatry', combined the scientific basis of psychiatry with vivid clinical descriptions and authoritative advice about treatment. It was immediately recognized as a major work of scholarship and a significant advance on other textbooks of the time and it soon became the standard British post-graduate textbook. It passed through three editions and was translated into Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, and Chinese. It was a turning-point in the teaching of psychiatry and its approach was the forerunner of what was to be known, much later, as evidence-based psychiatry. Following these successes Roth was the natural choice as director when, in 1956, the Medical Research Council established a clinical research unit at Graylingwell Hospital. However he did not take up the post because in the same year he was elected to the chair of psychiatry at King's College, Newcastle (then part of the University of Durham). He remained there after King's College became the independent University of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1963. 
In Newcastle between 1956 and 1977 Roth built a world-class academic department with a wide-ranging research programme which included studies of the psychiatric disorders of old age, mood disorders, and child psychiatry. Among the important findings from Roth's own research were those showing the neuropathology of the psychiatric disorders of old age, carried out with Bernard Tomlinson, work which confirmed Roth's original classification based on clinical features and outcome. Other important studies used epidemiological and statistical methods to study paranoid disorders occurring in elderly people, and to investigate whether depressive disorders with different clinical features were distinct conditions or manifestations of a single basic disorder. 
Roth's achievements in Newcastle went far beyond research. He was a skilful and caring clinician, and an inspiring teacher who drew to his department many talented young psychiatrists who went on to successful academic careers in Britain and elsewhere. Before long his growing reputation led to appointment to the committees of national and international organizations. In 1958 he joined the World Health Organization's expert committee on mental health problems of the aged. From 1964 to 1968 he served on the Medical Research Council, from 1968 to 1971 on the council of the Royal College of Physicians, and from 1968 to 1975 on the government's standing mental health advisory committee. In 1968 he was elected president of the section of psychiatry of the Royal Society of Medicine. 
In 1971 Roth was elected as the first president of the newly established Royal College of Psychiatrists. Until this date the professional organization of psychiatrists had been the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. This organization, founded in the nineteenth century, and granted a royal charter in 1926, already carried out many of the functions of a medical royal college and many senior members of the profession of psychiatry saw no reason to abandon it, while many junior members feared that the entrance requirements for membership of a royal college would add yet one more obstacle to their already difficult career path. Thus the task of the first president was not easy: the college started life amid controversy and there were many doubters to convince. Roth dealt with these problems with great skill and outstanding success. He brought wisdom, dignity, diplomacy, and authority to the office of president, and worked tirelessly and with great determination. At the first full meeting of the college, he won over the doubters with a memorable address that combined a clear vision of the future, compassion for the problems of the younger members, and disarming wit. Another problem was that the new college had no permanent home. Roth set about raising the substantial funds needed to acquire suitable premises in central London and succeeded in a remarkably short time, impressing major donors with his clear plans and his ability to carry them through. During his presidency the college flourished: a rigorous system of training was established, a fair system of examination was implemented, and trainees were given a voice in the college's debates. Before long the views of the new college were being sought regularly by government. In 1972 Roth's outstanding achievements were recognized by the award of a knighthood. 
In 1977 Roth was elected to the newly established chair of psychiatry at the University of Cambridge, and to a fellowship of Trinity College. Starting from very little, he soon established academic psychiatry as a major discipline within the university. His impressive scholarship and wide cultural interests quickly made him a respected figure in the wider academic community which he served in many ways, notably as a syndic of Cambridge University Press from 1980 to 1987. In Cambridge he soon established a new programme of research into the psychiatric disorders of old age. An important early product was the Cambridge mental disorders of the elderly examination (CAMDEX), a research tool that was quickly adopted by research groups worldwide. Roth's research so impressed the Nobel prizewinner Sir Aaron Klug that he embarked on a programme of collaborative research into the molecular pathology of Alzheimer's disease. This research was important not only for its immediate findings but also as a stimulus for studies by other scientists into the molecular basis of Alzheimer's disease, which led to a better understanding of the causes of disorder and pointed the way to possible treatments. 
Roth cared deeply about the suffering of mentally ill people and was sympathetic to the problems of the most disadvantaged among them. He believed passionately that careful diagnosis of their conditions and scientific study of the causes could alleviate suffering. He grew increasingly concerned, therefore, about the status being given, in the 1970s and beyond, to the ideas of the anti-psychiatry movement based on the writings of R. D. Laing and Thomas Szasz. These authors argued that mental illnesses did not exist and that their clinical manifestations were the responses of healthy minds to unfavourable circumstances of life. For Szasz, a psychiatric diagnosis was a meaningless label that stigmatized but did not help, and often harmed, the person labelled. When Roth saw how much credence these ideas were gaining among the public, he determined to counter them through writing and public debate. He argued that they were founded on an incomplete understanding both of the experiences of people suffering from serious mental disorders, and of the scientific evidence about the nature and causes of these conditions. In 1986 he published, with Jerome Kroll, 'The Reality of Mental Illness', a sharply argued rebuttal of the ideas of the anti-psychiatry movement and a clear account for the general reader of the humanitarian and scientific foundations of modern psychiatry. The book was an important contribution to the public understanding of psychiatry. 
Roth retired from his university post in 1985 but remained a fellow of Trinity College. As the years went by he lost none of his vigour, intellectual curiosity, and originality of mind, and he continued with a busy schedule of research and writing. By now he was recognized internationally as the founder of the academic discipline of old age psychiatry and in 1996 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He received many other honours and prizes, among them fellowship of the Academy of Medical Sciences, and distinguished or honorary fellowship of the American, Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand psychiatric associations; the Anna Monika prize (1977); the Sandoz prize of the International Association of Gerontology (1985); the gold medal of the Max Planck Institute (1986); and the lifetime achievement award of the Society of Biological Psychiatry (1996). 
Roth was devoted to his children and to his wife, who supported him throughout his career. He had an extensive knowledge of European and classical literature, the result of wide reading and a retentive memory. He enjoyed music and was an accomplished pianist, and had a well-informed appreciation of the visual arts. He enjoyed good company and lively conversation and was interested in new ideas and in other people. He possessed a seemingly boundless store of entertaining stories and wise sayings and was an accomplished public speaker. His health was in decline in his later years, and in August 2003 he was critically ill and spent three months in hospital, following which he never regained mobility. His wife, Constance, then cared for him until his death at his home in Hills Road, Cambridge, on 26 September 2006. He was also survived by their three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 97474


Sainsbury, Simon David Davan (1930-2006), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 1 March 1930 at 27 The Vale, Chelsea, London, the second of three sons of Alan John Sainsbury, later Baron Sainsbury (1902-1998), grocer and businessman, and his first wife, Doreen Davan, 'nee' Adams (1904-1985), daughter of Leonard Adams. His early life was spent in Chelsea, and at Dorney, near Windsor, during the Second World War. He was educated at Eton College, where he became head of his house and president of Pop, the Eton society. He excelled at music and sport, scoring a century in the Eton-Harrow match at Lord's in 1947. After national service with the Life Guards (where he was made sports officer), he took a degree in history at Trinity College, Cambridge, before qualifying as a chartered accountant in 1956. He joined the family food retailing firm, J. Sainsbury Ltd, later the same year. Initially he worked closely with his uncle Robert Sainsbury (1906-2000) on matters relating to personnel, finance, and general administration. He was appointed a director in April 1959. 
Whereas previous generations of the Sainsbury family had largely been trained 'on the job', it was felt important, as the business grew in scale and complexity, that the fourth -- Alan's sons John ('b'. 1927), Simon, and Timothy ('b'. 1932), and Robert's son David ('b'. 1940) -- should be better equipped to manage different aspects of its strategy and direction. Thus while his elder brother John gradually assumed responsibility for trading and marketing and his younger brother, Timothy, became a chartered surveyor and subsequently director responsible for estates and store development (and also Conservative MP for Hove from 1973 to 1997, a government whip, and a junior minister), Simon Sainsbury built on his accountancy training and experience in administration to play a key role in updating the business's financial, administrative, and distributive infrastructure and in planning its future development. In particular he championed investment in the modernization of the company's antiquated distribution system and the introduction of an administrative structure that was reliant on professional managers. He was also responsible for the first application of computer technology to British food retailing. 
In 1969 Simon Sainsbury succeeded his brother John as deputy chairman of Sainsbury's on John's appointment as chairman. Together with their younger brother Timothy, and subsequently also their cousin David, the brothers oversaw the company's growth from a medium-sized regional family firm to become Britain's most successful food retailer. A crucial aspect of this transformation was the company's flotation on the stock exchange. Simon Sainsbury, who took responsibility for this move, explained to readers of the company's house magazine that the timing of this decision was governed jointly by the Sainsbury family's desire to see the completion as a private company of the centenary in 1969 and by its decision to have 'largely completed' the replacement of the pre-war store portfolio with self-service shops and the updating of its supporting distributive and administrative infrastructure before going public. It was to be the biggest and most oversubscribed public flotation to that date; it was also the first to be advertised on television. The share offer opened at 10 a.m. on 19 July 1973. When it closed one minute later it was oversubscribed thirty-four-fold. Priority in allocation of shares was given to small investors, and to members of Sainsbury's staff, for whom a million shares were set aside. 
In 1975 Simon Sainsbury began a gradual handover of his responsibilities as deputy chairman to Roy Griffiths, whom he had brought into the business in 1968. Roy Griffiths had succeeded him as personnel director and now became joint deputy chairman. The transfer of responsibilities lasted until 1979, when Simon Sainsbury finally retired. Subsequently his involvement with the business was confined to supervision of its arts sponsorship committee, of which he was chairman from the programme's inception in 1981 until 1990. He was thus responsible for establishing the company's reputation as one of Britain's most enlightened corporate arts sponsors through projects that included a mixture of existing arts programmes and 'own brand' events like the Sainsbury choir of the year competition. 
At the same time Simon Sainsbury was conducting a much less publicized programme of private philanthropy, much of it anonymous. He possessed an exceptional eye for art and design, shared with his uncle Robert. In 1965 he set up the Monument Trust, which in its early days gave generous support to architectural charities, including the Georgian Society and the National Trust, funding the restoration for the nation of the interiors of a number of important country houses and enabling the trust to bid at auction for items that had been sold by their previous owners. His support included major donations to the British Museum, Royal Academy, the V&A, the Council for the Protection of (later Campaign to Protect) Rural England, the Landmark Trust, and Christ Church, Spitalfields. With his support the original Addenbrooke's Children's Hospital building at Cambridge was saved from demolition and transformed into the Judge business school. 
The Monument Trust provided essential finance for HIV and AIDS sufferers before statutory funding was made available. It also supported projects to make the lives of prisoners more hopeful, and the regeneration of Meadow Well estate, north Tyneside, after the riots of 1991. It was characteristic of Simon Sainsbury's style of patronage that beneficiaries of his philanthropy received much more than money: he took a keen interest in their progress, often over a period of many years. He was a trustee of the Wallace Collection from 1977 until 1997, serving as its chairman for the last five years of that period, and a trustee of the National Gallery from 1991 until 1998. 
Simon Sainsbury preferred his patronage to remain undisclosed, but when the high-profile funding of the National Gallery's Sainsbury wing by the three Sainsbury brothers (John, Simon, and Timothy) made it impossible to maintain anonymity he relented. 'Now that my name is in letters a foot high in Trafalgar Square, there doesn't seem much point', he told Martin Drury, director-general of the National Trust ('The Times', 18 Oct 2006). Neil McGregor, the National Gallery's director, recalled that Simon Sainsbury's chairing of meetings with the gallery and the architects over an extended period provided 'master-classes in running a project' ('The Independent', 4 Oct 2006). After the gallery opened in 1991 it was Sainsbury who organized a party for the stonemasons and car-park attendants. 
In his private life Simon Sainsbury was reticent almost to the point of reclusiveness. Friends reported his virtues correspondingly to be those of modesty: loyalty, persistence, understatement, and self-discipline, leavened with a dry sense of humour. Neil McGregor observed in his 'Independent' obituary that Simon Sainsbury 'would... have hated to read this tribute' ('The Independent', 4 Oct 2006). It was characteristic that he declined to appear in 'Who's Who', and was reported to have turned down public honours. His partner of over forty years was Stewart Grimshaw, restaurateur and bookseller, with whom he registered a civil partnership in January 2006; a fitting, very private, celebration for a couple who had campaigned over many years for disadvantaged same-sex couples (and had provided crucial funding for Stonewall, the group campaigning for lesbian and gay equality). His last years were marred by the progressive onset of Parkinson's disease. He died on 28 September 2006 at Southampton General Hospital following a fall, and was survived by his civil partner, Stewart Grimshaw. He left an estate valued at almost $300 million, and bequeathed eighteen paintings from his collection to the National Gallery and Tate, including works by Monet, Degas, Francis Bacon, and Lucian Freud. 


@@@@@


doc= 97476


Tippet, Sir Anthony Sanders (1928-2006), naval officer and public servant, was born on 2 October 1928 at Loughrigg, South Molton, Devon, the son of William Kirby Roberts Tippet (1898-1985), bank clerk, and his wife, Henrietta Winifred Parker, 'nee' Sanders (1904-2004). At the time of his birth registration his parents lived at Hawthorn, Middle Road, Lymington, Hampshire. He was educated at West Buckland School, then joined the Royal Naval College, when it was still at its wartime home at Eaton Hall on the Grosvenor estate in Cheshire, as a paymaster cadet. He was top cadet in his term, and impressed from his initial appointment, when his first and subsequent reports noted his sense of duty, boundless energy, intelligence, and leadership. He made a particular impact as judge advocate at an infamous court martial in Malta in 1950 when an officer (Lieutenant-Commander Christopher Swabey) was tried and found guilty of indecent assault and dismissed from the service. Although many years later the conviction was quashed, there was never any suggestion but that Tippet, though unqualified, had run the court martial impeccably. On 21 October the same year (Trafalgar day) he married Lola Audrey Bassett, aged twenty-three, daughter of Walter Bassett, commercial dealer, of Okehampton, Devon. They had three sons and a daughter. 
After a number of shore and seagoing appointments Tippet qualified as a barrister, being called to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1959. On promotion to commander in 1963 he was secretary to the director of naval intelligence and then to the flag officer, Middle East, where he stayed to command HMS 'Jufair' at Bahrain. Though not a warfare expert, he easily became an accomplished assistant director of naval plans from 1970 to 1972, when he ignored a formal warning, given for his health's sake, not to take on too much. Aged forty-nine he survived a heart attack. Meanwhile he was chief staff officer to the flag officer, Plymouth (1972-4), and captain of the barracks at Chatham (1976-9) before becoming, as a rear-admiral, assistant chief of fleet support (1979-81) and then flag officer and port admiral, Portsmouth (1981-3). Over the weekend of 2-3 April 1982 his leadership at Portsmouth was a key factor in preparing the fleet (which had just been given Easter leave) for the Falklands War. 
From 1983 to 1986 Tippet was fourth sea lord, or chief of fleet support, responsible for the repair and maintenance of the fleet, the supply of armaments, stores, aircraft repairs, and the administration of all support services to the Royal Navy at bases throughout Britain and abroad. He controlled some 50,000 civilian staff and managed an annual budget of more than $2.5 billion, and an estate valued at $6 billion. He had reporting lines to every Conservative minister in the Ministry of Defence and at the behest of the secretary of state, Michael Heseltine, he took the royal dockyards into commercial management. The process, against opposition from vested interests on the left and right and from other senior officers, involved competitive bidding and the drafting of an act of parliament. Seemingly intransigent labour problems were thrashed out with trade union officials over late-night glasses of whisky in his office. The changes Tippet wrought in the dockyards were the model for many subsequent privatizations of military facilities. He also played a full part as a member of the Board of Admiralty in the overall direction and operations of the Royal Navy. 
Tippet was knighted KCB in 1984 and retired from the navy two years later, at the relatively young age of fifty-eight. In 1987 he was appointed after open competition as general manager of the Hospitals for Sick Children Special Health Authority (which included Great Ormond Street Hospital) and he led this into NHS trust status, becoming chief executive of Great Ormond Street Hospital in 1994. His enthusiasm infected everyone from senior clinician to hospital porter and, with his naval style and charm but undoubted authority, he ensured the survival of Great Ormond Street. He was the driving force behind the Wishing Well campaign in 1987-9, with its trademark cartoon of a child's face with a teardrop. The appeal raised $54 million in two years and was at the time Britain's most successful fund-raising campaign. Once the core of the hospital had been rebuilt Tippet set himself the target of raising $10 million per annum to extend Great Ormond Street's research and clinical services. He retired in 1995, after eight strenuous years. 
He might have chosen to walk the hills of his beloved Dartmoor or to sail or to holiday in his villa in south-west Turkey, but in September 1997 Tippet became chairman of the Funding Agency for Schools, responsible to the Labour secretary of state for education and employment for the funding and performance of 1200 grant-maintained schools in England. With a budget of $4 billion per annum he was set the task of handing the schools back to the superintendence of their local authorities within two years and to close the agency. Liaising with civil servants, education authorities, and local government, he achieved this task in October 1999, with little fuss and without controversy. Meanwhile, in 1998, following a critical Ofsted report on Calderdale local education authority, he had become chairman of the Halifax Learning Zone, with direct responsibility to the secretary of state for twenty-nine schools and their nine partnerships in industry, commerce, education, and the arts. The education action zone which he led closed in December 2003 when he had changed it into one of New Labour's 'excellence clusters'. His final public duty was to chair Bradford council's Interim Policy Partnership (2001-2) which, also following a critical Ofsted report, outsourced Bradford's education services. 
Tippet's wide range of public duties extended to leading roles in more than a dozen naval, medical, and education charities, including the National Appeal for Music Therapy and the Peter Pan Children's Fund, a worldwide charity to encourage the young to support children's hospitals. He was also a governor and president of his old school, a trustee of the sea cadets, and a trustee and chairman of the Royal Naval Benevolent Society for Officers. 
Tippet was hardworking, purposeful, and determined: problems of any nature were a challenge to him. He had a phenomenal memory for names and faces, could engage anyone in conversation, and was a forceful leader. As senior instructor at Dartmouth he once sailed the yacht 'Wyvern' in the teeth of a south-westerly gale to Ushant for the weekend: his exhausted crew of midshipmen were expecting a slap-up meal in France but Tippet, having seen the lighthouse, turned and ran before the wind to Devon to write a lengthy dissertation in the boat's journal about the differences between his dead reckoning (the Dartmouth boats were in those days equipped with only basic navigation aids) and his observed positions. He collapsed on the London Underground on his way home on 13 October 2006, after giving a talk at dinner at the Institute of Child Health. He was survived by his wife, Lola, and three of their children, one son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 97477


Thompson, Donald James (1933-2006), athlete, was born on 20 January 1933 at 6 Cleveland Road, Hillingdon, London, the son of Lauri James Thompson, aircraft draughtsman, and his wife, Doris Alice, 'nee' Denny. At the time of the registration of his birth his parents lived at 61 Keith Road, Hayes. He was educated locally. He took up running as a child, but an injury to his Achilles tendon when he was eighteen made him switch his attention to race walking as a member of the Metropolitan Walking Club. While working in insurance, he started to make an impact in the amateur racing world in 1954, when he finished second in his first London to Brighton walk, a distance of 52.5 miles. 
In 1955 Thompson achieved national and international success as a race walker, winning the London to Brighton race and the 100 km Milan race. His diminutive frame -- he was 5 feet 5 inches at his tallest -- and his powerful performance earned him the nickname of 'il topolino' (the little mouse) from the Italian spectators, a sobriquet that stuck. In 1956 he successfully defended his London to Brighton title, won the Race Walking Association (RWA) 50 km at Enfield, and represented Great Britain in the 50 km race at the Melbourne Olympic games. However, he suffered from dehydration in the Melbourne race, and withdrew after 45 km while in fifth place. Thompson dominated the sport in the late 1950s and early 1960s, regularly winning the RWA 50 km and the London to Brighton race, setting a course record of 7 hours 35 minutes 12 seconds in the latter in 1957. He also challenged for the European 50 km title in 1958, finishing in fifth place. In all, he won the RWA 50 km title eight times (from 1956 to 1962 and again in 1966), and the London to Brighton race nine times (from 1955 to 1962 and in 1967). His performances in the RWA's events won him that association's Edgar Horton cup in 1956, 1957, 1958, and 1961, while his performances on the London to Brighton race led him to be known as Mr Brighton in the race-walking world. 
Thompson's fame spread beyond the relatively small world of British race walking in 1960 when he won the gold medal in the 50 km walk at the Rome Olympic games. He had learnt the lesson of his dehydration in Melbourne, and included some home-made climate training in his preparation for Rome. As well as concentrating on distance and stamina in his regular road training around his home in Cranford, Middlesex, he turned the bathroom of his mother's house into a heat chamber, blocking the doors and windows and using steam and an oil heater to get the temperature up to 43 degree C. He carried out close to twenty of these sessions, exercising in the heat and humidity for up to three quarters of an hour each time. The carbon monoxide fumes from the heater were a problem, but when he got to Rome, and had to race in 38 degree C heat, he found himself well prepared. With sunglasses and his trademark sunhat, made of a handkerchief sewn on to a cap, he started well, and when two of the early leaders were disqualified for losing contact with the ground, Thompson found himself battling for gold with John Ljunggren of Sweden. Thompson led for the last 5 km, and won by just 17 seconds in a new Olympic record of 4.25.30. Thompson later described himself as 'smugly happy' ('The Times') with his victory, which was the only British athletics gold at Rome. He added to his international success later in 1960 by winning the Milan 100 km, and became the first -- and at the time of his death only -- race walker to be named sportsman of the year by the Sports Writers' Association. 
As well as continuing to dominate domestic competition in the early 1960s and breaking British records at all distances from 20 to 30 miles and 25 to 50 km, Thompson also competed internationally, coming third in the European 50 km championship in 1962. He defended his Olympic title in Tokyo in 1964, but failed to retain the gold, ending in tenth place. However, his time of 4.22.39 was almost three minutes faster than his Rome time. He competed in the 1966 Commonwealth games in Kingston, Jamaica, switching down to the 20 km and finishing in fourth place. He also raced in the European championship and the Lugano cup in 1967, the last international performances of his race walking career. 
On 26 May 1967, at Epsom register office, Thompson married Margaret (Maggie) Ball, a 28-year-old secretary at a teachers' training college, and daughter of John Arthur Ball, local government officer. They had one son and one daughter. They settled in Hythe, Kent, with Thompson joining the Folkestone Running Club. Although withdrawing from international competition, he remained active in both race walking and in long-distance running, managing over 150 marathons with a personal best time of 2.51. He maintained high mileage training for the rest of his life, combining his work as a self-employed gardener with training walks and runs of over 100 miles per week. In 1978 he achieved race walking's centurion status by completing the Leicester to Skegness 100 mile walk. He made an unlikely international return in 1991, when he was a member of the British team in a 200 km walk in France. He remained dedicated to the sport at club level, and was still active into his seventies as 'the elder statesman of English Walking' (Erickson). In March 2006, Thompson and his wife moved from Hythe to Fleet in Hampshire to be closer to their children's families. In October of that year, Thompson suffered an aneurysm. He died of a subarachnoid haemorrhage and pneumonia on 3 October 2006 at Frimley Park Hospital, Surrey. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97478


Tennant, Sir Iain Mark (1919-2006), television executive and businessman, was born on 11 March 1919 at Hyndford House, North Berwick, Haddingtonshire, the only child of Lieutenant-Colonel John Edward Tennant (1890-1941), army and air force officer, and his first wife, Georgina Helen, daughter of General Sir George Macaulay Kirkpatrick. He was descended from Charles Tennant, a fabulously rich Glasgow chemical manufacturer. His father, who had served in the Scots Guards and then commanded the Royal Flying Corps in Mesopotamia at the end of the First World War, divorced his wife in 1925 and was remarried the following year to Victoria Duff, daughter of Sir Robert Duff, second baronet, with whom he had four further children (two son and two daughters). Despite these family upheavals Tennant had a happy childhood. During holidays he developed a love of Scotland at Innes House in Moray, the home of his grandfather Francis John Tennant, and at the Hambro home at Glendoe, near Fort Augustus -- Jocelyn Hambro being a lifelong friend. 
Tennant was educated at Eton College, where he rowed for the school, and then at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where his passion for the cinema and playing bridge led to his going down after his first year. With an ambition to enter the film industry, in which his family had interests, he worked briefly in studios at Welwyn Garden City before being called up on the outbreak of the Second World War. He was commissioned into the 2nd battalion of the Scots Guards as an intelligence officer in 1940. He was captured at Tobruk in 1942. In prisoner-of-war camps in Italy and Germany he was much involved in entertainment essential to maintaining morale, sometimes staging productions five times a week. His father (who had joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve as a group captain) was killed in action in 1941 and his grandfather died the following year, leaving him Innes House and part of his estate. The remainder, with Lochnabo House near Lhanbryde, was left to Tennant's only surviving uncle, (Francis) Michael Tennant. He left the army in 1946 with the rank of captain and settled at Innes House. On 11 July that year he married Lady Margaret Isla Helen Marion Ogilvy ('b'. 1920), second daughter of David Lyulph Gore Wolseley Ogilvy, seventh or twelfth earl of Airlie, with whom he had three children, Mark ('b'. 1947), Christopher (1950-2003), and Emma ('b'. 1954). 
After the war Tennant worked briefly for the Inverness-based Caledonian Associated Cinemas, which had a string of some fifty cinemas across Scotland and was partly owned by the Tennants. Chaired by Sir Alexander Boyne King, Caledonian was a serious Scottish challenger to the dominant American ABC Films. Tennant became a non-executive director in 1950, a position he held until the business was sold thirty years later. When the film 'The Dam Busters' was made in the early 1950s he acted as a gofer in the production. Such was his enthusiasm for the silver screen that he had a cinema fitted up in the old kitchen at Innes House where he could preview films. During the 1950s and early 1960s Caledonian continued to acquire new cinemas and through King formed a close relationship with Films of Scotland. In 1960 King, by way of a subsidiary, Caledonian Television, bid successfully for the franchise for commercial television in the north of Scotland. Renamed Grampian Television, with King as chairman and Tennant as vice-chairman, it went on air the following year, assisted by Howard Steele of Associated-British Picture Corporation. On King's retirement in 1968 Tennant succeeded him as chairman of both Grampian and Caledonian, positions he was to hold for a further twenty years. Under his chairmanship the brevity of Grampian's board meetings was compensated for by extensive peregrinations around the transmission area as far north as Shetland and as far west as the Hebrides. 
Tennant's skill as a non-executive director earned him directorships of the Times Publishing Company from 1962 to 1966 and from 1968 to 1989 of the Clydesdale Bank, a subsidiary of the Midland Bank until 1987. His greatest delight was his chairmanship of Glenlivet Distillers from 1964 until 1984. This was a period of expansion for both blended whisky and single malts. Tennant oversaw the merger with the blenders Hill Thomson & Co. of Edinburgh and with Longmorn-Glenlivet Distilleries in 1972. Although annoyed that the Imperial Group without telling him sold its stake in the company to the Canadian Seagram Corporation in 1977 to give it control, he continued to serve as chairman and joined the Seagram board. During his time as chairman of the company he visited over forty countries as an ambassador for its brands. 
Tennant devoted time and energy to public service, particularly in Moray. He served as a county councillor, founded the Moray Sea School in 1949, and in 1963 was appointed lord lieutenant. He became a governor of Gordonstoun School in 1951 and served as chairman from 1957 to 1970; he brought his business acumen to bear in restoring its precarious financial position. During his time as chairman the prince of Wales was a pupil at the school, often spending weekends at Innes House. A member of the Royal Company of Archers from 1950, Tennant was an usher at the coronation in 1953 when he had to sit on the steps beside the pew he was guarding. On sitting down the seam of his trousers split with a loud retort, whereupon a peeress leaned forward to inquire if he needed a needle and thread, as she had one tucked in her coronet. The official appointment he cherished above every other position he held was as crown estate commissioner for Scotland from 1970 to 1990. Although the bulk of the crown lands in Scotland were on Speyside, there were holdings scattered across the country. In just the same way as he made the board of Grampian Television patrol its territory he insisted on visiting crown property in every part of the country to ensure it was well managed and the tenants satisfied. From 1981 to 1986 he served on the newspaper panel of the Monopolies and Mergers Committee. The queen appointed him a knight of the Thistle in 1986 and lord high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1988 and 1989. 
Tennant's wife never cared for Innes House and when he was unexpectedly left Lochnabo House on the death of his uncle Michael in 1973 the family moved there and Innes House remained empty for some twenty years. Tennant died at Lochnabo on 25 September 2006 of bronchopneumonia and immobility, having suffered increasingly from Parkinson's disease. The funeral service was held at Gordonstoun School on 14 October. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, and two of their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97482


Clements, Richard Harry (1928-2006), journalist, was born on 11 October 1928 at 60 Warwick Gardens, Kensington, London, the third child and second son of Harry Clements, osteopath, and his American-born wife, Sophia Victoria (Sonia), 'nee' Edelman. His father, born in rural Gloucestershire in the 1890s, had been a conscientious objector during the First World War, and after a spell in jail he spent the rest of the war as a farm labourer in a Tolstoyan community at Whiteway, near Stroud, Gloucestershire. After the war he crossed the Atlantic to join a similar community in New England, where he studied osteopathy. There he met Sonia Edelman, an anarcho-syndicalist of Russian Jewish parentage, whom he married in the early 1920s. After the birth of a son (John) and a daughter (Barbara), the family moved to England, and Harry set up in practice, first at Whiteway and later in London. The practice prospered, and the family moved to Hampstead Garden Suburb so that Dick (as he was universally known throughout his life) and his siblings could go to King Alfred School, a progressive co-educational school nearby. 
When the Second World War came and France fell, Clements was sent to the United States to stay with an uncle, John Edelman, who was a well-known Washington lobbyist for the Congress of Industrial Organizations (roughly the equivalent of the British TUC). His formal education continued at Western High School in Washington DC, and he gained a valuable knowledge of American liberal politics by meeting his uncle's friends and colleagues. But after his brother was killed as a pilot in Bomber Command, Clements insisted on returning to England, where the V1 flying bomb campaign was in full swing. He went first to Regent Street Polytechnic to matriculate, then joined the Merchant Navy as an apprentice in 1946. 
After eighteen months in the navy Clements won a place at the London School of Economics but he dropped out in 1949 to become a reporter, first on the 'Middlesex Independent' and then, in 1951, on the 'Leicester Mercury'. While there, he tried to establish his own left-wing weekly in the midlands. It failed, but it led to an offer in 1953 of the editorship of the Labour Party's youth paper, 'Socialist Advance'. In 1954 this led in turn to a job as industrial reporter at the TUC-owned 'Daily Herald'. For much of this post-war period he was living with his parents in Baker Street, where his mother kept court over a remarkable assembly of young people, most of them either stray Americans or students at the London School of Economics. On 28 November 1952 he married Bridget Mary MacDonald, the 27-year-old daughter of Alister MacDonald, architect, and granddaughter of the former prime minister Ramsay MacDonald. They had met in a pub near his parents' country cottage, where she was acting as a temporary barmaid. The pub's owner was her aunt, Ishbel MacDonald, daughter of the former prime minister. They had two sons. 
After two years at the 'Herald' Clements was invited in 1956 to join the staff of the left-wing weekly, 'Tribune'. The paper was then edited by Michael Foot, who was at the time in conflict with his old friend and ally Aneurin Bevan over Bevan's rejection of unilateral nuclear disarmament. With his pacifist background, Clements backed Foot in this dispute, and when he was eventually appointed editor in 1961 he proudly attached the slogan 'The Paper that Backs the Anti-H Bomb Campaign' to its masthead. It was to remain there throughout his subsequent twenty-one years in the editor's chair -- a stint that covered some of the nastiest and most bad-tempered years in Labour Party history. The easiest part was probably putting the paper together each week. Indeed his greatest achievement may well have been keeping it solvent for twenty-one years, because 'Tribune' was chronically hard up, and much of the editor's time was taken in raising funds. Among Clements's most successful fund-raisers was Neil Kinnock. 
Though firmly committed to democratic socialism, Clements's 'Tribune' remained a beacon of comradely debate at a time when an array of Trotskyist factions were competing to take over the party. This even-handed fairness, combined with his good humour and optimism, made him liked and respected across the ideological divide -- so much so that Jim Callaghan offered to 'parachute' him into a safe east London seat just before the 1979 election. Had he accepted, he would almost certainly have sat on Labour's front bench. But he was too much of a democrat to agree to this, and he insisted that there must be several candidates for the local party to choose from. Callaghan gave way, a selection conference took place, and Clements lost. 
Clements eventually resigned the editorship in 1982 to become an adviser to Michael Foot when he became leader of the party in succession to Callaghan. He remained in the leader's office after Kinnock succeeded Foot a year later, and stayed there as office manager until 1987, becoming a popular figure at Westminster. After his retirement in 1993 he took a job as director of the Citizens' Income Trust, using his contacts to advance the radical concept of a guaranteed minimum income for all citizens. He retired finally in 1996 after being diagnosed with Parkinson's disease. 
Clements's amiability may well have been responsible for the final twist to his career in 1999, when a Soviet defector, Vasily Mitrokhin, named him long after his retirement as a KGB 'agent of influence' with the code name Agent Dan. It was claimed that he had been a channel of propaganda for the Soviet Union, printing KGB-inspired articles in 'Tribune'. Clements laughed this off, pointing out (accurately) that his paper had published masses of anti-communist material. He argued that the KGB agents had probably been exaggerating their successes to impress their bosses, although it is equally possible that they had been deceived by his affability into a belief that he really was on their side. 
One surprising aspect of Clements's character was that, in spite of his geniality, he exhibited a ferocious competitive drive in sport. A first-class tennis player (he once took a set off Jaroslav Drobny), he was also a fanatical captain of 'Tribune''s cricket team, especially in its annual contest with its great rival, the 'New Statesman'. These confrontations had, in the pre-Clements days, been largely an excuse for a picnic, whose main purpose was the consumption of vast quantities of beer and white wine. Under Clements 'Tribune' was out to win. People who knew only the affable Clements were startled to encounter this other one. They put it down to his spell in America. 
Clements's Parkinsons's disease got progressively worse over the last ten years of his life, and his final months were spent in the Arkley Nursing Home in Barnet (near his home in Strafford Road). He died there of end-stage complications of the disease on 23 November 2006. He was survived by his wife, Bridget, and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 97483


Clarke, Nicholas Campbell (1948-2006), broadcaster and writer, was born on 9 June 1948 at Mount Alvernia Nursing Home, Godalming, Surrey, the son of John Campbell Clarke, journalist, and his wife, (Wilda) Ruth, formerly Massy, 'nee' McNeile. He was educated at Bradfield College, Berkshire, and Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, where he read modern languages. After graduating he spent two years as a reporter on the 'Yorkshire Post', before joining the BBC in Manchester in 1973, 'on condition', he recalled, that 'I shaved off my very large beard' ('Radio Times', 11 Dec 1993). Within three years he had been appointed industrial correspondent, and by 1980 was reporting for BBC2's 'The Money Programme'. In the mid-1980s he appeared on BBC2's 'Newsnight' as political correspondent and presenter. However, it was radio rather than television that increasingly appealed to his sense of seriousness. From 1989 he took the presenter's job on BBC Radio 4's Sunday lunchtime current affairs programme, 'The World This Weekend', and over the next five years he frequently stood in on 'Any Questions?', 'Any Answers?', and 'The World at One'. During the Gulf War of 1991, when Radio 4 turned one of its frequencies into a 'rolling-news' service, he was a key anchorman, at ease occasionally conducting an interview in fluent French while simultaneously providing his own running translation. It was, one reviewer suggested, largely through the 'sober tact' of Clarke and his fellow presenters that the BBC's first rolling-news service established itself as 'urgent without being hysterical', confounding the worst expectations of its critics ('Daily Telegraph', 22 Jan 1991); (Hendy, 348). 
Clarke's skill as a political interviewer was put to best use after 1994 when he became the full-time presenter of 'The World at One'. Politicians, journalists, and listeners noted that he always asked clear questions and insisted on proper answers, though he would never 'growl, bark or nip' ('Daily Telegraph', 7 Aug 1993). 'I don't like interruptions', he once explained; 'I believe it's nearly always possible to find a pause, however microscopic, into which a question can be inserted' ('The Times', 4 Oct 1995). Commentators regarded such unyielding civility, and the 'surgeon's instinct for the political raw nerve' it belied, as something to be cherished in what seemed like an increasingly frantic media culture ('Sunday Times', 27 Feb 1994). This was confirmed in 1999 when the Voice of the Listener and Viewer organization made him radio broadcaster of the year and again in 2000 when the Broadcasting Press Guild voted him broadcaster of the year. Both awards acknowledged not just the quality of his journalism but his wider contribution to the medium of radio. When Radio 4's 'Round Britain Quiz' was revived in 1997 Clarke's inquiring but unobtrusive style made him the obvious choice as question-master. He was equally well suited to chairing 'Straw Poll', a live public debating series broadcast in 2004 and 2005. 
Clarke, once described by a columnist as 'Radio 4 personified' ('The Guardian', 24 Nov 2006), briefly contemplated writing a history of his favourite network. He had already published in 1999 a well-received biography of another Radio 4 figure, Alistair Cooke, and it had sold well. In the event his follow-up was 'Shadow of a Nation' (2003), an elegiac and highly personal reflection on the changing character of Britain, in which he despaired of a growing celebrity culture and lamented the 'draining away' of social cohesion. The national psyche, he believed, was gradually being debased through television's 'staple diet of spurious fame' ('Shadow of a Nation', 3-7). 
Away from this diminishing public realm, Clarke found regular consolation in the private pleasures of fine wine, cooking, cricket, and, above all, family life. His first marriage, on 13 October 1973, was to the journalist Susan Katharine (Sue) Armstrong. Aged twenty-one at the time of their marriage, she was the daughter of Philip Bryan Armstrong, solicitor. They had two sons and one daughter (twins Alison and Tom, followed by Pete) before the marriage was dissolved in 1990. In the following year he married the television producer Barbara Want, with whom he had twin boys. Benedict and Joel were still young children when, in November 2005, Clarke (whose father had died of cancer when Clarke was eighteen) discovered a lump on his left buttock, a metastatic sarcoma that forced him to have his left leg amputated. He and his wife recorded an audio diary throughout his illness, and much of it was heard on Radio 4 in June 2006 as the documentary 'Fighting to be Normal'. Clarke worried that broadcasting a personal story was 'inappropriate' for BBC presenters, but listeners wrote in their thousands to say how moved they had been and how much he was being missed. Soon after its broadcast he returned to presenting 'The World at One'. But the respite was brief. The cancer had spread, and Clarke died on 23 November 2006 at his home in Highlever Road, Kensington. He was survived by his wife and his five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97490


Bleaney, Brebis (1915-2006), physicist, was born on 6 June 1915 at 423 King's Road, Chelsea, London, the second son of Frederick Bleaney, a house painter then serving as a sapper in the 3rd London field company of the Territorial Army, and Eva Petersen. His father did not register the birth until 4 May 1916 (when he mistakenly gave the birth date as 5 June). Bleaney's mother was Danish and his father was English. His unusual name of Brebis came from the village of La Brebis, near Ypres, where his father was serving when Brebis was born. His brother, Paul, was born three years earlier. His parents were not well off financially and because of this, in 1919, Paul was sent to Denmark to live with his grandparents. The family lived in a succession of barely legal flats and Bleaney attended Cook's Ground elementary school from 1921 until 1926 when he won an entrance scholarship that enabled him to go to Westminster City School. He won a number of prizes at the school and obtained distinctions in his school certificate examinations in mathematics and in physics. 
In 1933 Bleaney was awarded an open scholarship at St John's College, Oxford which he took up the following year, despite his family's continuing financial difficulties. He undoubtedly enjoyed his experience as an undergraduate at Oxford. He played football and other sports for his college and chess for the university, which he represented against Cambridge from 1936 until 1938. He obtained a first-class degree in physics in 1937. Francis Simon was his supervisor for the DPhil degree from 1937. Bleaney shared a room with Nicholas Kurti and successfully modified a cryostat so that he could cool samples below 1K and then perform various experiments on the properties of materials at what were then very low temperatures. In 1939 he was awarded his DPhil and obtained a senior studentship from the Goldsmiths' Company to continue his research for another two years. 
However, towards the end of 1939 many university physicists were drafted into the military and some from Oxford were sent to radar stations around the coast. Bleaney went to stations at Pevensey in Sussex and at Crail in Fife. In 1940 he returned to Oxford to work in the team assigned the task of designing and building the electromagnetic generators for radar waves. He contributed to the design of klystrons that produced 10 cm wavelength electromagnetic radiation; the wavelength was subsequently decreased to 3.2 cm, then 1.25 cm. The designs were easier to manufacture than those developed in the USA, and in 1943 Bleaney and his colleague J. Griffiths went to the USA by plane and arranged for the Raytheon Company to build klystrons to the Oxford design. The klystrons were later described as the most important single package to cross the Atlantic at that time. 
In 1945 Bleaney was appointed a university lecturer in Oxford, and he became a fellow of St John's College in 1947. Initially he started to extend his work with microwaves by studying their propagation and attenuation in gases and in particular in ammonia. This was important work but the spectra were very broad, so he decided to concentrate on the properties of magnetic solids and how microwaves can provide a vast amount of information about magnetic solids. The technique parallels nuclear magnetic resonance, which had just been developed in the USA but requires the use of much higher frequencies because the electronic magnetic moments are much larger than the nuclear moments. Initially he and his co-workers found that the resonance lines were broad, due to interactions with neighbouring atoms. Bleaney's experience of cooling samples below 1K enabled him at least partially to overcome this problem, especially when they were combined with materials in which the magnetic ions were diluted, so that it was much harder for them to interact with one another. These experiments enabled Bleaney and Roger Penrose in 1948 to establish electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) as an invaluable tool for determining the magnetic state of ions and the local environment in which they occurred. Unknown to Bleaney a successful electron paramagnetic experiment had been performed in Kazan in Russia, in 1944, but this work was not subsequently followed up. At this time one of his collaborators was Betty Isabelle Plumpton, daughter of Herbert Francis Plumpton, stockbroker. They married at St Nicholas's Church in Compton, Surrey, on 15 March 1949; she was then aged twenty-two. They had a son and a daughter. 
For the next ten years Oxford was the leading establishment for EPR measurements and theory. Experimentally Bleaney and his team explored the electronic ground state of the transition metals and of the actinides, how this depended on the electronic environment produced by the neighbouring atoms, and how it was influenced by the interactions with the nuclear ground state through the hyperfine coupling. The experiments were performed in close collaboration with theory. Maurice Price, Roger Elliott, Ken Stevens, and Anatole Abragam emphasized the importance of symmetry and introduced the 'spin Hamiltonian' and other concepts to explain the experimental results. EPR soon became studied worldwide and used particularly by chemists and biologists for the determination of the location and environment of magnetic impurities in materials. 
In 1956 F. A. Lindemann (Lord Cherwell) resigned from both Dr Lee's chair of experimental philosophy and the headship of the Clarendon Laboratory and Sir Francis Simon was appointed to succeed him. Unfortunately a month later Simon died and in due course Bleaney was appointed to the chair and took over the headship of the laboratory in 1957. A period of institutional and personal difficulty followed. Willis Lamb had been appointed to a chair in theory in 1956 and Denys Wilkinson was appointed to a chair in experimental (nuclear) physics in 1959. Although Bleaney was nominally responsible for both new professors they each wanted their own department, and, encouraged by the university, the departments of theoretical physics and nuclear physics were set up in 1962 as independent departments in buildings on the opposite side of Parks Road from the Clarendon Laboratory. It is likely that Bleaney did not approve of this break-up of physics in Oxford, but Simon had already promised Wilkinson a new department. The three departments were eventually reunited, together with astronomy and atmospheric physics, in 1990. 
At the beginning of the 1960s there was a marked increase in the number of undergraduates in physics. This pressure on space was alleviated by obtaining funds from the Mullard Company to build the Mullard cryomagnetic laboratory in 1962 and by the move of the theoreticians and the nuclear physicists out of the Clarendon Laboratory. Most of the undergraduate practical teaching remained in the Clarendon under the supervision of Bleaney. There was comparatively little change in the research activities in the Clarendon Laboratory for the next twenty years. There was a large group concerned with electron spin resonance and another group concerned with low temperature physics. Tony Stradling initiated a group working on semiconductors and Colin Webb introduced laser physics into the department, to develop a high resolution optical spectroscopy group. 
In 1977 Bleaney resigned from his chair and from the headship of the laboratory because he wished to devote more energy to his research. He became a Warren research fellow of the Royal Society and then a Leverhulme fellow from 1980 to 1982. He continued to produce excellent contributions to electron spin resonance and nuclear ordering in solids, and to be active in the laboratory until he was over eighty-five. He wrote over 300 scientific papers, many of which were ground-breaking publications on electron spin resonance. He and his wife wrote the textbook 'Electricity and Magnetism' (1957), which was an excellent description of much of solid state physics as well as of electromagnetism, concentrating on the physics instead of the mathematics, unlike so many books on electromagnetism. It went through a number of editions, culminating in a revised edition in two volumes in 1989. Together with Anatole Abragam he also wrote 'Electron Paramagnetic Resonance' (1970; rev. edn, 1986), a clear and comprehensive account of EPR experiments and theory, and a primary source for those interested in the low energy states of magnetic ions. 
Bleaney was awarded many honours. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society as early as 1950. He was awarded the Charles Vernon Boys prize of the Physical Society in 1952, the Hughes medal of the Royal Society in 1962, the Holweck medal and prize of the Institute of Physics and the Societe Francaise de Physique in 1984, and the Zavoisky prize in 1992. He was appointed CBE in 1965 and held many visiting professorships at universities including MIT, Columbia, Berkeley, and Pittsburgh. He enjoyed travelling and meeting people. 
Bleaney was an excellent tutor and supervisor who took a personal interest in his students and their progress. He had an impish sense of humour, as shown by the photograph he displayed of himself on a beach with his trousers rolled up to the knees. With Betty he enjoyed playing and listening to chamber music, and they were an active tennis pair until he was over seventy-five. He was an excellent product of the pre-war educational system, and made the best possible use of the opportunities it provided. He died on 4 November 2006 at his home, Garford House, Garford Road, Oxford, and was cremated at Oxford crematorium; he was survived by his wife and by their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97494


McManners, John (1916-2006), historian and Church of England clergyman, was born on 25 December 1916 at 14 Lanark Terrace, Ferryhill, co. Durham, the eldest of three sons of Joseph (Joe) McManners, a miner, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Marshall, a schoolteacher. He grew up in an Anglican vicarage after his father was ordained, and was educated at the Alderman Wraith Grammar School, Spennymoor. In 1936 he won an exhibition to St Edmund Hall, Oxford, and graduated with first-class honours in modern history in 1939. 
Abandoning plans for a research degree on the outbreak of the Second World War, McManners at once volunteered for officer training in what he saw as a just and necessary conflict. Joining the Northumberland Fusiliers, a machine-gun regiment, in 1940, he was posted to Egypt and almost immediately found himself in the besieged garrison of Tobruk. The first sight of dead Germans strengthened a hitherto weak vocation to be ordained after the war ended. Subsequently he was wounded, but served throughout the north African campaign, rising to the rank of major and adjutant of his battalion. He ended the war, vividly chronicled in his memoir 'Fusilier' (2002), as a liaison officer with the Greek army in exile, and was made an officer of the order of King George of the Hellenes. 
Once more unsure of his vocation, McManners was nevertheless persuaded on demobilization to take a theology course at St Chad's College, Durham. In 1948 he was finally ordained. At Durham he also met his wife, Sarah Carruthers, a 31-year-old geographer, and daughter of William Isaac Errington, farmer. They were married by McManners's father at St Oswald's Church, Durham, on 27 December 1951, and had two sons and two daughters. By the time of his marriage McManners had returned to his old Oxford college as chaplain and tutor in modern history, remaining until 1956. In that year, perhaps inspired by wartime memories of Australian comradeship, he took a chair in history at the University of Tasmania. His years in Hobart were scarred by disputes not of his making, but they brought the completion of 'French Ecclesiastical Society under the Ancien Regime: a Study of Angers in the Eighteenth Century' (1960), which instantly established his reputation. The result of summer vacations in the early 1950s spent in French archives, it painted a lively picture of a provincial church on the eve of violent disruption by the revolution. It was unpartisan, but showed an empathetic understanding of pre-revolutionary ways seldom found in French historiography. All its author's subsequent work was imbued with the same spirit. 
From 1959 McManners spent happier years at the University of Sydney, but a sabbatical leave in 1965-6 as visiting fellow at All Souls College, Oxford, reminded him of how distant Australia was from the best scholarly resources, not to mention his ageing parents. He returned to England in 1967 to become professor of history at the University of Leicester. From there he published the 'harvest of that delightful year' back in Oxford, a brilliant short distillation of current knowledge, 'The French Revolution and the Church' (1967), and a fuller discussion of later relations between Catholicism and the Third Republic, 'Church and State in France, 1870-1914' (1972). When in the latter year the regius chair of ecclesiastical history at Oxford fell vacant, requiring as it did a holder in orders, he was an obvious candidate. He hesitated before accepting an offer that took him by surprise, but his appointment was widely welcomed in the university. It entailed a canonry at Christ Church, and membership of two faculty boards. He served as a very popular and successful chairman of that of modern history from 1978 to 1981. It seemed the peak of his career, with election as a fellow of the British Academy in 1978, and the publication in 1981 of 'Death and the Enlightenment', which won the Wolfson prize for history. But when he reached the customary retirement age in 1984 he was invited to return to All Souls as chaplain. He remained there for seventeen years, which he described as the happiest of his life. They saw the publication of the best-selling 'Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity' (1990), which he had edited, and culminated in his eighty-second year in the magnificent, two-volume 'Church and Society in Eighteenth Century France' (1998). Condensing a lifetime's learning, it avoided what its author called 'morbid analysis' ('Church and Society', 1.1), making points with teeming examples and anecdotes, 'no good story' as he put it, 'knowingly left out' ('The Independent', 16 Nov 2006). It offered a vast panorama of the church first encountered in microcosm in Angers, with all its idiosyncrasies, inconsistencies, and vices, but also many humble virtues, comforts, and decencies, all doomed to perish tragically in a largely unexpected revolution. No Englishman had ever written better, or with more insight, about the 'ancien regime'. 
Invested as a commander of the Ordre des Palmes Academiques in 1991 and the Ordre National du Merite in 2001, and appointed CBE in 2000, McManners was an accomplished lecturer and preacher, invited to give many endowed lectures outside his own institutions. Widely respected for his integrity, common sense, and quiet generosity of spirit, he was unfailingly good-humoured, a lover of puns, and an assiduous reader of the popular press for its human interest stories. Wiry in build, he was also a lifelong sportsman, playing football when younger, and tennis almost daily well into his eighties. He died of chronic obstructive airways disease at his home, 71 Cunliffe Close, Oxford, on 4 November 2006, and was survived by his wife, Sarah, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97498


Kneale, (Thomas) Nigel (1922-2006), television dramatist, was born on 28 April 1922 at Risedale Maternity Home, Barrow in Furness, Lancashire, the elder son of William Thomas Kneale (1896-1963), journalist, and his wife, Lilian, 'nee' Kewley (1889-1979). Both parents were natives of the Isle of Man, in exile at 74 Market Street, Dalton in Furness, while Kneale's father gained experience locally as a reporter. When Kneale was five they returned to the island capital, Douglas, in 1927, for William Kneale to join 'Mona's Herald', the newspaper that he would edit and eventually own. From junior school in Murray's Road, he went to Douglas High School for Boys, leaving at seventeen to be articled to an advocate. He found this uninteresting, and also rather limiting in that Manx law is not applicable elsewhere in Britain. And though he loved the island, especially the coast around Peel where his grandfather had a farm, its combination of wind and sun was already causing him discomfort. 'The sun and I are enemies', he would say. Whether or not this aversion was a factor, he was found medically unfit for military service in the Second World War. 
In his spare time Kneale -- known to family and friends as Tom, but more widely as Nigel -- was writing stories. In 1942 he had his first magazine acceptance, and on a visit to London the following year was invited by Collins to assemble a collection for a book, though in the end it was six years before they published it. Meanwhile he failed to sit his final law exam, 'for fear of passing it,' he claimed, and enrolled at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA). This was partly because he fancied being an actor, but also with a view to writing for the theatre or the screen. Next came two years carrying a spear at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford upon Avon, while continuing to pursue his writing ambitions. His volume of short stories for Collins, 'Tomato Cain', finally emerged in 1949. They were terse, imaginative, even weird: a wartime airman lost in the desert wanders into the palace of the Sleeping Beauty, or (in the title story) an island vegetable grower seeks to prohibit the cultivation of alien tomatoes, only to succeed in ridiculing himself. The book earned its author the Somerset Maugham award of 1950, but his earnings remained irregular, with spells back in the Isle of Man whenever he was hard up. 
Then in 1951 came a lucky meeting with Michael Barry, who had been one of Kneale's tutors at RADA, and was now head of drama for the BBC's fledgling television service. Anxious to improve on the worn-out stage plays that accounted for much of the output, Barry hired Kneale as a staff writer. As there was no provision for such a post, he had to be paid out of the petty cash. Finally, authority was given to set up a script unit, 'although most of the money made available', the BBC's historian Asa Briggs acidly recorded, 'went to one man, Nigel Kneale' (Briggs, 689). 
Much of the work that came Kneale's way was still adaptation from established sources, along with furnishing dialogue for children's puppet series. When, however, at a department meeting to make plans for 1953, he urged a venture into science fiction, not only was this accepted, but he was assigned to write it. The producer would be Rudolph Cartier, which was ideal casting. Viennese by birth, Cartier had worked with Max Reinhardt and at the Universum Film studios in Berlin before fleeing from the Nazis. His creed for television was to disregard the limitations of a tiny studio, cumbersome cameras, and live transmission, and attempt the impossible. 'The Quatermass Experiment' (1953), a six-part serial about an astronaut returning to earth infected with the spores of a disease that would turn him into a human vegetable, held the nation agog. Yet the backdrop to the macabre climax in Westminster Abbey (chosen because it would be familiar to viewers from the coronation coverage earlier in the year) was simply a giant enlargement of an illustration in the abbey guidebook. Poking through it were Kneale's own hands in wash-leather gloves strung with noisome bits and pieces to represent the gruesome monster. Two further serials, 'Quatermass II' (1955) and 'Quatermass and the Pit' (1958-9), pursued the theme of advances in science whose implications only Kneale's hero, Professor Bernard Quatermass, seemed to grasp. 
Meanwhile, in 1954, Kneale and Cartier had also collaborated on a brilliant realization of George Orwell's '1984'. A torture scene with live rats raised an outcry and a foolish demand in parliament that the customary repeat performance be cancelled, but the BBC held firm, and Michael Barry personally introduced the broadcast. On 8 May the same year Kneale married (Anne) Judith Kerr ('b'. 1923), daughter of a refugee German critic, Alfred Kerr, and sister of the lawyer Sir Michael Kerr. She became a lauded children's author and illustrator. They had a son, Matthew, a writer, and a daughter, Tracy, a painter. 
Kneale's own career was, however, advancing a little uncertainly. Cinema versions of his Quatermass epics from Hammer (1956, 1957, and 1967) were low-budget, and looked it. Moreover, in the first two a 'tough guy' American, Brian Donlevy, was cast as the supposedly wise and cerebral professor. Only 'Quatermass and the Pit', with the Scottish actor Andrew Keir replacing Donlevy, had much of the force of the original. Kneale, ironically, was winning plaudits at this time with his screenplays for films far removed from his usual flights, including John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' (1958) and then 'The Entertainer' (1960). But worlds to come or latent terrors from the past were still the stuff of his striking original works. In 'The Road' (1963) eighteenth-century dwellers by a country lane are haunted by the future victims of a disaster on the motorway that the lane will one day become. 'The Stone Tape' (1972) offered the opposite proposition, present-day researchers beset by spirits trapped in the fabric of an old building. Another pair was prompted by the prospect of a grossly overpopulated planet. In 'Wine of India' (1970) human beings earn a contract to dwell on earth, the span depending on each one's usefulness, and agree to euthanasia when their time is up. In the earlier but extraordinarily prescient 'The Year of the Sex Olympics' (1968) the natural urge to make love and have children has been deliberately corrupted by non-stop pornography on all television channels, in particular a peep-show anticipating the 'reality television' that actually manifested itself within twenty years. 
A temporary set-back was the BBC's decision not to go ahead, on cost grounds, with a four-part epilogue to the Quatermass canon. Thames Television took over the project and in 1979 brought the concerns of the now aged professor, played by John Mills, to a respectable and rather touching conclusion -- or what would have been so had not a new channel, BBC4, mounted a foolhardy live performance, in 2006, of the original 'Quatermass Experiment' scenario. Kneale watched it in dismay. The deepest disappointment of all was when, back in the 1970s, and again because of costs, Associated Television (ATV) abandoned production of his only major script rooted in Manx history. This was 'Crow', derived from the exploits of a notorious pirate and slave-runner. The consolation here came when Kneale's son, Matthew, drew on his father's researches for the background to his 'English Passengers', which won the Whitbread award in 2001. 
From 1962 Kneale and his family lived on Barnes Common, London, where Kneale's friend and mentor Rudy Cartier had also settled. He continued to contribute to such popular television series as 'Kavanagh QC', and he and his wife, Judith, enjoyed travel within the limitations of his aversion to sunlight. He died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, on 29 October 2006 of multiple organ failure. He was cremated at Mortlake cemetery, Surrey, on 6 November and his ashes were scattered on Barnes Common, where also a tree was planted in his memory. He was survived by his wife, his son, and his daughter, Tracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 97507


Williams, Ursula Moray (1911-2006), children's writer and illustrator, was born on 19 April 1911 at Cherrycroft, Bell Hill, Petersfield, Hampshire, the younger of identical twins of Arthur Moray Williams (1878-1959), a classics tutor at Bedales School and amateur archaeologist, and his wife, Mabel Lizzie, 'nee' Unwin (1874- 'c'.1954), a Froebel-trained teacher and sister of the publisher Stanley Unwin. Her paternal grandfather was John Alfred Williams, vicar of Alderminster, Warwickshire, and grandson of another John Alfred Williams, who had built up a fortune in Birmingham pin manufacturing. Her father liked to be known as Mr Moray Williams and gave each of his children the middle name Moray, but this was never formally part of their surname. After the First World War the family moved to Southampton, where her father took up a full-time post with the Red Cross. Living in part of a large, crumbling, eccentric mansion, Williams and her identical twin sister Barbara (died 1975) spent a happy childhood full of reading, storytelling, imaginative games, ponies, and writing their own books for family consumption. They were educated mainly at home, first by their devoutly religious mother and later with governesses, before spending a year at a girls' school near Lake Annecy, France, at the age of seventeen, and then moving on together to Winchester College of Art. While Barbara went on to the Royal College of Art, later achieving distinction as the wood engraver and sculptor Barbara Arnason, Ursula stayed only a year at Winchester before deciding that writing was, for her, more than a childhood interest and could develop into her chosen career. Her parents supported her to stay at home and write, and her uncle Stanley Unwin encouraged her early ambitions and later steered her towards a good agent. 
Williams's books often drew on her girlhood experiences; her first book, 'Jean-Pierre' (1931), about a little boy and his pet goat, was published when she was just twenty. She provided her own pen and ink illustrations for almost half her books; some were illustrated by her sister, but with Barbara's marriage and move to Iceland, long-distance collaboration became more difficult, and over time Williams worked with many other well-known illustrators, including Edward Ardizzone, Shirley Hughes, Faith Jaques, and Eileen Soper. 
On 28 September 1935 Williams married Conrad Southey (known as Peter) John, a thirty-year-old aircraft manufacturer, later contracts manager, and great-grandson of the poet Robert Southey. While pregnant with the first of their four sons she wrote 'Adventures of the Little Wooden Horse' (1938). A long episodic story about a wooden horse in search of his master through many ups and downs, its 'read-aloud' style owed something to her enjoyment of being read to as a child, and perhaps the storytelling she herself had done as a Brownie Guide leader. Charmingly illustrated by Joyce Lankester Brisley (better known as the author and illustrator of the Milly-Molly-Mandy stories), the book was an immediate publishing success. Arrangements with nannies left afternoons free for work, so that Williams was able to combine writing and motherhood, and she was one of relatively few children's writers to be published throughout the Second World War, despite the paper shortage. She wrote mostly under her maiden name, although as Ursula John she had written 'The Adventures of Boss and Dingbat' (1937), with photographs by Peter John, and also under that name was a contributor to 'The Robin' magazine and annual in the 1950s and early 1960s. 
A recurring theme of Williams's writing is the 'sentient toy' that identifies with human needs and emotions. Thus the Little Wooden Horse has an indomitable spirit through many adventures, as well as kindness and persistence, and the clockwork doll-child Marta (in 'The Toymaker's Daughter', 1968) longs to experience what it is to be human. Williams's writing unselfconsciously recalled the fairytales and imaginative games she enjoyed in childhood. In an interview with Elaine Moss in 1971 she mentioned the toy hobby horses she and her sister owned when young; and how much she had adored the story of Pinocchio. Moss then went on to speculate: 'had it ever occurred to her that her childhood passion for Pinocchio might have been partly responsible for the creation of the little wooden horse? Clearly it hadn't' (Moss, 55). Many children's writers of the 1950s and 1960s owed something to this earlier, much-loved episodic toy fantasy; those who developed new 'read-aloud' expressions of the 'sentient toy' theme included Joan G. Robinson (the Teddy Robinson series, 1953 onwards), Modwena Sedgwick (the Galldora stories, about a rag doll, from 1960), and Rumer Godden (in various doll stories). 
Williams was modest about her work, and never achieved a literary award. However, some of her best-loved books, including 'Adventures of the Little Wooden Horse' and 'Gobbolino the Witch's Cat' (1942), about a reluctant witch's accomplice seeking a more domestic life, were enjoyed by several generations and remained in print more than half a century later, testimonies to the pleasure her work, full of adventure, loyalty, fun, and kindness, gave to many. Her productive writing career covered some seventy years, and after her husband died in 1974 she continued with writing, gardening, giving talks to schools, and involvement in local life in the village of Beckford, in Worcestershire, where she had lived since 1945, serving as a magistrate on the Evesham juvenile bench for many years. She died at Tewkesbury Nursing Home, Bushley, Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire, on 17 October 2006, and was survived by three of her four sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 97508


Watt, William Montgomery (1909-2006), Scottish Episcopal clergyman and scholar of Islam, was born on 14 March 1909 at the manse, Ceres, Fife, the only child of Andrew Watt, a minister in the Church of Scotland, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Burns, primary school teacher. His early years were far from stable. His father died shortly after his birth and this misfortune necessitated frequent relocations during his childhood. An uncle and an aunt shared parenting duties with his mother and he grew up primarily in Edinburgh, where he attended George Watson's College. 
Watt initially dreamed of a career in science, but because of financial considerations and lack of career guidance he abandoned that ambition in order to study classics at the University of Edinburgh. He completed his MA a year ahead of schedule and entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1930 with a Warner exhibition. He showed great promise, winning several scholarships (including the Ferguson scholarship in classics in 1931), and was disappointed to receive only a second-class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1932. Fortunately scholarships allowed him to spend another year studying at Balliol. He made the most of his extra time and redeemed the disappointing BA by writing a thesis for the degree of BLitt (awarded in 1935) entitled 'Kant's view of the relation between teleology and ethics', under the guidance of Clement C. J. Webb, whose 'personalist' approach to the philosophy of religion proved stimulating. In the summer of 1934 he continued his explorations in German philosophy at the University of Jena in Germany. When he returned to Scotland in the autumn, he took up an assistant lectureship in moral philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, where he served until 1938. 
The year 1937 proved to be both difficult and pivotal for Watt. His mother died, he was jilted, and his doctoral thesis at the University of Edinburgh was rejected with no option for revision. He also published his first book, 'Can Christians Be Pacifists?', which provided a manifesto for 'Christian internationalism' (p. 125). The book signalled the beginning of Watt's lifetime interest in the development of a universal religion that would supersede all previous particular religions. Watt believed that humanity required a common religion to help it manage the transition from allegiance to the nation state to support of a common world federation. However, he had little first-hand experience of the challenges of religious dialogue and reconciliation until he caught a 'glimpse of the profundity of the problem' through conversations with a Muslim flatmate from Pakistan (Watt, 'Islamic Revelation in the Modern World', 1969, v). These conversations piqued Watt's interest and proved the beginning of a lifetime of reflection on the relationship between Christianity and Islam. 
Following the exchanges with his Muslim friend, Watt entered into correspondence with the Anglican bishop in Jerusalem, George Francis Graham Brown. Shortly thereafter Graham Brown invited Watt to join him in Jerusalem as his specialist in Arab affairs. This new post required several years of preparation, but Watt made rapid progress, receiving ordination in 1939 after training at Cuddesdon College and completing his curacy in 1943 (in which year he married Jean Macdonald Donaldson, a social worker; they had a son and four daughters). During this busy period he studied Arabic at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London and began work on his doctoral thesis, 'Free will and predestination in early Islam', under the direction of the Scottish Arabist Richard Bell at the University of Edinburgh. He was awarded his PhD in 1944. 
Watt arrived in Jerusalem in 1943 and remained on the bishop's staff until 1946, when a friend's death in the bombing of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem impelled him to look for a change of scenery. By the time he had returned home to the University of Edinburgh to take up a lectureship, first in ancient philosophy in 1946 and subsequently in Arabic in 1947, he had refined his own view of the proper Christian approach to Islam. In Watt's assessment the cultivation of a vigorous indigenous Arab Christianity in a fiercely nationalistic climate required appreciation of the enduring values of Islam. He believed that attacking Islam would only strengthen the already rapidly spreading cancer of materialism, so he argued that Christians should instead focus primarily on helping Muslims become better Muslims. 
Watt's missionary experience gave impetus to his development of a Christian critique of Western views of Islam that anticipated elements of later post-structuralist and Marxist critiques of Orientalism. Watt believed that misconceptions and stereotypes about Islam in the West could be traced back to the 'medieval war-propaganda' of the crusades (Watt, 'Muhammad at Medina', 1956, 324). From his position in Edinburgh, where he served as professor of Arabic and Islamic studies from 1964 to 1979, he set about countering false perceptions. His monumental two-volume biography of the prophet Muhammad, 'Muhammad at Mecca' (1953) and 'Muhammad at Medina' (1956), broke new ground through the sympathetic treatment of its protagonist. In addition he launched the successful 'Islamic Surveys' series at Edinburgh University Press. He edited the series from 1961 to 1979 and contributed many volumes of his own work including 'Islamic Philosophy and Theology' (1962), 'A History of Islamic Spain' (1965), 'Islamic Political Thought' (1968), and 'The Influence of Islam on Medieval Europe' (1972). 
Methodologically Watt attempted to blend philology with sociology. Though he eschewed the social and psychological reductionism of Marx and Freud, their work made him aware of the ways in which political and social biases unconsciously shaped both ideas in the past and conclusions of supposedly neutral scholarship in the present. Since political commitment was unavoidable, he believed it important that scholarship should support the right cause. For Watt this cause was religious and political internationalism. While class conflict, racial prejudice, and nationalist chauvinism threatened to tear the world apart, he believed that religion could play a crucial role in helping humanity form 'a single harmonious society' (Watt, 'Thoughts on Islamic unity', 'Islamic Quarterly', 3, 1956-7, 193). In 'Islam and the Integration of Society' (1961) he sought to determine how Islam had fostered social cohesion in a localized context in the past and how it might do so on a worldwide scale in the future. Concepts derived from the work of Carl Jung, whose work Watt greatly admired, figured prominently in the analysis. In 1968, Watt forecasted presciently that by 'the year AD 2000 it seems probable that Islam will be one of a half-dozen significant political forces in the world' (Watt, 'Islamic Political Thought', ix). At the time, he believed Islam's political re-emergence would mean the spread of global unity and he did not anticipate the subsequent rise of Islamist terrorism. Many years later he provided an analysis of why things had not turned out as he expected in 'Islamic Fundamentalism and Modernity' (1988). 
Watt's Christian faith was of a decidedly liberal orientation. Though he was sympathetic to aspects of Anglo-Catholic spirituality, the liberal theology of F. D. Maurice exercised an early and lasting influence on his 'intellectual attitude as an Anglican' (Watt, 'Towards the religion of the future', priv. coll.). His numerous theological writings reflected his concern to communicate traditional Christian doctrines in modern scientific terms. He served as a priest for the Scottish Episcopal church throughout his life, and though sceptical of institutional initiatives towards Christian unity, he supported ecumenism by joining the Iona community in 1960. Though his work was not without its critics, he earned wide acclaim as one of Britain's foremost interpreters of Islam in the twentieth century and garnered numerous awards, honorary doctorates, and visiting lectureships throughout the world. He died on 24 October 2006 at Liberton Hospital, Edinburgh, of bronchopneumonia, and was survived by his wife, Jean, and their five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97517


Peyton, John Wynne William, Baron Peyton of Yeovil (1919-2006), politician, was born on 13 February 1919 at 6 Berkeley Street, Mayfair, London, the elder son of Ivor Eliot Peyton, of independent means, a farmer and captain in the South Nottinghamshire hussars, and his wife, Helen Dorothy, 'nee' Elphinstone. He was educated at Eton College, and went to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1937 to read jurisprudence. At Oxford he met Edward Heath, and had a minor interest in university politics and the union. From 1936 onwards he was convinced that war was inevitable, and in 1939 he suspended his studies to enlist in the 15th/19th hussars, in which regiment an uncle had once been a general. Stationed in York, he met and fell in love with Mary Constance ('b'. 1921), daughter of (Everard) Humphrey Wyndham, an army officer then serving as aide-de-camp to George VI, and granddaughter of the second Baron Leconfield of Leconfield (and niece of the third, fourth, and fifth barons). 
A member of the British expeditionary force, Peyton was captured during the invasion of Belgium in 1940, and spent the next five years as a prisoner of war. This was undoubtedly a formative period in his life, and several of his fellow prisoners became lifelong friends. He discovered an interest in music (he later became a friend of William Walton), and under the tutelage of Jack Hamson (before the war a Cambridge academic lawyer) studied for his bar exams. In 1941 he was part of an unsuccessful escape attempt that included Desmond Llewelyn among its participants. Peyton spent several months handcuffed during daylight hours in 1942, and was devastated by news of his brother Tommy's death that year. He wrote later of the 'bottomless misery of war' (Peyton, 42). 
Liberated in 1945, Peyton at first found it difficult to adjust to freedom; to compound matters, on return to London he discovered that Mary Wyndham was about to marry Ralph Hamilton Cobbold. Called to the bar in 1945, in 1946 he approached Walter Monckton to secure a place in chambers, and was invited to become his personal assistant as constitutional adviser to the nizam of Hyderabad and Berar (then believed to be the richest man in the world) during the preparation for Indian independence. He spent two periods in India, allowing him to observe at first hand events surrounding independence. He returned to the country in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1947 he survived a serious plane crash near Basrah. In December 1947, in Johannesburg, South Africa, he married Diana Clunch, whom he had met a few months before. She was the daughter of Douglas Clunch of Durban. By this time Peyton had become a Lloyds broker, but quickly decided to enter politics. He stood unsuccessfully as Conservative candidate for Bristol Central in the general election of 1950, then won the seat of Yeovil in October 1951. In 1950 he and his wife had moved to Odcombe near Yeovil; they had three children, a daughter and two sons. 
In parliament Peyton soon became reacquainted with Edward Heath (then deputy chief whip). In 1951 he became parliamentary private secretary to Nigel Birch (also educated at Eton), a junior minister at the Ministry of Defence. His membership of the regional health board both shaped his view of the limitations of state bureaucracy and allowed him to campaign successfully for a new hospital in Yeovil. During the 1950s he became an opponent of capital punishment, a stance that did not always find favour with his constituents. He was nevertheless a strong advocate of free market economics, and was a member of the right-wing Monday Club by the early 1970s. 
In 1960 Peyton's younger son died during a routine operation; this led to a period of great unhappiness in his life. In 1962 he renewed his acquaintance with Mary Cobbold ('nee' Wyndham). He and she were both divorced in 1966, and married on 27 July that year; it was a happy marriage that lasted the rest of his life. He became a stepfather to her son and daughter by her marriage to Ralph Cobbold. 
In June 1962 Harold Macmillan asked Peyton to become parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Power. Peyton saw poor industrial relations and management of nationalized industries as the two key issues, and embarked on a programme of visiting coalmines. He found the paperwork associated with ministerial life frustrating. He was not invited to join Heath's shadow team in 1965, but was asked to develop a policy for the west country before the general election of 1970. This identified developing transport links as being the priority for the region; following Heath's victory Peyton was surprised to be invited to become minister of transport. Industrial relations and poor infrastructure were again key themes, and he began developing good links with trade union leaders, including Jack Jones. His two most important decisions during this period were the introduction of compulsory helmets for motorcyclists and the signing of the treaty agreeing the channel tunnel in 1974. He viewed the latter as an important physical symbol of Britain's commitment to Europe; it also enabled him to strengthen his friendship with Christopher Soames, then British ambassador in Paris. In 1971 Peyton was responsible for the sale of British Rail's travel agency, Thomas Cook. 
After the Conservative defeat in the general election of February 1974 Peyton began to develop his business interests, becoming chairman of the British subsidiary of Texas Instruments. He was also a director of Alcan Aluminium and of the London and Manchester Assurance Society. In November 1974 Heath invited him to become shadow leader of the House of Commons. Following Heath's defeat in the first round of the leadership election of 1975 (after which Peyton advised him to resign), Peyton stood in the second ballot, a move he later regretted. He received eleven votes. The victor, Margaret Thatcher, subsequently asked him to continue as shadow leader of the house, moving him sideways to become shadow minister of agriculture in 1976, a post he never really enjoyed. Peyton had admired Heath; his relations with Thatcher were less strong. In 1979 he was disappointed at being the only opposition spokesman not to be offered a cabinet post. His relationship with Thatcher never recovered; she offered him a life peerage at the next election, and he requested she confirm this in writing. He expressed misgivings at her divisive policies and treatment of the miners, but admired the way in which the Falklands conflict was handled in 1982. 
In 1983 Peyton was appointed to the House of Lords, as Baron Peyton of Yeovil; his sponsors were the former prime minister Alec Douglas-Home, Lord Home of the Hirsel, and Lord Zuckerman, a longtime government scientific adviser. Zuckerman persuaded Peyton to become involved with the Zoological Society of London, and he quickly became treasurer, securing much funding during the 1980s. A well-received autobiography was published in 1997, and a biography of Zuckerman in 2001. In retirement he remained a highly regarded figure in his former constituency and could often be seen walking near his home in Hinton St George, wearing a distinctive black beret. He was a master of mischievous retort, a skill that made his writing attractive but did not always endear him to contemporaries; John Biffen once remarked, 'I wonder what quip John will make when he meets God' ('The Independent', 25 Nov 2006). He died at St George's Hospital, Tooting, London, on 22 November 2006, of multi-organ failure. He was survived by his second wife, his daughter, one son, and his stepchildren. A bequest was used for a memorial screen in Hinton St George church. 


@@@@@


doc= 97521


Johnson, Frank Robert (1943-2006), journalist, was born on 20 January 1943 at Hackney Hospital, London, the only son and first child of Ernest Johnson, baker and pastry cook, and his wife, Doreen Elizabeth, 'nee' Skinner, of 68 Belgrade Road, Stoke Newington. The family was close, and Johnson did not fully leave home until he was thirty-two. Until then, his mother would bring him a cup of tea in bed every morning. 
Johnson failed the eleven-plus examination, and was educated at Chartesey and Shoreditch secondary schools. His school career was undistinguished, and he left at sixteen. By that time he had developed a love of opera that was to prove lifelong. At the age of fourteen he had appeared in 'Norma' at Covent Garden, alongside Maria Callas, in the silent role of one of her sons. He later described the first night: 'I could not forget that when Callas bore down on us with the knife, her nostrils flared; that when, dropping the knife, she repentantly clasped me to her bosom, her perfume smelt like that of an aunt who was always kissing me; and that... there penetrated, into my left eye, the tip of the diva's right breast, which partnership remained throughout the subsequent duet with Stignani... there are few men who can truthfully say that their eye made contact with the right nipple of Maria Callas. ('Out of Order', 246-7)' After leaving school Johnson took a bus to Fleet Street, and asked for and got a job as a messenger-boy at the first office he came to, that of the 'Sunday Express'. In 1960 his talent was spotted and he joined the 'Walthamstow Post' as a reporter. He moved to the 'Walthamstow Guardian' the following year, and worked briefly in Barrow in Furness for the 'North-West Daily Mail' from 1965 to 1966. In the latter year he joined the press gallery of the House of Commons as a reporter for the 'Nottingham Evening Post', soon becoming a lobby correspondent for the 'Liverpool Daily Post'. He joined the political staff of 'The Sun' in 1969. 
It was during these early years in parliament that Johnson built up the habits of observation that were to stand him in such good stead when, in 1972, he became a leader writer for the 'Daily Telegraph', whose 'unfashionably right-wing views', as he put it, he shared 'before they became fashionably unfashionable' ('Out of Order', 8). His working-class toryism was attracted by the rise of Margaret Thatcher. He began to write the paper's parliamentary sketch. It was in this role that he was the master. His comic gift was based on the effect of inverting expectations: 'exemplary cowardice'; 'Such is his [James Callaghan's] deviousness that he always knows the right moment at which to be straightforward'; 'If the Government bales out the C of E, all Heaven will break loose'. It was always deployed with a lightness of touch, and hit the right note with a public that wanted irreverence about the political situation of the 1970s, but not nastiness. He was a virtuoso, easily outclassing all others in the field. Amusing and handsome, with large quantities of wavy hair, Johnson was by this time considered one of the most eligible bachelors in London. 
Johnson was so successful as a sketch-writer that he feared being trapped in the role. In 1979 he left the 'Daily Telegraph' for much higher pay as the political columnist of Sir James Goldsmith's new weekly magazine 'Now!', but shortly before the magazine folded in 1981, he joined 'The Times', the paper that, as a young autodidact, he had most respected. There, too, he became the sketch-writer, but cast this off in 1984 in favour of being the paper's Paris diarist and then its correspondent in Bonn from 1985 to 1986, hoping through these posts to gain the education in European civilization his school had not provided. He returned to London, however, as the sketch-writer once more. 
In 1987 Johnson became associate editor of 'The Times', but was at war -- as was quite often the case in his career -- with his editor, and left the paper in 1988 to become associate editor and political columnist of the 'Sunday Telegraph' under the editorship of Peregrine Worsthorne, whom he much admired. There Johnson created what he called Worsthorne College, the mischievous, intellectually original comment pages that, despite endless skirmishing, survived the replacement of Worsthorne as editor (though not as the 'comment editor') by Trevor Grove, in the following year. In 1994 Johnson was promoted deputy editor by Grove's successor, Charles Moore. In 1995, after Moore's departure to edit the 'Daily Telegraph', Johnson hoped to succeed him at the Sunday paper. In fact, however, the owner, Conrad Black, made Johnson editor of 'The Spectator' instead. Although Johnson brought to the job all his qualities of subversive humour, intellectual curiosity, and encouragement of the young, his time at the magazine was not very successful. His lack of organizational power was marked, and he fell out irrevocably with the business management of the paper. In 1999 he was removed from his post by Black, who appointed Boris Johnson in his stead. Johnson was hurt by Black's failure to give him this decision in person. 
Despite his eviction from the editor's chair at 'The Spectator', Johnson continued to work for the Telegraph group, returning yet again to his most popular role as sketch-writer for the 'Daily Telegraph'. But in 1999 he developed cancer, of which, after a long struggle, he died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital on 15 December 2006. He was lovingly cared for by Virginia Mary Fraser, 'nee' Grose, the widow of Simon Fraser, the master of Lovat; they had married on 23 December 1998. He had no children. Although Johnson was an Anglican his funeral took place at the Roman Catholic church of the Most Holy Redeemer and St Thomas More, Cheyne Row, on 22 December. He was cremated at Mortlake crematorium, and his ashes were scattered in the Languedoc region of France, where he and his wife had a house. 


@@@@@


doc= 97522


Hussey, Marmaduke James, Baron Hussey of North Bradley (1923-2006), newspaper and broadcasting executive, was born at Lychwood, Worplesdon Hill, Woking, Surrey, on 29 August 1923, the only son and elder child of Eric Robert James Hussey (1885-1958), then a Sudan colonial servant, later director of education in Uganda and Nigeria, and his wife, Christine Elizabeth Justice, 'nee' Morley (1892-1977). He was educated at Rugby School, from where he gained an open scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford. Surrounded by sportsmen on both sides of the family, he too excelled. At Rugby he was in both the cricket eleven and the rugby fifteen. At Oxford he won a cricket blue as a left-arm slow bowler in 1942, and that autumn was selected for the varsity rugby match. However, since he was due to report to the Grenadier Guards the following Monday, he decided not to risk any delay, and so sacrificed -- as he put it -- 'my life's ambition to play... against Cambridge' ('Chance Governs All', 27). 
Hussey deemed the most critical impact on his life the five-year struggle to recover from fearful wounds suffered four days after the allied landing at Anzio, Italy, in January 1944. For forty years he reproached himself for his short war, but later was persuaded that the story might inspire. Machine-gunned at close range, hit in the right hand, right leg, and spine, he had his right leg amputated below the knee at a German field station. In great pain, he was transferred to Rome, then by hospital train northwards. His life's turning point came when he fought off the temptation to sleep. 'I knew I could conquer this, whatever it was, the belief never left me' ('Chance Governs All', 44). That self-belief was tested repeatedly. From a prisoner-of-war hospital near Fulda, where the nuns were so certain he would not survive they added his name to those who died there, he was one of a handful repatriated in wartime by the Red Cross. Once he was back in Britain the ensuing five years saw treatment and surgery to the unhealed spinal wound, which had turned to the then incurable osteomyelitis. Finally an unorthodox operation at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford produced a healing, though leaving him permanently crippled. For the rest of his life Hussey, with his cane and distinctive gait, publicly made light of his suffering, appearing invariably ebullient, with a hearty laugh. Back at Oxford in 1946, sport now only a memory, he resumed his history studies and in 1949 completed his final BA paper with distinction -- although he did not get the first he had earlier hoped for. 
On leaving Oxford in 1949 Hussey joined Associated Newspapers Ltd as a trainee. He started at the bottom -- in the advertising department of the 'Daily Mail' as a copy clerk -- and finished at the top. He described his approach thus: 'I like a ladder to climb as fast as I can, not worrying too much on whom I step on the way up' ('Chance Governs All', 74). A protege of the owner, Esmond Harmsworth, second Viscount Rothermere, he climbed steadily: manager of the 'Evening News', manager of the 'Scottish Daily Mail' (which he closed), director in 1964, and managing director in 1967. He knew more about newspaper production than journalism but he took credit for recruiting David English in 1969 from the 'Daily Express' to be editor of the 'Daily Sketch', and eventually editor of the 'Daily Mail'. Meanwhile, on 25 April 1959, in Bath Abbey, he married Lady Susan Katharine Waldegrave ('b'. 1939), fifth daughter of Geoffrey Noel Waldegrave, twelfth Earl Waldegrave. They had one son and one daughter. Lady Susan Hussey was a lady-in-waiting to the queen from 1960. 
During his time at Associated, Hussey, with responsibility for labour relations, had become spokesman for the Newspaper Proprietors Association, where he first made Rupert Murdoch's acquaintance. At the association he learned much both of the unions' obduracy in defending their ruinously expensive restrictive practices, and of the owners' fecklessness in taking advantage of any rival title with union trouble rather than standing together. Both were to colour his approach to the eventual showdown at Times Newspapers Ltd (TNL), into which 'The Times', a chronic loss-maker, had been merged in 1966 with the Thomson-owned money-spinning 'Sunday Times'. Hussey joined TNL in 1971, at the point when Roy Thomson, first Baron Thomson of Fleet, notwithstanding his 'open-ended' commitments to 'The Times', was expecting its losses to be trimmed to at least break-even point. Hussey was appointed chief executive in place of Thomson's lieutenant, Sir Denis Hamilton, who assumed the lesser job of chairman. The two men never got on. Hussey was also rarely comfortable with Gordon Brunton, the parent Thomson Organisation's chief executive, and this was fateful. It was a calamity for Hussey that Hamilton and Brunton had already initiated moving 'The Times' from Blackfriars into a building next door to the 'Sunday Times' on Gray's Inn Road. The aim was integration but its unintended consequence was that the ruinous malpractices of the latter's mostly casual labour force -- whose disruption was such that the paper was dubbed the 'Sunday Sometimes' -- were to infect the whole operation. Also a setback for Hussey was the death in 1976 of Roy Thomson and his succession by his son Kenneth, whose interests always were more in Canada, and who made clear that his own commitment not to sell 'The Times' was dependent on the introduction of the new computer typesetting technology by the end of that decade. 
Hussey's approach to the unending labour problems was to act like an officer dealing with good NCOs. The trouble in this case, as with much of the then turbulent industrial relations besetting the Heath, Wilson, and Callaghan governments, was that the NCOs, the union general secretaries, might mean well but had mostly lost control of the more militant shop stewards. In print unions these were the branch officials known as 'chapel fathers', and Hussey had to deal with fifty-six separate bargaining units at TNL. The accusation that he ignored the chapels is not the whole truth; his plan was to get the general secretaries on his side in the hope that they could help restore union discipline, and then proceed to dot the 'i's and cross the 't's with each chapel father. In the event he could hardly have done worse had he proceeded the other way round, and he might have done better. 
The crunch came in 1978, with the Thomson interests prospering in North Sea oil, television, and travel, but haemorrhaging in TNL. Unofficial stoppages cost the group 7,337,000 copies overall in 1977. In the new year's first three months there were twenty-nine failures to complete the print run of 'The Times', and nine on the Sunday. At a TNL executive board meeting on 16 March chaired by Hussey, with William Rees-Mogg, editor of 'The Times', as his fellow 'hawk', there was a unanimous decision to go for the 'big bang', a shutdown if the unions failed to agree wholesale reforms by 30 November. 'Basically, if we were going to have a row we might as well have a bloody big row and throw in the kitchen sink... Yes I did feel a sense of mission in attacking what I saw as the canker of irresponsible trades union activity at the heart of the industry, and, indeed, the country. ('Chance Governs All', 148)' Brunton, he reported, was 'absolutely delighted' (ibid.). However, little thought had been given to practicalities. Not until October did TNL's management produce detailed proposals for negotiation, and the November deadline arrived with only two chapels having reached agreement. Despite much attempted negotiation the general secretaries predictably failed to deliver. Hussey lamented later that 'I placed too much faith in those printing princes' (ibid., 154). Both papers and all supplements closed, a shutout if not a complete lockout (Hussey later incorrectly labelled it 'a strike'; ibid., 159). The trial of strength was on but there had been a miscalculation of the balance of forces. The unions proved to have alternative resources. Many of the sacked workers were opportunistically re-employed at other titles like 'The Observer', 'The Guardian', and the 'Financial Times', which put on extra pages and even sections. 'Almost magically, an industry that was already notoriously over-manned absorbed the staff of 'The Times' and the 'Sunday Times' as it came off the company's payroll' (Jacobs, 72). 
To break the deadlock Michael Mander, whom Hussey had brought from Associated as advertising director, got the board to agree to a secret scheme to outflank the unions, involving printing abroad and selling round the world a weekly edition of 'The Times'. Rees-Mogg was a fervent supporter. Timed for the eve of the British general election, the first edition, written by journalists who remained on the payroll, was to be computer-set in Darmstadt and printed in Frankfurt at a Turkish-owned plant. Alerted by the London unions at the last minute, German pickets and agitators demonstrated outside the plant. After petrol-soaked material was found in an apparent bid to sabotage the main presses the police advised that with the May day holiday imminent they could no longer guarantee the safety of the operation. The full print run of 80,000 was abandoned, though 10,000 copies with the date of 30 April 1979 were run off and distributed around the world. That feat of eluding pickets, albeit with a limited edition, convinced Hussey, supported by Rees-Mogg and his deputies at 'The Times', that they at last had the unions on the ropes. But even ahead of Frankfurt there had been some wobbling by Brunton, Hamilton, and Harry Evans, editor of the 'Sunday Times'. They wanted contacts with the chapels, which Hussey saw as a stab in the back. Treating Frankfurt as a fiasco rather than a partial success, Brunton now reversed his approval and, seeking compromise, ordered no more international adventures. To Hussey this 'robbed us of what was our strongest card' ('Chance Governs All', 164). 
Hussey was even more dismayed when he got wind that Ken Thomson was also giving up, 'not prepared to foot the bill any longer' (Grigg, 491). Thomson came over in June and met the unions. With Hussey cut out of the negotiations, the final surrender still took another five months. Publication resumed on 13 November 1979, virtually on the chapels' terms, or terms they had no intention of implementing, after total TNL losses of $46 million. By the following summer Hussey was moved out and given the non-job, under Hamilton, of vice-chairman of a new TNL holding company. Suddenly, viewing the 'Times' journalists' strike over pay as the last straw, Ken Thomson had had enough; in 1981 he put the papers up for sale, and they were bought by Rupert Murdoch. Significantly Murdoch cleaned out the TNL management but retained the holding company board with Hussey as consultant. Although not involved in Murdoch's successful showdown with the unions at Wapping in 1986, Hussey took some credit for advice he gave the new owner. Rees-Mogg later asserted that Hussey's defeat was Dunkirk to Murdoch's D-day. 
By September 1986 Hussey was mixing various business chairmanships and directorships with good works: he was, among other things, a Rhodes trustee from 1972 to 1991, a member of the board of the British Council from 1983 to 1996, a member of the government working party on artificial limbs and appliance centres in England from 1984 to 1986, chairman of the Royal Marsden Hospital from 1985 to 1998, and in 1985-6 joint chairman of Great Western local radio in Bristol. On the death of Stuart Young, the BBC chairman, he was asked by the head of Margaret Thatcher's number 10 policy unit, Brian Griffiths, to suggest some candidates to replace Young. When they conferred Griffiths threw out that his wife, Rachel, had suggested Hussey do it, but Hussey laughed it off. In fact Griffiths was serious; he discreetly gained Denis Thatcher's approval, and that of the former home secretary William Whitelaw, and moved Hussey to the top of the list. By some Hussey was seen as an old-fashioned Liberal, but by others as a Thatcherite who would stand up to BBC management the way Murdoch had stood up to the unions at Wapping. Hussey was duly phoned by Douglas Hurd, the home secretary, offering the chairmanship, and further persuasion was added by William Waldegrave, a junior minister and Hussey's brother-in-law. 
Even before getting to Broadcasting House (he had to check the address in the telephone directory) Hussey judged the corporation to be 'out of control with some pretty unreliable characters there' ('Chance Governs All', 193). A state of war was reckoned to exist between management and the governors, with Alasdair Milne, director-general, and Rees-Mogg, outgoing vice-chairman, leading the opposing forces. Hussey found most of the BBC's top managers out of touch, 'marooned... like a couple of Boer contingents in a laager' (ibid., 202), and he threw himself into the fray with a hands-on approach not hitherto associated with his more supervisory predecessors. Within days he had gone behind the director-general's back in strictly management matters, and four months later he and the new vice-chairman, Lord Barnett, stealthily gained the consent of their fellow governors to dismiss Milne, the first director-general to be so treated. Hussey considered him 'unbalanced and irresponsible' (ibid., 213). With only cursory explanation that the governors wanted change, Hussey and Barnett told Milne that either he could resign or he would be dismissed. They had a letter ready for his signature. 'What terrible people, I thought' (Milne, 202). 
Dismissal was one thing, appointment another, and there were fateful unintended consequences. Hussey then failed to get the governors to agree to his choice of successor, David Dimbleby, a leading television presenter who had little experience of BBC management. They chose instead Milne's deputy, Michael Checkland, an accountant expert in BBC finances. Hussey asked Checkland if he would accept Dimbleby as his deputy. Checkland demurred, and, at Paul Fox's suggestion, with Michael Grade's approval, invited John Birt, who came 'expensive', as Hussey put it ('Chance Governs All', 271), from London Weekend Television. 
Turbulent times ensued, over policy, appointments, and programmes. Hussey was firm in repulsing the attacks on the BBC from Norman Tebbit, the chairman of the Conservative Party, but he did not oppose the government's ban on direct interviews with Sinn Fein spokesmen -- who, comically, were shown with their words spoken by actors. Throughout this time Thatcher had the BBC firmly in her sights. She had always anathematized the licence fee, asking why people who only watched ITV should pay it. She and her supporters were also incensed by current affairs coverage both of the Conservative Party and of Northern Ireland (although it was Thames TV that felt the heaviest blow). Hussey had well-grounded fears that she intended breaking up the corporation with part-privatization, stripping it of TV and radio channels in the projected Broadcasting bill, but her efforts in cabinet committee were talked out by ministers like William Whitelaw, David Mellor, and Hurd himself. The work was incomplete by the time she resigned. Under John Major, who was less aggressive, the BBC's new charter and licence fee settlement were reached. 
Much china was broken on the way, however. Birt was no sooner made deputy director-general than he fell out with Grade, who left for Channel 4. Checkland worked mightily to trim spending and reform management practices, but Hussey harassed him for more, and finally schemed with Birt, and Patricia Hodgson, the one open high tory among top BBC executives, to replace him with Birt. In a messy compromise that pleased no one, Hussey made Birt director-general designate, while Checkland was to serve another year, itself foreshortened. Most unusually the post was not advertised for a competitive appointment board, which brought a protest from John Tusa, the managing director of the BBC World Service. In appointing Birt, Hussey had offended against his own axiom: 'appoint only a man who has the support and confidence of a good portion of the staff' ('Chance Governs All', 218). Birt, after five years in charge of news and current affairs, was already seen as the most hated man in broadcasting. Whether in spite of or because of this he launched further rounds of reforms and manning reductions, relying massively (and expensively) on management consultants. Hussey was at first staunchly behind his protege. In a public furore prompted by revelations that Hussey had allowed Birt a tax-efficient contract to be paid not as a BBC employee but by Birt's private company, which allowed his Armani suits and his wife's secretarial services to be tax-deductible, Hussey stood firm. 'The Observer' called in vain for the resignations of both Birt and Hussey. Hussey later inaccurately and unfairly claimed that Birt's contract was identical to that of others -- such as John Tusa. This was untrue, since Tusa and others were paid as self-employed freelances. 
Yet by the time of the broadcasting white paper of 1994 Hussey and Birt's disenchantment was mutual. Hussey questioned Birt's lack of judgement, while Birt believed that Hussey was ageing and jealous of all the plaudits Birt got for the new licence-fee settlement. In their respective memoirs each claimed total credit for the latter, while Checkland pointed out, in a letter to 'The Times' (22 Oct 2002), that the groundwork had been done under his aegis. Hussey and Birt's relationship finally foundered in 1996 on Birt's decision to withhold from Hussey the fact that Diana, princess of Wales, had recorded a TV interview with 'Panorama'. Birt did not trust Hussey not to sabotage the planned scoop, through his wife's connection to the queen. Hussey was not told until one week before the scheduled transmission, the same day that Diana personally informed the queen, and the BBC publicized the interview. Hussey felt betrayed. All the reinforced procedures for referral of contentious matters to the governors had been defied. Hussey, who maintained that he never previewed programmes and in any case kept his wife's royal duties out of his business, would have been justified in calling for Birt's dismissal, but the interview drew a record audience and was hugely popular. Instead it was Hussey who departed shortly afterwards, after the longest spell of any BBC chairman. He was made a life peer, as Baron Hussey of North Bradley, on John Major's recommendation. His parting shot at Birt in a House of Lords debate in 1999 was seen by some as a belated conversion: 'There is too much bureaucracy, over-bloated policy units, and too much spent on expansion and management', he lamented ('Hansard 5L', 597.1686, 3 March 1999). 
Hussey's final years were clouded by the onset of dementia, and he died on 27 December 2006 at 3 Beatrice Place, Marloes Road, Kensington, London, a nursing home for the elderly. He was survived by his wife and their two children. At the time of his death, his legacy was deeply contested. He bestrode three careers, but perhaps relied too much on instinct rather than deepening knowledge. Yet had he, like Murdoch, had the benefit of Thatcher's laws curbing union power, he could well have saved the Thomson papers. At the BBC his engineering of Birt's appointment backfired on both of them in the end, with considerable fallout for the institution. Michael Grade scoffed in 2002 that all Birt (and Hussey) 'paraphernalia... has come apart and been hastily dismantled' ('The Guardian', 26 Oct 2002). 


@@@@@


doc= 97524


Figures, Sir Colin Frederick (1925-2006), intelligence officer, was born at 34 Primrose Lane, Hall Green, Birmingham, on 1 July 1925, the son of Frederick Joseph Figures, insurance clerk, and his wife, Muriel Nellie, 'nee' Hadwell. He was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham. He then served in the Worcestershire regiment from 1943 to 1948; his postings included the inter-service Russian language course at Cambridge and the British military missions in Romania and Hungary. On demobilization he went to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he took a degree in French and Russian. A keen sportsman, he had played rugby for King Edward's and for Pembroke College and had a chance of a Cambridge blue. Perhaps to console himself for not achieving this, towards the end of his time at university he co-founded the Woodpeckers, a combined Oxford and Cambridge touring rugby side. He was also an enthusiastic cricketer. 
Figures joined the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS, also known as MI6) directly from university in 1951. After two years at the head office in London he was attached to the Allied Control Commission in Germany from 1953 to 1956, then to the embassy in Amman from 1956 to 1958. After a year back in London, in 1959 he was appointed head of the important station in Warsaw, which gave him the chance to demonstrate his ability to recruit and run foreign spies under hostile conditions. His reputation within the service for competence and reliability was by this time growing into the realization that he was potentially a high-flying senior officer. In 1956 he had married a secretary at the Foreign Office, Pamela Ann (Pam) Timmis, with whom he had a son and two daughters. 
Figures returned to London in 1962 and spent most of the next ten years dealing with operations behind the iron curtain, including a period from 1966 to 1969 as head of a station in a Vienna that would still have seemed atmospherically familiar to Harry Lime. This was a busy time politically as well as professionally, coinciding with the 'Prague spring' of 1968, and led to his being appointed OBE in his last year there. Over the next ten years he broadened his relationship with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and, especially during four years directing SIS operations in Northern Ireland, with the Security Service (MI5) and the military. His east European experience proved extremely useful in the Irish context and during this period SIS shook off the adverse effects of the Philby and Blake disasters and scored a number of significant recruitment successes against the hardest east European targets. He was involved in the operational planning of several of these. By the time he handed over the Northern Ireland responsibility he had established himself as a leading member of the Whitehall intelligence community and was appointed CMG in 1978. 
Figures was a natural choice to take over as deputy chief of SIS under Sir Arthur (Dickie) Franks in 1979, then to replace him as chief in 1981. Figures's four years as chief were conspicuously successful. He combined a background founded on solid midland middle-class values with practical common sense and an ability to lead by example. Self-effacing but quietly self-confident in manner, he exemplified SIS's stated policy of employing not risk seekers but risk takers. His door remained metaphorically, and often actually, open; and through it could sometimes be heard ball-by-ball test match commentary, turned down very low. He was approachable by the whole staff, a good delegator who was liked, respected, and trusted by his subordinates. A man of total integrity, he combined an infectious sense of humour with an absence of pomposity; never a puritan, he was always staunchly loyal to his family and he was unusually fortunate in having a wife who also established herself firmly in the affections of the service and took great interest in questions of welfare in what could sometimes be quite stressful professional circumstances. 
Figures had not been long in the chair when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands in 1982. SIS initially came in for some criticism for not having forecast the invasion, as did the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, but it was soon rightly accepted that foreign intelligence and diplomatic services faced an impossible task in monitoring the unpredictable policies of an erratic dictator. More importantly, and with some invaluable help from their excellent relationships with allied liaison services in North and South America, western Europe, and the Commonwealth, SIS was able to contribute significantly to the achievements of the armed forces in their successful military campaign. Among SIS's achievements was the monitoring of the commercial availability of Exocet missiles that might have replenished Argentinian stocks, the missiles having been deployed with considerable effect against the Royal Navy at a time when the outcome of the campaign was still far from clear. SIS was also able to complement Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) in reporting on the Argentinian air force and navy. A less glamorous preoccupation for Figures as chief of SIS was the growing Treasury pressure to trim the budgets of the intelligence community and to improve the working relationships between SIS, the Security Service, and GCHQ. He was ideally suited for this role, lacking as he did any hint of pretentiousness or bombast but having a good eye for detail, and under his leadership SIS's relations with the other two services and with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office were all harmonious. He was knighted KCMG in 1983. 
During Figures's time as chief SIS was still unavowed, in other words the existence of the service was not officially acknowledged and still less was the identity of the CSS (chief of the secret service) himself known to the public. With increasingly open government, a press that rejected traditional attitudes towards secrecy, and not least because of the building of a relatively high-profile new headquarters beside the Thames to replace the nondescript building near Lambeth North tube station, it became impossible to maintain the pretence. The former low-profile existence had suited the inherently modest Figures very well, but it became much harder for him to avoid the limelight when in 1989 he was appointed intelligence co-ordinator in the cabinet office in succession to Sir Tony Duff. This job formalized the responsibility he had been given in SIS for budgetary control and joint intelligence co-operation, but now he had to oversee all three services and their relationships with Whitehall in general and with the joint intelligence committee, under Sir Percy Cradock, in particular. Rigorous financial controls were imposed by the Treasury, but making good use of his high reputation and popularity in the intelligence community Figures presided over four harmonious and successful years for British intelligence. One of his outstanding achievements in this period was the reorganization of the intelligence machinery in Northern Ireland, especially after the Ballygawley incident of August 1988, when eight British soldiers were killed and twenty-eight injured by an IRA bomb. His previous responsibility for SIS operations in the territory gave him an invaluable background for this task and meant that his views carried appropriate weight. 
After his retirement in 1989 Figures and his wife divided their time between Thames Ditton, Surrey, and the Isle of Wight. He even listed beachcombing as one of his pursuits, but he also keenly followed sport. During the last few years of his life he became increasingly incapacitated by Parkinson's disease and was fortunate to have a supportive wife and family. On 8 December 2006 he died peacefully after quite a long period in Emberbrook Care Centre, Thames Ditton. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97525


Farr, Dennis Larry Ashwell (1929-2006), art historian and museum director, was born on 3 April 1929 at 30 Leagrave Road, Luton, Bedfordshire, the youngest of three children of Arthur William Farr, who sold, and later manufactured, hats, and his wife, Helen Eva, 'nee' Ashwell. Educated at Luton grammar school, where he was encouraged in his ambition to study the history of art by Ronald Smoothey, the enthusiastic senior art master, he went to the Courtauld Institute of Art, University of London, in 1947 (graduating BA in 1950). At the time Anthony Blunt had just become director and the student body consisted predominantly of former servicemen and -women. At Blunt's suggestion he wrote his MA dissertation on William Etty, the early nineteenth-century painter of nudes, which was subsequently published with a full catalogue, as 'William Etty' (1958). 
In 1954 Farr was appointed assistant keeper at the Tate Gallery, just when the 'National Gallery and Tate Gallery Act' gave full independent status to the Tate for the first time. Farr described his early years there in an illuminating reminiscence in the 'Burlington Magazine' (Jan 2006) containing numerous amusing anecdotes, including a description of the occasion when the then director, John Rothenstein, punched the well-known, irascible collector, Douglas Cooper, on the nose. He worked on several exhibitions, notably a Duncan Grant retrospective, and he was on the committee of the legendary Romantic Movement exhibition, celebrating the tenth anniversary of the Council of Europe in 1959. But the long-term fruit of his period at the Tate was the catalogue 'Modern British Paintings, Drawings and Sculpture' (1964), which he wrote with Mary Chamot and Martin Butlin, and a general book, 'British Sculpture since 1945' (1965). On 6 June 1959 he married Diana Pullein-Thompson ('b'. 1925), a successful author of childrens' books, and daughter of Captain Harold James Pullein-Thompson. They had two children, Benedict and Joanna. 
Relatively brief interludes as curator of the Paul Mellon Collection in Washington (1965-6) and then as senior lecturer in fine art at Glasgow University (1967-9) led to the appointment that turned out to be central to Farr's career, the directorship of Birmingham City Museums and Art Gallery (1969-80). The Art Gallery is outstanding among the regional collections in England and under Farr's direction it enjoyed a golden period, marked by major acquisitions, notably a Giovanni Bellini altarpiece and two views of Warwick Castle by Canaletto. His calm and modest demeanour and human kindness and the encouragement he gave to his staff were widely recognized and appreciated. His high standing in Birmingham was attested in a variety of ways, not least in his appointment as JP (1977-80) and the award of the honorary degree of DLitt by the university (1981). 
In 1980 Farr was appointed director of the Courtauld Institute Gallery, where his first task was the integration and display of the recent munificent bequest of Count Antoine Seilern, the Princes Gate collection. This was mainly of Flemish and Italian paintings and drawings, and it added a new dimension to Samuel Courtauld's original collection of French impressionists and post-impressionists. A few years later Farr planned and supervised the collection's move from its modest home in Woburn Square to grand surroundings in the fine rooms at Somerset House. The new galleries were opened to the public in 1990 and Farr was appointed CBE in the following year. His popularity with his colleagues at all levels was attested by the security staff, who insisted on giving him their own leaving party when he retired in 1993. 
Farr's rather easygoing manner belied a great deal of energy and commitment. As well as the administrative tasks of his directorships he engaged in research, particularly, though by no means exclusively, on twentieth-century British art, and produced numerous publications. Most notable was his volume in the 'Oxford History of English Art' series, 'English Art, 1870-1940' (1978), and his monumental book on the sculptor Lynn Chadwick, written with Eva Chadwick (1990). Nor did he shirk the demands of the public arena of his profession. A valued member of numerous committees, he was, uniquely, both president of the Museums Association (1979-80) and chairman of the Association of Art Historians (1983-6). On the academic side he was editor of 'Clarendon Studies in the History of Art' (1985-2001). 
Retirement from the Courtauld gave Farr more time for his favourite hobby, riding, in pursuit of which he and his wife moved to Haslemere in Surrey. Yet he continued to be in demand as a guest curator of exhibitions and he took on a Francis Bacon retrospective at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven in 1999. He also contributed fourteen entries to the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography', including a substantial article on William Etty. His career provides an eloquent example of an able manager who was also a gifted curator and a productive scholar. He died of a cerebral haemorrhage at the Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, on 6 December 2006, and was cremated at Guildford crematorium following a funeral service at St Bartholomew's Church, Haslemere, on 14 December. A memorial service was held at St Mary-le-Strand on 19 April 2007. Farr was survived by his wife, Diana, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97526


Drake, Charles Edward (1925-2006), actor and comedian, was born Charles Edward Springall on 19 June 1925 at 185 Westmoreland Road, Walworth, London, the second child in the family of three sons and three daughters of William Springall, newspaper vendor, and his wife, Winifred, otherwise Violet, 'nee' Drake. He attended Victory Place junior school and Paragon Row senior school, leaving the latter aged fourteen. Congenitally restless and fired by memories of accompanying Harry Champion singing 'Any old iron' at the South London Palace aged eight, he was determined to succeed as an entertainer. His short stature (five feet one and a half inches), quick wits, and acrobatic ability made him a natural comic. His boyish face, wispy strawberry-blond curls, and blue eyes gave his persona an innocence belied by a truculent determination to get his own way. He enlisted in the RAF in 1943 as a wireless operator and rear gunner, finding occasional opportunities to perform. After demobilization he worked part-time at working men's clubs as a stand-up comedian, adopting his mother's maiden name. 
After the war Drake turned professional, initially working as Dick Emery's feed touring provincial variety theatres, but his career took off after pairing with Jack Edwardes, whose height and lugubrious persona complemented Drake's whirlwind, maniacal energy. Their double act, featured on the children's magazine television programme 'Jigsaw' (BBC, 1954-5), blossomed in their own show on ITV, 'Mick and Montmorency' (1955-8). Drake's 'Hello, my darlins' became a national catchphrase. Unwilling to be typecast as a children's entertainer he dissolved the partnership to star in several series built round his own impish persona: 'Drake's Progress' (1957-8), 'Charlie Drake In...' (1958-60), and 'The Charlie Drake Show' (1960-61) for the BBC. A perfectionist dedicated to the comedian's craft, Drake, who wrote or co-wrote his material, often with his long-time writing partner Lew Schwarz, gained a reputation as 'difficult' because of his uncompromising demands in decor, lighting, and set design. The latter was a necessity as his shows were built round inventive and perilous slapstick set pieces -- 'The reluctant tightrope walker' or 'The little picture hanger' -- that required absolute exactitude. During an episode of the live television show 'Bingo Madness' (1961) he was seriously injured and lay in a coma for several days. However, Drake always felt that a live show provided 'the edge and fear that... are essential to all of the performing arts' ('Drake's Progress', 98). 
After a two-year break Drake returned with what became his best-remembered series, 'The Worker' (1965-70), for ITV, playing a willing but accident-prone handyman who fails at every job he is given. The central scenes of mayhem were bookended by his sparring with Henry McGee's dead-pan labour exchange clerk Mr Pugh, always mispronounced as 'Poo'. The culmination of his television career came in 1968 when a compilation of set pieces from the BBC series 'The Charlie Drake Show' won the coveted golden rose at Montreux. It included the celebrated nine-minute sequence in which he conducted an orchestra performing Tchaikovsky's '1812 Overture' and played every instrument, a masterpiece of comic invention, timing, and the megalomania that characterized many of his creations. 
Drake's cinema career -- he starred in four films for the Associated British Picture Corporation -- was less successful. 'Sands of the Desert' (1960) was undistinguished, but 'Petticoat Pirates' (1961) made more inventive use of the anarchic and lubricious side of his persona. The 'Times' reviewer referred to him as a 'battered Botticelli cherub' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1961), an epithet he treasured. In 'The Cracksman' (1963) and 'Mister Ten Per Cent' (1967) he explored the dilemma of the artist whose integrity and yearning for acceptance is spurned by an uncomprehending and venal world. 
Drake also enjoyed recording success with sentimental or comic songs, produced by George Martin, notably 'Old Mr Shadow' (1960) and 'My Boomerang Won't Come Back' (1961) and continued to perform on stage, including prestigious appearances at the London Palladium, starring in nine royal variety shows (he had missed his first invited appearance as a result of the accident while filming 'Bingo Madness'). He concentrated on his stage act after 1970 but was suspended by Equity after refusing to pay a fine for employing a non-member -- a local housewife -- in a Christmas pantomime at the Bradford Alhambra (1974-5). During eighteen months of inactivity he lost both income and familiarity and his return with 'Slapstick and Old Lace' was undermined by the extraordinarily hot summer of 1976 when audiences plummeted. After several further lean years he faced bankruptcy in 1979, unable to support a sybaritic lifestyle that included a Surrey mansion, yacht, racehorses, sports cars, and inveterate gambling (poker and horse racing). 
Accepting whatever work was offered in order to clear his tax debts, Drake branched out into serious acting, starring in a production of Alfred Jarry's 'Ubu Roi' (1980). He played Touchstone in 'As You Like It' at the Ludlow festival in 1981 and gave acclaimed performances as Davies in 'The Caretaker' (1983) and as the grotesque moneylender Smallweed in the BBC adaptation of 'Bleak House' (1985). After playing Nagg in Beckett's 'Endgame' (1992) he returned to the stage for Jim Davidson's adult pantomime 'SINderella' (1994) as Baron Hardon. 
Drake's first marriage, on 11 March 1954 to Heather Evelyn Barnes, an eighteen-year-old professional dancer (and daughter of Edward Barnes, department store manager), whom he had met on tour, produced three sons but ended in divorce in 1971. His second marriage, on 12 May 1979, to Elaine Ann Bird, another professional dancer thirty-two years his junior (and daughter of Frank George Bird, telegraphist), also ended in divorce, in 1985. Following a stroke in 1995 he stopped performing and lived at Brinsworth House, Twickenham, a retirement home for actors and performers run by the Entertainment Artistes Benevolent Fund, where he died on 23 December 2006 from bronchopneumonia and heart failure. He was survived by his three sons. 
Drake's cultural roots were in music hall but he was one of the first generation of variety comedians for whom television provided their main audience. He was part of the long tradition of diminutive British working-class comedians who played the 'little man', the underdog muddling his way through all adversity. But there was a darker, harsher side to his comedy, exploring the pressures and torment that performers experience. This ambivalence made him the most distinctive, if not the best-loved, comedian of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 97529


Carter, Denis Victor, Baron Carter (1932-2006), farmer and politician, was born on 17 January 1932 at 39 Hayles Street, Southwark, London, the son of Albert William Carter (died 1973), tea warehouseman, and his wife, Annie Julia, 'nee' Tynan (died 1972). The family later moved to Hove, Sussex, where they ran a sweetshop and later a cafe. After attending six different schools in seven years, Carter was sent to Xaverian College in Brighton, where he met his future wife, Teresa Mary May Greengoe, daughter of Cecil William Walter Greengoe. They eventually married on 3 August 1957; Carter was an agricultural student by that time, and she a primary school teacher. They had one son, Andrew ('b'. 1963), who died at the age of nineteen, and one daughter, Catherine ('b'. 1959), who died at the age of forty-four. Both suffered from the hereditary degenerative condition retinitis pigmentosa, and in addition Andrew had a defective heart. 
Carter, a city boy with no agricultural connections who was to become one of the most knowledgeable men in Britain on agriculture, had developed the idea of becoming a farmer between 1950 and 1952 when he was doing his national service in the Suez Canal zone working as an audit clerk. After returning to England he went back into accounting and worked for a company in London but the 'call of the land' was persistent, and two years later he enrolled at the East Sussex Institute of Agriculture, followed by Writtle Agricultural College, Essex, where he obtained the national diploma in agriculture and the queen's award for the country's highest marks. Much later, in 1970, he was awarded a two-year senior research fellowship in agricultural marketing at the Institute of Agricultural Economics at Worcester College, Oxford, where he gained a BLitt in 1972. 
In 1957 Carter founded and became director of an agricultural accounting and management company, AKC Ltd, which grew to manage and handle the accounts of a large number of farms, mainly in southern England. He held this position for forty years until 1997, when he entered government. At the same time he also began farming himself, first in Oxfordshire and then on a larger scale in Wiltshire and Hampshire. In 1968 he founded and then worked for thirty years with United Oilseeds, which expanded, largely under his guidance, into a substantial farm trading operation. United Oilseeds was responsible for introducing large-scale oilseed rape marketing into Britain and later encouraged the production of opium poppies as a profitable medical crop. 
Carter stood once for parliament. Encouraged by Wilfred Cave, a Wiltshire farmer and staunch Labour supporter, he contested Basingstoke as the Labour candidate in the election of 1970 but was unsuccessful. In the mid-1970s, during the boom in agricultural land prices, Carter served on the Northfield committee, investigating especially the effect of City funds on land prices. Other farming appointments followed including, in 1982, being elected chairman of the Farmers' Club, of which he was later a trustee. Many other organizations gained from Carter's enthusiasm, expertise, sharp mind, down-to-earth approach, and dry humour. He chaired the BBC rural affairs and agriculture committee from 1987 to 1990; in 1993 Michael Heseltine appointed him to chair the UK Co-operative Council, a post he held until 1997; he was president of the Guild of Agricultural Journalists from 1994 to 1996 and of the British Institute of Agricultural Consultants from 1992 to 1997. He was also a member of two agricultural discussion clubs, Turners (in Stockbridge) and Grasshoppers (in Amesbury). 
In 1987, on Neil Kinnock's recommendation, Carter was created a life peer as Baron Carter, acting for his first ten years as an authoritative opposition spokesman on rural affairs. He was also opposition spokesman on social security from 1988 to 1990 and health from 1989 to 1992, the latter with special reference to the disabled. His experience of bringing up children with a degenerative disease causing increasing disability made him a sensitive spokesman in the Lords on these complex and important issues. In 2003, when he chaired the joint committee on the draft 'Mental Capacity Bill', he won cross-party support for the legislation and was particularly successful in ensuring that people with learning disabilities could present evidence to his committee. In memory of their children the Carters set up the Andrew and Catherine Carter Foundation Trust to help disabled people. He was made an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists in recognition for his work for the disabled. 
From 1990 to 1992 Carter was deputy opposition chief whip in the House of Lords, and when Labour gained power in 1997 he was appointed captain of the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen at Arms (government chief whip), deputy chairman of various committees and deputy speaker, and was sworn of the privy council. For five years until 2002 he steered a heavy legislative programme including the 'Human Rights Act' through the House of Lords, and he was involved in the negotiations that led to the compromise in the 'House of Lords Act' 1999, which retained ninety-two hereditary peers in the first stage of reform. Carter himself was a strong supporter of Lords reform. A year after the start of Tony Blair's second term as prime minister he stood down as chief whip in the Lords, having reached the age of seventy. Still farming, he remained an active member of the House of Lords and became vice-chairman of the English Farming and Food Partnership and the British Association for Biofuels and Oils, and president of the Forestry and Timber Association and the Royal Association of British Dairy Farmers. He was voted peer of the year in 2003. 
Carter was a man of courage and vision who was respected by all members of the House of Lords, loyal to his political party and its values, committed to those who lived and worked in rural enterprise, dedicated to his wider belief in caring for the disabled, and, above all, a committed Roman Catholic. He died of cancer of the pancreas at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Chelsea, London, on 18 December 2006. Baroness Amos, leader of the House of Lords, in paying tribute to him, recalled that she had visited him only a few hours before his death, to find him filling in his tax return. He was survived by his wife, Teresa. 


@@@@@


doc= 97530


Boston, Richard (1938-2006), journalist and author, was born on 29 December 1938 at Stonefield nursing home, Blackheath, London, the elder son of Frank Boston ('b'. 1903), a dairy farmer of Shernden, Edenbridge, Kent, then serving as an engineer officer in the RAF, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Vessey ('b'. 1904). He was educated at Stowe School and spent a year studying art at the Regent Street Polytechnic in London before going to King's College, Cambridge, where he read English. He went to Sweden in 1963-4, once running in a marathon there. He spent 1964-5 in Paris, living in a garret high above the Gare du Nord. He taught English, wrote occasional feature articles, and appeared in Jacques Tati's film 'Playtime'. After returning to Britain he moved into a flat in Covent Garden and worked for 'Peace News', later claiming that MI5 had compiled a file on him. He then worked at the 'Times Literary Supplement', where he was a sub-editor and took great pleasure in headlines such as one he wrote for a review of a book on Pearl Harbor, which read 'Nasty nip in the air'. He became books editor of 'New Society' magazine, and edited a critical volume on the British newspapers, 'The Press We Deserve' (1970). On 27 January 1968, he married (Elizabeth) Anne Caulkin ('b'. 1945), then a secretary but later (as Anne Boston) a journalist and author, daughter of Lieutenant David Howard Caulkin, army officer. There were no children of the marriage, which was dissolved in 1976, though they remained close friends. 
After returning from a convivial spell living in a former hunting lodge in the Sologne region of France Boston signed a contract in 1972 as a features writer for 'The Guardian', a relationship that would last for nearly all the rest of his life and took a number of forms. He became celebrated for championing 'real ale' and attacking the big brewers in a weekly column, 'Boston on beer', which he began in 1973, shortly after the founding of the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA). Though he always said he preferred a pink gin to a pint of beer, the column became a great success with readers, and won a Glenfiddich award for food and drink writing as well as providing material for a book, 'Beer and Skittles' (1976). When 'The Guardian' launched its Saturday supplement Boston appeared on the cover of the first issue, naked in a deck chair and with a portable typewriter strategically placed in his lap, to illustrate an article about a nudist colony in the south of France. The article was entitled 'Starkness at noon', which later became the title of a collection of his pieces (1997). A similar pun had given him the title for another book bringing together his best articles, 'Baldness be my Friend' (1977). 
Though he listed procrastination as a recreation in 'Who's Who' (in another reference book he chose 'soothsaying, shelling peas and embroidery'), Boston was always pursuing new avenues. In 1974 he published the first book he had written rather than edited, 'An Anatomy of Laughter', a fluent, characteristically wry, but also extremely erudite account of the subject ranging from the Marx brothers to Henri Bergson. He wrote or edited a dozen more books on subjects ranging from the first English translator of Rabelais, Sir Thomas Urquhart ('The Admirable Urquhart', 1975) to a British Film Institute monograph on the classic French film 'Boudu sauve des eaux' (1994). His fondness for practical jokes led to a book recounting the tomfoolery of an invented character whom he named C. O. Jones ('cojones'), 'The C. O. Jones Compendium of Practical Jokes' (1982, with illustrations by Posy Simmonds). When the book was published a BBC interviewer asked him on air if practical jokes were possible on radio. Boston replied by saying nothing and, after an interval, everybody in the studio began to giggle. Apart from his regular writing for 'The Guardian' Boston contributed to a wide range of publications, mainly on literary or country matters, though he also did a spell as restaurant critic for the newspaper. Towards the end of his life he was working on a book about Cezanne and Zola. 
In 1977 Boston founded the environmental magazine 'Vole', working out of a cramped basement room in his accountant's office beside Regent's Park. Though it was in constant financial straits and closed in 1980 the magazine was ahead of its time and was home to a fine collection of writers and illustrators. He also edited the literary journal 'Quarto' from 1979 to 1982. He used his wit to full effect as a presenter of the television press review programme 'What the Papers Say', and as a panellist on such radio programmes as 'The News Quiz'. He also maintained his artistic interests with sketches and watercolours, and on one occasion presented the newly appointed editor of 'The Observer' with a tie he had decorated with vivid variants of the newspaper's masthead and a quiz question on the back. 
After living in Islington during his first marriage Boston rented a cottage in the Berkshire village of Aldworth from the cartoonist and designer Osbert Lancaster, the subject of a biography he published in 1989 ('Osbert: a Portrait of Osbert Lancaster'). He then bought the converted village schoolhouse that was his home for the rest of his life, becoming an integral part of Aldworth life, often seen sitting outside the nearby pub on summer evenings, munching on pork scratchings and drinking something other than beer. In the European parliament election of 1994 he formed the Boston Tea Party and ran for the local constituency on the slogan 'It's a big trough and I want to get my nose in it'. He received only 1018 votes, but wrote a high-spirited account of his campaign for 'The Guardian'. His politics remained rooted in anarchism, usually coloured by his contrary spirit, which rebelled against any form of authority. His companion for the last twenty-three years of his life was Marie-Claude Therese Chapuis, a tour guide thirteen years his junior, and daughter of Marcel Chapuis, commercial traveller. Together they spent winters at her family home outside Aix-en-Provence where Boston pursued his research into Cezanne. They married on 7 December 2004. Boston died in the Royal Berkshire Hospital in Reading on 22 December 2006, of bronchopneumonia following a haemorrhagic stroke. He was survived by Marie-Claude, and by Anne Boston. 


@@@@@


doc= 97534


Stubbs, John Francis Alexander Heath- (1918-2006), poet, was born at Streatham Manor, Leigham Avenue, Streatham, London, on 9 July 1918, the elder son of Francis Heath-Stubbs, of independent means, and his wife, Edith Louise Sara, 'nee' Marr. At this time his parents lived at 5 Ranulf Road, Hampstead. His father had qualified as a solicitor but never practised. His mother was a concert pianist of distinction, as Edie Marr. She gave up her professional career after her son was born but became a music teacher when her husband developed multiple sclerosis and their private income was reduced by the depression of the 1930s. Music was to play a major part in her son's life and poetry. 
Most of Heath-Stubbs's boyhood was spent near the New Forest. The wild birds there, identified for him by his father, became a frequent source of inspiration. At the age of twelve he went to the recently founded Bembridge School on the Isle of Wight. He spent much of his free time in the school library, where he became absorbed in works of reference, namely 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', 'Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable', and 'Lempriere's Classical Dictionary'. They were the foundation of his education, he said later. Though he was miserable on the whole at Bembridge it was there that his literary talent began to emerge. He wrote poetry, published in the school magazine, but thought of studying biology at university. 
When he was eighteen Heath-Stubbs was diagnosed with glaucoma, unusual in one so young, inherited from his father. After an operation he lost the sight of his right eye but retained some vision in the left, which he was able to use for reading until 1961. He bore this misfortune with great stoicism and overcame the disability to a remarkable degree, becoming phenomenally well read. After the operation he was sent to Worcester College for the Blind where he learned Braille, though he never used it. He became editor of the college magazine and, most important, he came into contact with boys of a working-class background and began with them his lifelong enjoyment of beer-drinking and of mixing freely with people of all social classes in pubs. Meanwhile his parents had heard of the Barker exhibition at Queen's College, Oxford, given to someone who was either blind or in danger of losing his sight, to read English. Heath-Stubbs was awarded the exhibition in 1939 and at the age of twenty-one went to Oxford. 
At Oxford Heath-Stubbs soon became friends with two Queen's undergraduates, Sidney Keyes and Drummond Allison, who were poets, and with the handsome Philip Rawson, also writing poetry, later to become a professor of Indian art and a sculptor. Heath-Stubbs found the Oxford English school a satisfying complement to his private reading of poetry. He enjoyed listening to J. R. R. Tolkien lecture on 'Beowulf' and 'Gawain and the Green Knight'. He stored the alliterative metre in his mind for future use. His tutors were Herbert Brett-Smith for literature and John Bryson for language, but it was attending lectures by Nevill Coghill and above all C. S. Lewis that he found most rewarding. He also went to lectures by Lewis's friend Charles Williams, who seemed a saint-like presence to many in Oxford at that time. Williams's account of the English poetic tradition made a powerful impression on Heath-Stubbs, who later wrote the pamphlet on him for the British Council's 'Writers and their Work' series. 
Herbert Read, the poetry adviser to Routledge, published 'Eight Oxford Poets' in 1941, edited by Sidney Keyes and Michael Meyer, the future biographer of Ibsen, then at Christ Church. Heath-Stubbs was one of the eight, as was Keith Douglas. In a preface Keyes wrote: 'we are... 'Romantic' writers, though by that I mean little more than that our greatest fault is a tendency to floridity, and that we have on the whole little sympathy with the Audenian school of poets' ('Eight Oxford Poets', vii). This volume was followed a year later by Keyes's 'The Iron Laurel' and Heath-Stubbs's 'Wounded Thammuz', a booklet of twenty-four pages containing an elegy celebrating the Babylonian deity mentioned by Milton in 'Paradise Lost', a poetic reworking of the dying god myth. Both books were published by Routledge. 
Heath-Stubbs took first-class honours in his final schools in 1942 and stayed on for a BLitt on the background to James Thomson's 'The Seasons', but after a preliminary year's work both he and his supervisor, David Nichol Smith, came to the conclusion that in spite of his wide knowledge of literature, scholarship was not his forte. Part of his trouble was emotional: he had by now discovered his homosexuality and fallen desperately in love with Philip Rawson who, while admiring Heath-Stubbs's intellect and offering him firm friendship, was not of the same sexual orientation. 'Beauty and the Beast', the volume by Heath-Stubbs published by Routledge in 1943, contains 'The Heart's Forest', a moving poem of unrequited love. 'The Divided Ways' (1945), dedicated to Rawson, has for its title-poem Heath-Stubbs's elegy for Keyes, killed in action in 1943 at the age of twenty. Allison was also killed in the war. 
During this period William Bell, a poet from Merton College, introduced Heath-Stubbs to the college's literary society, the Bodley Club. He met there the atomic research scientist Ronald Bright, who later converted to Roman Catholicism to become Laurence Bright, a Dominican friar. Under his influence and that of Charles Williams, Heath-Stubbs reverted to the Anglican faith of his upbringing and became a regular churchgoer. Bell published a generous selection of poems by Heath-Stubbs in his anthology 'Poetry from Oxford in Wartime' (1945) and several by Philip Larkin, an Oxford contemporary of Heath-Stubbs, excluded by Keyes and Meyer from 'Eight Oxford Poets'. Heath-Stubbs and Larkin shared a dislike of each other's work. Larkin and his friend Kingsley Amis, both at St John's College, derided the use made by the Queen's poets of myth and legend. Three years later Bell, a keen mountaineer, died while climbing the Matterhorn. Heath-Stubbs edited and introduced a posthumous volume of Bell's poems, 'Mountains Beneath the Horizon' (1950). These early deaths of his compeers left Heath-Stubbs the sole post-war survivor of Oxford's wartime poetic romantics. 
After leaving Oxford Heath-Stubbs went to live in London, taking lodgings in a boarding-house in west Hampstead. Poetry was his vocation but he needed a job. He obtained one as a schoolmaster at The Hall preparatory school, where he read 'The Ancient Mariner' to his pupils but found keeping them in order at other times to be beyond him. He resigned halfway through his second term. His next job was on a popular illustrated encyclopaedia in preparation at Hutchinson. He contributed articles not only on literature, music, and theology but also on plants, birds, insects, and cookery. He was also commissioned to write a book about Edgar Allan Poe but gave it up when it was half-written, having, as he put it, 'seen through Poe'. He gave up the Hutchinson job, too, after eighteen months, and apart from temporary university appointments became a freelance for the rest of his life. 
Heath-Stubbs soon began to make his mark as a poet in London. His poems and articles appeared in Wrey Gardiner's 'Poetry Quarterly', Hugh Kingsmill's 'New English Review', and above all in John Lehmann's 'Penguin New Writing'. He gave readings of his poetry with other poets, including Dylan Thomas, George Barker, and James Kirkup, at the Ethical Church in Bayswater. His work was noticed by Edith Sitwell who, when she was in London, invited him to luncheons at the Sesame Club. He encountered T. S. Eliot, who asked him to edit 'The Faber Book of Twentieth-Century Verse', which he compiled with his Oxford friend David Wright, a poet who was deaf. With Wright he also edited, for Lehmann's publishing imprint, 'The Forsaken Garden', an anthology of English poetry from 1824 to 1905. His critical study of some of the poets of this period was published in 1950 as 'The Darkling Plain'. 
Heath-Stubbs's social life centred on what came to be known (though not strictly accurately, as he was fond of pointing out) as Soho. He became almost as much a fixture in the Wheatsheaf, Rathbone Place, off Oxford Street, as the short-story writer Julian Maclaren-Ross. In between drinking pints of beer, he would discourse at length on literary matters ranging over vast areas of poetry and mythology to anyone prepared to listen to him. He was as unstoppable and mesmerizing an impromptu talker as was Coleridge in the eyes of his contemporaries. 
Heath-Stubbs's next collection was rejected by Routledge, where Geoffrey Grigson had taken over as poetry adviser, but this did nothing to arrest the steady flow of poetry from his pen. He brought out fresh collections at regular intervals with various publishers: 'The Swarming of the Bees' (1950) with Eyre and Spottiswode, 'A Charm Against the Toothache' (1954) with Methuen, 'The Blue Fly in His Head' (1958) and 'The Triumph of the Muse' (1962), both with Oxford University Press, which also published his translations from Leopardi, the beginning of his work of translation, usually with a collaborator, of exotic poets he considered too little known in England. He found a permanent home for his own work with Michael Schmidt's Carcanet Press in Manchester. Carcanet published 'The Watchman's Flute' (1978), 'Naming of the Beasts' (1982), 'The Imitation of Aleph' (1985), and several other volumes, though his major work, 'Artorius' (King Arthur), 'a heroic poem in four books and eight episodes', was first published in a limited edition of 315 copies by Alan Clodd's Enitharmon Press in 1973. This lengthy poem's sources were Malory, Geoffrey of Monmouth, the 'Mabinogion', and more immediately, as Heath-Stubbs explained in his memoirs, 'Hindsights' (1993), Robert Graves's suggestion in 'Count Belisarius' that 'if we had learnt about King Arthur... from an historian like Procopius... we might have had a very different picture of the British leader -- as a general trying to preserve what was left of Roman civilisation in western Britain against the barbarian incursion of the Anglo-Saxons. ('Hindsights', 284)' The poem may also be seen as an act of homage to Charles Williams, whose Arthurian poems 'Taliessen Through Logres' and 'The Region of the Summer Stars' Heath-Stubbs considered to be among the greatest poetry of the twentieth century. 
Heath-Stubbs's early work had been notable for Browning-like monologues put into the mouths of literary or mythological figures. He now repudiated this kind of poetry and adopted a much more direct manner, speaking in his own voice rather than through masks, and experimenting in a wide variety of metrical forms. His technical versatility, comparable in its vast scope to that of Auden, became apparent with the publication by Carcanet of his 'Collected Poems, 1943-1987' (1988), where he relegated the poetry of his youthful 'romantic' period to the back of the book. The poem 'Epitaph', written in 1956, began: '
Mr Heath-Stubbs as you must understand 

Came of a gentleman's family out Staffordshire 

Of as good blood as any in England 

But he was wall-eyed and his legs too spare. 

' His most anthologized poem, he grew to hate and wish he had never written it. Nevertheless, its gentle ironic humour pervades much of his later work. His admiration for the style of such masters as Dryden, Pope, and Crabbe emerged in his 'Literary Essays' (1998). 
Heath-Stubbs was rescued from the hardship of trying to live on literary earnings boosted by a small inherited income by his appointment as Gregory fellow of poetry at Leeds University in 1952. He was highly successful in this role, making a friend of Bonamy Dobree, head of the English department, and the composer Peter Dickinson, for whom Heath-Stubbs wrote the libretto of an opera never staged, 'The Unicorns'. As a contribution to the revival of poetic drama he wrote 'Helen in Egypt' and other verse plays. 
After three years at Leeds Heath-Stubbs was made visiting professor of English literature at the University of Alexandria in Egypt. His tenure there coincided with the Suez crisis and he gave an entertaining account in 'Hindsights' of his continuing lecturing and teaching while under surveillance by the police as a potential British spy. His next appointments were at Ann Arbor, Michigan, in 1960-61, and then as a lecturer in London at the College of St Mark and St John, Chelsea. Another part-time teaching post followed at Merton College, Oxford, where John Jones, whom he had met as one of William Bell's friends, was the fellow in English. Jones needed someone to look after his pupils while he was engaged on research and working as the professor of poetry. Heath-Stubbs, though by now with only minimal sight, would travel from London to Oxford and back alone. On one occasion he suffered a serious fall while going down the steps at Oxford station and had to go to hospital with a broken hip. 
In London he lived alone, too, in a small ground-floor flat in Bayswater but next door to his close friend Guthrie McKie. He had no difficulty in doing his shopping by himself. He was well known to the local shopkeepers, a tall man with a white stick, a glass eye, and a penetrating voice. He enjoyed the company of many friends who called, some of whom regularly read to him. He also enjoyed attending the spring and winter dinners of the Omar Khayyam Club, an all-male sodality aimed at celebrating the life of Edward Fitzgerald and the 'Rubaiyat'. Heath-Stubbs had himself made an English version with Peter Avery, published in 1979. He contributed several poems to the club's illustrated menus and made a memorable speech when proposing the toast to the master. His sixtieth and eightieth birthdays were celebrated in special issues of the poetry magazine 'Aquarius', edited by his friend Eddie Linden. He was awarded the queen's gold medal for poetry in 1973 and made an OBE in 1989. Latterly he was cared for at the Athlone House nursing home in Woodfield Road, Westminster. He died in London on 26 December 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 97538


McDonald, (William) Ian (1933-2006), neurologist, was born on 15 March 1933 at Ngaio Road, Wellington, New Zealand, the son of William Allan Chapple McDonald, insurance manager, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Leithead. Both parents had been born in New Zealand. McDonald and his sister, Leithe, younger by three years, grew up in Christchurch, where he was educated at St Andrew's College, subsequently matriculating at Knox College, Otago, in 1951 and graduating in medicine in 1957. He worked first as a research officer of the New Zealand Medical Research Council with Archie Macintyre, obtaining the degree of PhD with a thesis on 'The effects of experimental demyelination on conduction in peripheral nerve: a histological and electrophysiological study' (1962), having already written a dissertation on 'Ascending long spinal reflexes' (1955); he then worked as lecturer in medicine at Otago. But academic life in New Zealand, and occasional work as a jackaroo fixing fences on his father's property, had its limitations; in 1963 McDonald moved to London, where his aesthetic interests were cultivated and his personality was more easily expressed. 
Although the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen Square, was an intimidating place to work in the 1960s, McDonald's talents were quickly recognized there, and he was appointed proleptically to the consultant staff in 1966 before working for three years in Boston, USA, with another New Zealander, Derek Denny-Brown, to whom the brightest neurologists training at Queen Square were usually sent at that time to broaden their experience of experimental neurology. The remainder of McDonald's career was spent at Queen Square, as consultant neurologist and consultant physician at Moorfields Eye Hospital from 1969 and as professor of neurology in the University of London from 1974. He rapidly honed the traits that characterized his professional style; sought after for his clinical opinions and renowned for his expertise and knowledge of multiple sclerosis and neuro-ophthalmology, he trained by example, lifting less gifted colleagues, and reflecting with generosity and uncomplicated pride on their achievements. Apparently easy performance, in his lectures and in writing, concealed meticulous preparation and attention to detail. McDonald was adept at synthesizing a complex story, with perspective and modesty concerning his own achievements set in the context of the illustrious predecessors he so much admired. 
In the 1960s McDonald was one of very few neurologists active in laboratory work who transferred the rigorous discipline of descriptive clinical neurology into the modern era of mechanistic studies. Working at that time with Tom Sears, he characterized the physiology and morphology of demyelination and remyelination in the central nervous system, work that leaned on classical studies and anticipated the era of limiting and repairing the damage in multiple sclerosis. In the 1970s, with Martin Halliday, he pioneered laboratory methods for supplementing the clinical diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. The observations brought objectivity to the diagnostic process, and the techniques became the definitive markers of what happens physiologically when the myelin sheath is lost from nerve fibres in the brain and spinal cord. In the 1980s McDonald realized that magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy could be used to illuminate the nature of inflammatory brain disease; his work provided laboratory measures for charting the efficacy of the first wave of disease-modifying treatments introduced in the mid-1990s. 
McDonald understood better than others the contribution made to the evolution of modern neurology in the UK by his mentor Roger Gilliatt, foundation professor of neurology in the University of London and chairman of the department at Queen Square from 1962, whom he expected to succeed in 1987. But it was not until 1995, following David Marsden and Anita Harding, that McDonald was appointed, and then for only a short period before his own retirement in 1998. He edited 'Brain' from 1991 to 1997, having earlier brokered the financially successful move of that journal, established in 1878, from Macmillan to Oxford University Press, achieving financial security in the process and thereby allowing the guarantors subsequently to distribute significant resources in support of young people training in the neurosciences. He was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1972, of the Royal College of Ophthalmologists in 1989, and of the Academy of Medical Sciences in 1999. He co-founded the European Neurological Society and served as its president in 1994-5; he also served as president of the Association of British Neurologists (1994-5) and the World Congress of Neurology (2001). Among many international prizes was the Charcot award of the International Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies (1991); and, being in love with the city, he was particularly pleased to be elected a foreign member of the Venetian Institute of Science, Arts, and Letters. 
In retirement, McDonald served as Harveian librarian at the Royal College of Physicians of London, editing Munk's 'Roll', seeing through to publication the final volume of the 'History of the Royal College of Physicians of London' (by Asa Briggs, 2005), and with others editing an illustrated history of 'The Royal College of Physicians and its Collections' (2001). When the sale of important items such as the Wilton psalter was mooted, he was a staunch defender of the responsibility that the college had to preserve the legacies of those fellows who had built up the collection. The item that gave him most pleasure -- for professional and historical reasons -- was the manuscript diary of Augustus d'Este, grandson of George III, who first wrote a personal account of multiple sclerosis. 
McDonald's partner from the early 1980s was Stanley Joseph Hamilton (1951-2011), with whom he entered into a civil partnership in 2006. They had many friends among people active in music, dance, the visual arts, literature, and history; and these friendships outside medicine provided a counterpoint to McDonald's professional work and a rich source of information and anecdote that he used in conversation, and in his writings and lectures. His passion was music. He considered himself to be of average competence as a pianist, being a useful accompanist in lieder and chamber music from the baroque classical and easier Romantic repertories; but others judged that, as a member of a trio, he was exceptional -- certain in rhythm, intensely musical in his ability to see a long phrase within a theme, and with the fingers led by the ear. It was poignant that a small stroke in 2004 removed, for a while, his ability to understand music, read a score, or play the piano. Later he published, in 'Brain', a characteristically erudite account of this intensely personal episode. He died suddenly of a heart attack at home, 15 St Peter's Street, Islington, London, on 13 December 2006. He was survived by his civil partner, Stanley Hamilton. 


@@@@@


doc= 97539


Wooderson, Sydney Charles (1914-2006), athlete, was born at 11 Baldwin Crescent, Camberwell, London, on 30 August 1914, the second son of George Thomas Wooderson, fruit merchant, and his wife, Jeannette Emma, 'nee' Tindall. He and his two brothers, Alfred and Stanley, were all educated at Sutton Valence School in Kent. Taking inspiration from the athletic success of his elder brother, Alfred, Wooderson took up running as a schoolboy, and joined a local athletic club, the Blackheath Harriers. In 1933 he won the London Athletic Club's public schools championship, and became the first schoolboy to run faster than 4 minutes and 30 seconds for the mile. In that year he left school and became articled as a solicitor's clerk in the city of London; he later became a solicitor. 
Wooderson's talent was noticed, and he soon became coached by Albert Hill, the double Olympic champion of 1920. Under Hill's guidance he flourished: he finished second to Jack Lovelock of New Zealand in the mile at the second empire games in London in 1934 (Jerry Cornes, who had finished second in the 1500 metres at the 1932 Olympic games, was third), and in 1935 took the first of five successive Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) one mile championships (a record that was never matched in his lifetime), beating Lovelock in the process. After a second defeat by Wooderson in Glasgow in that year (where Wooderson set his first British record of 4 minutes 12.7 seconds for the mile) Lovelock recorded in his journal that '[I] made up my mind to defeat Wooderson next year or die', and it was the threat from Wooderson that shaped Lovelock's preparation for the 1936 Olympic games (Colquhoun, 18). 
In 1936 Wooderson set a new British record of 4 minutes 10.8 seconds for the mile, and defeated Lovelock in the AAA Championships. However, he injured his left ankle while out walking and failed to qualify for the final of the 1500 metres at the Olympic games in Berlin in that year. Outwardly he showed no sign of his disappointment that the much anticipated contest between himself and Lovelock (who took gold with a new world record) in the Olympic final failed to take place. On 28 August 1937, however, in a handicap race at a Blackheath Harriers' meeting at London University's Motspur Park track, Wooderson set a new world record for the mile of 4 minutes 6.4 seconds. Watching in the crowd were not only Wooderson's parents and his coach, Hill, but Walter George, who as a professional had set a record of 4 minutes 123/4 seconds in 1886. Afterwards George was photographed congratulating Wooderson; fifty years later Wooderson himself was present at a meeting at Crystal Palace organized as a tribute to mark the anniversary of his world record which featured the generation of British middle distance athletes of the 1980s, including Sebastian Coe, his successor as world record holder for the mile. 
Wooderson's record stood for five years until it was broken by the Swede, Gunder Haegg, in 1942, and it stood as a British record until broken by Roger Bannister in May 1953. Although Wooderson's comparatively light training and approach to the sport (he was scrupulous in returning overpaid expenses) epitomized the British amateur ethos of the day, there was nothing accidental about the world record attempt: four AAA timekeepers were present, and the track had been remeasured in advance and found to be slightly short, so that the start line had been adjusted by 10 inches. Wooderson later recalled 'I was quite amazed and could not sleep undisturbed for some days after' (Thurlow, 17). 
The following year, at the same meeting, on 20 August 1937, Wooderson set world records for the 800 metres (1 minute 48.4 seconds) and the 880 yards (1 minute 49.2 seconds), the latter standing as a world record for seventeen years. He was unable to compete in the 1938 empire games (held in Sydney, Australia) because he was taking his legal exams; however, he won the European 1500 metres championship in Paris that year, in a time of 3 minutes 48.4 seconds. Earlier in that year he had declared his ambition to try to run a mile in 4 minutes. In 1939, running on a grass track at Fallowfield in Manchester, he became the first man ever to break 3 minutes for three-quarters of a mile (setting a world record of 2:59.5), and was seen as a strong contender for the 1500 metres at the 1940 Olympic games, originally due to be held in Tokyo, then in Helsinki. His one notable appearance outside Europe, which took place at the 'mile of the century' in Princeton that year, was a disappointment, and he finished fifth. 
Wooderson's unlikely appearance for a leading world athlete was much commented upon; he was short (5 feet 6 inches tall) and slight (weighing less than 9 stone). He was also short-sighted and wore rimmed spectacles when racing. His appearance captured the public imagination, particularly in the immediate post-war period, and one observer has commented that this 'frail, bespectacled figure' symbolized the 'courage and endurance of the indomitable Englishman' (Holt, 275). Harold Abrahams wrote of a 'tiny figure... buffeted and almost apologising for occupying any space at all... the last person you would pick out as a king among milers' (Bryant, 102). One account characterized his defeats of Lovelock as 'like a goods train passing an express' (Lovesey, 86). His contests with the stylish Lovelock were one of the high points of athletics in the 1930s. Wooderson's frailty was deceptive, however: on the running track he cultivated an unmatchable finishing pace, and Lovelock commented in his private journal that Wooderson was 'so cool, clever and fast' (Colquhoun, 141). 
The outbreak of the Second World War interrupted Wooderson's athletic career, and undoubtedly prevented him from fulfilling his potential as an athlete. Although his poor eyesight precluded him from active service, he joined the National Fire Service and was stationed in Croydon during the blitz, and then the Pioneer Corps and the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers. He also participated in a number of wartime exhibition races, but in 1944 suffered a bout of rheumatic flu, which led to four months in hospital, and he received medical advice that he would never run competitively again. 
Remarkably, Wooderson made a full recovery, and it was his appearances in front of large crowds in the athletic meetings of the immediate post-war period that undoubtedly confirmed his iconic status for spectators of sport of that generation. Among the estimated 60,000 people who saw his narrow defeat by Arne Andersson at the White City stadium on 6 August 1945 was the sixteen-year-old Roger Bannister, who later recalled that from this day Wooderson became his hero and gave him a schoolboy dream of becoming a runner (Bannister, 30). In a rematch in Goteborg, Sweden, a few weeks later on 9 September, Wooderson was again defeated, but ran his fastest ever mile of 4 minutes 4.2 seconds. In 1946 he set a British record for the 3 miles, winning the AAA championship at that distance, and then won the European 5000 metre championship in Oslo in a time of 14 minutes 8.6 seconds, beating the young Emil Zatopek in the process. An injury in a 2 mile race at Motspur Park track later that year ended his track career, but he competed for Blackheath Harriers in the English national cross-country championships between 1947 and 1949, winning the title in 1948. He was president of Blackheath Harriers in 1946 and 1969 (the latter their centennial year) and continued to support the club for many years. In 1947, on his retirement from track competition, the AAA arranged for a dinner in his honour, a 'unique tribute to a phenomenal runner and a man as popular with other athletes as with the public' (Lovesey, 95). In 1952 he was part of a small group of Britain's most famous athletes presented to the new Queen Elizabeth at the AAA championships in that year. 
Wooderson married Pamela Lucy Willcocks, a 25-year-old secretary, and daughter of William Willcocks, gardener, on 15 April 1950, at St Paul's Church, Kingston Hill, Surrey. They had a son and a daughter. Always a modest man, after retirement from athletics Wooderson avoided public attention and retired to Devon and then Dorset. There was some discussion as to whether he was snubbed by the organizers of the 1948 London Olympic games, who failed to ask him to participate in bringing the Olympic torch into the stadium at Wembley, preferring instead a lesser known but more classically stylish athlete; one account states that Queen Elizabeth commented, 'of course we couldn't have had poor little Sydney', and late in life Wooderson claimed he had arrived on the opening day of the games as requested to bring the Olympic torch into the stadium, only to be told he was not required ('The Times', 23 December 2006). A campaign led by Chris Brasher resulted in Wooderson being made an MBE in 2000, by which time he was virtually blind. He died at Anglebury Court residential care home in Wareham, Dorset, on 21 December 2006, suffering from Parkinson's disease and Crohn's disease. He was survived by his wife, Pamela and their two children. A memorial service took place on 8 September 2007, and the Blackheath Harriers' clubhouse was renamed in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 97543


Cunliffe, Marcus Falkner (1922-1990), Americanist, was born on 5 July 1922 at the Municipal Maternity and Infants' Hospital, Castleton, near Rochdale, the second son of Harold Cunliffe (1888-1970), farmer, and his wife, Kathleen Eleanor Falkner (1897-1972), who was from Monmouthshire; her father had served in the Royal Artillery before taking up an administrative post with a south Wales steel company. The family lived at Diggle, on the edge of the Pennines, before Harold Cunliffe abandoned the land and began a profitable laundry business in Manchester, to which he drove daily. When Marcus was eight, the family and its business moved to Newcastle upon Tyne. Marcus first attended an elementary school in Jesmond, and then the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle, from 1932 to 1940. At the latter he was heavily influenced by two masters: Samuel Middlebrook, a historian; and the poet Michael Roberts (died 1948), editor of the 'Faber Book of English Verse', as well as by Roberts's wife, Janet Adam Smith (died 1999), who worked on the editorial staff of the 'New Statesman'. In 1939 the school was evacuated to Penrith, Cumberland. 
In October of the following year, Cunliffe gained an open scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford. He remained for five terms before attending officer cadet training courses at Perham Down, Wiltshire, and Sandhurst. In 1942 he was commissioned into the Royal Tank regiment. From June 1944 until May 1945 Cunliffe served (mainly as an intelligence officer) with 144 regiment, Royal Armoured Corps, 33 armoured brigade, seeing action in north-west France, Belgium (including the Ardennes counter-offensive), the Netherlands, and Germany. Towards the end of the war, 144 regiment was renamed 4th Royal Tank regiment. In August 1945 Cunliffe was given a privileged attachment to the military history team at the headquarters of the British army of the Rhine. He worked on an account of the twenty-first army group's campaigns that was later published (with co-author Hugh Darby) as 'A Short Story of 21 Army Group' (1947). 
In January 1946 Cunliffe returned to Oxford to read for the abbreviated 'wartime' BA degree in modern history, and in October 1947 he gained first-class honours. As his degree course was one year shorter than conventional degrees, he was permitted to spend the remaining money from his scholarship on postgraduate research. He completed a BLitt thesis entitled 'The British army as a social institution, 1815-60'. Cunliffe began by specializing in British history, and his serious interest in United States history was really a development after his time at Oriel. He had been impressed by the American contribution to the allied victory in 1945, had been absorbed by American literature since his schooldays, and was captivated by American culture, style, and the movies. He recalled that he had been 'cheered by the easy abundance of post-war America'. Indeed, he had been 'taken' by America (Cunliffe, 'Backward glances', 85, 86-7). As a result, he spent the years 1947 to 1949 as a Commonwealth fellow at Yale University, where he studied under David Potter and Ralph Gabriel. 
In 1949 Cunliffe was appointed to the first lectureship in American studies in Britain at the University of Manchester. He proved a true pioneer in developing an American studies degree in a British university. He developed in his teaching interdisciplinary approaches that brought together perspectives derived from the combination of history and literature. His task was not easy, as British university life in the 1950s was insular and conservative. Cunliffe zealously built up the American collection in the university library ('All that American rubbish' was the unguarded opinion of the senior staff (private information)). Appointed head of department, he recruited a group of distinguished colleagues, including (among others) Dennis Welland, Maldwyn A. Jones, and Howard Temperley. The year 1954 was one of achievement: he spent most of it as a Commonwealth (now called Harkness) fellow at the University of Chicago and was promoted to senior lecturer, and his first major book on an American theme, 'The Literature of the United States', was published. Cunliffe's approach was historical, and successfully blended 'biographical and socio-cultural information with stylistic and aesthetic observations' (4th edn, 10). 'The Literature of the United States' remained the standard work for decades, and went through three further editions; the fourth edition (1986) included two new chapters on women writers and southern literature. The interdisciplinary direction that Cunliffe imparted to the subject was reinforced by his devotion to the British Association for American Studies, founded in 1955. He served as its first secretary and then as chairman from 1962 to 1965. 
Cunliffe devoted much of the early 1950s to writing British regimental history. 'The Royal Irish Fusiliers, 1793-1945' (1952) and 'History of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment, 1919-1955' (1956) are clearly the successful discharging of past obligations. Yet they played an important part in Cunliffe's future development because he began to demonstrate a skill at combining telling detail with the broad overview. This combination is evident in two of his mature books published at the end of the decade. 'George Washington: Man and Monument' (1958) is a subtle short biography linked to an analysis of Washington as a national symbol. 'The Nation Takes Shape, 1789-1837' (1959) offers a cogent, synoptic account of the period. Producing two books simultaneously was made possible by a fellowship held in 1957-8 at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Palo Alto, California. 
In 1949 Cunliffe married Mitzi Solomon ['see below']. They had three children: Antonia, Shay, and Jason. The Cunliffes were an extraordinarily colourful couple. Their house in Didsbury, Maldwyn Jones recalled, 'became an acknowledged centre, not only for University colleagues, but also for the varied intellectuals whom the press dubbed the 'Didsbury set''. Cunliffe was generous, relaxed, charming, urbane, vivacious, witty, playful, and attractive to women. He was also a man of paradoxes and contradictions. His appearance changed over time from the well-groomed and clipped air of the ex-officer in tweed suits to a more flamboyant and modish look with longish hair and beard. An undergraduate at Manchester recalled that 'I was as impressed by his sartorial splendour (those 'ties') and glimpses of a lifestyle I had associated with film stars and actors, as with his seemingly inexhaustible knowledge of American history, literature... and popular culture' (White). But the showman, whether masquerading as bohemian or high society figure, concealed a deceptive capacity for hard work. 
From 1959 to 1960 Cunliffe spent a year as visiting professor at Harvard, where he cemented a growing friendship with Arthur M. Schlesinger junior. Although given the chair of American history and institutions in 1959, Cunliffe had grown bored with Manchester, and in 1965 was appointed professor of American studies at the University of Sussex. He played a major part in establishing that university's exciting reputation during its first hectic decade. American studies at Sussex was at the forefront of new developments, as the subject embraced the social sciences and eventually topics such as women's history. Cunliffe moved easily and without self-consciousness in the circles inhabited by the most distinguished of American historians. His interest in historiography was demonstrated by the work he edited with Robin W. Winks, 'Pastmasters: Some Essays on American Historians' (1969). In 1972 Cunliffe's love affair with Sussex and his dedication to liberal values were badly bruised by the 'Huntington affair'. An invitation issued by a colleague to Samuel P. Huntington, an adviser to the Johnson administration during the Vietnam war, distinguished political scientist, and author of 'The Soldier and the State' (1957), to lecture at Sussex, provoked outrage and denunciation. Cunliffe supported the case for freedom of speech. This upheaval in his professional life coincided with personal storms and the formal end of his first marriage in 1971. The academic year 1969-70 had been spent at the graduate centre of the City University of New York. While living in New York he met and then in November 1971 married the journalist Lesley Hume (1945-1997). 
Cunliffe's interests from the 1960s onwards revolved around the history of the presidency, military history, and aspects of American national identity. The last two themes tended to coalesce and resulted in Cunliffe's most important, original, and influential contribution to scholarship: 'Soldiers and Civilians: the Martial Spirit in America, 1775-1865' (1968). This book is a study of national character and values that places the American military experience within a social context. Cunliffe was ahead of his time in developing a sophisticated concept of military history. The subject was deeply unfashionable at the time of the book's publication in the USA, when as a result of disillusion with the Vietnam war all things military were decried. 'Soldiers and Civilians' did not receive the attention or praise that it deserved. Also in 1968 Cunliffe published 'The Presidency' (producing books in pairs was characteristic of him). An enlarged edition appeared in Britain under the title 'American Presidents and the Presidency' in 1972. Although a work of synthesis, this remains (in its third edition) one of Cunliffe's most enjoyable and sparkling books. 
In 1973-4 Cunliffe spent another year in the USA, this time as visiting professor at the University of Michigan. He edited volumes 7 and 8, on American literature, for the 'Sphere History of Literature in the English Language'. A year later he collaborated with his wife in producing 'Burke's Presidential Families of the USA' (1975), voted 'Reference book of the year' by the 'US Library Journal'. Cunliffe was also swept up by the ferment of debate over slavery and race relations provoked by Robert W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman's 'Time on the Cross' (2 vols., 1974). His contribution was 'Chattel Slavery and Wage Slavery: the Anglo-American Context, 1830-1860' (1979), a provocative study of American resentment over British criticisms of slavery. It had originally started life as the Lamar memorial lectures delivered in April 1978 at Mercer University, Macon, Georgia. Thereafter he produced no major work on American history: for several years he found the subject too restricting, and turned to world history, editing 'The Times History of our Times' (1971) and writing 'The Age of Expansion, 1848-1917' (1974). 
The late 1970s were a period of some frustration and disenchantment. Cunliffe sought solace on the American academic scene: in 1976 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Pennsylvania; 1977-8 was spent as a fellow of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC; and he delivered the 1978 Jefferson memorial lectures at Berkeley, although these remained unpublished. The failure of his application for the Rhodes chair in American history at Oxford was a disappointment. Cunliffe had personal reasons for contemplating a permanent move across the Atlantic. In 1978 he met the American historian Phyllis Marynick Palmer ('b'. 1944), whom he married in 1984, his second marriage having ended in divorce in 1979. 
Consequently, in 1980 Cunliffe left Sussex and moved to the George Washington University, Washington, DC, as university professor. He was only the second person in the history of that university to hold the title. The last decade of his life was spent keeping his older works in print and producing a volume of his essays, published posthumously as 'In Search of America: Transatlantic Essays, 1951-1990' (1991). He admitted, 'I feel I have spent too much time in recent years putting coats of paint on old structures instead of completing new ones...' (private information). 
Cunliffe was essentially a very modest man, but he tended to underestimate the esteem in which he was held. He certainly had not run out of ideas. In 1989 he signed a contract to write a collective biography of all the Roosevelts. He was acknowledged as the most fertile, creative, original, and adventurous British Americanist of his generation. He was an inspired (and inspiring) teacher, with a clutch of distinguished pupils: Sir Malcolm Bradbury (1931-2000), Michael J. Heale, and Michael C. C. Adams, among many others. He worked ceaselessly for the United States Information Agency, lecturing in India, Japan, Kenya, and much of Europe on their behalf. As a historian, he was happiest dealing with the period from 1775 to 1865, but he was more than just a historian, and his range was formidable. His purview swept every aspect of American culture and ideas, including art (the pictorial images in his books are more than just decorative), music, culture, mythology, literature, and thought, although his literary writings tend to treat thought as a branch of the history of ideas. Cunliffe had always turned his back on specialization; he was a polymath who was influenced by the social sciences, for his writings reveal a surprising attachment to 'models' as a method of explanation and means of comparison. It was emblematic of his paradoxical nature that his swirling visual and literary sense was complemented by a preference for typologies. All his writings are adorned with a graceful and evocative prose style. Cunliffe as a commentator on America stands comparison with Lord Bryce and Sir Denis Brogan. 
Although an academic by training and inclination, Cunliffe had no patience with theoretical disputes. He had much in common with the pre-war man of letters, for example Leonard Woolf, who ignored disciplinary boundaries and scorned narrow specialization. Cunliffe, an indefatigable correspondent, cultivated a glamour and sage-like manner consistent with this kind of public figure. The true significance of his writings can be found in his dissection of ideas of American distinctiveness and the quest for American national identity. Cunliffe argued that the USA was not as exceptional as many American writers claimed. He always stressed the European (and especially British) threads in the fabric of American culture. In the 1960s he had been very critical of assumptions that the south was a distinct American section. The inter-connections between Western cultures were a prominent theme in Cunliffe's corpus (he was a talented linguist, spoke French fluently, and had good German and also some Italian). In the mid-1980s, perhaps as a reaction to the chauvinism of the Reagan years, he embarked on an uncompleted, ambitious project on the emergence of the great popular author, a comparison of Walter Scott, Charles Dickens, Mark Twain, and Victor Hugo. He died of leukaemia in the George Washington University Memorial Hospital, Washington, DC, on Sunday 2 September 1990 and was cremated. 
Cunliffe's first wife, Mitzi Cunliffe (1918-2006), sculptor, was born in New York on 1 January 1918, the daughter of a wealthy Jewish manufacturer of glass products. She attended the Art Students League of New York and Columbia University, where she graduated MA in 1940. Among wartime commissions was one for marble sculptures for cruise liners owned by American Export Lines. After the war she spent a year at the Academie Colarossi in Paris, and also studied in Sweden. She moved to England after her marriage to Marcus Cunliffe. Her first major commission was for two pieces for the Festival of Britain in 1951, one of which ('Root Bodied Forth', depicting intertwined figures emerging from a tree) was displayed at the entrance to the festival. (The other was a pair of bronze door handles in the form of hands, for the Regatta Restaurant.) In 1955 she was commissioned to produce a relief panel for Heaton Park pumping station, showing the water's journey from Haweswater to Manchester; the building was listed in 1998 as a 'complete work of art', still at the time of her death the only such listing for a post-war public building. Also in 1955, she was commissioned by the Guild of Television Producers and Directors (which merged with the British Film Academy in 1958 to form the Society of Film and Television Arts, renamed the British Academy of Film and Television Arts in 1976) to design an award for the guild's annual prizegiving ceremony. The resulting golden theatrical mask was still in use for BAFTA awards more than half a century later. In 1957 she designed what was then the largest pierced bronze screen in the world, depicting scenes from the Wars of the Roses, for Lewis's department store in Liverpool. As well as sculptures and screens she designed textiles, jewellery, and ceramics. In the 1960s she developed techniques for the mass production of architectural decorations, and her exhibition 'Sculpture by the Yard' toured Britain and western Europe between 1967 and 1971. Her last major commission was for four carved stone panels for Scottish Life House, London, in 1970. About the time of the break-up of her marriage she was forced by arthritis and retinal problems to abandon sculpture, and turned instead to teaching, first at Thames Polytechnic from 1971 to 1976, and then in North America, at the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, New York, the University of Pennsylvania, and Concordia University, Montreal. Dynamic, vivacious, and always strikingly dressed, she made a lasting impression on her students. Her later years were clouded by the onset of Alzheimer's disease and she moved back to England to be near her children. She died in Oxford on 30 December 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 97544


Cole, Grace Elizabeth Agnes Annie (1924-2006), trumpeter, was born at Ivy Cottage, Rowlands Gill, co. Durham, on 8 September 1924, the only child of Albert Ernest Cole (1904-1986), miner and musician, and his wife, Elsie, 'nee' Lee (1905-1972). Her four first names were those of two grandmothers and two great-grandmothers. Her father played cornet in colliery bands in Yorkshire and was also a popular children's entertainer, going by the name of Albertino the Clown, and whenever he changed bands the family moved, so that Gracie's schooling was somewhat unsettled. When she was twelve her father taught her to play the cornet, and within a few months she was playing in her first brass band, the Rossington Welfare, and in two years was playing alongside her father with Firbeck Colliery Band. In 1939 she made her first broadcast on 'Children's Hour' when 'Brass Band News' advised all bandsmen to listen, saying, 'they will be surprised to hear such fine playing from a girl'. 
Gracie Cole was making brass band history in the 1930s when brass bands were very much a male preserve, with none of the top bands using female musicians. It therefore created quite a stir when, in 1940, an invitation to be guest soloist with the Besses o' th' Barn Band led to her being featured with them for the next three years. She was soon in demand by the noted brass band conductors of the day, including Harry Mortimer, broadcasting and performing with the likes of Fairey Aviation, Foden's, and Grimethorpe Colliery, whose band she joined in 1942, becoming the first female to compete in the Belle Vue championships. Another landmark was reached in 1942 when she competed for the Alexander Owen memorial scholarship, something no other woman had attempted, and which she won by an astonishing twenty-one points, the biggest winning margin in the history of the competition, not to be repeated for another thirty-eight years. 
Later in 1942 Cole became eligible for call-up into the armed forces or 'war work'. On her father's advice she switched to the trumpet and joined Gloria Gay's All Girls Band, working with ENSA, followed by a brief spell with Rudy Starita's Starlites. In November 1945 she joined the Ivy Benson Band as lead trumpet and soloist at the start of the band's second European ENSA tour, and was featured on a live broadcast from Hamburg immediately following George VI's speech on Christmas day. She spent the next five years with Ivy Benson, the most famous 'girls' band in Europe, playing the Russian sector of Berlin and Egypt and the Suez Canal zone, as well as headlining variety theatres in the UK with summer residencies at Butlins holiday camps. 
In 1950 the Ivy Benson Band was in Grimsby where a photo call was arranged with the George Evans Band, which was also appearing in town. So impressed was Evans with Gracie Cole's playing that he invited her to join his previously all-male band. She needed no persuading even though she would be taking a cut in salary, having fallen for Evans's trombonist William (Bill) Geldard ('b'. 1929), whom she married in 1951. It seemed like a dream ticket when both were invited to join the legendary Squadronaires, but male prejudice soon made life uncomfortable and Gracie left having decided to form her own 'girls' band. She continued fronting this until the birth of her first daughter in 1957. She led a male band for Mecca ballrooms in 1958 and then played with the Denny Boyce Band at Wimbledon Palais before joining Sydney Lipton at Grosvenor House in 1960. The birth of her second daughter later that year led to her playing on a freelance basis from then onwards. Together with her husband she did much to encourage local brass bands, and in 1990 she was made a freeman of the City of London. Having lived in Thames Ditton, Surrey, since the mid-1960s, she developed Alzheimer's disease towards the end of the 1990s and spent the last six months of her life in Westcott House, Guildford Road, Westcott, where she died on 28 December 2006. Her funeral at All Saints' Church, Weston Green, Surrey, on 19 January 2007 was followed by cremation at Randalls Park crematorium, Leatherhead. She was survived by her husband and their two daughters. 
Gracie Cole, along with her contemporary, the Halle Orchestra's trombonist Maisie Ringham, was a prime innovator of the musical emancipation of women, changing the face of brass bands in the 1930s and 1940s, although it would be many more years before female musicians were finally accepted as the equals of their male counterparts. 


@@@@@


doc= 97545


Chisnall, (James) Arthur White (1925-2006), social worker and club and concert promoter, was born on 3 June 1925 at 33 Birkenhead Avenue, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the son of Elizabeth Goater Chisnall, of no fixed occupation, then residing at 7 Cambridge Road, Kingston upon Thames. The identity of his father was never confirmed, although as an adult he speculated that his father was a local shopkeeper to whom he was sent as a young boy with an empty basket and a note from his mother. The man would look him over and then fill the basket and send him on his way. The young Chisnall spent his earliest years living with his mother in his maternal grandparents' home. George and Rosella Chisnall ran a shop in Kingston. By the end of 1930 both had died. Chisnall took the death of his grandfather particularly badly, describing it as a 'major trauma' (personal knowledge). His mother continued to run the family shop for several years and sent him to a local church school. He struggled through his education; although left-handed, he was forced to write with right-handed pens and was scolded 'for spoiling charitably given church property' (ibid.). He left at fourteen. His first job was working for the carpet department of a Kingston-based store, Hide & Co. In 1942 he volunteered for military service and joined the Royal Engineers. He served in a specialist communications unit in north Africa and took part in Field Marshal Montgomery's operation Bertram, which saw him involved in the deployment of dummy tanks in the largest deception plan of the desert war. 
After demobilization Chisnall was employed on the groundnut scheme in Tanganyika; there he formed a jazz club in Nachingwea. He returned to England in 1951 and took a course in social science at Coleg Harlech in Merioneth. His interest in social trends and what was happening to the post-war generation took on more impetus after he returned in 1952 to Kingston, where he initially worked in a junk shop. At the same time he joined a group of academics, among them Leslie T. Wilkins of the Home Office research unit, and Brian Lewis, later deputy director of the Institute of Educational Technology at the Open University, who were interested in the views and problems of young people; several believed that the impact of two world wars had created a gap in the nation's cultural heritage and structure, which left a generation of young people lost and alienated from society. 
Through his work in the junk shop in Kingston Chisnall had witnessed the popularity of jazz and blues records among students from the various arts schools, and decided to utilize this in his social research. In 1956 he convinced Michael Snapper, the owner of the dilapidated hotel on Eel Pie Island, just down the River Thames from Kingston, to give him free rein to organize music sessions on Wednesday and Sunday nights. (Snapper had started letting out the hotel's ballroom to jazz musicians a few months earlier.) He started by booking traditional jazz musicians like Ken Colyer, Cy Laurie, George Melly, Acker Bilk, and the Temperance Seven. The hotel's secluded location (initially it could be reached only by a small ferry, though this was soon replaced by a footbridge) and Chisnall's supportive attitude towards the emerging rhythm 'n' blues scene helped nurture many artists who went on to revolutionize pop culture. At the hotel musicians could experiment with their song styles and band line-ups, and play for an audience who, like them, wanted to change the world. Chisnall booked the Rolling Stones in 1963 (all members of the band having previously played on the island as part of other outfits). He also gave stage time to such up-and-coming British rhythm 'n' blues bands as the Cyril Davies All Stars, the Yardbirds, John Mayall's Bluesbreakers, the Artwoods, the Downliners Sect, Jeff Beck and the Tridents, and Long John Baldry and his Hoochie Coochie Men (featuring the young Rod Stewart). 
Chisnall never saw the club as a commercial operation: he booked bands primarily to attract young people into the club so that he and other members of his social research group could help them to write CVs and apply for grants and entry to colleges and universities. He would later be described as an outreach social worker, although he attracted young people to him by using what he referred to as the 'carrier wave', popular music, rather than going out to find them himself (personal knowledge). There was a network of people whom he invited to Eel Pie Island to talk to the clubbers and to encourage them to develop their potential; politicians, scientists, and policy makers thus mixed with art students and young music fans at the island's gigs. Chisnall himself steered many young people towards higher education, several going to Coleg Harlech, which became well known as a 'second chance' college, often for people who for economic or social reasons had never had a first chance of a university education. An altruistic man, he used his own time and the little money he had to run a social club that almost incidentally became fertile ground for talented bands to showcase their music. 
By 1967 the shabby hotel was in urgent need of repair, and since neither Chisnall nor Snapper could afford the estimated $200,000 cost, the police forced its closure. (It briefly reopened as Colonel Barefoot's Rock Garden in 1969 before being occupied as an anarchist commune and then being destroyed by fire in 1971). In the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s Chisnall continued to work in social research and for the BIT Information Service in London (formed by supporters of the 'International Times'), which provided a range of information to young people, published a number of alternative travel guides, and nurtured the British Communes Network. In addition, it helped and supported the 'Arts Lab Newsletter', the Community Levy for Alternative Projects (CLAP), and Cope, an anti-psychiatry information and help service. In 1974, with Brian Lewis and Auriol Hall, he published 'Unattached Youth', based on a study commissioned by the Joseph Rowntree Memorial Trust. His last years were spent in Strawberry Hill, Twickenham. He died on 28 December 2006 at the Princess Alice Hospice, Esher, Surrey, of cancer. He was survived by his wife, Susanne Fischer, a decorator. 


@@@@@


doc= 97546


Channon, (Henry) Paul Guinness, Baron Kelvedon (1935-2007), politician, was born on 9 October 1935 at 21 St James's Place, Westminster, the only child of Sir Henry (Chips) Channon (1897-1958), politician, and his wife, Lady Honor Dorothy Mary, 'nee' Guinness (1909-1976). Few twentieth-century politicians have inherited so many advantages of wealth and family connections. His mother was the daughter of the second earl of Iveagh and heiress to a brewing fortune. His American-born father wrote one of the most celebrated political diaries of the twentieth century and was a Conservative MP for the last twenty-three years of his life. He had taken over the seat, Southend-on-Sea, from his mother-in-law, Lady Iveagh, who in turn had replaced her husband, the Hon. Rupert Guinness, as MP when he became second earl of Iveagh. Guinness had first won Southend in 1912. Thus in January 1959, when following his father's death Paul Channon won a by-election for what had become the constituency of Southend West, he was maintaining an unbroken family connection with the seat that had already persisted for the best part of five decades. When he was selected as the Conservative candidate against stiff opposition, led by Lord Beaverbrook's 'Daily Express', his grandmother, Lady Iveagh, told the constituency party that 'you have done the right thing by backing a colt when you know the stable he was trained in' ('The Times', 14 Jan 1959). 
Certainly Channon would not have entered parliament at the age of twenty-three if he had relied on his own proven merits. Educated at Lockers Park, Hertfordshire, and Eton College, he had undertaken a year's national service in the Royal Horse Guards before entering Christ Church, Oxford. His father's death, and the ensuing by-election, occurred at the start of Channon's final year, and he never took a degree. But in this truncated academic career he won the presidency of Oxford's Conservative Association and his maiden speech, which drew on his experiences of national service in Cyprus, showed that he had more to offer than an exalted pedigree. 
The first steps of Channon's path towards ministerial office were assisted by Conservatives who had been associated with his father. In 1959 he was appointed parliamentary private secretary (PPS) to the minister of power, Richard Wood, son of Lord Halifax, before serving 'Rab' Butler (successively home secretary, first secretary of state, and foreign secretary) in the same capacity from 1960 to 1964. Channon's father had been Butler's PPS in 1938-41, when the latter was under-secretary at the Foreign Office. On 7 August 1963 Channon married Ingrid Olivia Georgia Guinness, 'nee' Wyndham ('b'. 1931), daughter of Major Guy Richard Charles Wyndham, army officer and artist, and former wife of Channon's cousin Jonathan Guinness, later third Baron Moyne. It was a happy union that produced three children, Olivia ('b'. 1964), Georgia ('b'. 1966), and Henry ('b'. 1970). 
The tories lost office in 1964, not least because of their close connections to the aristocratic establishment. Yet Channon's origins were not held against him by colleagues who had come to appreciate his personal qualities. His voting record placed him clearly on the 'progressive' wing of his party, alongside most other senior Conservatives of the time. In 1965 he was elected to the executive of the Conservative backbench 1922 committee, and when Edward Heath became leader of the party in the same year he gave Channon a front-bench speaking role, on public building and works. In 1967 he was given an even more congenial job, covering the arts. A love of art was almost the only trait that he shared with his father. However, when the Conservatives returned to office in 1970 a more senior figure, Viscount Eccles, was given the arts portfolio. For most of the period until the government fell in February 1974 Channon was a junior minister within the Department of the Environment, working on housing. His housing duties were interrupted briefly in 1972 by a spell as a junior minister for Northern Ireland. During this time his historic London home, 96 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, was the venue of a controversial and abortive meeting between the secretary of state, William Whitelaw, and representatives of the Provisional IRA. 
In opposition again after 1974, Channon continued to speak for the Conservative Party on environment issues, though still in a junior capacity. Despite his relative youth, by 1974 he had been in parliament for fifteen years and could have expected promotion. Instead when Heath was replaced as Conservative leader by Margaret Thatcher in 1975 his prospects sharply declined; the new leader spoke of him slightingly as 'that millionaire' ('Daily Telegraph', 30 Jan 2007). With no constructive outlet for his energies in London he turned towards Europe for political engagement, serving as deputy leader of the Conservative delegation to the Council of Europe and the Western European Union from 1976 to 1979, but in the latter year he failed to secure a nomination for the first elections to the European parliament. After the Conservative victory in the general election of 1979 Thatcher indicated that her view of Channon was unchanged by floating the idea that he should take a peerage. After his refusal she relented to the extent of appointing him to another junior post, this time in the Civil Service Department, under Christopher Soames. Since Soames was soon dispatched to oversee the transition to majority rule in Rhodesia, Channon was effective head of the department for much of the time. In 1981 he finally became arts minister, but unlike Heath, Thatcher did not believe that the state should have an active role in this field. Having recognized that Channon was an able administrator and an energetic lobbyist on behalf of his department she moved him in 1983 to the newly established Department of Trade and Industry, again as a junior minister. 
In January 1986 the secretary of state for trade and industry, Leon Brittan, was forced to resign as a result of the Westland affair. Channon (seen as a safe pair of hands) took Brittan's place, sixteen years after his first appointment as a junior minister. For the first time since his selection for Southend West, he had found himself in the right place at the right time. Unfortunately he had used up his ration of good fortune. Within a few months of joining the cabinet he lost his daughter Olivia to a drugs overdose after a party to celebrate the end of her final examinations, at Channon's old college. Even if Channon had never entered politics the death of his daughter in such circumstances would have attracted prurient media interest. 
Channon's political life provided no respite from this personal tragedy. When he took over trade and industry the department was engaged in negotiations to sell off parts of the state-owned British Leyland motor company to the American firms General Motors and Ford. Although Channon managed to block both deals the incident aroused patriotic anger within parliament and among the general public, and Channon was not the kind of man to deal effectively with emotional diatribes. At trade and industry he was also faced with a series of controversial takeover battles, including the attempt of the Guinness brewing firm to take control of Distillers. Channon delegated oversight of this transaction to his junior minister, Michael Howard, but allegations of 'insider dealing' in shares led to lengthy legal proceedings against three prominent businessmen, inevitably harming both Channon and the family firm. 
After the 1987 general election Thatcher moved Channon to transport. Although this was clearly a demotion within the cabinet, it signalled that the prime minister retained her faith in Channon's administrative abilities. Unfortunately for Channon transport had just been afflicted by the sinking of the ferry 'Herald of Free Enterprise', costing almost 200 lives; and in his relatively brief spell as secretary of state the department would be hit by an additional trio of tragedies. In November 1987 thirty-one people were killed in the Kings Cross fire; in December 1988 there were thirty-five fatalities after a collision between two trains outside Clapham Junction; and just nine days later a bomb exploded inside a Pan-Am jet flying over Lockerbie, killing 270 people on the plane and in the town. Channon was much criticized when, two days after the Lockerbie disaster, and while questions were being asked of the Department of Transport's failure to pass on warnings, he left Britain for a holiday on the island of Mustique, which was particularly identified in the public mind with aristocratic debauchery thanks to publicity surrounding Princess Margaret and her friends. By this time looking hopelessly accident-prone, in the cabinet reshuffle of July 1989 he left the government. In the Conservative leadership election of the following year he voted for Michael Heseltine rather than Thatcher, but this decision was entirely consistent with his ideological inclinations on domestic and European issues. 
Channon's first years in his new role as a backbench MP were marked by skilful chairmanship of the Commons' transport select committee. In 1992 he hoped to follow three family members by serving as speaker of the house. Instead, amid procedural wrangling, he was forced to withdraw from the fray. Later in the 1992-7 parliament his old ally Willie Whitelaw asked him if he intended to stand for election again. Channon replied: 'You must be mad! I don't want anything to do with this lot, and hope I'll never see them again' (private information). He announced his decision to stand down in 1995. Finally accepting a peerage after the election of 1997, he took the title of Baron Kelvedon from the main family home in Essex, Kelvedon Hall. However, he made little mark in the House of Lords, and his health was poor for many years owing to the onset of lewy body disease. He died at the Lister Hospital, Westminster, on 27 January 2007, and was survived by his wife and two of his children. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 12 June 2007. Essentially a pragmatist rather than a Thatcherite ideologue, he had continued to uphold an ethic of public duty long after he had been overtaken by more self-serving colleagues. In stark contrast to his garrulous, extrovert father, he was discreet even in retirement, when he could have helped his reputation by publishing an exculpatory account of his long years of ministerial service. As it was, at the time of his death he was remembered, perhaps unfairly, as a maladroit minister whose daughter had died after a decadent party. 


@@@@@


doc= 97548


Black, Dorothy (1914-2006), theatrical agent and translator, was born on 30 April 1914 in Johannesburg, South Africa, the younger daughter and youngest of six children of Francis Black (died 1918), quantity surveyor, and his wife, Elizabeth Johanna, 'nee' Albertyn. A brother, Brian Black, a rugby international, was killed in a flying accident in 1940. 
Black was educated first at Roedean School, Johannesburg, then in England, at St Albans, and finally, having passed her university entrance examination, at a finishing school in Paris. There she was persuaded by her music teacher to train as a concert pianist. She gave her first public recital in the Maison Pleyel when she was seventeen, then spent four years travelling in Europe, North and South America, and the West Indies with her mother. 'Sober reflection' during her travels (Black, 15) persuaded her that a career as a concert pianist was unlikely and so she learned to use a stenography machine and registered with a secretarial agency in London. 
Black's first job was as a junior shorthand typist at H. M. Tennent Ltd, a theatrical management company. She arrived in 1937, impressing both Hugh (Binkie) Beaumont, one of the firm's directors, and Harry Tennent, the managing director, with the ease and speed with which her stenography machine could manage dictation. By the end of her first month she was able to reflect: 'Not only was the theatre my abiding passion, but I was actually going to be allowed to earn my living working in it. The square peg had found the square hole and I was supremely happy' (Black, 7). Tennents was already a major player when Black arrived, and as the firm's status rose, so she assumed a greater part in the organization, liaising with clients and acting as the company's unofficial casting director for minor roles, as well as off-stage pianist and audition accompanist. In 1939 she became Beaumont's secretary, then, having assisted John Gielgud with the transcription of 'Early Stages', became his secretary as well in 1940. Following Beaumont's creation of a non-profit making arm of the company Black became increasingly involved in organizing and overseeing tours of airforce bases and regional theatres. A confident and sometimes overbearing woman, she was supremely loyal to Tennents, and was much annoyed when they appointed a casting director: 'half my job and much of the fun disappeared' (Black, 96). After the war Beaumont invited John Perry, formerly Gielgud's lover and now his, to join the firm -- in what Black described as a 'fairly unspecified capacity' -- which only increased her sense of grievance (ibid., 110). As a result she moved, at Beaumont's suggestion, to become assistant to Murray Macdonald, administrator of the Company of Four (Tennents' non-profit making subsidiary), at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith. 
The Company of Four's brief was to produce new plays with new directors and designers and to provide jobs for actors returning from the forces. Black and Macdonald worked happily together for many years, and presided over some major theatrical and box office triumphs, including 'The Relapse', 'The Holly and the Ivy', 'Let's Make an Opera!', and John Gielgud's season of classical revivals ('Richard II', 'Venice Preserv'd', and 'The Way of the World'). Despite their success Perry made it clear that she would never be the administrator of the company. Black therefore left in 1953 to become head of drama at the leading literary agency Curtis Brown. Already enormously well connected, she transformed the fortunes of the department through her tireless networking (much of it on the golf course) and powers of persuasion. Among her clients were Angus Wilson, Somerset Maugham, and Samuel Beckett. 
Black's years in Paris had resulted in a profound Francophilia that earned her the nickname Noir. The war had kick-started her career as a translator and adaptor: years of reading plays and watching productions take shape had instilled in her a respect for dramaturgical principles, which, married with her facility for languages, earned her a considerable reputation. In 1940 she provided Noel Coward with a literal translation of a Parisian hit, 'Histoire de rire' by Armand Salacrou. Although Coward declared himself delighted with the result, her efforts came to nothing when the fall of France ended any chances of negotiating rights for an English production. Immediately after the war her fluent French and can-do attitude got her the job of technical adviser and interpreter to the Old Vic's victory in Europe tour, organized by the British Council. She subsequently found success with her translations of Sartre's 'Crime passionel' and Kean and Anouilh's 'Point of Departure'. She also provided the literal translation for Anouilh's 'L'invitation au chateau', adapted by Christopher Fry into 'Ring Around the Moon', directed by Peter Brook, and she produced and edited translations for Peter Daubney's World Theatre seasons. 
In 1957 Black left Curtis Brown and England when she became engaged. This period of her life is tantalizingly blank, but she returned to England unmarried within a year and went on to work in television. She was also, thanks to her friendship with Allan Crawford, an unlikely supporter and financial backer of the first 'pirate' radio station, Radio Atlanta. For many years she lived in a large terrace house in Brunswick Gardens, Kensington, where she entertained prodigiously until her last years, which were clouded by the onset of Parkinson's disease. She died on 26 December 2006 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, of ischaemic heart disease. She never married, and had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97553


Rae, John Malcolm (1931-2006), headmaster and author, was born at 2 Rutford Road, Streatham, London, on 20 March 1931, the son of (Lawrence) John Rae, radiologist, and his wife, (Annie) Blodwen, 'nee' Williams. He was educated at Bishop's Stortford College and, after national service as a second lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he took a lower second-class degree in history. Competitive sport was the driving force that fuelled his already burgeoning ambition. He won half-blues for swimming and water polo, and narrowly missed a rugby blue. Swimming was a principal recreation to the end of his life. 
After considering a career in the security services Rae decided to become a schoolmaster. During his teaching practice at Fettes College, Edinburgh, in 1955 he became a protege of the headmaster, Donald Crichton-Miller, a powerful figure from whom he learned much about public school politics. Rae was advised by Crichton-Miller, a Cambridge blue and Scottish rugby international, to emphasize his sporting prowess, and in his first appointment as an assistant master at Harrow, from 1955, Rae was soon a successful coach of both swimming and rugby. At Harrow his lessons were remembered for their skilful organization. He had a commanding voice, and even then a physical presence that exuded authority. He was never a shrinking violet and the headmaster, Robert James, though an admirer, found him somewhat difficult to handle. When the first Wilson government set up the public schools commission in 1965, Rae suggested to the education secretary that he should represent the rank and file of the teaching profession. Although he was not appointed his opinions were canvassed and from this point his career and public profile blossomed. Meanwhile, on 17 December 1955, he had married Daphne Ray Simpson, the 22-year-old daughter of John Phimester Simpson, insurance manager. They had two sons and four daughters. 
Rae's eyes were always on a leading headmastership and he knew the potential handicap of his nonconformist background, moderate degree, and minor public school education. In his revealing autobiography, 'Delusions of Grandeur' (1993), he admitted that he became an Anglican partly for career reasons, and took a doctorate at King's College, London, to bolster his academic standing. His thesis, on conscientious objectors in the First World War, was published in 1970 as 'Conscience and Politics'. His doctorate was awarded in 1965, the day after he learned of his appointment to his first headmastership, at Taunton School. But even then his iconoclastic side was not trimmed by propriety and he said that many people who had doctorates were actually very dull. This was an accusation never levelled at Rae himself. 
As a student of Napoleon, Rae was always conscious of the importance luck played in a career. He was one of the lucky generals in both of his principal appointments. When he had applied for the headmastership of Taunton School, three coincidental factors counted in his favour among the older governors: his father had practised briefly in Taunton in the 1930s; Crichton-Miller, his principal referee, had made his mark as a youthful head of Taunton before the war; and another admired predecessor, whom Rae somewhat resembled physically, had also been educated at Bishop's Stortford and Sidney Sussex. 
Rae was always happiest when he had something big to tackle and he certainly found that at Taunton. The school was in need of a shake-up and under Rae it got it. When his wife attended the formerly all-male chapel on his first Sunday, the atmosphere, he recalled, was as though he had introduced a striptease dancer to the Athenaeum. He soon imposed his authority by expelling four senior boys, a necessary but courageous decision, as several private schools in Taunton fought over a diminishing market. Housemasters resented the weakening of their autonomy by his desire to build a sixth-form centre (opened by Princess Anne in his last term). In 1967 his pessimistic speech-day pronouncements on the future of the public school system caused much resentment. His address in 1969 on the failings of parents brought further trenchant publicity and the accusation that he was biting the hand that fed him. As a whispering campaign began, the fate of Crichton-Miller, whose headmastership of Stowe had recently been prematurely ended, was never far from Rae's mind. 
Taunton had proved a baptism of fire and Rae had no qualms about moving on, indecently early even in the eyes of his opponents, when the opportunity of Westminster presented itself after four years. Once again luck played its part. His principal rival dropped out before interview, believing, mistakenly, that he was about to be appointed headmaster of Eton. Another contender accepted the headmastership of Christ's Hospital, for which Rae had also been a candidate. At his Westminster interview Rae was asked what he would do if rebellious pupils appeared at his door demanding a change to the rules. 'Invite them in for a sherry' was his reply ('Delusions', 57). Such insouciance may have been too bold for some schools, but in the more urbane surroundings of Westminster it was a positive recommendation. Unexpected though his appointment was, it was a shrewd identification of the right man for the school at that time. He was exceptionally energetic and articulate, contributing widely to the national discourse on education policy. He was a regular contributor to the 'Times Educational Supplement' and was frequently interviewed on television and radio, where he always made a sound and courteous impression. 
Westminster, a centrifugal institution well suited to Rae's personal dynamism, was a school that appealed to the liberal-minded professional classes, who felt that country boarding schools were outmoded. His great achievement, in an era of social and cultural upheaval, was to treat intelligent sixth-formers not as recalcitrant adolescents, but as putative undergraduates, so that for some even Oxford or Cambridge seemed anti-climactic by comparison. Westminster pupils during his reign knew that they were there to work. His priorities were well focused; what mattered were the big issues, such as co-education, changing adolescent mores, or drugs, on which he was rigorous and uncompromising. Conscious that he was headmaster of a great school almost by accident, he felt that he had to play out that role. As a self-publicist, who needed to be the centre of attention, he had a masterful whiggish public manner and kept the school in the spotlight. 
Rae's constant public exposure led many outsiders to think he was neglecting the school, but this was not true. His energy and work-rate were prodigious. His immense stamina, helped by his regular 2 mile swims in the RAC pool in Pall Mall, was always an asset. He skilfully varied the routine with imaginative appointments, for example signing up the former England cricket captain Mike Brearley on a short-term contract. Parents were at ease with him (even if not with the television cameras that Rae allowed in to film the life of the school in 1979) and he was always more controversial outside the school than within it. He knew all his pupils by name, and provided a sympathetic ear for their problems, although some felt he was uneasy in the presence of emotion. 
In an era of rampant inflation Rae coped well with the financial pressures on the school, especially as only 3 per cent of the pupils were the sons or daughters of Old Westminsters (against a comparable figure of 40 per cent at Eton). He undertook expansion on a limited site skilfully, with a new day house (Dryden's), a girls' boarding house in Barton Street, and a new Under School in Vincent Square. During his lengthy tenure girls became full members of the school for the first time and overall numbers rose from 464 to 640. The success of the school was in many ways compensation for his own academic record. In 1977 he proved a politically astute chairman of the Headmasters' Conference. 
Rae's ultimate ambition was to move to Eton, but his failure in 1979 even to secure an interview was a watershed in his life. Westminster was not going to see him through to retirement and a change of career beckoned. Two factors hastened this process. His opposition to Margaret Thatcher's assisted places scheme in 1980, which he saw as subsidizing the cash-strapped middle classes, was at odds with the wishes of many of his governors. Characteristically he said 'You do not deal with a famine by sending a few lucky children to lunch at the Ritz' ('Delusions', 174). Second, in 1983 his wife published a frank book on the public schools, 'A World Apart', criticism of which served as vicarious criticism of Rae himself. Rae supported his wife's freedom to publish what she wanted, but some felt that his authority had been undermined. Eventually his chairman, the dean of Westminster, felt it was time for a change. Rae had had a long innings and in 1984 he was privately given two years to find himself a new job. He left Westminster in March 1986. One of his last acts was to appoint a Barbadian girl as head of school, shocking those he called 'the croakers' in the common room, though it was an appointment that proved an outstanding success. 
After leaving Westminster Rae found no shortage of interesting opportunities. He was adopted as a parliamentary candidate by the Social Democratic Party, became a director of 'The Observer' (1986-93), and was appointed director of the Laura Ashley Foundation (1986-9), set up to foster educational opportunities for those who had left school without qualifications. From 1989 to 1996 he was the first director of the Portman Group, a trade body that promoted responsible use of alcohol. He was also a member of the National Board for Crime Prevention (1993-5). 
As an author Rae had an early success with 'The Custard Boys' (1960), a sensitive story of evacuee children living out the war in a remote corner of the English countryside. The novel was filmed by Columbia as 'Reach for Glory' (1962), in which Rae appeared in a cameo role, and for which he received a United Nations award. He wrote several other successful novels, initially for his own children, as well as books on the challenges facing British education, notably 'The Public School Revolution' (1981) and 'Too Little Too Late' (1989). In 2001 he published a biography of Sister Genevieve O'Farrell, principal of St Louise's, a comprehensive school for Catholic girls in west Belfast. His last major work was 'The agnostic's tale', a rigorous examination of his own religious doubts, which he completed in 2004 but which remained unpublished at his death. 
John Rae was at the heart of the revolution that transformed private education in post-war Britain and he was the best-known public school headmaster of his day, combining exceptional leadership skills with a capacity to influence public life. He understood clearly how boarding schools would have to adapt to reflect changing social expectations and the demands of a generation of parents who were new to the independent school world. The process was sometimes painful and with his strong personality he divided opinion. Some felt he was the breath of fresh air desperately needed, especially on co-education; others that he was something of a Trojan horse, rarely tempering unpalatable truths with discretion -- he once observed, for example, that the tendency for Anglican priests to experience qualms of conscience about private schools stemmed from the time they could no longer afford them. He was never a bland figure, nor was he the traditional 'safe pair of hands'. In this lay his individual strength. His willingness to follow his own instincts and avoid prevarication, together with his deep commitment to the welfare of all his pupils, gave him a special place in both the educational and social history of his times. His final years were clouded by the onset of cancer, which he faced with the same courage and realism that had characterized his professional career. He died at his home, 2S Cedar Lodge, Lythe Hill Park, Haslemere, Surrey, on 16 December 2006, and was survived by his wife and their six children. In 2009 Rae's diaries, 'The Old Boys' Network', were published, which gave an insight into the pressures faced by a late twentieth-century headmaster. 


@@@@@


doc= 97555


Pearce, (Ann) Philippa (1920-2006), children's writer, was born on 23 January 1920 at Crofters, Woodlands Road, Great Shelford, Cambridgeshire, the younger daughter and youngest of four children of Ernest Alexander Pearce, master flour miller and corn merchant, and his wife, Gertrude Alice, 'nee' Ramsden. Brought up in the Mill House in Great Shelford, a handsome early nineteenth-century dwelling set in the upper reaches of the River Cam, Pearce suffered so badly from the kidney disease nephritis that she started school only at the age of eight. Despite this she was still able on occasion to enjoy fishing, swimming, and skating. From the Perse Girls' School in Cambridge she won a state scholarship to read English and history at Girton College, Cambridge. Employed as a civil servant from 1942 to 1945, she then moved to the BBC to work as a producer and scriptwriter in its schools broadcasting department. 
During a long period in hospital in 1951 recovering from another bout of nephritis Pearce helped pass the time by recreating every moment of a favourite canoe trip taken many years previously on the river next to her childhood home. These memories led to her first novel, 'The Minnow on the Say' (1955). Illustrated by Edward Ardizzone, this outwardly conventional story of two boys finding lost treasure in time to save the family home was also a sensitive exploration of mood, friendship, and the power of place. It was runner-up for that year's prestigious Carnegie medal for excellence in children's literature. Her next novel, 'Tom's Midnight Garden' (1958), was an instant success and soon took on classic status. Inspired by the fact that her father had decided to sell the family home before retiring, Pearce wrote a story based on the walled garden that she, her father, and her grandfather had all once enjoyed as children. She also drew on J. W. Dunne's 'An Experiment with Time' (1927), and its central notion that different periods of time are able to co-exist and blend together. The story describes how Tom, a schoolboy from the modern suburbs, somehow has regular meetings with Hatty, a child orphan living in Victorian times. It won the 1959 Carnegie medal and was televised three times, turned into a play, and made into a film. 
In 1958 Pearce moved to work in publishing, first at the Clarendon Press and then, from 1960, for Andre Deutsch. Meanwhile she provided the text for her only picture book, 'Mrs Cockle's Cat' (1961), illustrated by Antony Maitland. Her next novel, 'A Dog So Small' (1962), was rejected by her preferred publisher on the grounds that it was too depressing. This was a sad misreading of a fine novel that describes how a bored and lonely child slowly discovers that living in a fantasy world provides no long-term alternative to embracing reality to the full. Finally published by Constable, it was another critical success. 
On 9 May 1963, at Hampstead register office, Pearce married Martin James Graham Christie, a fruit farmer and researcher seven years her senior, son of James Christie, businessman. He died in 1965 just after the birth of their daughter Sally, never having recovered fully from his time as a Japanese prisoner of war. Bringing up her child single-handed, Pearce found less time for writing. But in 'The Children of the House' (1968) she expertly fictionalized the poignant but tangled childhood memoirs of Major Sir Brian Fairfax-Lucy, who had been brought up in the stately home of Charlecote in conditions of severe emotional and physical neglect. This outstanding joint publication was reissued in 1989 as 'The Children of Charlecote'. Pearce's next publications, 'The Elm Street Lot' (1969) and 'What the Neighbours Did' (1972), were both genial collections of short stories, some of which had been televised on the BBC's children's programme 'Jackanory'. Returning to her previous prize-winning form, 'The Battle of Bubble and Squeak' (1978), an account drawn from her own experience of a family's up-and-down adventures with a couple of lively gerbils, won the Whitbread children's book award for that year. 
Leaving London, where she had been working as a freelance for the previous six years, Pearce moved in 1973 with her daughter to Ashton, a small cottage built by her grandfather opposite the Mill House in Great Shelford, which she had immortalized in fiction as 'Great Barley'. Among her later books were 'The Way to Sattin Shore' (1985), once again runner-up for the Carnegie medal, and 'The Little Gentleman' (2004), an affectionate tale about a talking mole whom she imagined living beneath an old log visible from her window and on which she liked to sit. With her daughter Sally, by then a writer and publisher herself, and her two grandsons living next door, and with a pony, goat, dog, cat, and hens for additional company, Pearce remained a much loved figure at home and at meetings and conferences, whose audiences were always charmed by her wit, wisdom, and inherent sense of grace. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1993 and appointed OBE in 1997 for services to children's literature, she died of a stroke at the University Hospital of North Durham, in Durham, on 21 December 2006, having just addressed a meeting at Seven Stories, the centre for children's books in Newcastle upon Tyne. She was survived by her daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 97557


Needham, Rodney (1923-2006), anthropologist, was born Rodney Needham Green on 15 May 1923 at The Limes, Belle Grove Road, Welling, Bexley, Kent, the only son and eldest of three children of Horace Edward Green, a clerk in the War Office (later an official in the Ministry of Supply), and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Needham. After a year of schooling at Haileybury College he enlisted in the Scots Guards in 1941. In 1942 he was posted to India, where he transferred to the 1st Gurkha rifles. He was commissioned second lieutenant that year, and promoted temporary captain in 1943. In 1944, just before the battle of Kohima, he was severely wounded in the leg while attempting to light a flame thrower; his subahdar, Narang Ghal, was awarded an MC for rescuing him under heavy enemy fire. Demobilized in 1947, he changed his name to Rodney Needham (a change confirmed by deed poll in February 1951), apparently because of disappointment that his father had not once written to him while or after he recovered from his battle injuries in Burma. In 1947 he enrolled at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London to learn Chinese, and on 10 April 1948 he married (Maud) Claudia Walch, 'nee' Brysz (1919/20-1989), a translator for the BBC. She was the former wife of Frederic Alfred Walch and daughter of Stanislaw Brysz, a university professor. They had two sons, Tristan and Guy. 
After completing his studies at SOAS in 1949 Needham went to Merton College, Oxford, for graduate training in social anthropology. In 1951-2 he carried out fieldwork among the nomadic Penan of Sarawak, Borneo, for which he received a doctorate. In 1954-5 he conducted fieldwork on the Indonesian island of Sumba. In 1956 he was appointed lecturer in social anthropology at Oxford and later became a fellow of Merton College. In 1976 he was elected professor of social anthropology and made a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. He held numerous visiting fellowships and professorships in universities in the USA, Australia, and Japan. 
Needham's reputation rested primarily on his early championing of Levi-Strauss's version of structuralism, which, together with Edmund Leach and Mary Douglas, he brought across the channel, Anglicizing it in the process. He used to say he had found a copy of Levi-Strauss's 'Les structures elementaires de la parente' (1949) in an Oxford bookshop the week before going on fieldwork in Borneo. Primed by his knowledge of Dutch structural anthropology, he immediately recognized its significance and its concern with conceptual structure over social organization. Structuralism gave Needham a radically new approach to the study of kinship systems, the template for social structure in small-scale societies. An industrious scholar, he applied this new style in a series of brilliant papers in which he stressed the importance of alliance, through marriage, over that of descent. He established his reputation in 1962 with the publication of 'Structure and Sentiment', a highly polemical short work in which he argued convincingly for the power of structuralist approaches in the study of kinship systems over psychological ones, as advocated by the American anthropologists George Homans and David Schneider. 
However, Needham's promotion of a strict Levi-Straussian structuralism ended abruptly in 1969 when the French anthropologist somewhat unfairly attacked Needham's assiduous editing of the translation into English of his 'Structures elementaires'. Needham, ever the painstaking scholar, wanted to restrict Levi-Strauss's ideas to those societies where they could be fruitfully applied. Levi-Strauss would have none of this: he wanted his ideas to be generally applicable, not ethnographically restricted. This attack, alongside Needham's realization in the course of the translation that the power of Levi-Strauss's approach owed as much to the rhetoric of his prose as to the incisiveness of his thought, led him to pursue and develop his own version of structuralism. From then on he only made reference to Levi-Strauss in a critical vein, cutting through his oratorical excesses and moulding structuralism into a more exact practice. At one point he even suggested that Levi-Strauss, who in wartime New York had participated in Andre Breton's circle, should be regarded not as the famed exponent of structuralism but as 'the greatest Surrealist of them all' ('The birth of the meaningful', 'TLS', 13 April 1984). 
From the early 1970s onwards Needham published a stream of important books and articles on systems of classification, cognitive universals, indigenous psychologies, and kinship theory, in particular 'Percussion and Transition' (1967), where he pointed out the global use of percussive sound in rites of passage, 'Polythetic Classification' (1975), in which he contended that most terms used for cross-cultural comparison will not have simple definitions but are more akin to Wittgenstein's idea of family-resemblant concepts, 'Skulls and Causality' (1976), where he argued against the unnecessary imposition of intermediary terms when trying to understand the causal reasoning of other peoples. He also edited the highly influential 'Rethinking Kinship and Marriage' (1971) and 'Right and Left: Essays on Dual Symbolic Classification' (1973). He was perhaps proudest of 'Belief, Language and Experience' (1972), in which he performed a cross-cultural, cross-disciplinary investigation to argue that belief is not a human universal. 
In the 1960s structuralism was viewed by its supporters in almost messianic terms as offering a new vision of the world. Thanks to the work of Levi-Strauss, his champions, and his popularizers, the anthropological version of this approach gained a renown far beyond its usual disciplinary boundaries. Thanks to Needham, Oxford became a world centre for structuralist anthropology and attracted students from all over the globe. He was an exacting but kindly tutor who drilled his students both to take imaginative risks and to be ever sceptical. He regarded it as his academic duty to be exceptionally generous with his time for his students, and to be a forever loyal supporter of most of them. Many of those he had supervised regarded him as the greatest single academic influence in their lives, and an almost inimitable exemplar of dedicated, inspiring scholarship. 
Needham, ever the polemicist, frequently enjoyed taking a contrary path to most of his colleagues. Thus he took particular pains to revive interest in anthropologist predecessors whose work, he felt, had been undervalued or overlooked. He and, at his behest, some of his proteges translated and edited books by, among others, Arnold van Gennep, A. M. Hocart, and Robert Hertz. But these re-editions sold badly. His students quietly confessed that they bought copies only to read his extended introductions. In his later years much of his most powerful work was published as series of essays, especially 'Against the Tranquility of Axioms' (1983), 'Exemplars' (1985), and 'Counterpoints' (1987). Their individual chapters were models of elegant scepticism and have continued to serve as powerful cautionary tales for fledgeling anthropologists. By adopting an increasingly sceptical style in later life Needham's work echoed that of two of his heroes, Ludwig Wittgenstein and Lucien Levy-Bruhl, both of whom spent the second half of their intellectual lives systematically questioning the positions they had advanced in the first half. 
Needham's experience of the Second World War and his time with the Gurkhas were central to his life. He learnt Gurkhali and even in old age was able spontaneously to sing wartime songs in the language. It was important to him that, in his last years, he achieved reconciliation with Japanese veterans of a battle he had participated in. Several of them paid him visits in Oxford, some repeatedly. But, above all, Needham was a self-made Oxford man. He revelled both in its great traditions and in its petty ceremonies. As he was ready to admit, he created and lived a dream of Oxford. Many of his students, especially from abroad, were happy to join him in this. Though inclined towards atheism, he enjoyed attending the weekly ritual of the university sermon. At Sunday lunchtimes he would sit in the 'don's bar' of the King's Arms, ready to hold court to whoever might turn up. This, he felt, was the way an Oxford don should comport himself. He loved classical music and painting. He was enchanted by form and was more interested in clarifying the conceptual structures underlying the nitty-gritty of daily life than examining their political manipulation. He would often lament that when attending a seminar in theoretical physics or mathematics he knew anthropology could not withstand comparison with such logically grounded subjects. 
Uninterested in the analysis of power, Needham was ready to acknowledge that he was not very skilled at its deployment. In 1972 he was not chosen to succeed his mentor Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard in the Oxford chair, though many saw him as the leading candidate. He was finally awarded the post four years later. But some of his departmental colleagues soon came to regard him as over-eager to revitalize their centre. When, towards the end of the first year of his incumbency, senior members of the university overruled an administrative decision of his, he packed his books and moved into college rooms. He never returned to the department, though he remained in post until his retirement in 1990. 
Needham was enamoured of many aspects of the United States, especially its landscape. In middle age he would often speak of his desire to abandon academia and run a ranch in Montana. After his retirement he took pleasure in repeated visits to New Mexico and Arizona. He cherished friendship and assiduously kept up a voluminous correspondence. Maintaining an almost military discipline to the end, he bore his long, final illness, the result of colonic cancer, with composure and good humour. In his last week he refused to enter a hospice as he did not wish to lose contact with his friends. He died from pulmonary fibrosis at his home, a Merton College flat at 56 Holywell Street, Oxford, on 4 December 2006. He was survived by his two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 97561


Lambton, Antony Claud Frederick, styled Lord Lambton (1922-2006), politician and writer, was born on 10 July 1922 at West Marden Hall, Emsworth, Sussex, the younger son of John Frederick Lambton, fifth earl of Durham (1884-1970), and his first wife, Diana Mary (1901-1924), only daughter of Granville Frederick Richard Farquhar, of Dalton Hall, Beverley, Yorkshire. After attending Harrow School, in 1941 Antony Lambton became heir to the family earldom in tragic circumstances, when his elder brother, John, shot himself. Lambton joined the Hampshire regiment in the same year, but was soon invalided out of the army due to eye trouble. (This affliction led him in later life always to wear sunglasses.) He went to work in a munitions factory, where he met the spirited Belinda Bridget (Bindy) Blew-Jones (1921-2003), daughter of Major Douglas Holden Blew-Jones, of Westward Ho!, Devon. The couple married on 10 August 1942 and had five daughters followed by a son. 
Lambton belonged to an illustrious political family. The first earl of Durham, John George Lambton, a radical whig MP, cabinet minister, ambassador to Russia, and governor-general of Canada, was famous for the Durham report of 1838, which led to self-government in the Canadian and subsequently other colonies. Several other ancestors had served as MPs, usually for their native co. Durham. Lambton's first cousin was Lord Dunglass, later Sir Alec Douglas-Home (prime minister in 1963-4). It was therefore not surprising that Lambton embarked on a political career after the Second World War. Defeated in the general election of 1945, when he fought Chester-le-Street for the Conservatives, he served as a somewhat controversial councillor in Durham for two years before suffering a second parliamentary defeat, at Bishop Auckland in 1950. Refusing to rest on the fame of his family, he had worked hard within the Conservative organization in the north-east, becoming area president of the Young Conservatives. His reward was selection for the Conservative-held seat of Berwick upon Tweed, which he won in the general election of 1951. Although he was far from being an assiduous constituency MP, he held the seat until 1973. 
As the scion of such a notable family, Lambton's prospects for advancement should have been bright. However, he was not universally popular among his colleagues. Even before he had entered parliament an astute Conservative colleague, the diarist Cuthbert Headlam, regarded him as 'an irritable and impatient man who does not suffer fools gladly' (Ball, 595). Lambton's maiden speech, delivered on 13 March 1952, was more controversial than the usual offering, and included a prescient warning about the likely effect of an ageing population on the social security budget. The next speaker, Labour's Harold Wilson, offered his congratulations; years later (during a speech in the House of Commons on 26 April 1966) Lambton joked that this was the only time that Wilson had ever spoken about him in civil terms. 
In 1954 Lambton became parliamentary private secretary to the minister of supply, Selwyn Lloyd. This appointment took on greater significance in April 1955, when Lloyd was elevated to the cabinet as minister of defence, winning further promotion to foreign secretary in December. Yet Lambton's connection with Lloyd turned out to be a mixed blessing. Lloyd was foreign secretary during the Eden government's ill-fated Suez intervention, and although Lloyd stayed in his post after the humiliating British retreat, Lambton resigned. He was disgusted by the aftermath of Suez, and never forgave Eden's successor, Harold Macmillan. The ill feeling was reciprocated, which did little to help Lambton's hopes of promotion while Macmillan remained party leader. 
During the next decade Lambton devoted much of his energy to cross-party back-bench initiatives. For example he played a key role in the passage of Roy Jenkins's 'Obscene Publications Act' in 1959. This was not the only respect in which Lambton deviated from the stereotype of a right-wing Conservative; for example he also advocated the decriminalization of cannabis. Lambton's idiosyncratic ideas -- often expressed in pungent contributions to the Beaverbrook press -- helped to debar him from preferment even when his cousin, Alec Douglas-Home, succeeded Macmillan as prime minister in 1963. His parliamentary career seemed fated to end in futility. He could, though, continue to raise issues close to his heart; in April 1969 he introduced a 'Bill of Rights' into the House of Commons, and although the measure failed its supporters included Home and Margaret Thatcher. 
Towards the end of 1969 Home's successor as Conservative leader, Edward Heath, gave Lambton official responsibility to speak for the party on foreign affairs. The appointment signalled that Heath was willing to promote talented right-wingers -- even those, like Lambton, who disagreed with him on the key issue of Britain's relationship with the European Economic Community. Lambton had also worked for Heath's opponent, Reginald Maudling, in the Conservative leadership election of 1965. However, there was no question of Lambton's securing a cabinet position when his party unexpectedly won the general election of 1970. Instead, he was made an under-secretary within the Ministry of Defence; his area of special responsibility was the Royal Air Force. 
It might have been better for Lambton if Heath had left him out of the government. Foreign affairs -- especially the politics of the Middle East -- continued to be his main interest, and he later confessed to being bored by his duties at the Ministry of Defence. His most notable contribution to political life in this period was his decision to renounce the earldom of Durham, which he inherited on his father's death in February 1970. Lambton had consistently argued that heirs should be able to renounce their peerages in order to stay in the House of Commons. However, he combined this view with a firm attachment to hereditary honours, and continued to insist (against the objections of procedural experts) that he should be known by the courtesy title of Lord Lambton for parliamentary purposes. 
After three years of unremarkable service in junior office, Lambton suddenly created unwelcome headlines by resigning from the government in May 1973. Thanks to a concealed camera and microphone, a tabloid newspaper had secured evidence of Lambton's dealings with more than one prostitute; particularly damaging was a photograph of Lambton in bed with two prostitutes, smoking marijuana. Eventually this material was handed to the police, and Lambton was investigated by the secret services in case his activities had constituted a security risk, like those of John Profumo a decade earlier. Although there was no basis for this suspicion, it was impossible for Lambton to continue in office. He resigned his parliamentary seat and was later convicted of possession of cannabis. The lord privy seal, Lord Jellicoe, resigned shortly afterwards because of his own involvement with prostitutes. 
After his resignation Lambton gave a television interview to Robin Day in which he frankly admitted to his relations with prostitutes, offering the explanation that 'people sometimes like variety. I think it's as simple as that and I think that impulse is understood by almost everybody' ('The Independent', 2 Jan 2007). After leaving public life he retired to the magnificent seventeenth-century Villa Cetinale, near Siena in Italy, taking a keen personal role in the restoration of the house and gardens. Although he never divorced his wife, his companion in this voluntary exile was Claire Ward, a noted society beauty. In the ensuing years his villa was visited by numerous politicians and pop stars; it was rumoured that Lambton presided over many dissolute parties, and he enjoyed playing practical jokes on his guests. 
Apart from his love of women and gardening, Lambton wrote several books in retirement. A volume of short stories published in 1983 was followed by two novels, 'Elizabeth and Alexandra' (1985) and 'The Abbey in the Wood' (1986). These productions confirmed the impression that Lambton had considerable talents, but lacked the consistency of application that might have created a lasting legacy. Ironically his next and best-known book, 'The Mountbattens' (1989), accused the late Lord Louis Mountbatten of exaggerating his own achievements. It could be countered that Lambton himself, for all his abilities, had few tangible achievements to exaggerate. More sympathetically, the erratic career of Antony Lambton could be used to exemplify the dilemmas that faced members of the aristocracy during a supposedly 'meritocratic' era. His six children (who included the noted author and broadcaster Lady Lucinda Lambton, born in 1943) displayed enough ability, dynamism, and eccentricity to suggest that they would have become prominent people even if they had lacked social advantages. When he died at Villa Cetinale, Sovicille, on 30 December 2006, Lambton's obituarists concentrated on the sexual scandal that had ended his political career. He was cremated in his adopted home of Siena, and the ashes were buried in a specially restored chapel at his villa. His son Edward 
(Ned; 'b'. 1961)
became seventh earl of Durham and inherited his father's entire estate, valued at $11,800,360 net in England and Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 97564


Adams, Norman Edward Albert (1927-2005), artist, was born on 9 February 1927 in a flat at 74 Shernhall Street, Walthamstow, Essex, the only child of Albert Henry Adams (1900-1975), a London Transport clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth Winifred Rose, 'nee' Humphries (1906-2000). The family moved shortly afterwards to Hendon and later Burnt Oak to be nearer their families, the house in which most of his childhood was then spent being one of the many 'sunshine semis' of the suburbs of north London. In 1940 he won a free place at Harrow Art School, where he stayed until 1946, meeting Anna Theresa Butt ('b'. 1926), daughter of George Baseden Butt, magazine editor, in 1944 when they were both students of painting. They married at Hendon register office on 18 January 1947, just in time for the great Europe-wide snowfall. 
From Harrow Adams had won a scholarship to the Royal College of Art but his call-up papers had swiftly followed. He registered as a conscientious objector, but spent 'seven terrifying weeks' in Wormwood Scrubs prison for refusing to attend an army medical as ordered by the tribunal that turned him down (Usherwood, 12). Never a church-goer, and later calling himself a 'sort of freelance agnostic' ('Sunday Telegraph', 14 May 1995), he credited that short but intense experience, during which he was much impressed by the prison chaplain, with convincing him that art had to have a message. Throughout his life he read considerably on religion and various mythologies, and his painting from the very first reflected a deep concern for both spiritual matters and music. He had discovered William Blake at the age of sixteen and Blake remained his great hero. He received no formal musical education but there had been a classical record society at Harrow, attended by staff as well as students; and the new BBC Third Programme became his musical university from 1947. 
In 1948, after two years as a farm labourer in lieu of army service, Adams was able to take up his place at the Royal College of Art. He left three years later with the bronze medal for painting, having been taught by many talented figurative artists of the period, notably John Minton, Francis Bacon, Rodrigo Moynihan, and particularly Carel Weight, who continued to take a helpful interest in the young artist. His first solo exhibition was at Gimpel Fils in 1952, which led to a commission to design the sets for a ballet called 'A Mirror for Witches', choreographed by Andree Howard and staged at Covent Garden. In 1955 he designed costumes as well as sets for 'Saudades', choreographed by Alfred Rodrigues and performed at Sadler's Wells. By this time he had moved to Roland, Browse, and Delbanco in Cork Street as his dealers, who gave him two-yearly shows until the late 1970s. 
Another early commission, completed in 1954, was for murals of 'The Odyssey' for the library of one of the earliest comprehensive schools, Broad Lane in Coventry, Adams and his wife having met the architect, Michael Smith. The school was later listed and renamed the Woodland School and Sports College. Parallel with these early successes Adams undertook stints of part-time teaching at Hammersmith and Maidstone art schools and then for nine years at St Albans. Among his colleagues at this lively school run by Mary Hoad were the experimental sculptor George Fullard and the painter Euan Uglow. 
In the spring of 1955, while camping at Clapham in the Yorkshire dales, Adams and his wife found an affordable cottage with a barn that had studio potential. It stood on Butts Hill in Horton-in-Ribblesdale, so-called from the ancient village archery location: it was simply a coincidence it matched Anna's maiden name. In 1956 their eldest son, Jacob, was born, soon followed in 1958 by Benjamin, and the routine of wintering in London and summering in Yorkshire continued for six years. Then in 1962 Adams was appointed head of painting at Manchester College of Art, where he stayed until 1970: for the first four years he stayed for three nights a week in a camper van in Manchester, returning for long weekends at Horton. In 1967, the year Adams was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, he was among several young and up-and-coming artists asked by Oxford University Press to illustrate parts of the 'Old Testament' in five volumes. His colleagues in this project, including John Bratby and Alan Reynolds, all upheld in their own distinctive ways the English tradition. Adams held a particular distrust of the American influence on European painting, and maintained a missionary zeal that serious painters should be involved in higher education. 
Ever enthusiastic explorers (though Adams never flew), the family had spent more than a month in the west of Scotland in 1963 and crossed to the Outer Hebrides. They paid a brief visit to the tiny island of Scarp, where six years later they bought a crofter's shieling where much of the 1970s was spent. This was a very productive decade, being almost free of teaching commitments apart from part-time lecturing at Leeds University from 1975 to 1978. In 1971 St Anselm's Church, in Kennington, commissioned Adams to paint large-scale murals on both sides of its aisle. The theme he chose was the 'Pilgrim's Progress', though he portrayed Bunyan's images in a semi-abstract language. In 1975 he made fourteen ceramic panels depicting the stations of the cross for the Roman Catholic church of Our Lady of Lourdes in Milton Keynes. Anna Adams's work as a ceramic sculptor and writer flourished and they began to visit Provence frequently, finding new sources of creativity together: he would say later, 'hardly a day goes by when I don't discover a new colour' (Usherwood, 80). In the spring of 1981, after returning from one of these first expeditions without their sons, Adams applied for the chair of fine art and director of King Edward VII College, Newcastle University, a post he held for five years. 
The post for which Adams was best known, keeper of the Royal Academy Schools, was offered in 1986: he was glad to return to London and work in an establishment run by fellow artists. He had been elected a full member in 1972, and after nine years became in 1995 professor of painting, a post he held until he retired in 2000. The major part of his new salary consisted of a spacious and sky-lit residential studio at the top of Burlington House, just off Piccadilly. The academy respected his view that the work of professional artists involved in the training of the young should not be hampered, else they would have little to teach. Adams eschewed bureaucracy in all art schools, managing to tread the fine line between dealing with it while not letting it overtake the primacy of discussion and practical involvement with each student. His facility for watercolour resulted in his being invited by the Royal Watercolour Society to become an honorary member in 1987. In 1988 he illustrated Anna's book of mainly urban poems, 'Angels of Soho', and in 1991 contributed eight watercolours to 'Island Chapters', a book about their life on Scarp. In 1994 an anthology of articles about their life in Yorkshire, 'Life on Limestone', originally written for 'The Guardian' and the 'Craven Herald', reproduced eight Ribblesdale watercolours. Earlier he had also illustrated books written by Glyn Hughes, 'Alibis and Convictions' (1978), and John Milner, 'A Decade of Painting, 1971-81' (1981). 
In 1994 Dennis Clinch, the visionary parish priest of the oldest Roman Catholic church in Britain, St Mary's, Mulberry Street, Manchester, advised by Wendy Beckett, commissioned what Adams himself considered the greatest work of his life, the cycle in oils for the stations of the cross. Proving more easily comprehensible than the cycle at St Anselm's and more modern, even African in their influence, than his murals at Milton Keynes, they were summarized by Anna Adams as illustrating 'everything that has happened in the outside world in the way of men's ongoing crucifixion of one another' ('Stations of the Cross', 9). Moving many visitors to tears, they were shown at the Royal Academy's Sackler galleries before being installed at the church, affectionately known as the 'hidden gem', in 1995. 
Soon after the dedication of the stations, worrying symptoms Adams had gradually been experiencing were diagnosed as Parkinson's disease. While both his travelling life and his ability to draw direct from nature were curtailed his passion for painting from the imagination continued apace, still inspired by an enduring love of Blake and, to name but two others, Giotto and Grunewald. He worked on large watercolour compositions for eight years until his right hand lost its cunning. He last used the studio in Yorkshire in 2003 and thereafter, when not in hospital, he lived in the studio in Gainsborough Road, Chiswick, that he and Anna had bought in 1990. Anna was caring for him there when in August 2004 a violent rainstorm caused the main sewers in the road to overflow and their ground floor was completely flooded: Adams's bed became an island. While the water subsided the ensuing damage made life very difficult, so at the beginning of February 2005 he was moved into the Dudley House nursing home at Isleworth. He died there of bronchopneumonia on 9 March 2005 and was buried over the wall from the cottage in Yorkshire, at the Norman church of St Oswald, Horton, next to his mother, who had moved to Settle in her widowhood. He was survived by his wife, Anna, and their two sons. His gravestone is inscribed with a line from John Donne, 'I shall be made thy music'. 


@@@@@


doc= 97567


Baker, Harold Brooks Brooks- (1933-2005), publisher, was born Harold Brooks Baker in Washington, DC, USA, on 16 November 1933, the son of Charles Silas Baker (1888-1943), head of the law firm of Baker, Beedy, and Magee, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Lambert. As a child he contracted polio and nearly died; he never recovered from the physical effects of his illness, and in his final years was confined to a wheelchair. For two years he languished in a sanatorium in Georgia, reading novels and day-dreaming; and his susceptibility to titled society perhaps dated from this time. At the age of fifteen he resumed his interrupted education, and entered Trinity College, a private school at Hartford, Connecticut; afterwards he studied at the University of Virginia law school. He is said to have been a press officer in the White House during the Eisenhower presidency. He worked as a foreign correspondent of the 'Washington Observer' in 1960-63, and then as a bond dealer in Paris and Geneva for six years. In 1964 he married Irene Marie, daughter of Count Robert Elliott Le Gras du Luart de Montsaulnin and his wife, Elisabeth de la Rochefoucauld -- a marriage that gave him the gratification of a connection with such exclusive French families as Polignac, de Luynes, and Murat. There were two daughters of this marriage. He adopted the surname of Brooks-Baker to circumvent the French laws of birth registration, which prevented him from bestowing the family name of Brooks as his daughters' middle forename. 
Brooks-Baker came to London in 1976 as managing director of Debrett's Peerage Ltd, which had recently been acquired by new owners. Under his direction the firm published a lucrative series of books on etiquette, manners, and protocol, notably Douglas Sutherland's 'The English Gentleman' (1978) and 'The English Gentleman's Wife' (1979). Brooks-Baker oversaw the launch in 1981 of 'Debrett's Handbook', a new biographical dictionary to rival 'Who's Who', retitled 'Debrett's Distinguished People of Today' from 1988. His office's affairs fell into disarray, and insolvency was only averted by the timely publication of a book marking the marriage of the prince of Wales in 1981. The London Trust Company bought a 75 per cent holding in 'Debrett's' at this time, and installed Ian McCorquodale as chairman of its subsidiary. Shortly afterwards Brooks-Baker was locked out of the office, and his dismissal was confirmed at a stormy board meeting on 9 November 1981, at which his cause was championed by the quixotic figure of Sir Iain Moncreiffe of that ilk. 
In 1984 Ravensdale Securities bought the company that published 'Burke's Peerage', a rival of 'Debrett's', which could not however meet its debts to the Inland Revenue and was wound up in 1985-6. It would have been sensible to merge the two competing reference books, but instead, during this period of financial vulnerability, Brooks-Baker acquired the right to publish spin-off books under the 'Burke's' imprint. But he had nothing to do with compiling or publishing 'Burke's Peerage', of which no new edition was published between 1970 and 1999. Instead his flair for publicity and self-advertisement was put to the service of an enterprise that published books on history and manners, and which undertook remunerative work as genealogical researchers for clients in Britain, North America, and Australasia. Subsequently he acted as a middleman who enabled his clients to buy Scottish feudal baronies at prices reportedly exceeding $50,000. These were not titles of honour, but dignities tied to specific lands, carrying powers and responsibilities over the property to which they were attached, and rather less empty than manorial lordships in England. Holders of Scottish feudal baronies were entitled to an armorial grant by the lord Lyon king of arms in Edinburgh. These dealings were exempt from the 'Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act' of 1925, although the Scottish parliament's 'Abolition of Feudal Tenure Act' of 2004 stripped feudal baronies of their powers and reduced them to mere titles of dignity, which could be bought and sold without any land. Brooks-Baker and his associates also designed and sold bogus coats-of-arms: bona fide heralds of the College of Arms held his activities in contempt. He was companionable, but had a reputation for being unreliable in money matters, and some of those who had business dealings with him were left smarting. People nicknamed him Brookie to his face, and Crooks-Faker behind his back. 
It was chiefly as a 'rentaquote' that Brooks-Baker reached prominence. In the 1980s he became a self-appointed arbiter of the habits and conduct of the British royal family and nobility. He was always ready with a pithy and provocative comment for journalists, and indeed issued bombastic public statements before being approached by newspapers. His opinions carried a spurious air of authority because of his association with 'Burke's', but were generally glib, ill-informed, smug, and malicious, and part of the culture of irresponsible, inaccurate, and defamatory comment on the house of Windsor that became so prevalent in the 1980s. There seemed no limit to his effrontery. Some senior journalists tried to inhibit the publication of his pronouncements, but they were usually foiled by lazy or ill-informed younger reporters, who found his quotes readily available and reliably catchy. 
His first marriage having ended in divorce, Brooks-Baker married secondly, in 1997, Catherine Mary Neville-Rolfe ('b'. 1947), writer, and daughter of Edmund Neville-Rolfe, agricultural economist and later an artist. His health failed after a fall in the autumn of 2004, and in his final years he suffered from post-polio syndrome. He died on 5 March 2005 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, of heart and respiratory failure. He was survived by his second wife, Catherine, and the two daughters of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 97571


Bishop, Sir Frederick Arthur (1915-2005), civil servant and director-general of the National Trust, was born on 4 December 1915 at 118 Hampstead Road, Brislington, Bristol, the son of Alfred John Bishop, foreman for a wholesale stationers, later factory manager, and his wife, Mary Maria, 'nee' Shaw. He was educated at Colston's Hospital School in Bristol. He joined the Inland Revenue in 1934. For financial reasons he had not been able to go to university, but he took an external law degree at London University in 1938. He served during the Second World War as a ferry pilot in the Air Transport Auxiliary. On new year's day 1940 he married Elizabeth Finlay Stevenson (1915-1999), a fellow civil servant, and daughter of Samuel Brown Stevenson, of Belfast; they had two sons and a daughter. 
Bishop returned to the civil service in 1947, initially in the Ministry of Food. There his abilities were soon recognized; within two years he was principal private secretary to the minister, John Strachey, and to his successors Maurice Webb and Gwilym Lloyd George. He was moved to be assistant secretary to the cabinet in 1953. He was an effective manager of the cabinet's economic business, and secretary of its building committee during the government's drive to build 300,000 houses a year, led by Harold Macmillan as minister of housing. He worked closely with the powerful cabinet secretary, Sir Norman Brook, who in 1956 secured his move to 10 Downing Street to become Anthony Eden's principal private secretary. His calm efficiency won the respect, and the ear, of an increasingly embattled prime minister. Some historians believe that even under Eden his advice, and his 'hawkish' views on international affairs, began to acquire the influence that was to be more marked under Eden's successor Macmillan. 
Macmillan kept Bishop on when he took over as prime minister in 1957. Over the next four years Bishop played a key role in the policy process, exercising influence out of all proportion to his formal responsibilities. With a weak foreign secretary in Selwyn Lloyd, Macmillan relied heavily for advice on international affairs on his civil service private secretaries, whose primary loyalty was increasingly to him personally, treating them as a virtual 'kitchen cabinet' (Aldous, 'Family affair', 14), 'more akin to American national security advisers than mere private secretaries' (McNamara, 67). Working closely with his colleague Philip de Zulueta, Bishop did not hesitate to disagree with, and brief the prime minister against, the official Foreign Office line. He and de Zulueta have been described as the ''change agents' essential to any process of [policy] redefinition, [giving] access to ideas that had not been dulled by slow passage through the bureaucratic machine' (Aldous, 'Family affair', 15). When in 1957 Macmillan wanted to ensure American collaboration in resisting communist infiltration into Syria, it was Bishop whom he sent to Washington for talks with the secretary of state, John Foster Dulles. Dulles was charmed and impressed by Bishop, declaring that there was 'genuine, intimate and effective co-operation, stemming directly from Macmillan' (McNamara, 100). Bishop often travelled with Macmillan, for instance to the Bermuda conference in March 1957 and to Moscow in 1959, the scene of a celebrated row between Macmillan and Nikita Khrushchov. His role and his influence were openly resented by the Foreign Office and the foreign secretary. 
Bishop became deputy secretary to the cabinet in 1959. Although in principle he should now have been impartially serving the cabinet as a whole, he remained very close to the prime minister; he has been described as acting at this time in some respects as though he were still Macmillan's principal private secretary, advising him on European matters. During the protracted debates about Britain's relations with the European Economic Community (EEC), pro-Europeans used Bishop as their direct link to the prime minister. He was appointed CB in 1960, having been made CVO in 1957. 
Bishop returned to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Food in 1961. Even there he continued to be influential in international affairs, especially in relation to the EEC. One historian, Jacqueline Tratt, has described him as a leading member of the small group -- including Harold Macmillan, Edward Heath, and Sir Frank Lee, permanent secretary to the Treasury -- that connived to bring about a major change of policy orientation, almost surreptitiously planning and putting into action the ultimately unsuccessful first approach to the EEC in 1961. He also played a significant part in creating the National Economic Development Council. He intended this in part to rival a department he disliked, the Treasury, arguing that there was a need for 'a more planned approach to the national economic problem... a partnership with employers and unions' (Ringe and Rollings, 342-3). His draft terms of reference were reproduced largely verbatim when the creation of the council was announced by the chancellor of the exchequer, Selwyn Lloyd. 
After three years in the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Food Bishop's government career seemed to be moving towards a climax when, in 1964, he was appointed permanent secretary of the Ministry of Land and Natural Resources, newly created by Harold Wilson. Wilson's aim was to speed up the planning process by removing it from what some saw as the dead hand of the Ministry of Housing and Local Government. Others felt that the new department, with a remit to bring forward more land for development by taxing landowners and developers, never had a chance. It was doubly unfortunate for Bishop both that his new minister, Fred Willey, was out of his depth and that the Ministry of Housing and Local Government was led by one of the most formidable civil servants of the post-war period, Dame Evelyn Sharp. She was determined that her department should lose no important responsibilities. Exploiting the access of her own minister, Richard Crossman, to Wilson, she fought ruthlessly to ensure, first, that the new ministry was given no real powers and, second, that it was wound up as soon as possible. Willey's complaints and Wilson's resentment were unavailing. Bishop, who had no illusions about either his ministry or his minister, found himself in a non-job. By June 1965 he had let it be known that he wished to resign from the civil service and Crossman was exulting in his diary, 'He should be sent off as soon as possible. Let's get rid of him this summer' (Crossman, 261). 
Bishop was an able and well-liked public servant who, in his most senior Whitehall post, was unlucky to be frustrated by such fierce bureaucratic and political in-fighting. He left the civil service in 1965 and took a number of part-time posts, most notably on the board of S. Pearson & Son. In 1968-9 he was a member of a group of former senior officials set up to advise Edward Heath, then leader of the opposition, on reforms to the machinery of government. The Pearson board brought him into regular contact with Patrick Gibson, a committee member (and later chairman) of the National Trust. One result was that in January 1971 Bishop took up his final full-time position, as director-general of the National Trust. He succeeded another former senior official, Sir John Winnifrith, whose name he had suggested himself. 
The National Trust, whose ethos Bishop was to describe as 'amateurism, in the real and best sense of the word' (Jenkins and James, 258), was trying to bring its style more into line with modern needs; it had opened its first shop in 1970, and during Bishop's tenure enlarged its professional staff and saw its membership double (to 500,000). Described by a former colleague as 'by nature a manipulator and negotiator' (Gaze, 235), Bishop used his Whitehall experience and contacts assiduously on behalf of the trust, in particular helping to secure valuable changes in the rules governing the tax treatment of bequests and gifts. Not all was smooth sailing, however: the 1975 annual report noted that 'a high level of inflation will make it impossible to maintain the high standard of conservation which both members and the general public have come to expect'. When Bishop that year outlined to staff the executive committee's proposals for a 20 per cent cut in real expenditure, the need for this was hotly questioned and tempers ran high. But in general Bishop was popular, both with members of the trust's committee and with staff, for whom he obtained better salary levels and pension arrangements. His management style was described as 'unobtrusive', without undue intervention in matters of detail (Gaze, 244). 
Bishop (Fred to his family, but Freddie more widely) took early retirement for health reasons from the National Trust in May 1975, having been knighted in January that year, and he and his wife moved to Cornwall. He had already been a member of the BBC's general advisory council (1971-75), a director of Pearson Longman (1970-77), and chairman of the Home Grown Timber Advisory Committee (1966-73); in Cornwall he took up directorships with English China Clays Ltd (1975-86) and Lloyd's Bank (1976-86). He continued to practise his skills as an amateur painter and his gift for friendship, not only with the Gibsons and others but also with Harold Macmillan, who visited the Bishops several times and remained in close touch until his own death. In 1987 Bishop and his wife moved to Hampshire to be closer to their grandchildren. He died at his home, Manor Barn, 65 Church Road, Bramshott, Hampshire, on 2 March 2005, of an acute transformation of chronic lymphatic leukaemia. He was survived by his three children, his wife having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 97577


Clark, George Sidney Roberts Kitson (1900-1975), historian, was born in Leeds on 14 June 1900, the younger son and second of the three children of Edwin Kitson Clark (1866-1943), of Leeds, lieutenant-colonel of the Territorial Army and mechanical engineer, the son of Edwin Charles Clark, regius professor of civil law at Cambridge. His mother was Georgina, a painter, the daughter of George Parker Bidder QC, lawyer, and granddaughter of G. P. Bidder, engineer, who was exhibited in his youth as a 'calculating' phenomenon. He was educated at Shrewsbury School. Brought up in a cultured and spacious home at Meanwoodside, Yorkshire, he was not happy at school, where he appeared awkward, untidy, and ineffective at games. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as an exhibitioner in 1919. There he found the environment in which he could blossom. With his genial and hospitable nature, he entered with zest into college activities. In part one of the historical tripos he obtained a lower second and in part two he was placed in the second division of the first class (1921). He became a research fellow of his college in 1922, college lecturer in 1928, university lecturer in 1929, college tutor in 1933, and in 1954 university reader in English constitutional history. 
As a tutor, teaching and administration absorbed most of Kitson Clark's time and energy. He liked young people, both children and undergraduates, and won their affectionate respect. To the end he retained a certain boyishness himself. Burly, courageous, and outspoken, he became one of the notable characters of the university. As fellow of his college and member of the history faculty, he was both active and innovatory. Though generally conservative in his views, he had a flexible and imaginative mind. He played a prominent part in the enlargement of the tripos syllabus to include American and imperial history. In his last two decades he was an outstanding supervisor of research students and made Cambridge a centre for research in English nineteenth-century history. He helped to establish New Hall, the third women's college at Cambridge. He founded the university's education film council. 
Kitson -- as he was generally known -- never married and, with the deterioration in his father's health and finances between the wars, he took on large and continuing responsibilities for the rest of the family. After the Second World War, when college and family pressures eased, his life widened. Underneath his bluff exterior there was a sensitive temperament, easily hurt and sometimes momentarily petulant. Though disappointed not to become vice-master of his college or Cambridge professor of modern history, he remained singularly free from professional envy. He had strong feelings, which he found difficult to suppress, and could offend unwittingly; he himself forgave easily. At heart he was a humble man. A devout Anglican, he revealed something of his deeper beliefs in two books, 'The English Inheritance' (1950) and 'The Kingdom of Free Men' (1957). 
His first and longest book (but not his best, nor the one he most enjoyed writing) was 'Peel and the Conservative Party: a Study in Party Politics, 1832-41' (1929; 2nd edn, 1964); this was a development of his fellowship dissertation. Apart from 'Peel' (1936), a brief life, he produced nothing more for twenty years and never again a major piece of research. As late as 1952 he was contemplating a companion volume on Peel and the corn laws and a study of mid-Victorian society which would fill the gap in Elie Halevy's classic 'Histoire du peuple anglais au XIXe siecle'. All that came of the first were three memorable articles on the social background. In place of the second came the books which constitute his main historical achievement: 'The Making of Victorian England' (1962), 'An Expanding Society, Britain, 1830-1900' (1967), and 'Churchmen and the Condition of England, 1832-1885' (1973). Significantly, all were based on series of lectures. He had found his medium and with it an attractive style, half-way between essay and conversation. The fruit of capacious reading and much reflection, his books were designed to redirect and illuminate, to stimulate rather than satisfy. A Kitson Clark school of historians would have been foreign to his mentality but generations of students at Cambridge and many contemporary historians were influenced by his outlook and grateful for his friendship, which they marked in an outstanding Festschrift, 'Ideas and Institutions of Victorian Britain', edited by Robert Robson (1967). In 1977, he published an erudite edition of G. M. Young's 'Portrait of an Age'. 
Kitson Clark was Ford's lecturer at Oxford (1959-60), Maurice lecturer at King's College, London (1960), Birkbeck lecturer at Cambridge (1967), and visiting lecturer at the universities of Pennsylvania (1953-4) and Melbourne (1964). Besides his Cambridge LittD, which he took in 1954, he received honorary degrees from Durham (1960), East Anglia (1970), Glasgow (1971), and Leeds (1973); and in 1975 he was elected foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He died at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 8 December 1975. 
Kitson Clark's sister, (Anna) Mary Hawthorn Kitson Clark, (1905-2005), archaeologist, was born in Leeds on 14 May 1905. She was educated at Leeds Girls' High School and Girton College, Cambridge, where she read history and stayed on for a year of archaeology. Returning to Yorkshire, in 1929 she became secretary of the Roman Antiquities Committee for Yorkshire, of which her father was treasurer, holding that post until 1943. In 1935 she published the acclaimed 'Gazetteer of Roman Remains in East Yorkshire', and from 1941 to 1943 she served as curator of Roman antiquities at the Yorkshire Museum, in York. On 5 July 1943 she married Derwas James Chitty (1901-1971), Church of England clergyman and archaeologist, and the son of James Charles Martin Chitty, also a clergyman. They had met in 1929 in Palestine, where she had joined Dorothy Garrod excavating palaeolithic sites and he was excavating the monastery of St Euthymius. After their marriage they settled in Upton, Berkshire, where he was vicar, though she remained involved in the Yorkshire Philosophical Society (which ran the Yorkshire Museum) and the Roman Antiquities Committee for Yorkshire for a number of years. They had one daughter. After her husband's retirement in 1968 they moved to Llangwnnadl, on the Llyn Peninsula, Caernarvonshire, near Bardsey Island (Ynys Enlli). As Mary Chitty she published 'The Monks of Ynys Enlli' in two volumes, covering the years 500-1252 (1992) and 1252-1537 (2000). In 1988 her earlier contributions to Roman archaeology in Yorkshire had been recognized in 'Recent Research in Roman Yorkshire: Studies in Honour of Mary Kitson Clark'. She died at Mor Awel, Llangwnnadl, on 1 February 2005 and was survived by her daughter. 
Norman Gash', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 97580


Corley, Sir Kenneth Sholl Ferrand (1908-2005), industrialist, was born at Rosthwaite, Westley Road, Acocks Green, Birmingham, on 3 November 1908, the son of Sydney Walter Corley, insurance inspector, and his wife, Annie Louise, 'nee' Sholl. He was educated at St Bees School in Cumberland. At the age of nineteen he joined the Birmingham firm of Joseph Lucas & Son Ltd, which specialized in electrical components for the automotive and aviation industries. He remained with the firm until his retirement forty-five years later. 
On joining Lucas, Corley was sent to the firm's depot in Leyton, where he learned the technical side of the business before returning to Birmingham to learn the commercial side by being 'office boy' to F. H. Walker, the firm's general manager and a future director. Corley first came to prominence in the firm when he was dispatched to Lowestoft in 1929 to act on behalf of the company when it acquired a major shareholding, valued at $8696, in the motor accessory firm D. V. A. Rist. Lucas's holding in Rists was kept secret for thirty-four years, for most of which Corley acted as the sole link between the two establishments. His business acumen attracted the attention of Oliver Lucas, the grandson of Joseph Lucas, who by 1921 had become a director. Lucas often took the young Corley with him when conducting business negotiations, including on a trip to the United States in 1933. On 19 June 1937 Corley married, at the Methodist Church, Oaklands Gate, Northwood, Middlesex, the 24-year-old Olwen Mary Yeoman (died 1999), daughter of Maurice Hart Yeoman, a principal assistant for London county council. They had a son, Peter, and a daughter, Ann. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War several Lucas directors and managers found themselves being seconded to other electrical firms at the request of the ministries of Aircraft Production and Supply. Corley was kept on at Lucas as Walker's assistant in spite of strenuous efforts made by another director, Peter Bennett, to appoint him to his staff at the Ministry of Supply. Corley's wartime effort was therefore spent entirely in Birmingham as part of the skeleton senior management team led by Bertram Waring, who became joint managing director with Peter Bennett following the death of Oliver Lucas in 1948. In the same year Corley was elevated to the position of company director. 
The early 1950s saw considerable organizational change at Lucas. In 1951 this entailed dividing the board of directors into two, creating a main board and an executive board, with the latter taking responsibility for running Lucas's various subsidiary companies. Corley was transferred from the main to the executive board, but quickly found himself part of a small, tight-knit coterie of managers surrounding Waring who in effect ran the organization. In 1955 Corley also took over the committee responsible for executive organization and development, and a year later was made chief administrative officer. 
Lucas harboured plans to expand into the European market and in 1959 Corley was given responsibility for initiating a partnership with Ducellier-Bendix-Air Equipment in France. A new enterprise was formed to manufacture a full range of electrical automotive components, known as Ducellier & Cie. In the same year, 1959, Lucas perceived that it would have to diversify its products following the Sandys report on the future of Britain's air defences, which had come out in favour of guided missiles at the expense of manned aircraft. It considered manufacturing electrical systems for British Rail. Corley was closely involved in this plan, but little had been achieved before British Rail announced that it preferred to remain with its tried and tested suppliers. Greater success obtained in supplying electrical equipment for the machine tool industry, though the financial benefits for the company were not as great as the potential gains that might have been garnered from more profitable railway supply contracts. Also in 1959, as part of the diversification exercise, Corley spearheaded Lucas's attempt to move into all-glass, sealed beamed light units for cars. A separate manufacturing company was proposed. British Sealed Beams Limited was registered in 1959 with Corley as chairman. Initial production was small, with Vauxhall being the first main customer, but over time orders were received from Ford and the British Motor Corporation, and heralded the success of the new subsidiary. 
In 1965 Corley was appointed commercial director of the executive board, while at the same time being vice-chairman (commercial) for the whole group as well as chief executive of Lucas Electrical. In 1969 he was appointed chairman and combined that role with that of chief executive. During his tenure as chairman he was responsible for streamlining the groups from nineteen more or less independent firms to seven. Under pressure from the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation in the late 1960s Lucas made a number of acquisitions in the aircraft industry. Corley promoted that side of the business, including a partnership with Rolls-Royce in developing the RB211 engine. However, the increasing costs of the RB211 eventually forced Rolls-Royce into crisis, leaving Lucas with debts of $20 million. On hearing of this all Corley is reputed to have said is 'Mmm, well, well'. 
Outside Lucas, Corley was a life governor of Birmingham University, a governor of the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, chairman of the Birmingham chamber of commerce in 1964, president of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders in 1971, and a governor of his alma mater, St Bees (and chairman, 1978-84). He was knighted in 1972 and made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1975 for his services to the automotive industry. After his retirement he instigated and presided over the Lucas Festival of Arts. A quiet unassuming man who got on with things, he retired to Cumbria where he enjoyed bee-keeping and fell walking, even climbing Scafell Pike on his eightieth birthday, yet still finding time to be an inveterate letter writer to the 'Daily Telegraph' newspaper. He died of prostate cancer at his home, Bradbury House, Gosforth, Cumbria, on 6 March 2005, and was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97584


DeLorean, John Zachary (1925-2005), motor car manufacturer, was born on 6 January 1925 in Detroit, Michigan, USA, the eldest of four sons of Zachary DeLorean, a Romanian-born foundry worker in the Ford motor car works, and his wife, Kathryn, 'nee' Pribak, a factory worker of Austro-Hungarian antecedents. His father was a violent alcoholic whose family suffered many deprivations and terrors. John DeLorean, who was educated at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, was drafted into the US army for three years midway through his course at the Lawrence Institute of Technology in Detroit, but graduated in 1948. He joined the Chrysler Corporation before transferring in 1952 to the Packard company, where he worked in the research and development of hydraulics and transmissions systems. 
In 1956 DeLorean was recruited to the Pontiac division of General Motors (GM), serving first as director of advanced engineering, then as chief engineer from 1961 and general manager from 1965. He incorporated vertically stacked headlights, racing stripes, cockpit-style interiors, angled instrument panels, and other accessories into the designs of Pontiac models such as the GTO and Firebird, which greatly raised sales to young male buyers, and he was a vice-president of GM by the age of thirty-nine. After being promoted in 1969 to be general manager of GM's Chevrolet division, he turned around its profitability. Subsequently he assumed responsibility for GM's five American car divisions (Chevrolet, Buick, Oldsmobile, Pontiac, and Cadillac), its American truck and coach division, and its Canadian operations. Nevertheless his flamboyance, egotism, and unconventionality jarred with his colleagues at GM, and he left the corporation in 1973. Next he registered the DeLorean Corporation, specializing in cars, camper vans, and trailers, and was involved in several business initiatives, including an avocado farm and a ski school, that ended in failure and litigation. He tried to attract government funding to set up a bus factory in the high unemployment area of South Bronx, but above all wanted to build an exotic sports car. Adapting a discarded Porsche design, he determined to build a rear-engined, two-seater sports car with an all-plastic chassis, stainless steel exterior, and gull-wing doors which, if both were open, gave the look of a bird in flight. 
In June 1978 DeLorean approached the Labour government in London with a plan to build this sports car at a government-subsidized factory in Northern Ireland. Despite expert misgivings, Roy Mason, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, assured his cabinet colleagues that DeLorean's initiative would bring great political, social, and economic benefits to the province and prove a hammer-blow against the Irish Republican Army. Mason, who had an entrenched socialist faith in government intervention in industry, concluded a deal with DeLorean, after hectic negotiations, on 28 July. A site was selected at Dunmurry, south-west of Belfast, a beleaguered area of high unemployment straddled by both Catholic and protestant districts, and a factory was erected that created 2500 jobs. The accession to power in 1979 of a Conservative government altered the way in which Whitehall responded to DeLorean's urgent, honeyed words. The Thatcher cabinet mistrusted government subsidies of feeble industrial enterprises, and when DeLorean approached Mason's successor, James Prior, for another $40 million of government money to develop a sedan car, Prior proved more interested in reducing the company's $25 million overdraft, which carried a government guarantee. Prior initially found DeLorean suave, handsome, self-confident, and commanding, but decidedly tricky; later he decided that DeLorean was a confidence trickster. Engineering work on the DeLorean car DCM12 was assigned to the Lotus company in Norfolk. Production began in December 1980 with high hopes, but the car was underpowered, boring to drive, and expensive at $25,000 each -- especially at a time when the USA, its only market, was in recession. 6000 DMC12s were supplied to the USA in the period to January 1982, but only 3000 were sold. The slipshod Belfast workers produced vehicles of such poor quality that they had to pass through rectification plants in the USA before they could be sold. The DeLorean Corporation was undercapitalized and hoped to raise $12 million by a float on the New York stock exchange, but the float was indefinitely postponed on the advice of its investment bankers. 
The Belfast company was insolvent by January 1982, and Sir Kenneth Cork, who was appointed as its receiver, began to unravel the squalid mess. He found DeLorean pompous, sly, and blustering. When DMC12 production ceased in October 1982, British taxpayers had contributed $78 million to produce 8500 vehicles. Cork soon discovered that $17.5 million paid for the development costs of the car had been diverted through Panama to Switzerland, and had then been pocketed by DeLorean, Colin Chapman, the head of Lotus, and a Lotus executive, Frederick Bushell. Chapman died in 1982, and Bushell was jailed in 1992, but DeLorean evaded attempts to extradite him from the USA to face British criminal prosecution. In 1986 he was unwarrantably acquitted of related charges by an American court. 
DeLorean had been genuinely dedicated to producing his own motor car, and longed to be the commander-in-chief of a motor corporation, but failed to control his venality or manage his headstrong talents. A desperate man who could not face failure, he hoped to save his toppling empire by a last desperate ploy, and after returning from Colombia he was arrested on 19 October 1982 in Los Angeles for importing 220 lb of cocaine worth $14.7 million into the USA. Despite strong evidence of his guilt, he was acquitted in August 1984 after arguing that he had been a victim of entrapment by the FBI. He was finally bankrupted in 1999, and his 434 acre estate in New Jersey (bought in 1981) was seized by a federal court in 2000. About the time of his arrest he became a born-again Christian. 
DeLorean married first, in 1954 or 1957, Elizabeth Elaine Higgins. They had an adopted son and two daughters. After this marriage was dissolved, he married, on 31 May 1969, Kelly Harmon ('b'. 'c'.1949), from whom he was divorced in 1972. On 8 May 1973 he married a model named Cristina Ferrare, from whom he was divorced in 1985. His fourth wife was Sally Baldwin. He died after a stroke on 19 March 2005 at Overlook Hospital, Summit, New Jersey. He was survived by his fourth wife and the children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 97586


Robinson, John Ebdon (1923-2005), planetarium director and broadcaster, was born on 22 December 1923 at Durham House, 102 Crouch Hill, London, the son of William Ewart Robinson, export and import merchant, of 109 rue du Relais, Ixelles, Brussels, and his wife, Yvonne Bertha, formerly Cryer, 'nee' Ebdon. He was educated at an English-language school in Switzerland and at Blundells School, which he did not enjoy. During the Second World War he served with the Royal Air Force; he twice survived having to bale out after being shot down, and suffered flash blindness as a result of a blast. After the war he planned to become an actor, and trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, but was advised against a career in the theatre since the bright lights affected his eyes. He took an external degree in English literature from the University of London while working as a buyer, and on 19 April 1952 married Angela Mary Knyvett (died 2003), a 21-year-old occupational therapist, and daughter of John Seymour Knyvett, army officer; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Uncertain about his career, from 1952 to 1957 Robinson lived in east Africa, working as a game warden and also buying and selling skins. He found time to master Swahili (languages always came easily to him) and founded a repertory company, the Nairobi City Players. When he returned to England he considered being ordained in the Anglican church, but rejected the idea on the grounds that he would find it hard to support his family on a clergyman's income. Nevertheless it had become clear that his real future lay in public speaking; he had what had been called a 'port-wine' voice, and as a lecturer he was helped by the fact that he was tall and good-looking. 
London's first Planetarium had been opened at Madame Tussaud's in Baker Street but had not been quite the success originally expected, and soon after his return to England Robinson (who by now was known as John Ebdon) was invited to become its chief narrator. His arrival made all the difference; his lectures -- he preferred to call them 'displays' -- were immensely popular, and the Planetarium was soon presenting several shows each day. He devised a wide range of programmes besides those for the general public, including special 'displays' for primary schoolchildren, secondary schoolchildren, and students of astronomy; for children with learning disabilities, gifted children, and the blind; and for those interested in references to medieval astronomy and astrology in English literature. One of his main strengths was his sense of humour, and unlike his predecessor he was always ready to talk informally to his audience after the end of the official display. Quite apart from this, astronomy had always been one of his main hobbies, so that he was well equipped to answer questions about it. He became director of the London Planetarium in 1968, when the moon landings were imminent, and remained until ill health forced him to retire in 1989. 
Long before then, Robinson had become established in a new career, that of a popular broadcaster (again using the name John Ebdon). A senior BBC producer, Denys Gueroult, heard him speaking at the Planetarium and was quick to appreciate his potential. He invited Robinson to compile a programme based on snippets from the BBC sound archives, adding his own comments between the excerpts; this was ideally suited to his rich voice, whimsical humour, and grasp of what was happening in Britain and abroad. The programme, 'Archive Feature', was broadcast on Radio 4 on the first Monday of each month, and ran uninterrupted for over a quarter of a century. Millions of listeners looked forward to his programme, which he always opened with 'How do you do?' and closed with 'Anyway, if you have been, thanks for listening'. Frequent references were made to his cat Perseus (to whom Robinson attributed some of his more controversial opinions), and the cat earned the unusual distinction of an obituary when he died in 1978. When the series came to an end in 1987 it was widely missed. He also appeared regularly on 'Woman's Hour', 'Thought for the Day', and 'Any Questions', and devised and presented other series, including 'A World of Sound', 'Nonsense at Noon', 'April Foolery', and 'Near Myths' (the latter based on tales from Greek mythology). 
Robinson's third career was as an author. 'Ebdon's England' (1985) was perhaps the best of his books, but all were beautifully written and all were well received. He was a great traveller, and had a particular fondness for Greece; he spent many of his holidays there, and wrote three books about it -- 'Ebdon's Odyssey' (1979), 'Ebdon's Iliad' (1983), and 'Near Myths' (1989), the last based on his radio series. He mastered both ancient and modern Greek and often broadcast on Greek radio, one listener commenting that his command of the language was almost perfect. 
Witty, good-humoured, and always urbane, Robinson was one of the most accomplished and popular broadcasters of the post-war BBC. His retirement was marred by the death of a son in a parachute accident, and by the death of his first wife, but he found happiness in a new relationship with Mary Elizabeth Lawson Light, a state registered nurse, and daughter of Albert Lawson Light, consultant surgeon. They married on 6 February 2004. Robinson died a year later, on 19 March 2005, at his home, 41 Hillside Road, Northwood, London, of cancer; he was survived by his second wife and two children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 97587


Haycraft, Anna Margaret (1932-2005), publisher and novelist, was born on 9 September 1932 at 2 St John's Road, Wallasey, Birkenhead, the only child of John Richard Alfred Lindholm, a supervisor of a general stores' packing department, and later works manager, and his Welsh-born wife, (Gladys) Alexandra Irene, 'nee' Griffiths. She was originally named Anne, but later changed her name to Anna. She went to Bangor county grammar school after her parents moved to north Wales, and on to Liverpool School of Art. Her father was half Finnish and her parents belonged to a group called the Church of Humanity, which preached a high-minded atheism. In reaction against her parents' belief, she became a Roman Catholic at the age of nineteen because she 'no longer found it possible to disbelieve in God' ('Daily Telegraph'). After dropping out of Liverpool Art School she spent a year as a postulant nun with the order of Notre Dame in Liverpool, but left after slipping a disc: the nuns refused to take anybody with a health disorder. In later years she would occasionally announce to her husband and children that she had always intended to be a nun and would one day join a contemplative order. 
Anna Lindholm moved to London, arriving in 1950s bohemian Chelsea, and found temporary work in a delicatessen. One of the customers was Colin Berry Haycraft (1929-1994), who was living near the King's Road. With a first in Greats from Oxford, Haycraft, son of an army officer, had worked as personal assistant to his cousin Cecil Harmsworth King on the 'Daily Mirror' but found his true vocation in publishing, and moved to Weidenfeld and Nicolson, where he started its academic imprint, the World University Library. He immediately fell in love with the dark-eyed beauty behind the counter, and on 15 December 1956 they married, at the Roman Catholic chapel of Our Lady of the Rosary, Dwygyfylchi, Caernarvonshire. From this time Anna Haycraft established a style that hardly changed over the years -- kohl-rimmed eyes and black clothes, with the occasional Jean Muir during more prosperous years. 
Anna Haycraft's stated view of human relationships was: 'There is no reciprocity. Men love women. Women love children and children love hamsters' ('The Independent'). The greater part of her life was absorbed by motherhood. She had seven children: five sons, William, Joshua, Thomas, Oliver, and Arthur, and two daughters, Sarah and Rosalind. Born prematurely, Rosalind died after two days. In 1978 her second son Joshua died, aged nineteen, after some months in a coma. He had fallen through a roof at Euston station while train-spotting. His death profoundly affected his mother, who likened the continuing pain to a form of amputation. 
In the early 1960s the Haycrafts bought 22 Gloucester Crescent, Camden Town, for $4000. Within a few years the crescent of large Victorian houses had become one of the most fashionable streets in London. Their close neighbours included Jonathan Miller, Alan Bennett, A. J. Ayer and Dee Wells, and Nick and Claire Tomalin. The street even gave rise to a cartoon in 'The Times' about media types, 'NW1'. The Haycrafts' house became a meeting place for bohemian culture, and the champagne cocktails mixed by Colin were renowned for inducing riotous behaviour. 
In 1968 Colin Haycraft decided with a partner, Tim Simon, to buy the publishing house of Duckworth, which had been founded by Virginia Woolf's half-brother in 1898. After the death of his partner from cancer, Haycraft became sole proprietor and moved the offices to the Old Piano Factory, Oval Road, close to their home. From 1970 Anna was in charge of fiction, while Colin concerned himself with the scholarly list. Beryl Bainbridge, who became a close friend of the Haycrafts, was the best known of the novelists whom Anna encouraged and published. As an editor, she was inspirational. She was unfailingly encouraging to young writers, and for a few years from 1993 ran a writing course, with the novelist Shelley Weiner, from her second home in Wales. It was notable for the apres-writing, when wine and conversation flowed till the early hours. 
In 1977, aged forty-five, Anna Haycraft published her own first novel, 'The Sin Eater', under the pseudonym Alice Thomas Ellis. It was published while her son Joshua was in a coma after his accident, and it was his death, she said, that made her go on writing. Her novels are spare, elegantly written black comedies, poignant with a touch of the supernatural. After 'The Sin Eater', which exposed the violent rancours of Welsh, Irish, and English, and won a Welsh Arts Council award, she published 'The Birds of the Air' (1980); 'The 27th Kingdom' (1982), short-listed for the Booker prize; 'The Other Side of the Fire' (1983); and 'Unexplained Laughter' (1985), which won the Yorkshire Post book award. Her trilogy 'The Clothes in the Wardrobe' (1987), 'The Skeleton in the Cupboard' (1988), and 'The Fly in the Ointment' (1989), about infidelity and betrayal, was filmed for television as 'The Summerhouse', starring Jeanne Moreau. 'The Inn at the Edge of the World' (1990), winner of the 1991 Writers' Guild award for fiction, alluded to Celtic myth, and 'Pillars of Gold' (1992) was an urban satire. This was followed by a collection of stories, 'The Evening of Adam' (1994), and a novel about the mysterious appearance of a newborn baby in a remote corner of Wales, 'Fairy Tale' (1996). In 1999 she was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Anna Haycraft also wrote non-fiction, again mainly as Alice Thomas Ellis, and her popular column 'Home life' in 'The Spectator' was published in four collections by Duckworth between 1986 and 1989. This account of domestic life was like a pithy soap opera, where readers got to know and love the various characters, such as the frequently mentioned Janet, who began as nanny to the Haycraft children, and moved on to be secretary, chauffeur, and general organizer to Anna. Anna Haycraft published a volume of memoirs, 'A Welsh Childhood' (1990), and books on food, beginning with her first ever book, 'Natural Baby Food: a Cookery Book' (1977, as Brenda O'Casey). 'Darling, You Shouldn't Have Gone to So Much Trouble', co-written with Caroline Blackwood (1980, as Anna Haycraft) featured recipes involving such ingredients as tinned sardines, Spam, baked beans, and lashings of alcohol. Her last book also centred on food: 'Fish, Flesh and Good Red Herring: a Gallimaufry' (2004), a quirky history of cookery through the ages. 
In her more controversial non-fiction, Haycraft (still writing as Alice Thomas Ellis) attacked the liberal wing of the Roman Catholic Church, objecting to nuns in slacks and 'happy-clappy stuff'. She published the polemical 'Serpent on the Rock: a Personal View of Christianity' in 1994. A fervent traditionalist (she attended the sung Latin mass at St Dominic's Priory in Kentish Town), she criticized progressive bishops in her column in the 'Catholic Herald'. In 1996 she attacked Derek Worlock, the liberal archbishop of Liverpool, who had died three months previously of cancer. Sacked by the 'Catholic Herald', in response to demands from the Catholic hierarchy, she moved on to 'The Oldie', where she continued her column as 'The God slot' -- published in 2004 in a collection as 'God Has Not Changed'. 
As someone who was tolerant of family chaos and friends' muddled lives, Haycraft's firm stance on religious orthodoxy seemed contradictory. And although she didn't much like eating, she enjoyed writing about food and cooking meals for her friends -- though she rarely sat down to eat, preferring to throw in occasional remarks, cigarette in hand, while leaning against the Aga. Her novels featured independent-minded women, but she was staunchly anti-feminist. She despised 'new age' theologies, yet possessed a Celtic awareness of the mystic. 
The Haycrafts' later years in publishing were beset by financial troubles. In 1988 Colin sold a 50 per cent share in Duckworths to an investor but in 1991 he was forced to buy back his shares in order to regain control. The stress affected his health and he died of a stroke on 24 September 1994. With Robin Baird-Smith as publisher, Anna Haycraft remained as fiction editor for several years. In 2001 she sold the house in Gloucester Crescent and moved to Trefechan, a farmhouse at Pennant Melangell in Montgomeryshire. Surrounded by mountains, reached by a single-track lane, with the nearest shop five miles away, it was not an ideal place for someone who didn't drive. There she worked on 'A Gallimaufry', and her columns for 'The Oldie' and other journals. In 2003 she was diagnosed with lung cancer and underwent an apparently successful operation. Cancer was diagnosed again early in 2005. She claimed to feel no fear at the prospect of death, only 'huge excitement' ('Daily Telegraph'). She died at Meadow House Hospice, Ealing Hospital, Southall, London, on 8 March 2005. The funeral Latin requiem mass, with plainsong, at St Ethelreda's, Ely Place, London, was officiated by Kit Cunningham, an old family friend who had also conducted Colin's funeral eleven years earlier. She was buried in the churchyard of St Melangell at Pennant Melangell, close to her husband, and her son Joshua. 


@@@@@


doc= 97588


Erskine, Ralph (1914-2005), architect and town planner, was born on 24 February 1914 at 30 Victoria Road, Mill Hill, London, the second child and only son of George Erskine, shipping clerk, and his wife, Mildred Goepel, 'nee' Gough. His paternal grandparents were Scottish. His father was unambitious, but his mother held a degree from London University and was described by Erskine as intellectually frustrated. Fabian socialists, they sent their son to the Friends' School at Saffron Walden as they admired its values. There Erskine met his future wife, Ruth Monica Francis (1914-1988), and, while he was never a Quaker himself, the pacifist and humanist ideals of the Quakers strongly informed his life and work. Wanting a career involving fresh air and drawing, he entered Regent Street Polytechnic in 1931 to study surveying, but changed to architecture as more interesting; he qualified in 1937. Gordon Cullen, with whom Erskine's ideas of townscape have often been compared, was in the year above. Modernism appealed to Erskine's social conscience, but he quickly became wary of white walls and flat roofs that aped the monumental; he was also suspicious of the classical details he was expected to apply to housing when he went in 1936 to work for C. W. Glover and Partners in Welwyn Garden City, and to factories when a year later he joined Ewart Culpin and Partners. 
A study tour of central Europe made little impression on Erskine's work. But in Sweden a social democratic government had come to power in 1932 with a programme of slum clearance and new building that adopted a gentle modernism that Erskine admired as functional and contextual. As he said, 'housing is a small 'a' architecture. It should be friendly, intimate and have little there to make it monumental' (BL NSA, interview, 23 Jan 1997). Perhaps it was fortunate that the Swedish climate made it impossible to follow the modernist dogma of flat roofs and thin concrete walling. He headed in May 1939 for Stockholm by ferry and bicycle, and found work there. He then sent for Ruth, and on 29 August 1939 they married. The Second World War broke out a few days later; Erskine lost his job and they were stuck with no work and no money. Yet, as a pacifist, he decided to stay in neutral Sweden. In 1941 he and Ruth built themselves a small house in timber at Lissma, and a few commissions with friends followed. In 1945 they decided not to return to Britain. 
Erskine's buildings from the early 1950s were modest in scale, yet many of the structures were experimental. Most were new rural settlements for the timber industry, including Gyttorp, begun in 1945, and Hammarby, begun in 1947. Terraces of housing had arched or steeply pitched roofs in a variety of picturesque forms, set around open spaces, and at Gyttorp accompanied by a school, added in 1955. In his industrial work of this period Erskine sought to break down factories' bulk into smaller components with sculptural forms expressive of their function, as for a cardboard factory at Fors, in 1950-53. In 1948 he designed the Borgafjall Hotel in Lapland, with a ski slope on its roof. The Engstrom weekend house on Lison took the form of an igloo. In 1954 he designed Sweden's first indoor shopping centre at Lulea, a response to the bleak northern climate; though inspired by North American models, it was more friendly in its variety of shapes, materials, and signage. 
A concept for an Arctic town brought Erskine international recognition, initially through a project of 1958 that he presented at the Congres International d'Architecture Moderne at Otterlo in the Netherlands the next year. He selected a south-facing slope, then provided additional shelter by means of a wall of flats that sheltered lower housing in its lee from north winds. The wall was largely blind on the north side, but had extensive areas of south-facing glazing, with balconies devised to avoid cold bridging, and roofs and porches to shield them from snow. In 1963 a revised version won a competition for Svappavaara, a new mining village in northern Sweden, but only the wall building and a few cottages were realized. In 1973 he produced a similar scheme for a new town at Resolute Bay, Canada, but again only part of the perimeter wall was built, with heavy timber sidings, before economic changes obviated the need for the town. Erskine was an associate of Team 10, attending several of its meetings as a way of keeping in touch with architects from southern Europe, but he felt the discussion was often academic and philosophical, with little relevance to the people really using the buildings -- very different from the humane approach he admired in Scandinavian architecture. He claimed that his sense of urban planning was indebted to medieval models such as Stockholm's Gamla Stan more than modern ideals, admiring their slow change and limited materials. 
The most extensive of Erskine's Arctic works was in Kiruna (1961), consisting of five blocks of offices and flats with curved walls of storey-height slabs and sharply angled roofs, up to thirteen storeys high. Similar forms were realized in brick from 1962 at Barberaren, in Sandviken, where a strong social democratic council offered many commissions. The slabs and curved corners were repeated in the house and office he built for himself at Drottningholm, outside Stockholm, in 1963, two parallel buildings of similar proportions that reflected his informal lifestyle and the strong sense of his office as an extended family. Between 1955 and 1963 his employees and their families moved the office each summer to an island at Rago, via 'Verona', a Thames barge he sailed over from England. The Erskines had a son and three daughters, the youngest born with Down's syndrome, who died in childhood. 
In the mid-1960s architectural work in Sweden was limited by the government's encouragement of large-scale system building for its project of a million new homes. Only a few low-rise schemes were built, including Landskrona (1969-70). Instead Erskine secured commissions for town planning and housing work in England. He produced a town planning study for Cambridge University in 1962, which led to his appointment at Clare Hall in July 1964, where he produced an informal design appropriate for a new graduate college, built of red brick with brightly stained timber details that included distinctively overscaled downpipes, balconies, and seating. He also designed private housing for Bovis in Newmarket and Milton Keynes, and for the builders Stanley Miller at Killingworth. The latter led him to be recommended for rebuilding Byker, an area of Newcastle already partly demolished for a motorway scheme, where a new Conservative administration was looking for an alternative to large slab blocks. Byker shines out among British public housing of this period for the intimacy of its detailing and landscaping in a massive scheme of 2000 units, and it was the most completely realized and intricate of all Erskine's housing designs. Built piecemeal over a decade, 1969-80, Byker was a model of early public consultation with the eventual tenants following the 1969 Skeffington report, Erskine opening an office and 'drop-in' centre in a former undertaker's shop within the redevelopment. The Byker wall was a snake of multi-coloured brickwork and blue roofs across the north of the site, with tiny windows facing the projected motorway to the north, while the south wall was a riot of fenestration and balconies. The low-rise housing in its lee featured children's playgrounds, and more timber decoration -- or what the critic Reyner Banham termed 'a tidal wave of sheddery and pergolation' (Banham, 330). Fragments of demolished Newcastle buildings were also incorporated in the landscape. 
From the late 1970s Erskine designed a prodigious number of buildings, increasingly using practices set up by former assistants to realize the working drawings. Housing included Myrstuguberget outside Stockholm (1977-80), on the Byker model to give shelter from a motorway. At Ekero, near Drottningholm (1985-90), he realized a new town centre, with modestly scaled housing, shops, and community facilities; this was his personal favourite among his designs. He worked extensively at Stockholm University's Frescati campus, including its library, student centre, and sports hall (1974-81), and the Aula Magna (great hall) (1997). In 1984 he received the Wolf Foundation prize for art, using the prize money to found a scholarship for young architects, and in 1987 he won the royal gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects. 
Erskine's most adventurous late projects were a pair of offices for the building firm Skanska; Lilla Bommen in Goteborg (1987-90), a twenty-two-storey landmark whose bright colours were derived from the ships in the surrounding harbour; and The Ark (1988-91), an atrium building tucked between a gyratory and the underground in Hammersmith, London. The atrium was filled with distinct spaces -- pods or shelves for up to four firms on each floor, with different stairs and lifts or access across flying bridges. Erskine explained that 'in a liberal democratic society you have concern for those not at the top... as those at the top can look after themselves' (BL NSA, interview, 23 Jan 1997). Among his last designs was the initial part of the Millennium Village in Greenwich, won in competition in 1998: another wall of flats to give protection from north winds, it was completed in 2007 by Tovatt architects. Erskine died on 16 March 2005 in Drottningholm, and was survived by his son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 97590


Gish, Sheila (1942-2005), actress, was born Sheila Anne Syme Gash, at Bromhead Maternity Home, Lincoln, on 23 April 1942, the only daughter and elder child of Major Ivan Henry Gash, an officer in the East Lancashire regiment, and his wife, Margaret Elsie, 'nee' Millar. At the time of the registration of her birth her parents lived in Welton, Lincolnshire. Her early years were spent in Germany, the Sudan, and Egypt. At the age of twelve she was sent to the Royal School for Daughters of the Officers of the Army, a boarding-school in Bath. She went straight from school to study as an actress at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts, and (with the stage name Sheila Gish) began her professional life in repertory theatres, including Birmingham and Pitlochry, where she met her first husband, the actor Roland Kingsford Curram ('b'. 1932), son of Bernard Kingsford Curram, who worked in insurance. They were married at Holy Trinity Church, Stratford upon Avon, on 12 December 1964. They had two daughters, Lou Gish ['see below'] and Kay Curram ('b'. 1974), both of whom followed their parents into acting. 
Gish's first role in the West End was as Bella in 'Robert and Elizabeth' at the Lyric Theatre in 1964, a musical adaptation by Ronald Millar and Ron Grainer of 'The Barretts of Wimpole Street'. The following year she made her film debut, alongside her husband, in 'Darling' (1965), directed by John Schlesinger and starring Julie Christie, both of whom became lifelong friends. Her early career was spent largely in comedic roles, and in 1975 she made a notable West End appearance alongside Pauline Collins and John Alderton in Alan Ayckbourn's five short plays that made up 'Confusions', for which she won the Clarence Derwent award as best supporting actress. In 1977 she was cast as the fading southern belle in the West End production of Tennessee Williams's New Orleans-set 'Vieux Carre' at the Piccadilly Theatre, but late cuts to the text made her feel that her role had been compromised, and she left the production shortly after the opening night, amid much press attention. 
While playing the title role in Christopher Fettes's production of Racine's 'Berenice' (1982) at the Lyric Theatre in Hammersmith, Sheila Gish was finally recognized as a major actress. Dressed simply in a Fortuny gown, on a smoked-mirrored set, she was riveting as Racine's love-consumed queen, disintegrating in despair. Her performance was a revelation, with a complete vocal mastery of Racine's alexandrines, and a depth of passion that surprised some people, but as she said 'I've worked for this step by step. I'm ready for more' ('The Times', 12 March 2005). That same year her delicate beauty was perfect for Chekhov's Yelena in 'Uncle Vanya' at the Haymarket, but despite a glossy cast (which included Donald Sinden, Frances de la Tour, Ronald Pickup, and Harry Andrews) the production was not a success. In 1983 she returned to Tennessee Williams, when she played Blanche DuBois in Alan Strachan's production of 'A Streetcar Named Desire' at the Greenwich Theatre, despite attempts by Williams's wilfully protective and eccentric editor, Maria St Just (thinking she was wrong for the part and perhaps remembering their previous encounter on 'Vieux Carre'), to prevent her. She gave a moving and original performance, portraying all of Blanche's fragility, vulnerability, and tenderness, but combined with a formidable intelligence and self-awareness. She was 'almost a figure of Greek tragedy, relentlessly pursued by the Furies' (ibid.). Her affinity with Williams's work was unusual in a British actress. 
Gish then played in a revival of Osborne's 'A Patriot for Me' (1983) with Alan Bates at Chichester, directed by Ronald Eyre, and made her National Theatre debut in Tom Stoppard's adaptation of Molnar's 'Rough Crossing' (1984). She and Curram were divorced in 1985, but that same year she met and fell in love with the actor Denis Lawson ('b'. 1947), the son of Laurence Lawson, watchmaker and jeweller. Meanwhile her stage successes continued: she played Celia in a West End revival of T. S. Eliot's 'The Cocktail Party' (1986) with Alec McCowen, directed by John Dexter; convinced completely as Isadora Duncan in Martin Sherman's 'When She Danced' (1989) at the King's Head; was perfectly cast as Mrs Prentice in 'What the Butler Saw' (1990); and played Clytemnestra to the Electra of Fiona Shaw in Deborah Warner's production of 'Electra' at the Riverside Studios (1991). 
On returning to the National in 1993 Gish scored a huge success as Yvonne, the monstrous mother to Jude Law in Sean Mathias's production of Jean Cocteau's 'Les parents terribles', and was rightly disappointed to lose the role to the more 'starry' Kathleen Turner when the production was staged on Broadway. At the Donmar Warehouse she gave an acclaimed performance as Joanna, the raddled alcoholic, in Sam Mendes's hugely successful production of Stephen Sondheim's 'Company' (1995), deservedly winning an Olivier award as best supporting actress in a musical, and challenging the memory of that role's creator, Elaine Stritch, with her desperate and funny rendition of 'The Ladies who Lunch'. She then returned to the Riverside Studios to play Racine's Phaedra (2002), again directed by Christopher Fettes, and scored once more in Tennessee Williams, as Violet Venable, the terrifying matriarch in 'Suddenly Last Summer' (1999). 
Film and television were never to offer Gish the same kind of opportunities as the theatre, but she had a good role in the film of Peter Nichols's 'A Day in the Death of Joe Egg' (1972), and shone alongside Maggie Smith, Alan Bates, and Isabelle Adjani in the Merchant-Ivory film of Jean Rhys's 'Quartet' (1981). She made her television debut in 'Z Cars' in 1968, and later appearances included roles in 'The First Churchills' (1969), in two adaptations of Kingsley Amis novels, 'That Uncertain Feeling' (1985) and 'Stanley and the Women' (1991), as an outrageous opera diva in an episode of 'Inspector Morse' (1993), and as Nancy Mitford's Lady Montdore in 'Love in a Cold Climate' (2001). 
Gish loved the theatre and knew it was her element. She was a serious and dedicated actress whose theatrical career was neatly divided in two. After the early years largely spent in comedy and farce, she then had a triumphant second half as a tragedienne, playing 'women on the verge of breakdown -- and women long past the verge, women ravaged, women in a frenzy, tortured and torturing' ('Daily Telegraph', 12 March 2005). These included Racine's Berenice and Phaedra, Williams's Blanche and Violet Venable, Cocteau's Yvonne, and Sondheim's Joanna. In 2003 the director Steven Pimlott asked her to play Arkadina in his production of Chekhov's 'The Seagull' at the Chichester Festival Theatre. By this time Gish had been stricken with a rare facial cancer, and when her illness led to corrective surgery and the removal of her right eye, she offered to withdraw. However, Pimlott suggested she play the role with an eye patch, and Gish rose magnificently to the challenge, giving an immensely brave and heartbreaking performance. Her daughter Kay appeared alongside her as Masha, the only time they were to act together. It was Gish's last stage role. 
Gish faced her illness with great courage, surrounded by family and friends. She worked once more, in a BBC radio production, partly recorded in her home, of two short pieces, 'Roman Fever' by Edith Wharton, and one final Tennessee Williams, 'Something Unspoken'. In March 2004 she and Denis Lawson married, in Antigua. She died on 9 March 2005 at Edenhall Nursing Home, Camden, London, of cancer, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. She was survived by her husband, Denis, and her daughters. 
Gish's elder daughter, 


@@@@@


doc= 97591


Gray, Patience Jean (1917-2005), writer on food, was born on 31 October 1917 at Michen Hall, Shackleford, near Godalming, Surrey, the second of three daughters of Hermann Stanham Stanham, then a major in the Royal Field Artillery, and his wife, Olive Florence, 'nee' Colgate, daughter of a Lincolnshire farmer. Late in life she delightedly discovered that her misogynist father, later a surgeon at the London Hospital, then a failed pig-farmer near Basingstoke, and subsequently a photographer with his own studio on the Sussex coast, was actually the son of a rabbi named Warschavski, who had fled persecution in Poland in 1861 and become a Unitarian minister. She and her sisters were brought up in an Edwardian-style household run by servants, where their overbearing father was the only male. 
A very bright child, Patience Stanham passed her university entrance examinations at sixteen, but her father felt she was too young to take up her place, so sent her to Bonn to learn German and study economics, which she abandoned in favour of art history. She returned to attend Queen's College in Harley Street, living with her maternal aunt and uncle, as her own family had fallen on hard times. She then took the degree of BSc (Econ) at London University, where her tutor was Hugh Gaitskell. In the summer of 1938 she set off with her sister Tania (who became a photographer) on a mission for the Quakers to establish cultural ties with Romania. When Queen Marie died in July she wrote her first piece of journalism, which appeared in a Bucharest paper; its infatuated editor laid siege to her, filling her hotel room with tuberoses, the scent of which, she said, always filled her with remembered horror. She and her sister escaped his attentions by fleeing to the Black Sea in a monoplane piloted by a Romanian prince. 
When the Second World War broke out Stanham was dismissed from the Foreign Office job she had just acquired for, she claimed, 'having too many foreign contacts' ('The Observer', 18 Oct 1987). She had an affair with a married man, Thomas Gray, a Spanish Civil War veteran who ran a clandestine counter-insurgency course for the Home Guard at Hurlingham, London. She was secretary of this school for teaching civilians new skills 'such as how to make Molotov cocktails' (ibid.). When Thomas Gray was conscripted he left her to cope with a son and a daughter in a cottage on the South Downs; she took the name Gray by public announcement in the 'London Gazette' of 17 January 1941. 
In 1950-51 Patience Gray worked as research assistant to F. H. K. Henrion on the Festival of Britain. In 1957 Penguin published her 'Plats du Jour, or, Foreign Food', a highly successful mass-circulation paperback cookery book, to which her friends Primrose Boyd contributed recipes and David Gentleman the striking illustrations and pink cover. It sold 50,000 copies in its first ten months, with recipes for the sort of sophisticated dishes that chic post-war London hostesses liked to prepare for dinner parties; but it stood the test of time. The next year, following a competition for 'The Observer' that was said to have attracted a thousand entrants, David Astor told her 'unenthusiastically that I had won, and they were prepared to take me on to start a woman's page' ('The Observer', 18 Oct 1987). At first she reported happily to Nigel Gosling, but in 1961 her next boss, George Seddon, had a different idea of the paper's readership, and she left in 1962, to work as a textile designer. 
In 1963 Gray met and fell in love with the sculptor Norman Mommens (1922-2000), whose own marriage was breaking up, and they began their odyssey in search of marble. This was described in her second classic book, 'Honey from a Weed: Fasting and Feasting in Tuscany, Catalonia, the Cyclades and Apulia' (bravely published in 1987 by Alan Davidson's Prospect Books, for whom it turned out to be a best-seller), and finally ended when, in 1970, Mommens bought the 'masseria' of a tumbledown ruined sheep farm at Spigolizzi in Apulia. Gray settled into the house, which had neither water nor electricity until the 1990s, cultivating her female neighbours to the extent that the local peasants regarded her as the repository of lore about their native edible and medicinal plants. Despite her principled objections to the institution Gray married Mommens in 1994; after his death she continued to live in the 'masseria', where the courtyard and surrounding fields were scattered with his phallic sculptures. 
Gray was a considerable prose stylist. In her writing, as in life, she achieved and celebrated simplicity and elegance. She kept up with her old friends, such as the bibliophile Irving Davis, whose book of recipes she edited in 1967 as 'A Catalan Cookery Book: a Collection of Impossible Recipes'. In 2000 she published 'Work Adventures Childhood Dreams', a collection -- arranged in no particular order -- of anecdotes about, for instance, T. S. Eliot's envy of Henry James, shopping in Lecce before the advent of supermarkets, Stendhal's travel writing, her enthusiasm for Buster Keaton, and Irving Davis's reincarnation as a bluebottle. She died at Spigolizzi on 10 March 2005, and was survived by her son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 97594


Hall, Willis Edward (1929-2005), playwright, was born on 6 April 1929 at 20 Addington Street, Hunslet, Leeds, the only son and elder child of Walter Hall, an engineer's fitter, and his wife, Gladys, 'nee' Gibbon. Raised in the back-to-back terraces of Hunslet -- when his first West End director, the aesthetic Lindsay Anderson, paid a visit to his old home in the interests of research he found himself 'stranded in a world I had no relationship with' (Anderson, 68) -- he was educated at local council schools then Cockburn High School. He thereafter drifted through a variety of dead-end jobs -- as factory worker, trawler hand, and amusement park attendant, most of which were to serve him well when he turned to writing for television -- until, anticipating national service, he volunteered for the regular army. In due course he found himself serving as a signals corporal in Malaya. Having dabbled with writing for radio at home, he now passed the time by composing plays for Chinese children on Radio Malaya -- a useful writer's discipline in that he was confined to an English vocabulary of about fifty words. 
On leaving the army, Hall settled in Nottingham, where he established himself as a scriptwriter for the BBC, and on 16 September 1954 married Kathleen May (Kay) Cortens, who ran the secretarial agency that typed up his early scripts. A 32-year-old divorcee, she was the daughter of William Edis, civil servant. Establishing himself at once in the pattern he was to continue all through his working life, Hall rented an office in a commercial block and from there worked a nine-to-five day. He began by writing radio plays, but soon moved on to television. The mid-1950s was the beginning of the golden age of the single television play, and Hall, with his command of what he called 'doorstep English' and his intuitive knowledge not only of how ordinary people talked but what they thought, was a natural. 
In 1958 the television director Peter Dews invited Hall to write a stage play for eight Oxford undergraduates in a production he was taking to the Edinburgh Festival. The only proviso was that there could be but one entrance and exit, owing to the limitations of the hall. It was just the kind of theatrical problem that appealed to Hall. He gave Dews a play called 'The Disciplines of War', which accommodated the restrictions imposed upon it by being claustrophobically set in the Malayan jungle, where half a dozen squaddies, plus a Japanese prisoner, await the inevitable onslaught by the enemy. The play was enthusiastically received in Edinburgh and transferred first to the Royal Court Theatre and then the New Theatre under a title, 'The Long and the Short and the Tall', provided by its London director, Lindsay Anderson. Described by the 'Guardian' critic Philip Hope-Wallace as 'a 'Journey's End' of the Malayan war' ('The Guardian', 9 Jan 1959), it was an instant success, propelling its leading light Peter O'Toole into stardom and its industrious young writer (who by now had some forty radio and television plays to his credit) to the ranks of the so-called 'new wave' of writers or 'angry young men,' as they were dubbed. 
At about this time Keith Waterhouse, an old youth club friend of Hall's from their Leeds days, was achieving some success with a new novel, 'Billy Liar' (1959). Hall called him out of the blue and observed, 'There's a play in this just screaming to get out.' Thus began a fruitful collaboration that lasted over thirty years. Starring Albert Finney and later Tom Courtenay, 'Billy Liar' (1960) played for 582 performances before being taken out on a series of national tours. It was filmed by John Schlesinger (1963), with Courtenay in the leading role and Waterhall Productions Ltd, as the pair now styled themselves, providing the screenplay. It became a long-running Drury Lane musical, 'Billy' (1974), starring Michael Crawford, and a television situation comedy both in Britain (1973-4) and, as 'Billy', in the United States (1979). 
With offers pouring in for Waterhall, the team, working from an office in New Bond Street, turned out a series of north-country plays of varying success, as well as situation comedies, sketches, and screenplays (starting with 'Whistle Down the Wind', 1961, and 'A Kind of Loving', 1962). They were regular contributors to Ned Sherrin's groundbreaking television satire show 'That Was the Week That Was' and its successors. Wishing by now to get rid of their cloth-cap image, they wrote a middle-class comedy, 'Say Who You Are' (1965). Starring Ian Carmichael and Patrick Cargill, it filled Her Majesty's Theatre for fifteen months, before transferring to the Vaudeville and then proceeding on an extended post-West End tour. Meanwhile Waterhall, among other enterprises, had two long-running television series in the pipeline -- 'Budgie' (1971-2), starring Adam Faith, and 'Worzel Gummidge' (1979-81), with Jon Pertwee. 
Hall's first marriage ended in divorce, and he was married three more times: on 24 January 1962 to the actress (Nora Noel) Jill Bennett (1929?-1990), daughter of (James) Randle Bennett, company director; in 1966 to Dorothy Kingsmill-Lunn; and on 2 November 1973 to Valerie Shute, a 28-year-old dancer and actress, and daughter of Alfred Shute, advertising director. His second and third marriages ended in divorce, but his fourth lasted until his death. In all he had four sons. 
After three non-stop decades the Waterhall machine was beginning to slow down, and Hall and Waterhouse agreed to pursue separate projects, though they remained close friends. Hall, with his wife Valerie, settled in the West Riding of Yorkshire and devoted himself to writing children's books -- he wrote about twenty, between 'The Royal Astrologer' (1960) and 'Vampire Island' (1999) -- the occasional stage musical adaptation, and his hobby of magic. He was a member of the Magic Circle and the International Brotherhood of Magicians, as well as the magicians' societies of the United States and Malta. He died at his home in Ghyll Mews, Ilkley, on 7 March 2005, of cancer of the oesophagus, leaving his wife Valerie and four sons. A celebration of his life and work was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 6 November 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 97597


Hiller, Erwin (1911-2005), cinematographer, was born on 2 September 1911 in Berlin, of mixed Anglo-German parentage; his father was Robert Hiller, described by Erwin as 'of independent means'. He grew up in Germany and as a result his English retained a continental inflection for the rest of his life. After attending art school, he made his first contacts with the German film industry, working on a number of productions, including Fritz Lang's first sound film, the classic 'M' (1931), where he assisted the principal cameraman, Fritz Arno Wagner. Although he often referred to having known and worked with various luminaries of Weimar cinema, the full extent of his cinematic apprenticeship in the German film industry is difficult to assess, as nearly all his contributions were uncredited. Nevertheless, his training in Germany had a marked effect on the style of his later work in Britain, especially in its emphasis on atmospheric lighting, visual fluidity, and unusual angles and movements. 
Following Hitler's rise to power in 1933, Hiller relocated to London, briefly working as a press photographer, and joining Gaumont British's camera department. On 27 May 1933, at Kensington register office, he married Helen Yates, the twenty-year-old daughter of Joseph Southgate; they had one daughter, Shirley. Meanwhile, at Gaumont British's Shepherd's Bush studios Hiller became a camera operator on productions including Alfred Hitchcock's 'Waltzes from Vienna' and 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (both 1934), assisting the established cinematographers Glen MacWilliams and Curt Courant respectively. He also worked on the Jessie Matthews musical 'Evergreen' (1934), directed by Victor Saville and once again with MacWilliams as principal photographer, and on two Walter Forde films, 'Jack Ahoy!' (1934) and 'Brown on Resolution' (1935), in both cases working under Bernard Knowles. For most of these films Hiller received no screen credits. In the mid-1930s he moved on from Gaumont to work on such cheaply made 'quota quickies' as the Warner Brothers comedy 'The Girl in the Crowd' (1935), shot at Teddington Studios, which marked his first film with the director Michael Powell. The two were reunited working for Joe Rock Studios at Elstree on the mystery drama 'The Man Behind the Mask' (1936), and on Powell's first collaboration with the Hungarian screenwriter Emeric Pressburger, the spy thriller 'The Spy in Black' (1939). 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War, Hiller (by now known professionally as Erwin Hillier) became principal photographer on a number of propaganda shorts commissioned by the Ministry of Information; these included 'Men of Tomorrow' (1942), produced by Sydney Box, which showcased the contributions from boy scouts to the war effort. The same year Hiller shot his first feature film as principal cinematographer, the comedy 'The Lady from Lisbon' (1942), a British National production, followed by 'Rhythm Serenade' (1943), a patriotic musical starring Vera Lynn. 'The Silver Fleet' (1943), a drama about Dutch wartime resistance, marked the beginning of his association with Powell and Pressburger's production company The Archers. The richly allegorical 'A Canterbury Tale' (1944) combined Hiller's predilection for chiaroscuro compositions with a perceptive way of photographing the English countryside. 
In 'I Know Where I'm Going!' (1945), for which he was credited by now unusually as Erwin Hiller, not Hillier, he devised a sublimely lyrical visual backdrop for the film's romantic drama set in Scotland's Western Isles. By now acclaimed primarily as an expert in black and white photography, he was replaced by Jack Cardiff in The Archers' subsequent colour films, 'A Matter of Life and Death' (1946) and 'Black Narcissus' (1947), while his own debut on a colour production, the musical 'London Town' (1946), proved a flop. Roy Ward Baker's atmospheric black and white 'film noir' 'The October Man' (1947), starring John Mills as an amnesiac accused of murder, played much more to Hiller's strengths, as did Brian Desmond Hurst's Gothic melodrama 'The Mark of Cain' (1947), and Lawrence Huntington's 'Mr Perrin and Mr Traill' (1948), set in a gloomy boarding school. 
The whimsical war comedy 'Private Angelo' (1949), starring Peter Ustinov as a cowardly Italian soldier, marked the beginning of Hiller's long association with the director Michael Anderson. In the 1950s their collaborations encompassed comedies ('Will Any Gentleman...?', 1953), thrillers ('The House of the Arrow', 1953; 'Chase a Crooked Shadow', 1958), and the acclaimed 'Shake Hands with the Devil' (1959), set in Dublin in 1921, but their biggest success was the iconic war drama 'The Dam Busters' (1955), about the legendary 'bouncing bomb' attacks on the Ruhr dams. The film was a success not least thanks to Hiller's breathtaking and authentic aerial photography, once again showcasing his mastery of black and white photography. 
During the 1960s Anderson and Hiller collaborated on a series of increasingly international productions, including the thrillers 'The Naked Edge' (1961), 'Operation Crossbow' (1965), and 'The Quiller Memorandum' (1966), the latter scripted by Harold Pinter. Their last collaboration was the papal drama 'The Shoes of the Fisherman' (1968). Hiller worked occasionally with other directors, and was nominated for a BAFTA award for 'Sammy Going South' (1963), directed by Alexander Mackendrick. His last film was 'The Valley of Gwangwi' (1969), directed by Jim O'Connolly, which mixed cowboys with dinosaurs. He died of ischaemic heart disease at his home, 7 Baronsmede, Ealing, London, on 10 January 2005, and was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 97606


Kossoff, David (1919-2005), actor and broadcaster, was born on 24 November 1919, at the Mothers' Hospital, Clapton, London, the son of Lewis (Louis) Kossoff, tailor, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Shaklovich. At the time of his birth registration his parents, Russian Jewish immigrants, lived at 104 Amhurst Road, Hackney. He was educated at an elementary school in east London and the Northern Polytechnic, London, which he left in 1937. The poverty of his parents, and those he saw around him, made him determined to do something better with his life. He spent a year as a draughtsman, took up interior design, especially of furniture, and was working on aircraft design when he told his appalled parents that he wanted to become an actor, reasoning that this was a good way of meeting attractive women. Years later he joked that his parents were so disturbed about the insecurity of an actor's life that they must have been the only parents of a son of call-up age in Britain who were relieved when the Second World War broke out. In the event he spent the war as a technical illustrator. On 3 October 1940, at Hackney register office, he married Elizabeth Kennedy, a 22-year-old member of the Women's Auxiliary Fire Service, and daughter of Richard McLeod Kennedy, civil engineer. 
Kossoff made his debut as an actor in 1943; he had joined the left-wing Unity Theatre at the end of the previous year, and at twenty-three played the part of Juan Rojo in 'The Spanish Village', a play about the Spanish Civil War. He remained with the Unity Theatre for three years, directing as well as acting in plays that were specially selected to entertain people who had had to spend night after night in air-raid shelters. When the war ended in 1945 he joined the BBC Drama Repertory Company, staying with it for six years. During this time he combined his radio acting with illustrating and designing. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 25 September 1947 he married Marjorie Eileen (otherwise Margaret or Jennie) Hunt, the thirty-year-old daughter of Francis Jenkins, scientific instrument maker, and former wife of John Hunt. They had two sons. 
It was his first major West End success, in Peter Ustinov's sometimes surreal play 'The Love of Four Colonels', that convinced Kossoff that he could become a full-time actor. At Wyndham's theatre in 1952 he took over the part of the Russian colonel, Alexander Ikonenko, one of four colonels representing the four victorious post-war powers in Berlin -- the Russians, the Americans, the British, and the French. Despite his youth Kossoff gave a convincing and much praised performance of a Russian of narrow materialist vision who is incredulous and alarmed when things occur that do not follow his logic. He later again played a Russian -- a KGB spy -- in the film 'The Iron Petticoat' (1956), starring Katharine Hepburn and Bob Hope. But although it was in 1953 that he made his film debut in 'The Good Beginning', it was in Wolf Mankowitz's 'The Bespoke Overcoat' at the Arts Theatre in 1953 (as in Jack Clayton's 1956 film version), in which he played the sympathetic and philosophizing tailor Morry, and 'A Kid for Two Farthings' (1955), in which he played the same sort of role and gained a British Academy award, that he established his reputation as a 'natural' for playing Jewish men, often elderly and certainly philosophical, benevolent, and sympathetic. In 'A Kid for Two Farthings' he was the elderly confidant of a boy who believes that his goat with only one remaining horn is really a unicorn. 
In the late 1950s Kossoff was best known for playing the vulgar but endearing old scalliwag Alf Larkin in the television series 'The Larkins' (1958-60 and 1963-4), based on the novels of H. E. Bates. To those who suggested that Alf the amiable oaf did not fully extend Kossoff's powers, the latter was apt to reply, as he did to one journalist: 'Alf earns ten times as much as Kossoff, mate. He helps Kossoff choose the parts he wants in straight plays and to say 'No' to the others. I like Alf. A lot of hard work went into creating him. He's probably the best thing I've ever done. ('The Guardian', 24 March 2005)' The fact that his Alf was to record cockney songs on several records and star in a film spin-off, 'Inn for Trouble' (1960), added to his satisfaction. 
In 1961 Kossoff started reading his own idiosyncratic versions of 'Bible' stories on BBC Home Service's 'Lift Up Your Hearts'. They became so popular that before long he had several radio series built around him as biblical raconteur, leading to the publication of pamphlets that in turn led to books, which then featured in television series. In the latter his square beard, heavy spectacles, and thoughtfully furrowed brow became his instantly recognizable trade mark. The stories were his own interpretations of incidents in the 'Old Testament', such as Jonah and the whale. Possibly because he would now be dealing with Christian beliefs, and might be thought to be mocking people other than himself, he was less at ease when he moved on from the 'Old Testament' to the 'New Testament', admitting that he had done so only after numerous requests by the BBC. His play, 'Big Night for Shylock', was produced in 1968. His prayer book, 'You Have a Minute, Lord?' (1977), was more characteristic, a logical extension of his flair for inoffensive humour. One of the texts was 'Must a person suffer fools, Lord?', which addressed the biblical injunction to make time for other people: '
But 'all' people, Lord? 'All?'


The bigoted, the ignorant, the intolerant, 

the small-minded, the envious, the 

self-centred, the vain, the patronising, 

the phoney, the wicked? 


'Must I, Lord?'

('You Have a Minute, Lord?', 31-2)' Kossoff's other books included 'Bible Stories Retold by David Kossoff' (1968), 'The Book of Witnesses' (1971), 'The Three Donkeys' (1972), 'The Voices of Masada' (1973), 'The Little Book of Sylvanus' (1975), 'A Town is a World' (1979), based on nineteenth-century Russian Jewish folk tales, 'Sweet Nutcracker' (1985), and 'The Old and the New' (2002). He wrote many of them, or corrected their proofs, while waiting in his theatre or studio dressing room to make his entry in plays, and claimed that his passion for writing was helped by the fact that he had never had a rejection slip. He was also highly popular in his one-man show based on reflections about religious matters, 'As According to Kossoff', which toured from 1970. Once his show consisted of him in a real restaurant, joining diners at their various tables, talking to them, and ultimately involving them in the act. This particular run was comparatively short. 
Kossoff's second son, Paul Kossoff (1950-1976), guitarist with the rock group Free, died at the age of twenty-five of a heart attack as the result of drug addiction. Kossoff had abandoned much of his other work to campaign against drugs when his son had had an earlier heart attack and appeared to have successfully given up drugs. When the withdrawal was not after all a success and Paul died Kossoff travelled widely, performing 'The Late Great Paul' as a memorial to him, taking no money for himself. He could laugh at himself for usually being more financially minded. After he had made many lucrative commercials, he pointed out that 'Bible' stories didn't pay extraordinarily well, but commercials did -- and anyway 'it just occurred to me that God might have guided my hand to J. Walter Thompson' ('The Guardian', 24 March 2005). He lived latterly at 45 Roe Green Close, College Lane, Hatfield, Hertfordshire. His wife predeceased him in 1995 and he died of cancer of the colon at St Christopher's Nursing Home, Drakes Way, Hatfield, on 23 March 2005. He was survived by his son Simon. 


@@@@@


doc= 97608


Lympany, Dame Moura (1916-2005), pianist, was born Mary Gertrude Johnstone at Greenbank Villa, Saltash, Cornwall, on 18 August 1916, the daughter of John Johnstone, then serving as a captain in the Australian infantry, and his wife, Beatrice Mary, 'nee' Limpenny. Her father, later an insurance agent, was frequently absent. The greatest influence was her mother, who spoke seven languages, had been a governess in Russia before her marriage, and taught piano and cello. From her Mary inherited a sharp business acumen and a keen sense of adventure. The latter quality stood her in good stead when she left England for a convent school in Belgium at the age of six. Any sense of loneliness or isolation was countered by her growing awareness of her instinctive talent. Cherished but occasionally chided by the nuns (her exuberance was sometimes viewed as a product of 'the sin of pride') she astonished all who heard her with a performance of Liszt's ultra-virtuoso E major polonaise. Her return to England (where she attended Our Lady of Sion convent school in Kensington) was marked by her debut in Harrogate where, aged twelve, she played the Mendelssohn G minor concerto, a work for which she retained a lifelong affection. It was the conductor of that performance, Basil Cameron, who suggested she change her name to Moura Lympany, an ingenious alteration reflecting her mother's love of all things Russian and her Cornish origins (Limpenny being an old Cornish name). 
After her triumph in Harrogate, Lympany studied at the Royal Academy of Music for three years (winning the Challen gold medal), then for a year in Vienna under Paul Weingarten. After a creditable performance in the first Liszt competition in Budapest, she returned to the Royal Academy of Music, where she studied under Mathilde Verne (who had taught Solomon Cutner, otherwise Solomon) and, most importantly, Tobias Matthay, whose influence was at the heart of her legendary fluency and musicianship. Maxims like 'never play faster than you can think', a quiet but firm insistence on relaxation, and, above all, naturalness of line, impetus, and phrasing became central to her musical outlook. 
Always enterprising and wide-ranging in her choice of repertory, Lympany followed a performance of the Grieg concerto in 1932 with one of the Delius concerto and Vincent d'Indy's 'Symphonie cevenole' and also gave a triumphant Wigmore Hall debut recital in 1935. She achieved international acclaim when she won second prize in Belgium's Queen Elizabeth competition in 1938, a time when competitions were few and mattered supremely. The youngest of seventy-nine competitors, she gave a performance of the Liszt E flat concerto that was of such freshness and agility that it deflected the jury's interest from other already celebrated pianists including Yakov Flier and Arturo Michelangeli. Only Emil Gilels excelled her in the final result. Her Proms debut quickly followed, and in 1940 she commenced her long association with the Khachaturian concerto, an exotic showpiece initially offered to Clifford Curzon who, daunted by the amount of time needed to master both its character and its intricacy, reputedly said, 'send it to Moura, she learns so quickly' (private information). Recorded for Decca with Anatole Fistoulari conducting, this concerto was an outstanding item in Lympany's discography, as was the first of three recordings of the complete Rachmaninov preludes. Performances of Rachmaninov's first three concertos, the Paganini rhapsody, and the second sonata (in the 1931 revision) became part of her stock-in-trade, but so too were her performances of English music, with premieres and appearances in works by Benjamin Dale, Richard Arnell, Benjamin Britten, Frederick Delius, John Ireland, Alan Rawsthorne, and Cyril Scott. 
During the Second World War Lympany played regularly at the National Gallery lunchtime concerts, and toured throughout Britain; she was later described as an 'indispensable part of wartime musical life' ('Daily Telegraph', 31 March 2005). She was reputedly the first British musician to perform in Paris after the liberation, playing Rawsthorne's first concerto, though she was at this time particularly known for her interpretations of Russian music. On 30 May 1944 she married, as his second wife, Colin Defries, an aircraft engineer and amateur pianist thirty-two years her senior, and son of Daniel Colman Defries, mechanical engineer. The marriage was short-lived, and ended in divorce in 1950. On 10 August the following year she married Bennet Henry Korn (died 1989), a 37-year-old American radio advertising, later television, executive, and son of Samuel Korn, hat manufacturer. She suffered two miscarriages, one of twins, before giving birth to a premature son who lived for thirty-five hours. There were no surviving children. The marriage ended in divorce in 1961. 
In contrast to her private life, Lympany enjoyed triumph after triumph in her post-war musical career. She built up a considerable following not only in Britain but in Europe and the United States, where she made her debut in 1948, South America, Australia, and New Zealand. For much of her life she was constantly on the move. She nevertheless found time to refine her technique (taking lessons with Eduard Steuermann, the pupil and interpreter of Schoenberg, in the 1950s) and to expand her repertory. She remained particularly associated with Russian music, but also became known for her interpretations of Beethoven, Brahms, and Schumann, as well as of the contemporary British composers whom she championed. Her recordings were both numerous and popular. 
Constantly clarifying and refining her art, Lympany had little use for exaggeration and surplus display, or for lurid bursts of speed. She aimed, she said, 'to play straight, nothing chichi, not what I call powdered rubato. And never to bang the keys' ('Daily Telegraph', 31 March 2005). In the words of one American critic, she was 'a virtuoso of dreaming' ('The Independent', 30 March 2005). Energy born of single-mindedness and an iron will to succeed were central to her success, and she rarely sacrificed her daily stint of four hours' practice even when interrupted by her incessant travels. Resilience was in the broadest sense the keynote to her life. Beset with serious illness and personal unhappiness, she resolved never to look back. Returning to the Wigmore Hall after a mastectomy in 1970 she regaled her audience with the story of her invitation to her music-loving surgeon to her Royal Festival Hall performance of Ravel's left-hand concerto only to receive an anxious letter asking her to confirm which part of her he had removed. 
Moura Lympany was never easily tolerant, and could sometimes be surprisingly vain: when invited to be a castaway on 'Desert Island Discs' she chose eight of her own recordings. Yet her warmth and sympathy were proverbial and she always showed the keenest interest in younger generations. Her autobiography, published in 1991, was more fluffy than substantial. She was appointed CBE in 1979 and DBE in 1992. Among many other awards both British and foreign, she was made a commander of the order of the Crown in Belgium in 1980, a chevalier de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France in 1992, and a member of the order of Prince Henry the Navigator in Portugal in 1996. Latterly she divided her time between London, Monaco, and Rasigueres in Languedoc, where she owned a vineyard and between 1981 and 1992 ran an annual festival of music and wine that attracted artists of the calibre of Victoria de Los Angeles and Elizabeth Harwood. She continued playing until her eighties, and was much acclaimed in the United States as well as in Europe. She died in Menton, France, on 28 March 2005. A service of thanksgiving was held at the church of the Immaculate Conception, Farm Street, London, on 7 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 97610


Marre, (Romola) Mary, Lady Marre (1920-2005), voluntary worker and public servant, was born on 25 April 1920 at 2 High Street, Chelmsford, Essex, the eldest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Aubrey John Gilling, bank manager, and his wife, Romola Marjorie, 'nee' Angier, the daughter of a sailmaker in Brightlingsea, Essex. She was educated at Chelmsford County High School for Girls, and went on to Bedford College, University of London, graduating with a second-class degree in philosophy in 1941. During the war London University was evacuated to Cambridge, where along with many other students she was attracted to communism, and may have joined the Communist Party. After leaving university she worked as a civil servant in the Ministry of Health for a year before joining the Auxiliary Territorial Service in 1942. On 24 December 1943 she married Alan Samuel Marre (1914-1990), son of Joseph Moshinsky, a Russian Jewish immigrant who ran a tobacconist's shop in the East End of London. Marre was a civil servant: he was knighted in 1970 and was appointed parliamentary ombudsman in 1971. They had one son and one daughter. 
While her children were young Mary Marre did voluntary work locally in north London, and in 1962 she became the organizer of the West Hampstead Citizens' Advice Bureau. In 1965 she was appointed deputy general secretary of Camden Council of Social Service, and through her work there became known to those working in the voluntary sector as an excellent committee chairman. From 1974 to 1984 she served as chairman of the London Council of Social Service (renamed in 1978 the London Voluntary Service Council), which provided advice for local councils of social service, which co-ordinated links between voluntary organizations and the local authorities. She was founder president of Barnet Voluntary Service Council from 1979. Among the many other voluntary organizations and committees she was involved with were the Prince of Wales's Advisory Group on Disability, of which she was a member from 1982 to 1984. She was also deputy chairman of the Royal Jubilee Trusts from 1981 to 1988. As a trustee from 1975 and vice-chairman from 1989 to 1993 of the City Parochial Foundation, which funded charities which were tackling poverty in London, she was particularly closely involved with the work of the Trust for London. Set up by the government in 1986, after the abolition of the Greater London council, with the City Parochial Foundation as trustee, the Trust for London concentrated on making small grants to locally based community groups, especially to black and ethnic minority organizations, refugee committees, and women's groups, at a time when there were very few other sources of money for such groups: these included the Haringey Muslim Women's Council, the Centre for Armenian Information and Advice, the Tamil Action Committee, and the Kurdish Charitable Association. She was instrumental in the awarding of grants to supplementary schools, run by minority ethnic groups outside school hours to help children keep up with their school work, and mother-tongue schools, which helped children to remain fluent in their original languages. She was appointed CBE in 1979. 
When the Law Society and the Bar Council set up the Committee on the Future of the Legal Profession in 1986 they appointed Lady Marre as chairman. As a lay person, but a former member of the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Legal Aid (1975-80), and with her reputation as an efficient chairman, she was a good choice to head the committee of six barristers, six solicitors, and six independent members, whose object was to look at the changes necessary to improve the legal profession and its ability to meet the needs of the public. The Marre committee presented its report, 'A Time for Change', two years later, with a note of dissent attached from five of the barristers and one independent member. Its main conclusion was that it was not in the public interest that the crown courts should continue to be the exclusive preserve of the bar, and it recommended that solicitors should be able to plead in the crown courts, and should be eligible for appointment as High Court judges: it was over these encroachments on the traditional preserve of the bar that the committee could not agree. Because the committee had failed to find a solution acceptable to both sides, and because of the acrimonious public debate that followed publication of the report, the lord chancellor, Lord Mackay, introduced three green papers on the future of the legal profession. These led to the introduction of the 'Courts and Legal Services Act', which became law in 1990 and implemented many of the proposals of the Marre committee. 
After the death of her husband in 1990 Mary Marre found great happiness in her relationship with Alan Lipfriend (1916-1996), a retired crown court judge, with whom she lived in Edmunds Walk, East Finchley, from 1991 until his death. Lipfriend was a practising Jew, a member of the New London Synagogue in St John's Wood. Mary Marre had converted to the Jewish faith before her marriage, but neither she nor her husband was a practising Jew: she now reconverted, and became very interested in and committed to Judaism, and involved in Jewish charities. This continued after Lipfriend's death. 
A lively, intelligent woman, Mary Marre was rooted in the voluntary sector, and saw that it was no use giving money for projects unless there were good people there to run them. She had a deep understanding of London and its needs. Astute and shrewd, with a terrier-like mind, she was greatly respected by her colleagues and staff, who listened to and valued her advice, and she in turn was a conduit for other people's ideas. Alongside her serious concern for disadvantaged people she had a sense of humour and a light touch, and with a very wide network of friends and contacts she was extremely effective in getting things done. Having moved to Kingsbarns, near St Andrews, Fife, she died of heart disease on 6 March 2005 in St Andrews Care Home, 1 James Foulis Court, St Andrews. She was survived by her son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 97616


Porter, Sir Leslie (1920-2005), businessman, was born Leslie Posament on 10 July 1920 at Streatham Manor, Leigham Avenue, Streatham, London, the youngest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Henry Alfred Posament, later Porter (died 1955), textile merchant, and his wife, Jennie (died 1983), daughter of Jacob Goldstein, owner of a chain of tailoring shops. His father had arrived in England from Lodz, Poland, shortly before the First World War, and his mother came from a Russian Jewish family who had settled in England five generations earlier; she started and founded a clothing design academy. At the time of his birth registration they lived at 4 South Villas, Camden Square, London. He grew up in Camden Town, and was educated at Holloway county secondary school, leaving after matriculating to work in a garage, Sam Morris & Co. He moved to another car dealer, H. R. Owen, in the West End of London, in 1937. As a member of the Territorial Army he was called up at the outbreak of the Second World War, joining the 1st battalion, the Rangers, the King's Royal Rifle Corps, and served in Greece, Cyprus, north Africa, and Italy, ending the war with the rank of technical quartermaster-adjutant. In 1946 he joined his father's household textile business, J. Porter & Co., in Old Street, becoming managing director in 1955, the year of his father's death. 
On 26 June 1949, at the New West End Synagogue, Paddington, Porter married Shirley Cohen ('b'. 1930), younger daughter of Sir John Edward (Jack) Cohen, founder and chairman of Tesco Stores Ltd; they had one son and one daughter. Although his father-in-law tried to persuade him to join his other son-in-law, Hyman Kreitman, at Tesco, Porter resisted for ten years, preferring to build up his own family business, and it was not until 1959, after Jack Cohen's illness, that he agreed to join the Tesco board as a part-time consultant. He became a full-time member of the board in 1960, and assistant managing director in 1964. Porter's experience had been in the marketing of textiles, and when in 1960 Cohen bought Harrow Stores, a drapery and furnishings business, he made Porter joint managing director. At the same time Porter began introducing household goods and furnishings into some Tesco stores, and by 1966 the sale of non-food items had reached nearly 10 per cent of the company's turnover. After the sale of Harrow Stores in 1967 the Tesco board decided to create Tesco Home'n'Wear Ltd to operate and expand the non-foods side of the company, and Porter took charge of that. By 1973 there were sixty-two separate Home'n'Wear stores, and floor space devoted to non-food items in many Tesco supermarkets. In the meantime, following the critical report on the Tesco management by McKinsey & Co. in 1969, there was a boardroom reshuffle, and in 1970 Porter became deputy chairman, Hyman Kreitman was elected chairman, and Cohen was given the title of life president. Porter was briefly managing director in 1972, and when Kreitman resigned in 1973 he became chairman, a position he retained until 1985. 
While Jack Cohen was still running Tesco, he quarrelled constantly with his sons-in-law, but while Kreitman, a quiet and unassuming man, was intimidated by this, Porter, self-confident and tough, stood up to his father-in-law, their confrontations including one famous occasion when they were said to have pursued each other round the boardroom brandishing the ornamental Wilkinson swords that hung on the wall. But after 1973 Cohen was forced into the background, while Porter faced the growing crisis threatening Tesco, which in 1974 suffered a $20 million (19.8 per cent) fall in profits. Jack Cohen's policy of 'pile it high, sell it cheap' no longer attracted customers, who were moving to rival chains including Sainsburys and Asda. Cohen had failed to see that low prices alone were not enough, that the quality of the product mattered as well, and the Tesco stores appeared old-fashioned and cluttered, selling cheap and shoddy goods, unlike Sainsburys, which had a reputation for quality. At the same time the popularity of trading stamps was waning: a report commissioned by Tesco showed that customers would prefer price cuts to stamps. In 1977, after a bitter struggle on the board, Tesco terminated its agreement with the Green Shield Trading Stamp Company. This was followed by the launch of operation Checkout, with the slogan 'Check out at Tesco: prices that help keep the cost of living in check', the start of a new direction for Tesco, combining a price-cutting campaign made possible by the $20 million a year saved by abandoning trading stamps with a new look for the Tesco stores. At first they could not keep up with demand -- in the first year Tesco's share of the grocery market rose from 7 per cent to 12 per cent -- but a new centralized buying system replaced the autonomy of individual store managers, while many of the smaller stores were closed, and were replaced by fewer but larger supermarkets. Between 1977 and 1983, 371 stores were closed and 97 new ones opened, and between 1980 and 1985 the average size rose from 11,000 to 17,000 square feet. Tesco stores now had a reputation for offering quality products at affordable prices. One casualty was the Home'n'Wear division: all Home'n'Wear departments and stores were closed in order to concentrate on making Tesco Britain's leading food retailer, an objective that was realized in the 1990s. Although Porter was not responsible for all these changes, under his chairmanship a new management style based on collective responsibility developed, with Porter at the head of a team that he trusted and allowed to get on with the job. 'Sir Leslie was not a dictatorial executive chairman', according to David Malpas, managing director from 1983 to 1997. 'His style was more participative in that he 'presided over' rather than 'implemented' change' (Porter, 57). Whereas Cohen had been a wholesaler, Porter was a retailer whose aim was to find out what the customer wanted. Cohen concerned himself with short-term profits, while Porter planned for the future, realizing that short-term profit might need to be sacrificed for the sake of longer-term gains: for example, in the late 1970s Tesco invested $100 million in advanced information technology systems. 
Porter was knighted in 1983, and in 1985 resigned as chairman. He was appointed president, a title he retained until 1990, but he did not interfere in the running of the company. He had hoped that a member of the Cohen family would join the Tesco board on his departure, but his successor, Ian MacLaurin, the former managing director, opposed the idea of having Porter's wife on the board. Porter later claimed that MacLaurin had promised his son John a seat, a claim MacLaurin denied. Among his public positions Porter was chairman of the Sports Aid Foundation from 1985 to 1988, and international vice-president of the Museum of the Diaspora from 1984. 
Porter's wife, Shirley, had been elected to Westminster city council in 1974, becoming leader of the council in 1983; appointed DBE in 1991, she served as lord mayor of Westminster from 1991 to 1992. But in 1994, after the district auditor ruled that she and other members of Westminster city council had been engaged in gerrymandering, involving losses to public funds of some $21 million, and after the death of their grandson in Israel, the Porters settled in the seaside town of Herzliya Pituach, north of Tel Aviv. In 1993 Porter was elected chancellor of Tel Aviv University, where he and his wife founded the Cohen-Porter United Kingdom Building of Life Sciences and the Porter Super Centre for the Environment and Ecological Research, which became the Porter School of Environmental Studies. The Porter Foundation funded the Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics, the Shirley and Leslie Porter School of Cultural Studies, and the Cohen-Porter Family Swimming Pool. 
Porter died in Tel Aviv on 20 March 2005, and was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97618


Reger, (Esther) Janet (1935-2005), lingerie designer, was born in Jubilee Street, London, on 30 September 1935, the eldest daughter of Hyman Phillips, textile manufacturer, and his wife, Ray, 'nee' Levine. Both her parents were the children of Jewish immigrants; her paternal grandfather, Zaida Phillips, from the Ukraine, had established a textile business in London's East End. When the Second World War bombing of London began in 1940 she, with her sister Barbara ('b'. 1939) and her parents, moved to Reading, where many of her maternal relatives lived. By the time the family had moved to Caversham, north of Reading, she had two more sisters, Gloria ('b'. 1941) and Sandra ('b'. 1948). She attended Battle council primary school in Reading, and Kendrick Girls' Grammar School, Reading, where she excelled in art. 
As the family textile business declined in the late 1940s Janet Phillips's parents developed a successful sideline making brassieres, recycling textile factory offcuts. Realizing the underwear market had potential, her father persuaded Janet to study corsetry and underwear design at Leicester College of Art and Technology. She started the two-year diploma course in September 1951. She specialized in designing co-ordinated sets of lingerie, an innovation at that date, and the set she made for her diploma final gained much publicity in the end-of-year fashion show. 
After leaving college in 1953 Janet Phillips worked for several established underwear and swimwear manufacturers, gaining experience and good salaries, but frustrated by the prevailing conservatism of underwear design, and lack of interest in her more adventurous ideas, she travelled to Israel in May 1958 to work on a kibbutz. In her first week there she met a fellow worker, Peter Reger, formerly Adolf Peter Reger (1940-1985), a German chemistry student from Munich, and the two were immediately attracted. By November, when Peter returned to Munich to complete his degree, they had decided to marry, and Janet planned a move to south Germany. In April 1960 she started work in Zurich for a lingerie and corsetry firm, and after graduation Peter found employment there also. Their future now looking secure, they married at Reading Synagogue on 1 January 1961. By April she became pregnant, and since her salary was essential she was persuaded by Peter to work from home as a freelance lingerie designer for firms throughout Europe. Her daughter Aliza, her only child, was born in London on 27 December 1961. Back in Zurich, Janet's freelance career developed with great success; Peter acted as her agent and secretary, and the couple enjoyed a luxurious lifestyle. However, by the mid-1960s it became difficult for foreign nationals to get Swiss work permits, and in December 1966 the Regers left Zurich for London. 
Since freelance design work was scarce in Britain the Regers decided to manufacture as well as design garments. Their company, Janet Reger Creations Ltd, was registered in June 1967, Janet working as designer, cutter, and production manager, and Peter as business manager. Deliveries to shops started in August, and immediately the new company was inundated with orders, as Janet Reger's pretty, glamorous lingerie caught the current mood, appealing to young, self-confident, and increasingly affluent women, who found the products of established underwear firms dull and utilitarian. The Regers set up business premises in Southwick Mews, Paddington, with a small staff and outworkers. Reger products were sold to trendy London boutiques as well as department stores, and thanks to enormous media interest the name Janet Reger became widely known. By 1970 the business had expanded into three buildings in Southwick Mews, and Janet had added new lines inspired by Edwardian and 1920s lingerie, and introduced her dragonfly Reger trademark. To meet increasing demand a mail order catalogue was issued, 'Bottom Drawer'. 
The 1970s saw a period of constant expansion, financial success, and unprecedented publicity for Janet Reger Creations, owing to the high profile of customers, including royalty and the wives of pop stars. Needing to expand production, the Regers took over a small factory in Wirksworth, Derbyshire. They moved their London base to Beauchamp Place, Knightsbridge, opening a boutique there, followed by a second shop in Brook Street, to cater for a West End clientele. In 1976 the American market was opened up through sales to Saks, the New York store, and a further London shop opened in New Bond Street in 1978. The hard work involved to ensure this success, however, took its toll on the couple's marriage: Peter suffered from stress and depression and Janet became aware of his frequent extramarital affairs. From then onwards their relationship was soured by rows. 
By the end of the 1970s the business was also facing difficulties. The high exchange rate deterred American customers, other lingerie firms were now offering competition, copying Janet's designs in cheaper materials, and the business had overexpanded. In 1982 the Regers signed a contract with the corset manufacturers Berlei, who proposed to market a 'Janet Reger collection', which proved a disastrous decision for the Regers. By the end of 1982 sales of luxury goods generally were in recession, and in January 1983 Janet Reger Creations Ltd went into liquidation. In the sale of the firm's assets Berlei bought the Janet Reger trademark, and attempted to prevent her from trading independently. Discovering that the contract referred to her company rather than to herself, Janet set up a new firm, Designs by Janet Reger, bought back the lease to the shop in Beauchamp Place, re-opening it in April 1983, and business flourished once more, a proof of her considerable entrepreneurial skills. The crisis of the liquidation ended the Regers' marriage, however. In 1984 Peter was bought out of the business, and in October 1985 he committed suicide. 
In early 1986 Berlei went into receivership, and Janet bought back her Janet Reger trademark, at enormous cost. She recouped this through licensing deals with firms manufacturing bedlinen, soft furnishings, and accessories under the Janet Reger name, as well as producing a couture lingerie collection. Her daughter Aliza took an increasing role in the business, becoming chief executive in 1998. After developing breast cancer in 1991, which was successfully treated, Janet spent much of her time in Mauritius, where her products were manufactured. She wrote her autobiography, with Shirley Flack, in 1991, because, she said, 'my story seems to occupy a special place in the public's imagination' ('Janet Reger', preface). She continued to be involved in her company until cancer returned and she died in the West Middlesex Hospital, Isleworth, London, on 14 March 2005. 
Janet Reger said that she knew her name had become a household word in 1978 when Tom Stoppard included the line 'Don't get your Janet Regers in a twist' in his play 'Night and Day' ('Janet Reger', 73). Her designs introduced glamour, luxury, and sexiness into underwear at a time when the more liberated attitudes of the 1960s made the erotic acceptable, and by using sensuous fabrics and fine embroidery she turned underwear into 'lingerie', eagerly bought by women and their male partners. Her 1970s designs exactly accorded with the prevailing nostalgia for 1920s and 1930s Hollywood glamour, re-introducing garments such as French knickers, camisoles, and basques, for which an international fashionable clientele paid couture prices. Janet Reger's legacy was the large number of high street firms producing glamorous and erotic lingerie in the twenty-first century, satisfying a market she created. 


@@@@@


doc= 97623


Spender, (John) Humphrey (1910-2005), photojournalist and artist, was born at 47 Campden House Court, Kensington, London, on 19 April 1910, the third son and youngest of the four children of (Edward) Harold Spender (1864-1926), journalist and author, and his wife, Violet Hilda, 'nee' Schuster (1878-1921). He was a brother of the poet Sir Stephen Spender. In early life his myopia was, bizarrely, misdiagnosed as a symptom of congenital syphilis, and he was forbidden to read, initially for a year, and later in artificial light, contributing, he believed, to his much heightened visual sense. He was educated at Charlcote School, Worthing, at a school in London, and at Gresham's School, Norfolk, before spending a year in Freiburg im Breisgau studying art history and perfecting his German. He then spent four years at the Architectural Association School of Architecture, London, qualifying in 1933. He never practised as an architect, however, instead setting up a photographic studio in the Strand with his lover Bill Edmiston. Much of his income initially came from portraiture, but an assignment photographing housing conditions in the East End of London led to commissions from the 'Left Review' to take pictures of the Jarrow marchers and the British Union of Fascists' rally at the Albert Hall. 
In 1935 Spender joined the 'Daily Mirror' for which, as Lensman, he covered numerous stories in the UK and abroad before resigning on a point of principle in 1937. He travelled frequently to Germany, where he was almost arrested at the Nazis' notorious Degenerate Art exhibition of 1937, after he had been overheard praising the art on display. He and his brother Stephen travelled often with Christopher Isherwood, and Humphrey Spender designed the dust jacket of Isherwood's 'Goodbye to Berlin' (1939) and took the iconic photograph of Isherwood standing at a window, which was later reproduced on the jacket of 'Christopher and his Kind' (1973). Meanwhile he had been persuaded by Tom Harrisson to join the team of Mass-Observation, and took more than 900 photographs in Bolton (Worktown). These he always took covertly, declaring that a photograph was 'spoiled' if its subjects had noticed his presence. He took a similar series of documentary photographs elsewhere for Stefan Lorant's 'Picture Post', whose staff he joined soon after its launch in 1938. At one point the mayor of Newcastle was driven to complain that Spender's photographs only ever showed the seamier side of Newcastle life. He was conscripted in 1941, and after a brief period in the Royal Army Service Corps spent the rest of the Second World War as an official photographer and interpreter of photo-reconnaissance pictures. 
On demobilization Spender returned briefly to the 'Picture Post', but after he had won a textile design competition (judged by his friend Henry Moore) Robin Darwin, rector of the Royal College of Art, invited him to join the staff of the textile department, where he remained as a tutor from 1953 until 1975. He won four awards from the Council for Industrial Design for his textile and wallpaper designs, and his work was reproduced by companies including Sandersons and the Edinburgh Weavers. He also painted -- his greatest passion -- and designed murals for the television pavilion at the Festival of Britain, and for the P&O liners 'Canberra' and 'Oriana'. Solo exhibitions of his work were held at the Leicester and Redfern galleries, the New Art Centre, and various provincial galleries. In 1982 he published some of his Mass-Observation photographs in 'Worktown People', and others were included in David Jury's boxed set, 'In Darkest England' (1998). Deborah Frizzell's book 'Humphrey Spender's Humanist Landscapes: Photo-Documents, 1932-1942' had meanwhile been published the previous year, to coincide with an exhibition at the Yale Center for British Art. His final publication, 'Morocco' (2004), was a record of a 'Daily Mirror' assignment in 1935. 
Spender was married three times. His first marriage, on 13 July 1937, was to Margaret (Lolly) Low, a 28-year-old architect whom he had met at the Architectural Association, and daughter of V. Warnen Low, surgeon. They adopted a son. Her death on Christmas day 1945 inspired Stephen Spender's 'Elegy for Margaret'. Spender married second, on 20 March 1948, Pauline Wynn, a 29-year-old actress and radio dramatist, and daughter of Group Captain Wynn Elias Wynn, RAF officer. They had one son. She died in 2003, and on 18 June that year he married his by then long-term companion, Rachel Anne Hewitt, a photographer and artist, and daughter of James Roy Hewitt, painter. She was fifty-five years his junior. Spender's wives were aware of his bisexuality, and the first two tolerated his many affairs with both men and women, who reputedly included Frederick Ashton and Paul Robeson's wife, Eslanda. From 1968 he lived at The Studio, Ulting, Maldon, Essex, a modernist building that was the first built work by the then unknown architect Richard Rogers. He died there on 11 March 2005, of heart failure, and was survived by his wife, Rachel, and his two sons. His Worktown photographs are now owned by Bolton Museum and Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 97638


Bedford, Sybille (1911-2006), writer, was born on 16 March 1911 at Charlottenburg, on the outskirts of Berlin, Germany, the second daughter of Maximilian Josef von Schoenebeck (1863-1925) and only child of his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bernhardt. Her father was descended from a long line of bureaucrats and minor landed gentry; his father, August von Schoenebeck, was a judge, both of whose sons entered the army. Maximilian von Schoenebeck's first wife, Melanie Herz, died in 1905, leaving a daughter, Maximiliana Henrietta, born in 1899. His second marriage, in 1910, enabled him to buy a small estate at Feldkirch in Baden, south Germany, and it was there that Sybille spent her childhood. Her half-Jewish mother was a Catholic convert, and Sybille was brought up in the Roman faith, educated somewhat haphazardly at home and for a brief period at a nearby Ursuline convent. 
As her mother was frequently absent, absorbed in a series of glamorous love affairs, Sybille von Schoenebeck was left mainly in the care of her father. It was from him that she imbibed a knowledge and love of food and wine that lasted a lifetime. Her parents divorced in 1921, and four years later her father died, consigning her to the care of her mother and of an Italian stepfather, an architect, Norberto Marchesani. For the next few years this threesome travelled through Italy, with Sybille at intervals dispatched to England to continue her education. It was while attending hearings at the law courts in the Strand that she first became fascinated by the judicial process, the subject of much of her non-fiction writing. 
The family finally settled in Sanary sur mer in the south of France, and there Sybille met the novelist and philosopher Aldous Huxley and his wife, Maria Nys, 'the two people I owe most to,' she wrote, 'who educated me morally [and] intellectually' ('Quicksands', 18). She later completed an acclaimed two-volume biography of Huxley, published in 1973-4. At Sanary, too, she came to know a number of English writers, among them Cyril Connolly and Brian Howard, and was drawn into a circle of German refugee intellectuals, forming a particular friendship with the children of Thomas Mann, Klaus and Erika. In 1933 she contributed an article to Klaus Mann's magazine, 'Die Sammlung', criticizing the Nazi regime, and this, together with the discovery by the German authorities of her Jewish ancestry, led to her bank account being frozen. Aware of the danger of her situation, she left for London, where the Huxleys helped to arrange a marriage of convenience to a club attendant sixteen years her senior, Walter Croan, otherwise Walter Bedford. They married at Westminster register office on 15 November 1935, with Aldous Huxley as a witness. Although the union was quickly dissolved, it had crucially conferred not only a British passport but the name by which Sybille Bedford became known to generations of readers. 
Although her mother had by this time died, Sybille Bedford returned to France, remaining until 1940 when she left for California, scraping a living as a secretary, journalist, and translator. After the war she spent a year travelling in Mexico before moving to Rome. Determined to pursue a literary career, she was much encouraged by two writer friends, Martha Gellhorn and Allanah Harper, the latter supporting the almost penniless Bedford with a small income. Fluent in four languages, she chose to write in English, the rope that saved her, as she put it, 'from drifting awash in the fluidities of multi-lingualism that surrounded me' ('Jigsaw', 70). In 1953 she published her first book, 'The Sudden View: a Mexican Journey', later reissued as 'A Visit to Don Otavio', widely regarded as a classic of travel literature. This was followed in 1956 by a novel, 'A Legacy', the first stage in a journey of imaginative autobiography culminating in 1989 in her penultimate work, 'Jigsaw'. 'A Legacy' was widely acclaimed, Evelyn Waugh referring to its author as 'a new writer of remarkable accomplishment' ('The Spectator', 13 April 1956). There were further novels, 'A Favourite of the Gods' (1963) and 'A Compass Error' (1968), as well as four works of non-fiction: 'The Best We Can Do' (1958), an account of the murder trial of Bodkin Adams, 'The Faces of Justice' (1961), describing proceedings in European courts of law, and two volumes of collected articles, 'As It Was' (1990) and 'Pleasures and Landscapes' (2003). Her last book, 'Quicksands' (2005), was a remarkable if elusive work of autobiography, dedicated to her long-term companion and executor, Aliette Martin. 
For over thirty years Bedford led a peripatetic existence until in 1979 she made a permanent home in Chelsea, London. She was a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, a vice-president of PEN, appointed OBE in 1981, and elected a companion of literature in 1994. Small and slender, with an almost heroic disregard for personal adornment, she had a mesmerizing personality and was intensely curious, fiercely intelligent, prone to frightful anxieties, and endowed with enormous kindness, sensitivity, and charm. She conducted several intense love affairs, one with a married woman in Rome, Evelyn Gendel, and for twenty years with the American novelist, Eda Lord. Despite tormenting difficulties with her eyesight, she was a dedicated writer, who brought to all her work a great sensitivity, a supremely elegant style, and an incorruptible morality. She died at the Lister Hospital, London, on 17 February 2006 and was cremated at Mortlake crematorium ten days later. A memorial meeting was held at the Reform Club, Pall Mall, on 5 June 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 97639


Bedser, Sir Alec Victor (1918-2010), cricketer and businessman, was born on 4 July 1918 at his grandmother's house, 13 Pangbourne Street, Reading, one of twin sons of Arthur Bedser (1890-1978), a bricklayer then serving as an aircraftsman with the RAF, and his wife, Florence Beatrice, 'nee' Badcock (1893-1989). He and his brother Eric Arthur Bedser (1918-2006), the elder of the two by ten minutes, from whom he was inseparable, were brought up first in two rooms in an aunt's house on Horsell Common, then at Knaphill, Surrey. Later they helped their father build a house in Woking and resided there together until Eric's death. 
A love of physical exertion grew apparent as Alec and Eric Bedser began walking the mile each way to Maybury junior school. Even when they were not in class together at Monument Hill central school, Woking, they would make the same errors. 'Our absolute and complete affinity is hard to explain,' Alec would reflect. 'But it is true and very real to us -- so much so that as long as I can remember we have never been happy apart' (Hill, 82). They shared a bank account; neither would marry. At fourteen they went to work as clerks in the same solicitor's office in Lincoln's Inn Fields, but the lure of the law did not last. Encouraged by Alan Peach, a former Surrey all-rounder who had opened a cricket school in Woking and would recommend them to the Oval, both bowled medium-fast (just as both had played full-back at football) until they decided it made no sense to duplicate each other so precisely. A coin was tossed, Alec won, and Eric switched to off-spin. Off the field, the only sure way to distinguish them was to spot the scar under the elder twin's chin, acquired while batting. The confusion was increased by the fact that they frequently wore matching outfits. 
Signed by Surrey in 1937, Alec and Eric Bedser made their first-class debut in the same match, against Oxford University two years later (Eric taking one wicket and Alec none). They joined the RAF at the outbreak of the Second World War. Sent to France with the British expeditionary force, they had a narrow escape when attacked by a German bomber on the Belgian border. Subsequently stranded in France, they were rescued by a Surrey member who drove them most of the way to Dunkirk. They subsequently served (together) in north Africa, Greece, Italy, and Austria. 
When play resumed after the war, pranks became a Bedser stock-in-trade. Eric gave speeches in Alec's stead. On one fabled occasion, they even shared an over, to the bewilderment of the renowned Kent and England left-hander Frank Woolley. 'Surrey v. England at The Oval in forty-seven', chuckled Alec, recollecting their coup of deception. 'Forty-six', corrected Eric: 'Monty [General Montgomery] was there, 18,000 in the ground. Alec bowled three balls then swapped with me at mid-on. I bowled spin but we had similar actions. Woolley didn't realise we were twins. At the end of the over he turned to the keeper and said, 'He's got a wonderful change of pace'. ('Sunday Times', 5 Jan 1997)' Eric Bedser went on to become a dependable all-rounder, and a stalwart of the highly successful Surrey team of the 1950s. Alec Bedser, by contrast, was primarily a bowler, but one of the most successful in cricket history. He, discerned that most poetic of cricket writers, Alan Ross, was a bowler 'by metier, as some are locksmiths or boot-makers or violinists' (Liverman and Liverman, 'A profile'). Blessed with massive shoulders and enormous hands, he generated bat-jarring pace from a brief, heavy-footed approach. What hoisted him above his peers was a relentless command of line and length enlivened by sharp inswing and a leg-cutter fiendish enough, at Adelaide in 1947, to confound and bowl Don Bradman for a duck: the Australian, widely regarded as the greatest batsman of the twentieth century, acclaimed it the finest ball he ever faced. 
Picked for England's first post-war test in June 1946 after taking 6-14 against a strong MCC eleven followed by half a dozen scalps playing against the Indian tourists, Alec Bedser immediately made himself virtually undroppable, ejecting seven batsmen in the first innings and four in the second, then another eleven in the next test. By the autumn he was taking his first steps on Australian soil, where the tumultuous greeting for the ultimately outclassed MCC tourists kick-started a love affair that would endure for the rest of his days. 'When we docked in Fremantle the quayside was packed', he later recalled. 'It was like that everywhere. The teams got on famously. While we were all travelling on the train from Brisbane to Sydney, Bradman came down the corridor to give us a crate of beer' ('Sunday Times', 5 Jan 1997). The series, though, began in anger. In the opening test in Brisbane, Bradman had made 28 of his eventual match-winning 187 when Jack Ikin claimed a catch at slip; at the end of the over Walter Hammond, the England captain, cursed his opposite number. In hindsight, felt Bedser, cricket reaped the benefits: 'The fact that Bradman came over [to England] in 1948 gave the game here the lift it needed. That's why him not being given out in Brisbane was the best thing that could have happened. Not that we made a fuss. I know what Hammond supposedly said, but I never heard it. When you'd had six and a half years' service in France and North Africa, it didn't seem that important. We were just grateful to be there. (ibid.)' Bradman, indeed, became a firm friend as well as a regular foe on the field. No other bowler ever took his wicket five matches running, albeit he averaged 91.38 in the thirteen test innings in which he and Bedser faced each other. 
Bedser's second Ashes tour saw his stature soar: in a series in which England lost the first four tests before inflicting their first defeat of Australia since 1938, he was essentially a one-man attack, claiming thirty wickets at 16.06 apiece. Two years later, he collected thirty-nine -- three times as many as the next most effective contributor -- to help his country reclaim the Ashes for the first time since 1933. At Trent Bridge, Lindsey Hassett had made a flawless, untroubled 115 when he fell to a ball that swung in, pitched leg, and clipped off-stump, drawing three equally futile strokes. At Headingley, Bedser overhauled the record held by the Australian spinner Clarrie Grimmett, taking his 217th test wicket; not for ten years would Brian Statham surpass his eventual tally of 236. The burden he bore so uncomplainingly made these feats all the more imperishable: in those two series he bowled the equivalent of 525.1 six-ball overs; the next most by an Englishman was Trevor Bailey's 244.2. 
By the time of the Ashes tour of 1954-5 Alec Bedser was thirty-six and, after a chastening first test in Brisbane, when he took one for 131, he contracted shingles only to discover his omission from the next encounter via a team-sheet pinned to a door. He deserved immeasurably better from Len Hutton, the driven but taciturn captain he had served so tirelessly, the leader whose reputation he had made, who said not a word. Thereafter, he watched from the wings as Frank Tyson and Brian Statham, the next, pacier generation, powered England to a resounding triumph. Playing one more test the next summer, he never forgave Hutton's apparent ingratitude. 
Meanwhile both Alec and Eric Bedser were fixtures of the remarkable Surrey team who under the captaincy of Stuart Surridge, and with Jim Laker and Tony Lock as team-mates, took the county championship title seven times in succession between 1952 and 1958, and in 1956 became the first English county for forty-three years to beat an Australian touring side. In all first-class cricket Alec Bedser took 1,924 wickets at an average of 20.41 and scored 5,735 runs at an average of 14.51. Eric Bedser took 833 wickets at an average of 24.95 and scored 14,716 runs at an average of 24.00. Alec retired in 1960, and Eric in 1962. 
In 1954 the twins, with their friend Jack Fagan, set up a shop selling office equipment in Woking. After opening another outlet in Staines, and acquiring Henry Baker Ltd, in St Bride Street, London, in 1962 they formed a partnership with Ronald Straker as Straker-Bedser, which by the time it was taken over by the Ryman chain in 1977 had 25 shops with 180 employees and an annual turnover of $1.8 million. The twins then became consultants for Brengreen Holdings, a contract cleaning company run by their friend and fellow cricketer David Evans (later a Conservative MP, known for his outspokenness and self-confessed racism). 
Meanwhile Alec Bedser remained an influential figure in English cricket. In 1962-3 he was assistant to the duke of Norfolk as manager of the MCC side on tour to Australia; he later managed the MCC tour of 1974-5 and the England tour of 1979-80. He also served as a national selector from 1962 to 1985, chairing the panel from 1968 to 1981, commanding respect but increasingly at odds with global professionalism and the one-day game amid a humbling period for English cricket -- one reflected in, and exacerbated by, impatient selection. To his credit was the left-field but highly successful summons for David Steele against Australia in 1975; more rigid, and typical, was the suspension in 1969 of Tom Graveney for participating in a charity game on the rest day of a test. Bedser was also involved in the initial decision to leave Basil D'Oliveira out of the England team due to tour South Africa in 1968, for fear of antagonizing the apartheid government. 
The Bedsers usually wintered in Australia, renewing a close friendship with Bradman; Alec made his final trip there alone for the Ashes series of 2006-7, coping better than anticipated, it seemed, with his brother's death on 24 May 2006. Never happier, apparently, than when chiding his successors for what he saw as an aversion to hard work, Alec Bedser came to be regarded as a kindly if inflexible symbol of the old order, an image hardened by his membership of the right-wing Freedom Association, which favoured maintaining sporting ties with apartheid South Africa and was in part funded by the South African government. Appointed OBE in 1964 and CBE in 1982, he was knighted for his services to the game in 1997 during the premiership of John Major, a Surrey member and perennial supporter. He liked to say that he was the first England bowler to have been knighted since Sir Francis Drake. At the time of his death of heart failure at the Nuffield Hospital, Woking, on 4 April 2010 he was England's oldest test cricketer, extolled as the last of the great medium-pacers and, as the packed memorial service in Southwark Cathedral on 12 July 2010 confirmed, the final heroic link to a misty, distant past. 


@@@@@


doc= 97640


Bowen, Denis Arthur (1921-2006), painter, was born on 5 April 1921 at Zantespans Drift Farm, near Kimberley, South Africa, one of two sons and two daughters of Alan Bowen, a farmer originally from Cardigan, and his wife, Bertha, 'nee' Jones. Orphaned young, he went to England with his brother and sisters in 1926. From then until 1933 he lived first with his maternal grandmother then with an aunt in Manchester. Thereafter he lived under the protection of a paternal aunt in Huddersfield, Yorkshire, and completed his schooling at King James I Grammar School in Almondbury. His artistic talent was already apparent and in 1938 he entered Huddersfield School of Art, where he was encouraged by the local painter Reginald Napier, a former Royal College of Art student who pointed his charge towards further studies at the college. 
As with many of his generation, Bowen's education was put on hold by the Second World War. He served in the navy, travelling on Atlantic convoys to Canada as well as sailing to Africa and the Far East. Experience at sea was seminal for Bowen's developing iconography and early informalism. In particular, the mercurial energy of the sea inspired his loose, gestural, and liquid paint handling, which exploited chance, accident, and the 'organic' processes of painterly image formation. From the deck of his frigate in Portsmouth harbour at night Bowen was intrigued by searchlight beams that unified the sky with the mysterious dark waters below. In his work vertical abstract marks deriving from these experiences countered the lateral orientation of most landscape-derived compositions. 
Bowen resumed his studies in 1946, entering the Royal College of Art with a borough scholarship from Huddersfield. His benign tutor, Kenneth Rowntree, together with charismatic teachers like Carel Weight and John Minton, saw him develop notable tonal skills that instilled even into gestural abstraction a naturalism related either to landscape or, in later work, to an extra-terrestrial cosmological vision. He took his diploma in 1949. What became a lifelong teaching career ensued; after graduating he taught part-time in the interior design department at Kingston School of Art. This was followed by teaching stints on the intermediate course at Hammersmith during the early 1950s and in the school of industrial design first at the Central School of Art (1953-6) and then at the Royal College of Art (1956-61). Not only did Bowen create in these colleges a network of professional contacts among staff and students that would last a lifetime, but the experimental tenor of his work was consolidated within a climate of radical innovation informed by the Bauhaus-inspired teaching methods introduced by Victor Pasmore and others. 
While Bowen's emerging abstract style was influenced by New York abstract expressionism and by contemporary French 'tachism', gleaned from the magazines 'Cimaise' and 'Art d'Aujourd'hui', a more direct spur to his evolving language came through meeting in London artists he admired, such as Alberto Giacometti, Pierre Soulages, Georges Mathieu, and later Mark Rothko. He also stayed in Paris with Yves Klein. An intrepid gallery-goer, he became a well-informed artist whose talents extended beyond his own artistic practice to embrace exhibition organizing and critical writing. Accordingly he opened his own gallery, the avant-garde New Vision Centre Gallery, with help from Halima Nalecz and Frank Avray Wilson, in April 1956. 
Both inspired by, and a reaction to, the Institute of Contemporary Art, founded in 1948, the New Vision Centre Gallery formed itself out of the Free Painters Group. As its title implies, this group represented a more open, democratic forum than the institute and during its decade-long existence (1956-66) the gallery devoted itself to promoting a broad spectrum of both hard-edged, geometric and informal abstract art by British, continental, and international artists. Among the many distinguished exhibitors were Peter Blake, Paul Feiler, Roy Turner Durrant, Piero Manzoni, Robert Goodnough, and the comedian Charlie Drake. Meanwhile Bowen's own exhibition career blossomed beyond the walls of the subterranean New Vision Centre Gallery to take in such prestigious West End galleries as the Redfern, O'Hana, Tooth, and Grabowski. Always an internationalist, he also exhibited in Paris, New York, Rome, and other major cities. He participated in the Redfern Gallery's landmark 'Metavisual, Tachist, Abstract' exhibition (1957) alongside leading young abstract artists like Gillan Ayres, Robyn Denny, and Roger Hilton. The 'Atomic Landscape' series, produced during a furious two-day burst of spontaneous production, frequently made up his gallery displays. 
During the early 1960s Bowen was inspired by space exploration, and his painterliness was formalized into geometrical symbols and stellar or planetry discs. 'Re-entry Colonel Glenn' (1962) and 'Triptych for a Venusian' (1963) epitomized these developments. By 1965 his output had peaked and he latterly refined the explosive gestures, as in the 'Projectile' series based on rocket launches, and the astronomical symbols. There were, however, innovations like his passing flirtation with 'op' and kinetic art, where he experimented with relief and with new, optically vibrant, fluorescent or luminous paints. 
Bowen married twice: first, on 7 April 1949, Eve Elizabeth Reinhardt, an 18-year-old art student, and daughter of Ernest Joseph Reinhardt, button manufacturer, and second, on 11 August 1962, Judith Ann Stapleton, a 22-year-old art teacher, and daughter of John William Stapleton, secondary school teacher. Both marriages were brief and ended in divorce. He became a British citizen in 1962. Although his teaching career took him to the University of Victoria, British Columbia, in 1969-72, he kept his rented flat at 4 Seymour Place, Marble Arch, above what had been the New Vision Centre Gallery. Latterly he taught at High Wycombe and devoted more time to writing art criticism for 'Arts Review' and 'Art International'. He was an active member of the Association of International Art Critics and travelled to their conferences across Europe. His penchant for travel took him regularly to the Venice Biennale and to workshops in Macedonia during the 1980s and 1990s. Finally, alongside younger artists he participated in the Celtic Vision, Cosmopolis, and Sharing a View painting groups during the 1990s and 2000s. A burst aorta suffered in his flat in March 2005 led to months in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington. Although he recovered he died from pneumonia at the same hospital on 23 March 2006. He was survived by a daughter, Amanda Groome. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 97644


Craig, Stella Ross- (1906-2006), botanical artist, was born on 19 March 1906 at 61 Gordon Road, Aldershot, Hampshire, one of the three children of John Ross Craig, pharmacist, and his wife, Christina Sinclair, 'nee' Lauder. Both her parents were Scottish. On her birth certificate her father signed himself J. Ross Craig, and by the time of her marriage she had added a hyphen. During her childhood in Hampshire and Kent her father, who was an amateur botanist, stimulated her interest in flowers, and her brother encouraged her to draw. After her mother's early death she left school at the age of fourteen to look after the family home. At eighteen she undertook a course lasting four years at Thanet Art School, where she studied life drawing, print-making, photography, and embroidery. At the same time she attended evening classes on botany. She subsequently extended her botanical knowledge at the Chelsea Polytechnic but took no qualification. There she met Joseph Robert Sealy, known as J. Robert Sealy (1907-2000), a fellow student, and son of Joseph Sealy, a sergeant in Kew Gardens constabulary; they eventually married on 24 October 1936. Sealy had entered the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew about 1925. Two years later he was transferred to the Kew herbarium to assist Otto Stapf, botanist and editor of 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine'. 

'Curtis's Botanical Magazine' published floral paintings, especially those of horticultural appeal. In 1929 it engaged Stella Ross-Craig as a botanical artist; it is not clear whether her future husband played any part in this appointment. The Royal Horticultural Society, which owned the periodical, paid her salary but she reported to Stapf at Kew Gardens. (She was never a member of Kew's staff.) Her first drawing was published in 1932, lithographed by Lilian Snelling, at that time the periodical's principal artist. From 1935 the floral dissections that accompanied every illustration were transferred to the text pages as line drawings, and most of them were executed by Ross-Craig. She succeeded Snelling when the latter retired in 1952 and was joined by Ann Webster (whom she claimed to have trained) and later by Margaret Stones as fellow artists. When her last painting was published in 1980, she had contributed 333 plant portraits to the magazine. 
In 1932 the Bentham-Moxon Trust at Kew Gardens employed Ross-Craig to produce line drawings for 'Hooker's Icones Plantarum', a periodical that Sir William Hooker had founded in 1837. Originally it had selected new or rare specimens from Hooker's personal herbarium, but it was now portraying species in the Kew herbarium. By 1956 Ross-Craig had drawn 397 plates, which included 25 for a small monograph that she compiled, 'A Revision of the Genus Sphaeranthus' (1955). She also produced 50 line drawings for W. B. Turrill's 'Studies in the Genus Fritillaria', which was completed by her husband after Turrill's death. It appeared as a separate issue of 'Hooker's Icones Plantarum' in 1980. 
Through her contributions to 'Hooker's Icones Plantarum' Ross-Craig perfected her skill as a black and white illustrator and was ready to contemplate her 'magnum opus', 'Drawings of British Plants'. It was to be a compendium of British native species, excluding Gramineae (grasses) and Cyperaceae (sedges), which other publications had adequately covered. She was not the first to conceive of such a project. W. H. Fitch had produced 'Illustrations of the British Flora' (1880) as a companion to George Bentham's 'Handbook of the British Flora'. Its small line drawings, four to a page, in a portable form, deserved their popularity with the general public, but they lacked detail. Much more in accord with Ross-Craig's concept was Roger W. Butcher's 'Further Illustrations of British plants' (1930), with competent line drawings by Florence E. Strudwick. 
Ross-Craig planned a line drawing of every species incorporating magnified dissections of its flower and fruit. She emulated the woodcuts in medieval herbals by occasionally including roots whenever they were a pertinent diagnostic detail. Charles Hubbard, a Kew botanist, encouraged her, and the director, Sir Edward Salisbury, introduced her to the publisher George Bell & Son. The publisher chose good quality paper to facilitate hand colouring by the purchaser. The first part appeared in 1948 and during the next 25 years she produced, on average, about two drawings a week, amounting to 1316 full-page plates in 31 parts. Her husband and their friend Bill Burtt joined her in collecting specimens, members of the Botanical Society of the British Isles volunteered to find rare species, and dried specimens in the Kew herbarium were consulted. Her husband, Burtt, and Noel Sandwith, a Kew botanist with a comprehensive knowledge of the British flora, advised her on any taxonomic problems. Issued in paperback parts, initially 6's'. each -- which had soared to $2 when the last part, the index, appeared in 1974 -- it was welcomed by teachers and students, for whom it was largely intended. Sir Edward Salisbury pronounced it to be 'a magnificent work of scientific investigation and recording'. It rapidly became a classic in its particular genre of botanical art. 
Ross-Craig's line drawings appeared in other publications: 69 in J. Hutchinson and J. M. Dalziel's 'Flora of West Tropical Africa' (vol. 2, pts 1-2, 1931-6); 16 in F. C. Stern's 'Study of the Genus Paeonia' (1946); and a few in H. J. Elwes's 'Monograph of Genus Lilium' (supplement, 1938-40). She contributed three colour plates to G. H. Johnstone's 'Asiatic Magnolias in Cultivation' (1955), but only the frontispiece to her husband's 'Revision of the Genus Camellia' (1958). It proved too expensive to include the other Camellia paintings she had executed (seven of them are now in the Kew library) but she compensated for their absence by drawing 102 line figures for the volume. When Sir Jeremiah Colman's fine collection of living orchids was bequeathed to Kew Gardens early in 1942, she painted 49 of them over the next four years and generously presented the paintings to Kew in 1968. 
Ross-Craig described her technique of painting and drawing in W. Blunt and W. T. Stearn's 'The Art of Botanical Illustration' (1994), and in an article in 'Medical and Biological Illustration' (1953). Before attempting any plant portrait she would absorb what she called its 'character or personality'. Only then would she lightly pencil in her composition, adroitly inserting floral dissections in appropriate spaces on the sheet. The smoothness and whiteness of hot-pressed Whatman paper gave her the purity of colour she sought. She objected to being grouped with 'flower painters', seeing herself as a botanical artist subject to the discipline of scientific accuracy. In an undated note, now in the Kew library, she affirmed that, for her, 'painting was never routine, always an endeavour to do justice to the plants' (Ross-Craig to Gren L. Lucas, Ross-Craig papers). As a botanical artist she will be remembered best for her accomplished line drawings, which project three-dimensional images through confident line and stipple shading. She drew in waterproof Indian ink with a flexible lithographic pen on Bristol board. Whenever living plants were not available she would consult Kew herbarium's collections. She had confidently mastered the difficult technique of recreating a plant from a lifeless specimen through a combination of precise draughtsmanship and botanical knowledge. 
Volume 182 (1978-80) of 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine' was dedicated to Ross-Craig and her husband, who had been its editor in all but name. Both had 'diligently upheld its high standards' for more than half a century. In November 1999 she was presented with the Kew award 'in recognition of her outstanding contribution to botanical art'. She received the Royal Horticultural Society's prestigious Veitch memorial medal in 2002. In the same year a selection of her work was exhibited in the Edinburgh Botanic Garden, and shown again at Kew in 2003. 
Ross-Craig was a modest, unassuming person -- some called her self-effacing -- but this natural reticence concealed firm resolve and stamina, qualities she needed to complete her ambitious 'Drawings of British Plants'. She cared for her husband during his last years while he suffered from dementia. She spent her declining years at Abbeyfield Nursing Home in Ennerdale Road, Kew, and died in the West Middlesex Hospital in neighbouring Isleworth of bronchopneumonia on 7 February 2006, just six weeks short of her hundredth birthday. The residue of her estate was divided equally between Kew's Bentham-Moxon Trust, which had once employed her, and the Kew Guild, of which her husband had been secretary for many years. She had prepared the preliminary drawings in the application of the guild for a coat of arms and a badge. She expressed a wish that her bequest should be used primarily for travel and plant expeditions and general research. Much of her published art work, miscellaneous watercolours and pencil drawings, a few sketchbooks, and a small archive of correspondence are housed in the Kew library. 


@@@@@


doc= 97649


Ford, Sir Edward William Spencer (1910-2006), courtier, was born on 24 July 1910 at The Hall, Repton, Derbyshire, the son of Lionel George Bridges Justice Ford (1865-1932), headmaster of Repton School, later headmaster of Harrow School and dean of York, and his wife, Mary Catherine, daughter of Edward Stuart Talbot, bishop of Winchester. The cricket writer William Justice Ford was his uncle. Ford was the fourth (twin) son. There were also two daughters. His twin, Christopher, was killed at Anzio in January 1944, while serving as a major in the Grenadier Guards. 
Ford was educated at Eton College as a king's scholar and excelled at sport. (For many years he was the oldest surviving member of an Eton or Harrow Lord's cricket team, and cricket remained an abiding pleasure to him all his life.) From Eton he moved on to New College, Oxford (where he was an open scholar). He took a first in classical moderations in 1931 and a second in 'literae humaniores' in 1933. He was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1937. His already burgeoning reputation as a counsellor was at that time being tested during a brief appointment as private tutor to the young King Farouk of Egypt, where it seems that his wise words may have fallen on deafer ears than at other stages of his life. He practised at the bar until 1939 then served throughout the Second World War in the Grenadier Guards. He was mentioned in dispatches twice, seeing action at Dunkirk and in north Africa, Italy, and Belgium. 
In 1945, while instructing at the Staff College in Haifa, Ford was invited to join the three-strong team of private secretaries in King George VI's household at Buckingham Palace. He accepted with alacrity and worked happily for two sovereigns, King George VI and Queen Elizabeth II, throughout the ensuing twenty-two years as assistant private secretary, with first Sir Alan Lascelles and then Sir Michael Adeane as principals. Ford's mixture of wisdom, humour, knowledge, and self-effacement fitted him ideally for the task, and he was a popular and jovial member of the royal household, known by many as the Pasha. On 1 December 1949 he married Virginia Polk (1918-1995), elder daughter of the leading banker Robert Henry Brand, Baron Brand, and widow of John Metcalfe (Jack) Polk, of the family of the American president of that name. Virginia was a niece of Nancy Astor. Ford's marriage, an exceptionally happy one, was based from 1963 to 1982 at Virginia's Palladian house, Eydon Hall, in Northamptonshire, which she inherited from her father. Virginia had already had two sons with Jack Polk, and was mother to two more with Ford. 
In 1967 came the other, besides his marriage, defining moment of Ford's life. Adeane was due to retire in 1972, and the private secretarial succession was complicated by the two contenders, Ford and Charteris, being close in age. Ford, typically, made way for Charteris. This caused him much sadness, but it was done with the good grace, good humour, and dignity that were variously his hallmarks. The move though, was not the end of his connection with the queen. He remained until the end of his life her valued correspondent (in one of his letters he coined the phrase 'annus horribilis', later used by her to describe the events of 1992, a poor year for the royal family's fortunes), adviser, and friend. And he retained, together with some vivid memories, a lifelong admiration for the queen and the duke of Edinburgh. In this respect his guardianship of the Order of Merit from 1975, as secretary and registrar, was impeccable. His notes on candidates, successful and otherwise, made good reading and reflected the extraordinary breadth of his knowledge on matters cultural and scientific, to name but two, which was the envy of his many friends. He was also, at various times, high sheriff and a deputy lieutenant of Northamptonshire, secretary of the Pilgrims Trust (1967-75), and, to his delight, prime warden of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1979. He had been made an MVO in 1949 and CB in 1952, knighted KCVO in 1957 and advanced to KCB in 1967, and in 1998 he was made GCVO. 
Virginia predeceased him, after a long illness, in 1995 but Ford, who had devotedly cared for her, recovered from this blow and continued to make energetic forays from his base in Little Venice into London society, country houses, family occasions, and, even in his nineties, homes abroad where he was entertained by the great and good. When asked how he entered one hostess's swimming pool in his exceedingly old age, he replied 'I always dive'. Such was the man that his interlocutor was not surprised. He died, still entirely in control of his faculties, of a heart attack at his home, 23 Blomfield Road, Westminster, on 19 November 2006, and was survived by his two sons and a stepson, one stepson having predeceased him. The queen and the duke of Edinburgh were among those who filled the Guards' Chapel, Wellington Barracks, London for a memorial service on 28 February 2007. 


@@@@@


doc= 97659


Hughes, Selwyn (1928-2006), evangelical minister and devotional writer, was born on 27 April 1928 at 4 Tunnel Terrace, near Fochriw, Glamorgan, the elder of the two children of John Wyndham Hughes (1906-1986), an underground colliery electrician, and his wife, Lily, 'nee' Marshallsea ('b'. 1906), a former domestic servant. At the time of his birth his parents were sharing with his maternal grandparents their spartan two-roomed accommodation in a remotely situated terrace of four unprepossessing cottages perched on a hillside in the highest inhabited location in south Wales, overlooking the mining village of Fochriw. Despite the austerity of his upbringing in the great depression some of Hughes's most vivid childhood memories were of his relatives enthusiastically recounting tales of religious revival from the extraordinarily influential Welsh revival of 1904-5 and the more recent Pentecostalist ministry of Stephen Jeffreys. Dedicating his nephew shortly after his birth, David Thomas, the pastor of the Assemblies of God mission hall at Fochriw, a former ambulance station where most of the tightly knit congregation were members of Hughes's extended family, prayed that Selwyn, whose name in Welsh signified the attribute of a clear voice, might one day become a great preacher of the gospel. 
The continuing economic depression forced Hughes's father in the mid-1930s to seek work at the Metropolitan Vickers factory at Saltley in Birmingham. The sudden experience of displacement suffered by Hughes induced a sense of alienation and introversion for the next three years until his father's failing health necessitated a return to his native Wales on the eve of the outbreak of the Second World War. An avid reader and devoted radio listener, Hughes developed an early love of language, and at the age of twelve he joined the local youth dramatic society, which provided his earliest experience of public speaking. However, his theatrical career ended when his father, a strict teetotaller, took exception to his over-enthusiastic portrayal on stage of a commercial traveller enjoying a convivial glass of whisky, and resolutely walked out of the public performance, much to his son's embarrassment. 
After securing a coveted scholarship to Bargoed grammar school in 1940 he left, unusually, after two years, with a special dispensation to undertake an engineering course at Bargoed Technical College. This was followed by a five-year apprenticeship in the Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds steelworks in Dowlais, where he loved 'the whirr of the machinery' and 'the heavy acrid smell of burning steel' to such an extent that he believed he had found a career that would offer him complete fulfilment in life (Peters, 'Selwyn', 24). Within a few months he was running the apprentices' football pool. For all his family's experience of spiritual revival, he acknowledged in his autobiography that he had been a rebellious teenager, smoking, swearing, chasing pretty girls, and even going through a phase of petty pilfering. However, in February 1944 he experienced a dramatic religious conversion. Passing the open door of the mission hut 'en route' for the dance hall, he heard his father praying fervently for his son's salvation, and when he eventually arrived at the dance hall he found its lure less appealing. He believed that God was calling him and shortly afterwards committed his life to Jesus Christ. On a bitterly cold March morning he was baptized by total immersion in the open air at Fochriw, with crowds watching from the hillside above, followed later by baptism in the Holy Spirit at a Pentecostal convention. He then trained successively as a Sunday school teacher and lay preacher, teaching himself to play the piano accordion to conduct open-air evangelistic campaigns. In 1946-8 he undertook national service at Bedlinog colliery, where the loss of a workmate in a catastrophic roof fall generated a sense of urgency to train for the ordained ministry, which he undertook at the Bristol Bible College, where his uncle had also trained. 
After ordination Hughes served in a succession of Assembly of God churches in Cornwall, west Wales, and south Yorkshire. In his first appointment, at Helston, Cornwall, his frugal meal budgeting included a diluted daily penny beef cube for lunch. On 10 April 1951, at the Methodist church in Helston, he married Enid Mary Osmand (1929-1986), manageress of the NAAFI canteen at HMS 'Culdrose', who considerably enriched both his diet and his ministry through her faithful support for the next thirty-five years. 
Hughes's desire to find new ways of communicating the gospel led him to operate outside denominational structures from 1958, when he resigned from the Assemblies of God following official opposition to a new urban mission he had started in Sheffield, near to an established Assemblies of God mission hall. After broadening his experience as a preacher and evangelist in the United States, and declining an offer to remain there, he went to London, where he launched a campaign for spiritual revival in 1963. This developed into the Crusade for World Revival, an international organization founded in 1965 for training Christian counsellors, leaders, and workers throughout the world and disseminating Christian resources. These included the daily devotional 'Every Day with Jesus', a bimonthly publication of themed reflections on the 'Bible' modelled on the accessibility of the 'Reader's Digest', which ultimately won Hughes a global influence and respect from Christians of every denomination. When the Crusade for World Revival moved to Waverley Abbey House, near Farnham, Surrey -- a Georgian mansion, purchased with donations from his supporters, situated alongside the site of the first English Cistercian abbey -- Viscount Tonypandy, the former speaker of the House of Commons and a Welsh Methodist lay preacher, declared at its official opening in 1987 that it would become 'a powerhouse for the Lord Jesus Christ in the unfolding years' (Hughes, 'My Story', 2007, 328). It rapidly became Europe's largest centre for training in Christian counselling and pastoral care, introducing a biblical model of understanding people developed by Hughes, and linked to Hughes's international ministry of evangelistic discipleship and seminar programmes that spanned five continents. He also developed an innovatory style of ministry and was one of the first Christian leaders to utilize overhead projectors and later data projectors in his professionally presented teaching seminars. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of divinity in 2004 by Brunel University, when Lord Carey described him as 'a giant of the faith', and he delighted that year in preaching in Cardiff at the centenary of the Welsh revival. 
Recordings of Hughes's sermons reveal a quietly spoken, measured delivery, with no pronounced Welsh accent (a consequence of his childhood years in Birmingham), but occasionally rising in volume and quickening in pace to emphasize key points or to challenge his congregation to a deeper spiritual commitment. His appearance, which one observer described as rather dapper, was characteristically modest, with neatly backcombed hair, greying in later portraits, longish sideburns, and lightweight spectacles framing a kindly, expressive face. His sermons, like his 'Bible' reading notes, were engagingly titled, carefully crafted, graphically illustrated, lightened by humorous anecdotes, and enhanced by carefully selected quotations and examples from his vast reading and his wealth of personal experience. 
The death of Hughes's wife after a debilitating, painful struggle with cancer, followed by the tragic loss within the space of ten months of their two sons, David and John, and Hughes's own protracted struggle with prostate cancer, enhanced his empathy with others experiencing suffering. He died at the Phyllis Tuckwell Hospice in Farnham on 9 January 2006, having assured those around him that 'he was looking forward to meeting his Lord' ('Idea', March-April 2006, 14). His funeral at Farnham Baptist Church on 17 January was followed by cremation at Aldershot crematorium. A memorial service was held at Methodist Central Hall, Westminster, on 9 September 2006. The evangelical press pronounced him 'one of the UK's most influential post-war Christian leaders' while obituaries in the secular press paid tribute to his 'extraordinary achievement' in developing 'some of the most popular daily 'Bible' study tools in the world, with nearly a million readers an issue' ('Daily Telegraph', 23 Feb 2006; 'The Times', 4 March 2006). His ministry, combining the roles of counsellor, evangelist, pastor, preacher, teacher, and writer, had spanned six decades. His personal authorship of every issue of 'Every Day with Jesus' had made him one of the most influential Christian devotional writers of any time. Indeed his influence through his preaching and writing in the twentieth century was comparable with that exercised by Spurgeon in the nineteenth century or Wesley in the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 97674


Rees, Charles Wayne (1927-2006), organic chemist, was born on 15 October 1927 in Cairo, Egypt, the son of a serving British soldier, later a civil servant, Percival Charles Rees, and his wife, Daisy Alice, 'nee' Beck. He was educated at Farnham grammar school. Working subsequently for the Royal Aircraft Establishment at nearby Farnborough as a laboratory technician, he developed a love for chemistry, obtained his higher school certificate (mainly by evening study), and became a chemistry undergraduate at the University College of Southampton. He gained a first-class honours degree in 1950 and then began work for a PhD under the supervision of Norman B. Chapman. Later studies under Adrien Albert (of the Australian National University, which had an outpost in London) led to the award of his PhD (Southampton) in 1953. On 19 December the same year he commenced a happy and enduring marriage to Patricia Mary (Tricia) Francis, the 22-year-old daughter of George Walter Francis, a representative of the tobacco manufacturers W. D. and H. O. Wills. They had three sons (David, George, and Michael). For years the family lived in Kensington after his appointment as assistant lecturer at Birkbeck College, London, in 1955. 
After two years at Birkbeck, Rees moved to King's College, London, where he spent eight years (1957-65) in the department chaired by the pioneer of free radical chemistry, Donald Hey. Free radicals are transient intermediates in chemical reactions where each molecule has an odd unpaired electron. Rees's later interest in free radicals must have dated from those years, though he also worked with Hey on different aspects of a branch of chemistry that he was later to make specially his own, that of heterocyclic compounds. In 1965 he was appointed professor of organic chemistry at the University of Leicester, and in 1969 moved to become professor of organic chemistry at Liverpool, succeeding George Kenner as Heath Harrison professor of organic chemistry in 1977. After one year as Harrison professor he was translated to the chair at Imperial College, London, named after another great pioneer in organic chemistry, A. W. Hofmann. He succeeded the Nobel laureate Sir Derek Barton, and finally retired from the chair in 1993. He was appointed emeritus professor and thereafter spent much time in his laboratory, unrestricted by regular teaching commitments. 
Charles Rees was a rare example of a distinguished organic chemist who was popular with a wide range of chemists and historians of chemistry. He was closely associated with the Royal Society of Chemistry, formerly the Chemical Society. He delivered the Tilden lecture in 1974 and the Pedler lecture (reported in 'Chemical Society Reviews') ten years later. He served on many of its committees, including as chairman of its publication and information board for four years, and in 1982 became president of the Perkin division of the society, concerned with organic chemistry. The ultimate token of esteem came with his election to the presidency of the Royal Society of Chemistry itself (1992-4). As president he went to great lengths to attend meetings of the smaller groups of the society and became widely known as a friend to all. 
Rees's great preoccupation was with that sub-group of organic substances known as heterocyclic compounds. They are substances whose molecules contain a ring of atoms, one at least of these being other than carbon. He became familiar with the properties of many heterocyclic ring systems, not least the aziridines and azoles in their many forms. Many of the new compounds contained other elements in their rings as well as nitrogen, for instance sulphur or even selenium. He was particularly interested in the decomposition of heterocyclic compounds, including their responses to heating. For his work in this field he was awarded the Royal Society of Chemistry award in heterocyclic chemistry in 1980 and the International Society of Heterocyclic Chemistry senior award in 1995. This research frequently involved surprising reactions; they often seemed to proceed through a transient intermediate as a derivative of benzyne (C6H4). In 1965 Rees obtained evidence for benzyne in the oxidation of the heterocycle 1-aminobenzotriazine, and in the early 1970s he discovered a new route to benzynes using low temperatures. Sometimes other intermediates were identified, as free radicals like carbenes (by then well known elsewhere), or the less familiar nitrenes. He obtained these by pyrolysis of aziridines and showed their key role in many heterocyclic decompositions, employing them in several important syntheses. 
Beyond the field of strict heterocyclic chemistry Rees was also concerned with aromaticity (a kind of stability, due to a number, usually six, of greekLetterpi-electrons in the molecule). In that connection he succeeded in preparing for the first time derivatives of [10]annulene (or cyclodecapentaene) and other non-heterocyclic compounds to put current theories to rigorous test. Other work was centred on derivatives of the 'square' molecule, cyclobutadiene, that showed the strange phenomenon of 'valence isomerism'. 
Much of Rees's work was entirely academic, yet even basic research in heterocyclic chemistry is relevant to living systems. Occasionally this became obvious, as when he participated in the discovery of cimetidine, a synthetic drug once used widely in the treatment of gastric ulcers. He claimed that this discovery saved the National Health Service a billion pounds and showed that academic chemistry, pursued for its own ends, could sometimes have important industrial or social consequences. Several other compounds of biological importance were also isolated. 
Rees published about 500 papers, generally in collaboration with his research staff and others, and the 'Annual Reports' of chemical progress for many years rarely failed to report his research. Some of these references were to prove immensely important for others in their future work. He contributed to many books and was a co-author of the seminal 'Organic Reaction Mechanisms' (three volumes, 1965-9), 'Carbenes, Nitrenes and Arynes' (1969), the multi-volume 'Comprehensive Heterocyclic Chemistry' (1984 and 1996), and 'Organic Functional Group Transformations' (1995). Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1974, he became president of the chemistry section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1984. He received honorary doctorates from the universities of Leicester (1994), Sunderland (2000), and London (2003) and was appointed CBE in 1995. 
Rees's devotion to academic chemistry showed itself in his frequent impromptu remarks at heterocyclic conferences, where his interventions were nearly always helpful, and in his lecturing technique, which was brilliant and deeply appreciated. He was always approachable and given to generous hospitality. Rarely seen in public without his customary bow-tie, he had a great sense of humour and was highly regarded by all who met him. He appreciated excellence in wine, music, and theatre. He died at his home, 67 Hillgate Place, Kensington, London, from cardiac arrest on 21 September 2006, and was survived by his wife, Tricia, and their three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 97679


Wharton, Michael Bernard (1913-2006), satirical journalist, was born Michael Bernhard Nathan on 19 April 1913 at 7 Glenhurst Road, Shipley, Yorkshire, the youngest child in the family of two sons and a daughter of Paul Sigismund Nathan, a woollen stuff merchant from a family of German-Jewish origin, and his wife, Bertha, 'nee' Wharton. As his father's wealth dwindled, his mother's conviction grew that her son should have been heir to Wharton Hall, Westmorland, with its deer park and long gallery, as he recounted in his memoir, 'The Missing Will' (1984). This title referred both to a lost testament that might restore his inheritance and to a lack of drive. As a boy he would stare for hours from the window at Nab Wood, where he first experienced the numinous. 
From Bradford grammar school Michael Nathan went in 1932 to Lincoln College, Oxford, on a county scholarship. He learnt to drink and, in 'an unremitting war on reality', joined a fellow Bradfordian in a game of their invention, West Riding Knife Throwing. This also entailed catching, and their hands were often bandaged ('The Missing Will', 45). Another friend said: 'He seemed to look at people as though they were animals at a fair' (ibid., 62). He took a third in classical moderations in 1934 but in the summer of 1936 was sent down for throwing a Scotch egg at high table in hall. He returned to Oxford one morning by permission to take his viva, very drunk. He did not gain a degree. On 17 July 1936, at Bournemouth register office, he married Joan Atkey, the 21-year-old daughter of William Atkey, estate agent. He described himself on the marriage certificate rather grandly as 'author'. At that time he was finishing a novel, 'Sheldrake', featuring Tibetan thought-forms in a Yorkshire mill-town, an adumbration of his journalism. It found a publisher only in 1958. 
His marriage was hidden from his parents until a son was born in February 1938, when he changed his surname to Wharton. He and his wife lived in a cottage in the Eden valley, Westmorland, a place he ever after loved, and campaigned to preserve. The rent was 10 shillings a month, and he regularly contributed to 'Punch' under the name Simon Crabtree, at $12 for 1000 words. He kept up contributions even while serving in the army during the Second World War. He rose to acting lieutenant-colonel as a staff officer in India. He was demobilized in 1946. Having left his wife and child he lived raffishly after the war, finding work with the BBC (where a report he saw said he was 'not really BBC material'; 'Missing Will', 214). For more than a decade he spent a day a week selecting morning stories for the radio. 
On 1 January 1957, having 'passed the night in a drunken phantasmagoria' ('Dubious Codicil', 3), Wharton began his first permanent job, writing a column in the 'Daily Telegraph' that he continued for forty-nine years. At first he assisted Colin Welch, who had begun the column fifteen months earlier, but from 1960 he wrote its 1000 words four days a week single-handed, resisting assistants. Headed 'Way of the world', it was signed Peter Simple. Readers were ignorant of its author, and the vignettes drawn by Michael ffolkes included one of Peter Simple as a tall, moustachio'd figure in a deerstalker. Sir Colin Coote, the editor of the 'Daily Telegraph', was not encouraging. 'Not too many skits please, Wharton', he would say (ibid., 12). His successor Maurice Green occasionally laughed at what he called Wharton's 'notes' (ibid., 167). 
Peter Simple's humour was black pessimism tempered by fantasy, influenced not by Beachcomber of the 'Daily Express' but by Myles na Gopaleen (Brian O'Nolan) of the 'Irish Times'. The columnar characters attracted Homeric epithets, such as Dr Spacely-Trellis, the go-ahead bishop of Bevindon, or Alderman Foodbotham, the 25 stone, crag-visaged, iron-watch-chained perpetual chairman of the Bradford city tramways and fine arts committee. A tutelary hero was Colonel Sibthorp (1783-1855), the reactionary MP who repelled the mainline railway from Lincoln. Wharton sided with such hated groups as Afrikaaners in South Africa and Serbs in the former Yugoslavia. 
Wharton was dogged by self-doubt, 'like an evil spirit, blighting life and hope', and haunted by a school report judging him 'passive and lacking in initiative'. Fascinated by his part-Jewish identity, he was aware of a 'persistent dream of literary fame and corresponding inability to live' ('Dubious Codicil', 72). In the 1960s attacks of unease and dread increased. In 1963, after being declared columnist of the year by Granada Television's 'What the Papers Say', his depression deepened. He spent ten days voluntarily in an asylum, and underwent electro-convulsive treatment, returning to work after five weeks. 
Wharton labelled his private life 'a horror comic' ('Dubious Codicil', 137). His second wife, Catherine Mary (Kate) Derrington (1931-1992; daughter of John George Frederick Derrington, electrical engineer), whom he had married on 19 December 1952, shared his taste for fantasy, and nocturnal drunken charades enacting the French Revolution or the battle of the Somme brought pyjama'd neighbours onto the pavement to dance with rage outside their windows. Despite ties of 'affection and intermittent lust', Wharton disliked Kate's growing dominance (ibid., 254). She had become the lover of Colin Welch, who spent part of his time with his own wife. In 1964 Wharton met Susan Daughne Moller, a schoolteacher thirteen years his junior, and daughter of Nils Henry Moller, barrister. They were to marry on 4 January 1974, but not until 1971, when his daughter with Kate was at university, did Wharton leave the house in Putney where Kate was bringing up two children of Colin Welch. Between marriages, alone in Prince of Wales Drive, Battersea, he invariably ate five fish-fingers for dinner, read into the small hours, and each day caught a combination of buses to Fleet Street, creating the column on the way. He often used the word 'masochism' to characterize his chosen 'life of routine boredom' (ibid., 221). 
In his early seventies Wharton seemed an inward man, peering through the upper lenses of his spectacles and making quiet remarks. He ended his column when the 'Telegraph' moved to the Isle of Dogs in 1987, but was persuaded to resume it for the 'Sunday Telegraph' by its editor, Charles Moore, then weekly for the 'Daily Telegraph' when Moore took up its editorship in 1995. Meanwhile 'The Missing Will' (1984) took his life to 1957; its sequel, 'A Dubious Codicil' (1991), painted astonishing comic scenes of drunken Fleet Street life, with a nightly theatre of the absurd in a pub called the Kings and Keys. Critics were struck by the vividness and honesty of these volumes. His last column appeared three days before his death, on 23 January 2006, of pneumonia in Wycombe Hospital. He was survived by his wife, Susan, and his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97680


Yellowlees, Sir Henry (1919-2006), medical officer, was born on 16 April 1919 at 3 Cumin Place, Edinburgh, the elder son and eldest of three children of Henry Yellowlees (1888-1971), psychiatrist, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Davis, a professional cellist. He spent his early childhood with his siblings David and Dorothy at The Retreat, a Quaker psychiatric centre in York, where his father was medical superintendent from 1922 to 1929 before moving to St Thomas's Hospital, London. He was educated at Bramcote preparatory school in Scarborough and then at Stowe School before reading medicine at University College, Oxford. In 1941 he joined the Royal Air Force, serving as a pilot and instructor until 1945. This delayed his entry into medical school at the Middlesex Hospital, and he graduated BM BCh in 1950. Meanwhile, on 21 August 1948, he had married Gwyneth Bramwell (Sally) Comber, (died 2001), a nurse two years his senior, the divorced wife of Andrew Stephen Charles Comber, and the daughter of Francis Joseph William Maddox, naval engineer. They had two daughters and one son. 
Yellowlees's first post was at the Middlesex as resident medical officer, and his effective management of an outbreak of meningitis among the staff was noted by the chief medical officer, Sir George Godber. Yellowlees gained extensive experience in the medical management of the National Health Service through appointments at the south-west regional hospital board (1954-9) and the north-west metropolitan regional hospital board (1959-63). In 1963 he accepted an invitation from Godber for a secondment to a civil service post at the Ministry of Health as a principal medical officer, and two years later he was appointed as a permanent senior principal medical officer. He worked closely with Godber, and was promoted to the position of deputy chief medical officer in 1967, shortly before the Ministry of Health was amalgamated into the Department of Health and Social Security. 
Yellowlees' succeeded Godber as chief medical officer in 1973 and served in that post for the next ten years, until his retirement in 1983, working for five secretaries of state for health: Sir Keith Joseph, Barbara Castle, David Ennals, Patrick Jenkin, and Norman Fowler. The post of chief medical officer was widely recognized as one of the most arduous within government. The occupant acted as a 'gatekeeper', ensuring that appropriate medical advice was provided for the secretary of state to react to health crises and also to develop new health policies and medical services; had responsibility for medical advice given to other government departments, including the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Education and Science, and the Home Office; and acted as a conduit between the government and the medical profession, helping with negotiations on such sensitive issues as doctors' pay, working conditions, medical education, and fitness to practise. It is testimony to Yellowlees' considerable managerial skills that he steered the governments he served through a number of crises, in addition to furthering the development of the medical profession and health service in Britain. 
Some of the most difficult situations that Yellowlees handled were related to the economic crises of the 1970s, which forced rationalizations in NHS budgets. The matter became politically complicated in 1974 when Barbara Castle determined to push through Labour's long-held manifesto pledge to remove 'pay beds' -- one of the final vestiges of private medicine -- from NHS hospitals. Yellowlees worked hard to restore the relations between the government and the medical profession, and was knighted KCB in 1975 (having been made a CB in 1971). During his tenure he also initiated some key health policies. He enabled the development of community medicine and accident and emergency medicine, drafted legislation that reduced the amount of lead in petrol, and made the wearing of car seat belts compulsory. He chaired the Committee on Medical Aspects of Food which developed daily nutritional guidelines, a topic he further promoted through his membership of the Council of the British Nutrition Foundation from 1973 to 1995. He was instrumental in reducing the number of hours worked by junior doctors, and helping women doctors to continue with their careers while raising families. 
Like previous chief medical officers Yellowlees served as a member of the General Medical Council (1979-89) and the Medical Research Council (1974-83). He was well-connected within the medical establishment both in Britain and overseas. He participated in annual meetings with American and Canadian health officials, and those of the World Health Organization. His time in office also coincided with the global elimination of smallpox, the discovery of Lassa fever, and the first cases of legionnaire's disease in Britain. When he retired as chief medical officer in 1983 he was appointed an adviser to the Ministry of Defence on the restructuring of the medical services of the armed forces. He then became a consultant for the European office of the World Health Organization, and played a significant role in the 1980s Balkans dispute by successfully negotiating with the Turks and Bulgarians for the provision of healthcare for refugees. He remained engaged with British medicine through his position on the council of the British Medical Association from 1986 to 1990, and chaired its group on euthanasia policy. 
Yellowlees's colleagues found him 'a joy to work with, always considerate of staff and aware of pressures on them, approachable, modest about his own considerable achievements, with a strong sense of humour and a charming manner' ('The Guardian', 12 April 2006). He was divorced in 1984, and in the same year he met (Patricia) Mary Porter ('b'. 1947/8), healthcare consultant, and daughter of William John McGowan, account supervisor; they married on 7 February 2001. Heart bypass surgery in 1997 gave Yellowlees a new lease of life, and he continued to enjoy gardening, walking by the sea, and listening to Gilbert and Sullivan operas. In his last years he found in humanism an expression of his core beliefs and requested a humanist funeral. He died at his home, 33 Lea Road, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, on 22 March 2006 of heart failure, and was cremated at Watford. He was survived by his second wife, Mary, and by the three children of his first marriage, Ian, Rosemary, and Linda, all of whom had followed their parents into medical or nursing careers. 


@@@@@


doc= 97682


Bingley, Juliet Martin, Lady Bingley (1925-2005), social worker, was born on 18 July 1925 at St Clere's Hall, Danbury, Essex, the third of four daughters of Reginald Martin Vick (1884-1971), consulting surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and his wife, Mary Kate ('b'. 1891), elder daughter of Sir Reginald James Neville Neville, first baronet, barrister and judge, of Sloley, Norfolk. She grew up with her three sisters in London in one of only two family houses in Harley Street. She attended King Alfred's School, Hampstead, which was co-educational and run without punishments or homework. Among her activities she attended spirited and energetic country dancing sessions at Cecil Sharp House. At the London School of Economics, then evacuated to Cambridge, she studied social administration. A life-changing experience was her placement with the Personal Services Society in Liverpool. For the first time she met racism, religious persecution, and poverty. She qualified as an almoner (medical social worker) in 1945 and started work at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London. 
On 7 August 1948 Juliet Vick married Alexander Noel Campbell (Alec) Bingley (1905-1972), a captain in the Royal Navy, and son of Robert Noel Glanville Bingley, tea planter. After their marriage they bought Hoddesdonbury, in Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, a farm mentioned in 'Domesday Book'. There she created a family home to which she was devoted for the rest of her life. She and her husband had three children: twins -- William and Charlotte Elizabeth 
(Liza; 'b'. 1950)
-- and Penelope 
(Polly; 'b'. 1954)
. In 1959 her husband, by now an admiral, was knighted KCB and appointed commander-in-chief, Mediterranean. The family went to live at Admiralty House in Valletta, Malta, where Juliet Bingley found full expression for her many talents. She became closely involved in reform of aspects of the Maltese health and social care system. The first president of Malta later said that her memorial was the change in attitude there to the importance of proper social welfare systems, especially for the old. She had met and become friends with Dom Mintoff, the prime minister, before she went to Malta. He was at odds with the British government, and she became an unofficial envoy, or 'messenger' as she put it, between him and the government. She continued to fulfil this role in the 1970s and 1980s, long after leaving the country, and for this and her work in promoting social welfare in Malta the Maltese government granted her its highest award, the companionship of Honour, in 1976. 
In 1961 Sir Alec Bingley was appointed commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, and Juliet Bingley became involved in improvements of the naval family welfare services. Two years later he retired from active service and returned to Hoddesdonbury. Juliet Bingley then began a long involvement with the National Association of Mental Health (later MIND), which culminated in four tumultuous years from 1979 as its national chairman. During this period the association changed from being an organization dominated by professional interests to one focused on the rights of those with mental health problems. MIND made a major contribution to the drafting of the 'Mental Health Act' of 1983. Another important development was an increased emphasis on the contribution of volunteers. 
In 1972 Alec Bingley died suddenly, at the age of sixty-seven, a devastating blow to his wife. Four days after his death Juliet Bingley decided that she should return to work as a medical social worker after an interval of twenty-four years. She obtained a part-time post at a small hospital in London, St Mark's, which specialized in disorders of the intestinal tract, and which was associated with St Bartholomew's. Many patients suffered from chronic or recurrent inflammatory bowel disease, and others suffered disorders of bowel function with an important emotional component. Juliet Bingley's warm and empathetic personality captivated patients and staff alike. She built up a close working relationship with both medical and nursing staff, and also with a psychotherapist. Her concern extended to the welfare of every member of the hospital staff, and she chaired a heads of staff committee. For this work she was awarded the Ellison Nash prize by St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1988, and was appointed MBE in 1990. 
In 1979 Juliet Bingley was a founding member of the National Association for Colitis and Crohn's Disease (NACC) and served on its governing council for twenty-three years, including a period as vice-chairman. During this time membership increased to 30,000. One of her particular contributions was the development of NACC In-Contact, a telephone enquiry and support service run by trained sufferers for sufferers. She also instigated and helped to run a welfare fund for those in financial need, and established a system of competitive awards for research into the psychological and social consequences of inflammatory bowel disease. 
Juliet Bingley was well built, with a fresh, open face and blue eyes. She was outgoing and fun to be with. She had a kind of inner radiance that brought out the best in those she came into contact with, and gave them the self-confidence to do themselves justice. People felt that she cared and that they could trust her implicitly. However, she had a steely resolve as well as charm and good humour in pursuing her goals. In later years she discovered a love of writing poetry and enjoying it with the Ware Poets Group. She published a volume of her poems, 'What It Was and What It Was Not' (2002), and circulated privately some charming books of illustrated stories written for her grandchildren. She collected Staffordshire figures and took great delight in the practical details of running Hoddesdonbury, and creating there a place of welcome for her family and wide circle of friends. 
After retirement from St Mark's in 1990 Juliet Bingley worked for twelve years as counsellor for a large general practice in Welwyn, and later for Danesbury, a unit providing care, rehabilitation, and respite for adults, especially young adults with serious physical illness. She supported innumerable local activities and good causes. The local newspaper in its obituary called her 'the People's Champion' ('Hertfordshire Mercury', 21 Jan 2005). She died on 16 January 2005, at Queen Elizabeth II Hospital, Welwyn Garden City, following a stroke. Hoddesdon parish church was packed for her funeral, as was Christ Church, Spitalfields, London, for her memorial service on 17 October that year. She was survived by her three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97694


Hibbert, Sir Jack (1932-2005), statistician and civil servant, was born at the Huddersfield Municipal Maternity Home, Huddersfield, Yorkshire, on 14 February 1932, the only child of William Collier Hibbert, a grocery branch manager, later master baker, and his wife, Ivy Annie, 'nee' Wigglesworth. After education at Leeds grammar school (1942-9) he gained entry to the civil service in 1950. He spent the next two years on national service with the Royal Air Force, then worked with the Exchequer and Audit Department in London and, from 1955, at the War Pensions Office near Blackpool. On 27 April 1957, in Selby, Yorkshire, he married Joan Clarkson ('b'. 1933), also an assistant auditor in the Exchequer and Audit Department, and daughter of Francis Clarkson, railway storeman. They subsequently had two sons and a daughter. 
To improve his prospects Hibbert joined the Central Statistical Office (CSO) in London on 2 October 1960. His talents were quickly recognized, but a suitable university degree was needed for the top posts. Studying part-time and then full-time in 1965-6, Hibbert graduated BSc (Econ) at the London School of Economics. Returning to the CSO as a statistician, he enhanced further his already considerable reputation in national accounting, a subject that fascinated him. He became a chief statistician in 1970 and an assistant director in 1977. 
Hibbert also came to be highly regarded in national accounting circles beyond the United Kingdom. He made a favourable impression at the 1975 conference of the International Association of Research in Income and Wealth. Participating frequently in later conferences, he served on the association's council from 1985 to 1992. In 1981, when high inflation had led to concerns about accounting conventions, the OECD and Eurostat commissioned Hibbert to examine the treatment of inflation in national accounts. The problems highlighted in his report, 'Measuring the Effects of Inflation on Income, Saving, and Wealth' (1983), were among those addressed later in the review of the international system of national accounts. Hibbert might have been expected to make a major contribution to the review, but, following a period as under-secretary in the Department of Trade and Industry (1982-5), in 1985 he succeeded Sir John Boreham as director of the CSO and head of the Government Statistical Service, holding the post until 1992. He did, though, help to ensure that the review was brought to a conclusion when differences threatened to prolong it unduly. The outcome then provided the basis also of the EU's own system. 
Hibbert became head of the Government Statistical Service when cuts had weakened it and there was mounting criticism, particularly of the reliability of unemployment statistics -- revised following changes to benefit rules. In 1987 and 1988 discrepancies within the national accounts became so large that it was unclear how the economy was developing. The Treasury and civil service select committee called for an investigation. The Pickford review, launched in June 1988, resulted in the transfer of more responsibilities to the CSO and the establishment of the much enlarged CSO as a separate department. The major changes introduced in 1989 under Hibbert's leadership provided the basis for subsequent improvements to the quality of economic statistics, and were also the first of several involving greater centralization in UK official statistics. 
The changes were, however, not those sought by critics outside government. In November 1989 the Royal Statistical Society established a working party on official statistics. In December 1989 the society and the Institute of Statisticians convened a meeting about public confidence in official statistics. Hibbert's written reply to the criticisms, published in the 'Journal of the Royal Statistical Society' (1990), reveals especially clearly his thinking about the issues. The society's working party 'found no evidence of a lack of integrity among government statisticians', but considered that 'the organisational and operational framework' had to be changed ('Official statistics: counting with confidence', 'Journal of the Royal Statistical Society', series A, 154, 1991, 23-44). Its recommendations had little impact on the Conservative administration, but had more appeal to the Labour Party, which gained power in 1997. Hibbert was a member of the Royal Statistical Society's council for the sessions 1989-93 and a vice-president in 1990-91. 
Hibbert was made KCB in 1990. He possessed integrity as well as technical expertise. Colleagues did not doubt that he would have resigned if required to do something he thought improper. He supported people facing difficulties. He was always calm, and in private had a friendly, sympathetic manner. He was less at ease with publicity and with press briefings, preferring to confine himself to issues he had considered carefully beforehand. In an address before he retired in 1992 he reflected on his experience and achievements (Hibbert, 'Official statistics'). 
In retirement Hibbert retained his interest in statistics. Comments in 2005 on the Atkinson report about measuring government output and productivity, and frequent letters to the press, demonstrated that he had lost little of his incisiveness. Nevertheless retirement allowed more time for other interests. Bridge had long been a passion and he became a national master. He and his wife, Joan, were members of Beckenham Bridge Club, whose 'Newsletter' carried a warm tribute after his death. In major competitions he partnered primarily Tim Lloyd-Williams and Marie Horlock, devising with Lloyd-Williams a bidding system called 'compromised club'. Hibbert and Robbie Kingston won the English Bridge Union senior pairs at Eastbourne in 2003. He was a member of the Reform Club; he and Joan enjoyed particularly meetings of the Thackeray Society, and they joined Hever Castle Golf Club, where in 1995 he won the seniors' cup. To Hibbert's amusement, his gambling successes provoked one national bookmaker to refuse his bets. 
Joan Hibbert supported her husband throughout his career, and he valued her opinions. For several years after retirement, Hibbert found himself caring increasingly for her, with support from their family, as Alzheimer's disease developed. Care in a nursing home eventually became essential. In later years he enjoyed the company of a circle of friends, with his last few years enriched by a close friendship with Ann Ramsay. Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease caused Hibbert's startlingly rapid decline and then death, on 23 August 2005 at the Princess Alice Hospice in Weybridge Hospital. His funeral, which was non-religious, took place on 6 September at Randalls Park crematorium, Leatherhead. He was survived by his wife, whose condition gradually deteriorated further, and by their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97701


Hayes, John Trevor (1929-2005), art historian and museum director, was born on 21 January 1929 at 18 Fursby Avenue, Finchley, London, the elder son of Leslie Thomas Hayes, actuary, and his wife, Gwendoline, 'nee' Griffiths. He was educated at Ardingly College and at Keble College, Oxford, where he graduated with a second-class degree in modern history in 1951. He went on to the University of London's Courtauld Institute of Art in 1952, where he gained a distinction in the postgraduate diploma in the history of art in 1954. In 1962 he received the degree of PhD from the Courtauld Institute for his thesis on the landscape paintings of Thomas Gainsborough. 
Hayes's first post was at the London Museum, where in 1954 he was appointed assistant keeper by the director, Sir Mortimer Wheeler. Four years later he was awarded a Commonwealth Fund fellowship that took him to the Institute of Fine Arts in New York and gave him the opportunity to travel across the United States to see public and private art collections. He forged many friendships during his year there and returned regularly over the following four decades. During his early years at the London Museum he organized a number of exhibitions, including in 1956 one on Anna Pavlova, which reflected his lifelong passion for ballet. In 1970 he was appointed director of the London Museum but the following years were difficult for him, since the proposed amalgamation with the Guildhall Museum and the plans to move from Kensington Palace to new premises, designed by Powell and Moya at London Wall, were not entirely to his liking. As director he appointed younger staff, established a modern department under the direction of Colin Sorensen, and, with very modest resources, continued to organize successful exhibitions such as that devoted to Mary Quant's London in 1973. 
When in 1974 he failed to be appointed director of the new Museum of London, Hayes applied successfully to succeed Roy Strong as director of the National Portrait Gallery. His twenty years as director witnessed a highly successful period in the gallery's history. Outstanding monographic exhibitions like those devoted to Van Dyck in England, Sir Peter Lely (both curated by Sir Oliver Millar), Johan Zoffany, and Sir Thomas Lawrence continued to enhance the gallery's burgeoning reputation as a centre for scholarship in historic British portraiture. Shortage of space at the gallery's cramped St Martin's Place premises was an issue that Hayes urgently wished to address and, although plans to move to the South Bank or to Canary Wharf in the later 1980s were not supported by the trustees, in 1987 Hayes persuaded Margaret Thatcher's government to purchase the freeholds on Orange Street, immediately to the north of the gallery, which allowed for expansion to house the gallery's extensive archives, administrative and curatorial offices, and conservation departments. In 1989 the newly remodelled ground floor of the gallery, with new twentieth-century galleries and the Wolfson exhibition gallery providing more space, was opened. Substantial funding for both these projects came from private donations, notably $2 million from the Heinz Foundation, and the new Orange Street extension opened in November 1993, just months before Hayes's retirement. 
Hayes was a notable exponent of outstations in the regions for the National Portrait Gallery, believing in the principle of putting on public display as many of the nation's pictures as possible. In 1979 collaboration with the National Trust resulted in the opening of Beningbrough Hall, near York, where many eighteenth-century works not on display at the gallery could be shown. A few years later Bodelwyddan Castle in Denbighshire became available for the display of nineteenth-century portraits. Hayes also pioneered the 'acceptance-in-lieu' scheme, which allowed works allocated to public museums in lieu of tax to be retained in their historic setting, such as the fine group of paintings by Mytens and Gainsborough at Arundel Castle. 
During Hayes's directorship the National Portrait Gallery made many important acquisitions, especially of eighteenth-century figures, including portraits by Reynolds of Laurence Sterne, by Gainsborough of J. C. Bach, and by Hogarth of the mathematician William Jones, as well as superb marble busts of Lord Chesterfield by Roubiliac and of Alexander Pope by Rysbrack. A subtle shift in policy could be detected in the gallery's attempts to ensure that acquisitions were not only of important historical figures but were high-quality works by leading artists. Hayes also had a profound interest in contemporary portraiture and in 1979 persuaded the trustees to extend the collecting policy to allow commissions. In 1980 he established the annual portrait award, initially sponsored by John Player and then later by BP, which led to the gallery's significant role in the revival of portraiture in the 1980s. In addition to acquiring important modern works like Graham Sutherland's 'Self Portrait' Hayes commissioned such popular works as Bryan Organ's portrait of Lady Diana Spencer, just before her marriage to the prince of Wales in 1981, and he also encouraged talented young portrait painters like Sarah Raphael. 
Throughout his tenure at both the London Museum and the National Portrait Gallery Hayes remained a prolific author. Soon after his arrival at the London Museum he began to publish learned articles in the 'Burlington Magazine' and 'Apollo' and he continued his profound interest in the work of the eighteenth-century painter Thomas Gainsborough. In 1960 he organized a small exhibition of the artist's work for the Arts Council and in 1970 he published the first full catalogue, 'The Drawings of Thomas Gainsborough'. This was followed a year later by 'Gainsborough as a Printmaker' and in 1982 by a catalogue, 'The Landscape Paintings of Thomas Gainsborough'. His catalogue entries were of unprecedented thoroughness, despite the lack of hard evidence about the dating of many of Gainsborough's works, and, after the death of Sir Ellis Waterhouse in 1985, Hayes was for some time unchallenged as the leading Gainsborough scholar. He organized two further exhibitions of the artist's work for the Tate and the Grand Palais in Paris in 1980-81 and for Ferrara Arte in Italy in 1998. His last major publication on Gainsborough was an edition of 'The Letters of Thomas Gainsborough' (2001). His interests were, however, much more wide-ranging and he published books on Rowlandson in 1972 and on Graham Sutherland in 1980. As an accomplished cataloguer he was also in demand internationally and his catalogue of the British paintings in the National Gallery of Art, Washington (1992), was followed by a catalogue of the British paintings in the Cincinnatti Art Museum, which remained unpublished at the time of his death. 
Hayes's shy and diffident public manner could be misleading, and he enjoyed the companionship of his friends and the conviviality of the Beefsteak and Garrick clubs. He was a keen tennis player in his youth at Keble and an avid devotee of the opera and ballet. Among his greatest pleasures was foreign travel, especially by train and road. He always claimed his fearlessness as a driver resulted from learning to drive in Manhattan in the late 1950s. Excursions abroad were meticulously planned to ensure stopovers where Michelin-starred restaurants were to be found so that he could indulge his passion for excellent food. He was, however, essentially an intensely private man, and friends were often bemused that despite knowing him for decades he remained as enigmatic as on first meeting. His management style as a museum director was to delegate as much as possible, not only to give his colleagues experience but so that he could continue to pursue his own research and writing. At the time of his death he was preparing a catalogue of the subject pictures of Gainsborough and was honorary editor of the project to produce a full catalogue of Gainsborough's portraits. 
Hayes was chairman of the Walpole Society from 1981 to 1996 and vice-president from 1996 until his death. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1971 and was appointed CBE in 1986. He never married and his only brother, Peter, predeceased him. In August 2005 he suffered a severe stroke which left him partially paralysed and with speech difficulties. He died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, from complications related to his condition on Christmas day 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 97708


Auld, William (1924-2006), Esperanto poet and writer, was born on 6 November 1924 at Hainault, Lesney Park Road, Erith, Kent, the son of George Auld, a draughtsman and structural engineer, who composed and recited comic verse, and his wife, Williamina Rose (Minnie), 'nee' Roy, shorthand typist. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 24 Bexley Road, Crayford, Kent. His father's ambition to become an actor had been thwarted at the age of fifteen, on the death of his own father (a soldier in a Scottish regiment). Auld's mother came from a more well-to-do family: her father owned a company that produced a particular type of cloth used in mines. Auld had a sister, almost eight years younger than him. Perhaps because of the age difference, they had little in common and were brought up almost as only children. 
When Auld was nine the family left Kent and returned to its roots in Scotland. He won a scholarship to the prestigious Allan Glen's School in Glasgow, where he excelled at sport. He ran, and played football, rugby, and hockey. He was also an avid reader. From the age of ten he was a regular visitor to the public library in the Gorbals district of Glasgow, where he found books in such languages as Russian and Polish, reflecting the cosmopolitanism of the city. It was in another library, this time in Glasgow itself, that Auld discovered books in the international language Esperanto. In addition, as a twelve-year-old boy scout, he encountered the scout promise in Esperanto, and asked his troop-leader if he knew about the language. The scoutmaster obliged by giving Auld 'Step by Step in Esperanto', by Montagu C. Butler. From this book Auld acquired a sound theoretical knowledge of the language. However, it was not until he was sixteen that he persuaded his friend John Francis (subsequently a member of the so-called Scottish school of Esperanto writing) to learn Esperanto, and they began to use the language between themselves. At this time Auld's mother bought him a 'Bible' in Esperanto, hoping -- unsuccessfully -- to convert her son from his atheism. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War Auld's family moved to Helensburgh, where he completed his schooling. In 1942 he volunteered for the RAF and underwent pilot training in Rhodesia. Two years later he came top of fifty candidates for high-level reconnaissance work. In this capacity he piloted Spitfires in north Africa, the Near and Middle East, Italy, Greece, and Palestine. After the war he was briefly a test pilot. 
In 1947 Auld enrolled at Glasgow University to study English language and literature, meanwhile continuing to hone his Esperanto. He would meet John Francis and the Esperanto poet and essayist Reto Rossetti, and the three would test each other's knowledge of obscure Esperanto vocabulary. Encouraged by Rossetti, Auld began to read widely in Esperanto, and to contribute to the periodical 'Esperanto en Skotlando'. 
Also in 1947 Auld became engaged to Margaret Barr (Meta) Stewart, two years younger and whom he had known since he was fifteen. She was the daughter of William Stewart, ship plater. At her request they decided not to marry until 1952, to allow her to complete her training as a nurse. They eventually married in Clydebank on 8 August 1952. To help support his wife and family (a daughter, Judith, was born in 1954, and a son, Roy, in 1956), Auld found work in a factory manufacturing bogies for railway vehicles. He finally graduated MA from Glasgow University in 1955 and obtained a teaching qualification in 1956. He taught in Johnstone and Paisley before moving in 1960 to be head of department at Lornshill Academy, Alloa, where two years later he was promoted to depute rector (deputy headteacher). He remained at the school until retirement. In 1963 the family moved to Dollar, Clackmannanshire, and set up home at 20 Harviestoun Road, where Auld lived for the rest of his life. 
Much of Auld's most important writing dates from his time as a teacher or trainee teacher, including the epic poem 'La infana raso' ('The infant race'), published in 1956 and described in a contemporary review as 'almost without parallel' in Esperanto (Waringhien, 116). The poem deals with the insignificance of the human race in the vastness of space and time. A collection of poems, 'Unufingraj melodioj' ('Melodies for one finger'), followed in 1960. In 1952 appeared the first of many translations into Esperanto, Jack London's 'The Whale Tooth'. Auld's translations later encompassed Byron, Burns, 'The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam', and, by 1997, Tolkien's 'The Lord of the Rings'. 
In 1999 Auld became the first Esperanto writer to be recommended for the Nobel prize in literature, by PEN. He was again nominated in 2004 and 2006. He died on 11 September 2006 at Hillview Court Care Centre, Sauchie, near Dollar, after a stroke. He was survived by his wife, Meta, and their two children. He was buried according to family wish in the parish church in Dollar on 18 September. 


