@@@@@


doc= 97710


Berman, Nestor Montague (1913-2006), film and television producer, was born on 16 August 1913 at 25 Whitechapel Road, London, the son of Israel (otherwise Isadore) Reuben Berman, musician, and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' Josephvitz. He was of Jewish descent. He was educated at University College School, Hampstead, and entered the film industry in 1930 as a camera assistant at Twickenham Studios. He then worked as a camera operator at Teddington Studios (1934-8), where he filmed Michael Powell's 'The Edge of the World' (1937), and at Ealing Studios (1938-40). On 11 November 1940, at Hendon register office, he married Ella Barbara Joan Humphrey, an eighteen-year-old hairdresser, and daughter of Stanley Frederick Humphrey, commercial traveller. 
During the Second World War Berman served in the army, attaining the rank of sergeant, and was transferred to the Eighth Army kinematograph unit in north Africa, where he met Robert S. Baker; they worked on the documentary 'The Way from Germany' (1946). After demobilization Berman continued as a camera operator on several films before forming a production company, Tempean Films, with Baker. They made two low-budget comedies, 'A Date with a Dream' (1948), financed by friends and relatives, and 'Melody Club' (1949), both starring Terry-Thomas, before becoming firmly established as second feature producers. They were a complementary team: Berman looked after the finances and cinematography, while Baker focused on script development and direction. Their reputation as efficient and capable producers came through a very tight control of budgets, scripting, casting, and direction, using a limited number of actors and directors (principally John Gilling). To reduce costs they often filmed on location, which allowed Berman more scope as the cinematographer and gave Tempean films a distinctive look in what was a largely undifferentiated market. 
Tempean's output of over thirty, mainly crime, films changed from the staunchly British early ones -- including 'The Frightened Man' (1952) -- to faster paced American thrillers using second-drawer American stars and designed for the American market. Many, including 'Impulse' (1954), starring Arthur Kennedy and directed by the blacklisted Cy Endfield, were indebted to 'film noir'. Under a separate banner, CIPA, Baker and Berman produced three films in Ireland, before graduating into first features, beginning with 'Sea of Sand' (1958), a gripping war film set in the north African desert. Berman directed as well as produced 'The Siege of Sidney Street' (1960), based on the events of 1911, and the luridly melodramatic 'The Hellfire Club' (1961), shot in colour. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 2 November 1956 Berman married Ursula Anne Sharp ('b'. 1934), actress, and daughter of Percy William Sharp, colliery agent; they had one daughter. 
The strict discipline of low-budget film-making was the foundation of Berman's and Baker's success after they moved into television production, working for Lew Grade's Independent Television Corporation, having secured the rights to Leslie Charteris's gentleman outlaw, the Saint. Roger Moore proved to be perfect casting as Simon Templar, and 'The Saint' (1962-9) was a major international success, changing to colour halfway through. By contrast 'Gideon's Way' (1964), based on the novels by J. J. Marric (John Creasey), was a sober, realistic police procedural starring John Gregson as Commander George Gideon of Scotland Yard, making expert use of London locations. 'The Baron' (1966) blended the two, with the American Steve Forrest playing a London antiques dealer who is also a secret agent. 
Having broken with Baker, Berman set up Scoton Productions with the scriptwriter Dennis Spooner, who had written over half the episodes of 'The Baron'. With Berman as producer and occasional writer, Spooner as script supervisor, and a stable team of writers and directors, Scoton produced five further series, beginning with 'The Champions' (1968-9), a conflation of the spy thriller and superhero adventure story. 'Department S' (1969-70), in which the three protagonists solve cases that have baffled conventional law agencies, was more popular, especially the foppish character of Jason King (Peter Wyngarde), the professional crime writer turned amateur detective. In 'Jason King' (1971-2) Wyngarde's hair, clothing, and mannerisms became more extravagantly camp. In between Berman and Spooner produced 'Randall and Hopkirk (Deceased)' (1969-70), a combination of supernatural fantasy and hard-boiled thriller about two slightly seedy London-based private detectives, Jeff Randall (Mike Pratt) and Marty Hopkirk (Kenneth Cope), the latter dead but returning to give his partner a helping hand. Scoton's final series, 'The Adventurer' (1972-3), starring Gene Barry as a wealthy government agent posing as a film star to travel the world, was stale and lacklustre. 
A talented cinematographer, Berman prided himself on his efficiency, 'orderliness', and quality control, and he had a reputation of being ruthless. These qualities enabled him to prosper in an intensely competitive market. However, his best-remembered films and television series also showed a degree of imagination and inventiveness that testified to his creativity as well as his business acumen. He retired after 'The Adventurer', but lived to see several of his television series becoming cult hits and remade. He died on 14 June 2006 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital of bronchopneumonia and severe aortic stenosis. He was survived by his wife, Ursula, and daughter, Charlotte. 


@@@@@


doc= 97721


Cadbury, Peter Egbert (1918-2006), aviator and businessman, was born on 6 February 1918 at 6 Kimberley Terrace, Great Yarmouth, the elder son of Sir Egbert Cadbury (1893-1967), then a flight commander in the Royal Naval Air Service, and his wife, Mary Forbes, 'nee' Phillips. He attended Leighton Park School, the Quaker establishment founded by his grandfather George Cadbury, a member of the Cadbury chocolate family, and then went to Trinity College, Cambridge. But his interests were fired more by the exploits of his father, a First World War air ace who shot down two zeppelins and was promoted air commodore before becoming managing director of the chocolate business (and being knighted in 1957). 
Cadbury was taught to fly by his father at the age of seventeen and in 1940 he joined the Fleet Air Arm. He was seconded to the Ministry of Aircraft Production, where he became one of the test pilots assigned to test the new Meteor jet aircraft. It was a high-risk profession and many of his colleagues died. But Cadbury survived to become a caricature of the dashing pilot, rarely without a fast car, a pretty girl, and a gung-ho quip, and always looking for an argument. He rejoiced in his nickname, the Cad. When he married Eugenie Benedicta Down-Byrne at Westminster register office on 13 December 1947 the legendary fighter pilot Douglas Bader was best man. Cadbury's first wife was three years younger than him, daughter of Major Ewen Cameron Bruce, army officer, and the former wife of St John Down-Byrne. They had a son and a daughter. 
In 1945 Cadbury had accepted an invitation from the Liberals to contest Stroud in the election of that year, because of his family's traditional links with the party. He reputedly told the electors, 'If you don't like any of [my views], I can change them because I only learned them yesterday' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 April 2006). Nevertheless he still managed to win 30 per cent of the vote. Soon afterwards he joined his natural home, the Conservative Party, and spent eight years at the bar (1946-54). This included a spell as an assistant prosecutor at the Nuremberg trials, where he accompanied his godfather, the formidable Norman Birkett. He showed no interest in working for the family business and his own high-profile commercial exploits were later a contrast, and often an embarrassment, to the rigorous standards of corporate governance associated with his more strait-laced Cadbury cousins. 
Cadbury's business career began in 1954 when he borrowed $75,000 from his father to buy the Keith Prowse ticket agency. Block bookings by Prowse could determine success or failure in the West End theatre and when Cadbury, who backed his own middlebrow tastes, declared that he only supported shows that his mother would like, John Osborne bemoaned the fact that plays should depend on 'catching the fancy of a tasteless man's tasteless mother' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 April 2006). He floated the business in 1960 for $1.5 million, a rapid profit. He remained chairman until 1971, in spite of a rebellion by his fellow directors about his autocratic style in 1964. 
Cadbury was attracted by the profits in commercial television, launched in 1955 and memorably described by Lord Thomson as 'a licence to print money'. He became a director of Tyne Tees in 1957. Then he sought what the 'Daily Express' called 'the last big plum' ('Daily Express', 17 Dec 1959), the west country franchise. He had few local connections and later described himself as driving down with only a copy of 'Who's Who'. He still assembled a formidable consortium including the TUC, lord lieutenants, and Daphne du Maurier. It beat eleven other bids. Westward Television was launched on 29 April 1961. But extravagant spending on local promotion and an overrun on purpose-built studios combined with a new government-imposed advertising duty to bring an early crisis and lay-offs. Cadbury fulminated publicly against the duty and the encroachment of neighbouring franchises, and demanded the expansion of the region to take in Bristol. In 1970 the board voted him out; one member said he was 'sick and tired of his wild statements' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 April 2006). However, he was back eight days later thanks to his control of the majority of voting shares. 
Cadbury's control of Westward brought him to public notice. The station made a genuine connection with its region and was consistently regarded as the friendliest, if sometimes the most amateur, of the ITV stations. He ran it mainly from London. When he drove down to Plymouth in one of his fast cars -- a Ferrari or a Bentley -- he would head for the bar, the pretty girls, and the fruit machine. Many of the staff idolized him and he treated them with a mixture of challenging demand 'if at first you don't succeed, you are fired' (private information) -- and encouraging delegation. As one producer put it, 'he was good to work for particularly when he wasn't there' (private information). 
As television became more regulated, however, Cadbury's autocratic style and choleric behaviour, usually in full public view and often in the newspaper letter columns, led to problems. Speeding led to confrontations with the police, and he began a vendetta against the local chief constable, attempting to keep him off Westward transmissions. He was charged with wasting police time over an anonymous letter alleging local authority corruption and also for shooting protected geese. It didn't help that his letters were routinely written on Westward notepaper. When, in frustration with local airline services, Cadbury founded his own airline on the Westward budget, the licence renewal due in 1980 looked increasingly unlikely. His solution was to bring in Lord Harris of Greenwich, a former minister in the Home Office (which allocated the licences). The tactic backfired as Harris sniffed the political wind and told Cadbury that with his behaviour, they did not stand 'a snowball's chance in hell' of renewal. Harris persuaded the board to vote him out but the staff petitioned for reinstatement. Cadbury reluctantly decided not to force the issue and left the company in early 1980. When the franchise was refused, he sent Harris a telegram asking what it was like 'to be a snowball in hell' ('The Guardian', 27 April 2006). Later he attempted and failed to buy MG and the Playboy Club but bizarrely acquired a loss-making magazine, 'Working Woman', where he sacked the feminist editor and soon closed it. 
Cadbury's first marriage was dissolved in 1968 and on 15 April 1970, at Kensington register office, he married Jennifer Mary Victoria Morgan-Jones (later well known as the businesswoman Jennifer D'Abo (1945-2003)), whom he had employed at Keith Prowse. The daughter of Michael William Vernon Hammond-Maude, land agent, she had already supported him through Westward crises and he later explained their divorce in 1976 by saying that 'she was a better entrepreneur than I am' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 April 2006). On 29 July 1976 he married, as his third wife, at Chelsea register office, (Angela) Jane Mead, a 36-year-old divorcee, and daughter of Harry St George, army officer. They had two sons. Cadbury meanwhile ran through a succession of grand country houses, where he regularly quarrelled with neighbours, at Preston Candover, near Basingstoke, Hampshire, where he had his own airstrip, at Lyneham House in Devon, where he complained of 'police harassment', and finally at Upton Grey Lodge, Upton Grey, also near Basingstoke. When it was burgled in 1994, he resigned from the Conservative Party criticizing its failure on law and order, and announced that he slept with a shotgun under his pillow. In 1999 thieves broke in again and their haul included his shotgun. He replaced it with a crossbow. Over 400 of his former staff turned out at a dinner in his honour in 2001, and others regularly visited after he suffered a major stroke in 2004. He died of a further stroke at Upton Grey Lodge on 17 April 2006, and was survived by his third wife, Jane, and five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97722


Campbell, Ambrose (1919-2006), musician and bandleader, was born Oladipupo Adekoya Campbell in Lagos, Nigeria, on 19 August 1919, the third of four sons in the family of six children of James, G. M., or Adekoya Campbell, a minister in the West African Episcopal church, and his wife, Phoebe Ibidun Adekoya. His father was an Ijebu of Sierra Leonean descent and his mother was Ijebu-Yoruba. Oladipupo (Oladipo) Campbell sang in his father's church choir as a child, and at night, accompanied by his fellow choristers, escaped from the family compound to join seamen and 'rascal boys' at the palm-wine shops where they gathered to drink and make music, playing guitars and simple percussion instruments. Singing and playing on a tin can with these well-travelled older men, he absorbed a wide variety of cultural influences, and adopted the name Ambrose to avoid bringing his family into disrepute: his father believed that playing music made his son a beggar. He left home aged fourteen in reaction to his father's restrictions, and found shelter in the home of the Nigerian nationalist Herbert Heelas Macaulay. At the age of sixteen he was apprenticed as a newspaper printer. He bought a guitar but when he joined an itinerant band he was playing a tambourine, known as 'eight corners' in Lagos, where it was an instrument of symbolic significance believed to have the power to stimulate mental and spiritual consciousness. With the Jolly Boys Orchestra, a group distinguished by the penny-whistle flute of Sunday Harbour Giant, he played for tips, and made his first recording in 1939. 
In wartime Campbell found work as a seaman. He saw England for the first time in 1940; he jumped ship in Liverpool two years later and moved to London. A slight physique ill equipped him for seafaring, but on a third voyage he reached South America, where he encountered Latin American music, and New York, where he and his shipmates played their guitars and drums in Harlem bars. He was greatly affected by the deaths of comrades at sea and did not want to return. He managed to prosper in wartime London in the face of widespread racial antipathy and deprivation, and made a mark in Camden Town, where he joined Cockney pub 'sing-alongs' and played music with friends. In 1942 he formed a relationship with Ida Margaret Gould ('b'. 1924/5), a restaurant waitress, and daughter of Noah Gould, a general dealer. They had a daughter, Dawn Adeyinka ('b'. 1944), and a son, Ambrose Oladipo ('b'. 1945). 
After the war Campbell formed a band with percussionist friends in response to taunts about the integrity of African music; he was joined by the guitarist Brewster Hughes, another member of the Jolly Boys from Lagos. They played 'highlife', the popular west African dance music, for student dances, and in 1946 accompanied the Ballets Negres, the first black British dance company, and visited Paris. With Campbell playing guitar as well as percussion, and after several changes of personnel, the band became the West African Rhythm Brothers, the name under which most of their 10 inch 78 rpm shellac records were made. Campbell's attractive singing voice, with its 'sad, strong, life-loving tones' (MacInnes, 'Highlife Today'), marked him out as leader, although Hughes was the group's main guitarist and its spokesman. The association with dancers continued when they formed a working relationship with the African-American choreographer and dance-teacher Buddy Bradley. In 1949 Campbell concentrated on the guitar. He studied with Ade Bashorun, a Lagosian who had joined the band playing bongos, and with the Trinidadian jazz musician Lauderic Caton, and was seen playing this instrument when the band made their television debut in 1948 supporting the work of the Nigerian sculptor Ben Enwonwu. 
In London Campbell's joyful music was an antidote to post-war austerity. More than two decades before the popularity of Afro-beat as a genre, he reinvigorated popular music with the gentle 'sunshine' sound of highlife, singing in Yoruba and accompanied by plangent guitars and by drummers who played melodies as well as keeping time. In 1952 the band found a base in London's West End when the Nigerian entrepreneur Ola Dosunmu opened the Abalabi, immortalized as the Beni Bronze by MacInnes (1957). Musicians, journalists, jazz fans, and intellectuals went there and to its successor, Club Afrique, to dance and drink, to savour the Nigerian atmosphere and food, and mix with Soho's African contingent. Nor did Campbell neglect the wider African community; his was the first visiting African band to play in Manchester's Moss Side. 
The West African Rhythm Brothers became a ubiquitous presence in jazz circles, where their intricate 'Afro-rhythms' coincided with a growing awareness of the African origins of black American music. Yoruba music was rooted in religious symbolism and cultural function, but in Britain Campbell moved beyond tradition. The influence of jazz and calypso was strong in west Africa during this period, and Campbell's own association with jazz musicians fired his imagination, leading him to augment the band with Caribbean instrumentalists -- their clarinet, saxophone, and muted trumpet attracted a wider audience -- and Adam Fiberesima, a Nigerian Ijo whose percussive piano playing emphasized the Latin American element present in highlife and built a fuller sound. When the band visited Nigeria in 1957 Campbell recruited exponents of the talking drum ('gan-gan'), in order, he said, to further 'enrich' the texture. 
In 1962 Campbell spent six months on Italy's Adriatic coast, where his audience included Jacqueline Kennedy, but back in London the growing popularity of music based on rock 'n' roll forced him to diversify from his earlier repertory and he flirted with a group of younger musicians, and played the twist. On 12 December 1964 he married Elizabeth Jane Graham-Smith ('b'. 1940), a riding instructor, and daughter of Richard Alan Graham-Smith, schoolmaster. They had two sons, Danny Adekoya ('b'. 1962) and Christopher Oladipo ('b'. 1964). When they separated Campbell formed a nightclub act with Cleo Howard, an Englishwoman whom he taught to play drums. 
Gentle, balding, and softly spoken, Campbell was a dreamer who lived for the day. He survived through his ability to attract support and friendship across class and cultural divides. The record producer Denny Cordell was an admirer, and in 1972 he persuaded Campbell to move to the USA and join him and the Oklahoman singer and pianist Leon Russell in a production company. He toured and recorded with Russell's band as a percussionist, returning briefly to Nigeria in 1979 to refute rumours of his death, then moved to Nashville and continued working with Russell and other popular musicians. In 1980, in order to support the man he claimed as his spiritual adviser, Russell opened the Ambrose Campbell World Video Studio in Burbank, California. In the USA Campbell married Antoinette (surname unknown) about 1973; their daughter, Funmilayo, was born in 1976. In 2004 he returned to England, precipitating a revival of interest in his work; he was interviewed and some of his recordings were reissued on CD. He died in Plymouth on 22 June 2006 from an acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage and cancer of the stomach. 
Campbell occupied a unique position as a traditional African artist. Respected by the jazz community and admired for his 'authenticity' by musicians like the saxophonist Ronnie Scott, who described Campbell as 'a bit special... a musicologist' (interview with V. Wilmer, 1991), he was exposed to jazz modernism, itself in part an outcome of African-American movements for self-determination and racial equality. Appreciation of his music developed in a context in which Afro-Cuban rhythms, associated with black cultural nationalism, crossed the Atlantic and remained a component in popular music. Predicting figures of future significance, in 1952 the critic Ernest Borneman chose Campbell's drummers for their potential to 'provide tomorrow's British horn-men with backing as interesting as any that [the Cuban percussionists] Machito and Chano Pozo... provided for [Charlie] Parker and [Dizzy] Gillespie' ('Melody Maker', 22 March 1952). 


@@@@@


doc= 97723


Castleman, Christopher Norman Anthony (1941-2006), merchant banker, was born Christopher Norman Phillips on 23 June 1941 at St Joseph's Nursing Home, Beaconsfield, the son of Stanley Howard Phillips, a P&O purser then serving in the Royal Naval Reserve, and his wife, Joan Doris, 'nee' Bennett-Levy. He was given the third name Anthony as an infant and adopted his stepfather's surname of Castleman as a schoolboy. He was educated at Harrow School and Clare College, Cambridge, where he took a first in law. After graduation in 1963 he joined the middle-ranking merchant bank M. Samuel & Co. Two years later it was acquired by Philip Hill Higginson, the combined firm, Hill Samuel, becoming one of the City's largest merchant banks. Hill Samuel was the creation of Kenneth Keith, one of the most forceful merchant bankers of the post-war decades. His ambition was to build a top City firm, and his philosophy was 'big is beautiful'. Keith insisted on hard work and professionalism, and disdained the gentlemanly amateurism that was widespread in the City at that time. Castleman became his foremost protege. The year of the creation of Hill Samuel also saw another merger -- Castleman's marriage on 30 October 1965 to Sarah Victoria Stockdale (1942/3-1979), a secretary, and daughter of Frank Alleyne Stockdale, a county court judge. They had a son and a daughter. 
Working on the corporate finance side of the business, Castleman advanced rapidly in the firm. Keith entrusted him with the launch of Hill Samuel Australia, of which he was general manager from 1970 to 1972. (In 1985 it combined with other interests to become Macquarie Bank, one of Australia's leading financial institutions, and Castleman joined the board.) After returning to London in 1972 he was promoted to director in the corporate finance department. In 1976 he became chief executive of the New York office and in 1978 he was dispatched to run the South African subsidiary. Profits grew 60 per cent over the two years he was at the helm in Johannesburg, establishing him as heir-apparent among the younger generation of executives. 
Castleman's elevation came sooner than expected. In 1980 Keith abruptly resigned from Hill Samuel, having fallen out with the board over unsanctioned takeover talks with Merrill Lynch, precipitating a reshuffle. Castleman became group chief executive. In the first half of the 1980s under his leadership Hill Samuel's profits quadrupled to $32 million, making it the most profitable of the merchant banks. This performance was achieved by strong cost control and the firm's transformation into a pocket financial conglomerate with five divisions: merchant banking, fund management, employee benefit consultancy, insurance broking, and shipping services. 
The mid-1980s saw the deregulation of the UK securities industry in a series of stages, culminating in the 'big bang' in October 1986. Relaxation of the rules regarding the ownership of stock exchange firms led to a scramble by merchant and commercial banks to acquire brokers and market makers. Though Castleman recoiled at the prices being paid for securities firms Hill Samuel took a stake in the broker Wood Mackenzie. 'We felt that to ignore big bang developments and basically go on as we were would have relegated our investment banking side to the role of a niche player', he told 'The Banker' (Travers, 'Castleman interview'). Castleman's strategy was the development of Hill Samuel as a British investment bank with a growing emphasis on the provision of personal financial services, unlike some other City houses that sought to meet the challenge of the Wall Street 'bulge bracket' firms in the global capital market, an idea that he described as 'lunacy'. In 1987 Hill Samuel was approached about a merger by Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS), which was keen to establish a substantial presence in investment banking in London. Castleman opposed a merger, believing that UBS would jettison the non-banking businesses, and advised against opening discussions with UBS, fearing that it would put the firm 'in play'. When the board disagreed he resigned. Within weeks of his departure UBS withdrew from the talks and the foundering firm was bought by the Trustee Savings Bank and later broken up when that bank merged with Lloyds Bank. 
Castleman was immediately hired as chief executive of Blue Arrow, a fast-growing employment agency, though he clashed with the chairman and left after only a few months. After a spell as an independent consultant, in 1989 he became chief executive of the transatlantic financial services group Johnson Fry, then from 1991 to 1995 its chairman. Also in 1991 he became an executive director at Standard Chartered, which was undergoing a major restructuring. He handled more than 100 acquisitions and disposals in the 1990s and contributed significantly to the bank's refocusing and substantial increase in profits. He retired from Standard Chartered in 2001, but remained an advisory director. He was also, at various times, chairman of National Investment Holdings, a director of Consolidated Goldfields, and an adviser at UBS Investment Bank, being valued for his extensive international contacts and experience. 
Highly competitive and passionate about sport, Castleman was a keen cricketer and ran marathons for charity. Following the death of his first wife, in 1980 he married Caroline Clare Westcott, a South African with whom he had two daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1990 and on 5 July the same year he married another South African, the 34-year-old Susan Mary (Suzy) Diamond, a dress designer, and daughter of Geoffrey Michael Twycross, farmer; they had a daughter and a son. Castleman lived latterly at Tofte Manor, a seventeenth-century manor house in Sharnbrook, Bedfordshire, with a holiday home in South Africa. He was diagnosed with leukaemia in 2003, but remained active until shortly before his death, on 26 April 2006, at St Anthony's Hospital, North Cheam, Surrey. He was survived by his wife, Suzy, and his six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97734


Ewing, Margaret Anne (1945-2006), politician, was born on 1 September 1945 at Fairhaven, Hyndford Road, Lanark, the daughter of John McAdam, ploughman, later builder's labourer, and his wife, Margaret Jamieson Cuthbert (Peggie), 'nee' Lamb. She was born to the rural working class rather like Chris Guthrie, heroine of Lewis Grassic Gibbon's 'A Scots Quair' (1932-34), whom in passion and radicalism she resembled. She retained an interest in rural affairs and the environment throughout her life. She attended the primary and high school at Biggar from 1950 to 1962, with the exception of the years 1957-8, when she was recovering from tuberculosis. After graduating with a second-class degree in French from Glasgow University in 1967 and taking a teacher training course at Jordanhill College she became an assistant teacher at Our Lady's High School in the then new town of Cumbernauld. In 1970 she moved to St Modan's High School, Stirling, as a special assistant teacher, and from 1973 principal teacher for remedial education. Her childhood illness and work as a remedial teacher gave her an empathy and a quality of kindness that made even her political opponents regard her with affection. On 20 July 1968 she had married a political scientist, Donald Straiton Bain, son of Donald Bain, veterinary surgeon. Both were already active in the Scottish National Party (SNP), and in the early 1970s her husband became an economic adviser to the party. Along with Gordon Wilson he investigated and impressively deployed the cause of North Sea oil, which won Margo MacDonald the Govan by-election in November 1973 on the eve of the report of the Kilbrandon commission. Also in 1973, Margaret Bain (by now a member of the SNP national executive) gained the nomination for East Dunbartonshire (really Cumbernauld New Town). 
1974 brought two general elections. Margaret Bain was heavily defeated in February but was returned to the House of Commons in the October contest with the truly hairsbreadth majority of 22 votes in a close three-way contest. In a sense, however, the election had already shot the SNP's fox. Labour, after conceding the principle of devolution, started to recover. By the autumn of 1977 it was steadily winning by-elections against the SNP. Margaret Bain, tall, arresting, blonde, and described by one parliamentarian not normally regarded as a chauvinist as having 'the best legs in the house since the eighteenth century' (private information), settled in well at Westminster, but her party's chances were soon ebbing away. A left-wing Scottish Labour Party was founded in 1975 by Jim Sillars as compromises were written into Labour's bill, most notoriously when a Scottish-born London MP, George Cunningham, inserted an amendment requiring a minimum 'yes' vote of 40 per cent of the 'entire' electorate. The referendum took place on 1 March 1979 during the bleakest winter in years, complicated by endemic labour problems. In Scotland the 'yes' vote was carried by a small margin, but failed to reach the 40 per cent threshold; in Wales devolution was rejected outright. The prime minister, James Callaghan, tabled the repeal of the bill: the eleven SNP MPs countered with a vote of no confidence. In this Plaid Cymru ultimately took Labour's side, but on a motion of no confidence carried by only one vote on 1 April the Labour government was forced to the polls. In the election of May 1979 Bain lost her seat by a wide margin, coming third behind both the Labour and the Conservative candidates. 
The aftermath of the 1979 election was scarcely less traumatic for the SNP. A left-wing pressure group, the '79 Group, headed up by Jim Sillars, now in the SNP, attracted many talented younger members, including Alex Salmond. In this confrontation Margaret Bain (who supported herself as a freelance journalist and later co-ordinator of the west of Scotland certificate in social service scheme) took the side of the party establishment against what was perceived as a 'party within a party', and supported the group's expulsion in 1982 (they were readmitted in 1983). She contested Strathkelvin and Bearsden, unsuccessfully, in 1983 and was senior vice-chair of the party from 1984 to 1987. Meanwhile her marriage to Donald Bain had ended in 1980, and on 30 November 1983 she married Fergus Stewart Ewing ('b'. 1957), solicitor and politician, son of Stewart Martin Ewing, lecturer in tax legislation, and his wife Winifred Ewing, then MEP for the Highlands and Islands in the European parliament (having previously served as SNP MP for Hamilton in 1967-70 and Moray and Nairn from 1974 to 1979). 
In 1987 Margaret Ewing returned to the House of Commons as MP for Moray and Nairn, retaining the seat in the elections of 1992 and 1997. She followed her mother-in-law in involving herself in European matters through the Commons select committee on European legislation from 1987 to 1999. In 1990, when the Soviet Union was about to invade Lithuania, democratic forces had barricaded themselves in the parliament buildings. Margaret Ewing took up their cause and set out with volunteers to support President Landsbergis, much to the apprehension of her colleagues. She was also deeply committed to improving the condition of elderly people and children. She was widely respected for her compassion and reasonableness, her assiduousness on behalf of constituents, and the sincerity of her nationalist beliefs. From 1987 to 1999 she was leader of the SNP parliamentary group, and in 1990 was widely tipped to succeed Gordon Wilson as party leader, but in the event was defeated at the party conference by Alex Salmond, by 486 votes to 186. 
Following the success of the 1997 referendum on devolution, Margaret Ewing was returned for Moray to the new Scottish parliament in July 1999, and held a dual mandate until 2001, when she gave up her Westminster seat. Her husband meanwhile served as SNP member of the Scottish parliament for Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber, and her mother-in-law for the Highlands and Islands. In April 2002 Margaret Ewing was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy. She took six months off but was returned to the Scottish parliament for Moray in 2003. In this session she took a particular interest in Africa and led a delegation to Malawi, which decided on a partnership with Scotland. According to her husband 'She insisted it was too important a cause to ignore' ('Daily Record', 24 March 2006). She recovered from the breast cancer therapy, but the long-term impact gravely impaired her health and increased her liability first to pneumonia, then to anaemia. She died suddenly of a heart attack at her home, Burns Cottage, Tulloch's Brae, Lossiemouth, Moray, on 21 March 2006, while dealing with constituents' correspondence. The widespread affection she enjoyed was reflected in the turnout at her funeral, at St Geraldine's High Church, Lossiemouth, on 25 March. She was survived by her husband Fergus. There were no children of either marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 97737


Finlay, Ian Hamilton (1925-2006), poet, artist, and gardener, was born in Nassau, Bahamas, on 28 October 1925, the son of James Hamilton Finlay and his wife, Annie Whitelaw, 'nee' Pettigrew. According to his son James Finlay was a bootlegger who smuggled rum into the United States during prohibition. When he was six Finlay was sent back to boarding school in Scotland. His education there lasted only until he was thirteen, when he was evacuated to Orkney on the outbreak of the Second World War. He briefly attended Glasgow College of Art before being called up for military service in 1943. He served in the Royal Army Service Corps until 1947, spending part of the time in Germany. He was married, in 1945, to Marion Fletcher. 
After demobilization Finlay returned to Orkney to earn his living as a shepherd and agricultural labourer. While there he began to write short stories and plays, some of which, in the 1950s, appeared in the 'Glasgow Herald' and were produced on BBC radio. His first book, 'The Sea-Bed and Other Stories', was published in 1958 by Castle Wynd, a small press in Edinburgh, and consisted of forty-eight stapled pages. His first collection of poems, 'The Dancers Inherit the Party', was published in 1960 but, significantly, was the product of an American small press run by a Scottish exile, Gael Turnbull, from Ventura, California. Turnbull's 'Migrant' magazine was founded in 1958 and had published poems by Finlay in its last two issues in 1960 before transforming itself into a publisher of new collections of poetry. Finlay's book was one of the earliest on its list and he thus became a recognized figure in the avant garde of American poetry -- his influence acknowledged by poets like Robert Creeley and Lorine Niedecker -- before he gained recognition in Scotland. What appealed to these American writers was the deliberate simplicity of Finlay's work, with its roots in folk tradition. The combination of popular culture and avant-garde experimentalism produced, in 1961, Finlay's groundbreaking collection of poems in contemporary Glasgow vernacular, 'Glasgow Beasts, an a Burd, Haw, an Inseks, an, aw, a Fush', which paved the way for some of the most experimental Scottish writing of the next two decades. 

'Glasgow Beasts, an a Burd' was the first production of the Wild Hawthorn Press, which Finlay founded with Jessie McGuffie in 1964 on the model of Turnbull's Migrant Press. Becoming his own publisher was indicative of the ways in which Finlay sought to control the environment of his art. The Wild Hawthorn Press launched, in the following year, the magazine 'Poor. Old. Tired. Horse.' (a title taken from the poem 'Please' by Robert Creeley), of which twenty-five numbers were produced by 1968. Edwin Morgan summarized it as a magazine in which 'well-crafted thing-y poetry was preferred to expressionist or confessional 'depth'', and observed that while it did 'publish concrete poetry, semiotic poetry, and sound-poetry' it also included poets who 'dealt with the larger socio-political issues: Mayakovsky, Jozsef, Neruda, Gunter Grass'. The result, Morgan suggested, was 'an eclecticism that two decades later seems to belong so much to the spirit of the sixties as to have gained more unity and harmony than it appeared to possess at the time' (E. Morgan, 'Early Finlay', in Finlay, ed., 'Wood Notes Wild', 20-21). It was Morgan who had directed Finlay to a letter about 'concrete poetry' by E. M. de Melo e Castro in the 'Times Literary Supplement', where Finlay discovered that 'it was just what in my little naive, home-made, Scottish way, I had been thinking about' (Finlay, afterword, 98). Finlay published his first concrete poetry in 'Rapel' in 1963 and contributed to the first international concrete poetry festival in Brighton in 1967. His role as a pioneer was acknowledged when he and Morgan were nominated as the Scottish representatives on the committee of the international concrete poetry movement. By the late 1960s, however, he was already moving towards a broader conceptual art in which language was situated in a specific environment, as in the series of boat names and numbers printed on wood and wrapped in fishing nets he produced in the late 1960s. One of these, 'Starlit Waters', inspired a campaign against the Tate Gallery when the latter acquired it in 1976. 
In 1964 Finlay married Sue MacDonald-Lockhart and in 1966 they moved into an abandoned croft at Stonypath in Lanarkshire, with their two children, Alec and Ailie. They began to develop the land round the croft as a garden that would provide the setting for Finlay's works. The joint work of Finlay and his wife in creating the garden was to become typical of how Finlay's work was produced, being made in collaboration with typographers, sculptors, architects, potters, glassmakers, and others, who produced the objects required by this 'environmental' art. As the garden developed the Wild Hawthorn Press continued to publish postcards, pamphlets, and booklets in which Finlay experimented with language and design in ways that would often prefigure the motifs inscribed on the plaques, the plinths, the sundials, and the sculptures around which the garden was built. 'What you compose with is neither here nor there', Finlay commented, 'you compose with words, or you compose with stone, plants and trees, or you compose with events' ('The death of piety'). 
Growing recognition of Finlay's achievement came with exhibitions in Sunderland in 1970, at the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art in 1972, at the National Maritime Museum in 1974, and at the Serpentine Gallery in London in 1977. One room of the exhibition at the Serpentine Gallery was described as 'a small temple opening upon a garden' (Abrioux, 7, quoting the exhibition catalogue), an image that was being created in reality at Stonypath by the transformation of an old cowshed into a gallery that, in the light of Finlay's increasing concern with classical Greece, would later be declared to be a temple. Stonypath itself would be renamed Little Sparta to signify its resistance to Edinburgh as the Athens of the North. Commissions from the Max Planck Institute Garden in Stuttgart in 1975 and from the Kroller-Muller Museum in Holland in 1980, followed by others from the Schweizergarten in Vienna, the Maritime Village in Swansea, and the Villa Celle in Italy, confirmed Finlay's growing international reputation both as a poet-artist and as a garden designer. 
Increasing prominence, however, also meant increasing conflict with the cultural establishment. As early as 1962 Finlay had been involved in an acrimonious exchange of letters in 'The Scotsman' with Scotland's leading poet, Hugh MacDiarmid (who had been best man at Finlay's first wedding). Challenged by Edwin Morgan with ignoring the new developments in Scottish literature represented by Wild Hawthorn Press publications, MacDiarmid queried whether 'progress to any desirable end will be achieved under the impetus of a group of teddyboy poetasters who have in any case written little enough in justification of their own attitude' ('The Scotsman', 18 May 1962; Bold, 811-14). In return Finlay and Jessie McGuffie accused MacDiarmid of being a Stalinist trying to ignore the thaw represented by younger writers. Rumours of an attack by a Wild Hawthorn zeppelin on the International Writers' Conference held as part of the Edinburgh Festival in 1962, and of a protest march, proved to be the prologue to a long-running confrontation between Finlay and arts institutions, often involving the use of art as a 'mythological' mode of attack, a confrontation that culminated in 1984 in what Finlay described as 'the Little Spartan War'. In 1978 Finlay had withdrawn his Serpentine exhibition from a Scottish Arts Council space, declaring the absence of the artworks to be more meaningful than their presence. As a consequence the Arts Council broke off all communication with Finlay, which in turn resulted in Strathclyde region revoking relief on the local tax that had been granted to Finlay's gallery, since it was no longer in receipt of Arts Council funding. When the cowshed was declared to be a temple in 1980 Finlay argued that it was therefore entitled to the exemption from taxation allowed to religious buildings, a status that Strathclyde region refused to accept. A raid by a sheriff officer appointed by the courts to seize assets as a form of payment was repulsed (in a well-prepared publicity event, with television and newspaper reporters in attendance) in February 1983 by a group of Finlay's supporters whom he had dubbed the Saint-Just vigilantes, after a leading figure in the French Revolution. A month later a second raid resulted in the removal of a number of works, some of which did not actually belong to the Finlays, but only succeeded in raising public awareness of Finlay's art when the events were transformed into a touring exhibition of 'Heroic Ephemera from the Little Spartan War'. 
The naming of this confrontation as the Little Spartan War was emblematic of Finlay's concern with the iconography of war (a bird table in the garden is in the shape of an aircraft carrier). The iconography of the French Revolution -- particularly the guillotine and the decapitated head -- also came to play a central role as Finlay explored the revolution's relation to classical models. The attention that Finlay's 'classicism' received in France, with several exhibitions taking place in 1987, led to his being commissioned by the French ministry of culture to design a garden commemorating the French Revolution for the bicentenary celebrations in 1989. In 1984, however, an exhibition entitled 'The Third Reich Revisited' had merged imagery from Nazi Germany with contemporary Edinburgh and, in particular, with the Arts Council office in Charlotte Square, the object of several assaults by the Saint-Just vigilantes. In Paris a campaign began against Finlay because of his use of what were perceived to be Nazi emblems (such as the double 'S' associated with the Nazi SS in one of his inscriptions), a campaign fuelled by the publication of extracts from Finlay's letters to one of his collaborators, Jonathan Hirschfeld, which were represented as being antisemitic. Finlay brought and won a case for libel against a Paris magazine and radio station, but he was awarded derisory damages of one franc, and by the time the case was concluded the commission for the bicentenary garden had already been cancelled by the French government. The stress of this episode fell substantially on Sue Finlay who, because Finlay suffered from a form of agoraphobia and rarely left his garden, undertook most of the organization of exhibitions. After it the couple separated. 
By the 1990s Finlay's work was appearing in major exhibitions in North and South America and across Europe, but it was only in 1991 that he received his first commission for a garden in the UK, at Stockwood Park Nurseries, Luton. The garden at Stonypath was, however, increasingly acknowledged as one of the major artistic achievements of the second half of the twentieth century, and Finlay was awarded honorary degrees by the University of Aberdeen (1987), Heriot-Watt University (1993), and the University of Glasgow (2001), and was made an honorary professor at Dundee from 1999. He was appointed CBE in 2002 and was presented with the Scottish horticultural medal by the Royal Caledonian Horticultural Society the same year. In 2003 he was awarded a $30,000 creative Scotland award by the Scottish Arts Council. On his seventieth birthday a trust was established to safeguard the future of the garden, which was declared in December 2004, by a poll of Scottish artists and gallery directors, to be the most important single work of Scottish art. Finlay had suffered a stroke in 1999, a side-effect of which was his release from agoraphobia, so that in the following years he was able to attend some of the events at which he was honoured. He died at Strachan House Care Home, Craigcrook Road, Edinburgh, of renal cancer, on 27 March 2006, and was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97739


Fletcher, Alan Gerard (1931-2006), graphic designer, was born on 27 September 1931 in Nairobi, Kenya, the only child of Bernard Wolfe Fletcher, an executive in the Kenyan government, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Murphy. His father died in 1936, and he and his mother then returned to his maternal grandparents' house in Shepherd's Bush, west London. At the outset of the Second World War in 1939 he was evacuated to Christ's Hospital, Horsham, Sussex. Leaving school in 1949 he took a place at Hammersmith College of Art, assuring his anxious mother that it would equip him for a teaching career. He transferred to the Central School of Arts and Crafts a year later, where his classmates included his future colleagues Colin Forbes and Theo Crosby, and his ambitions expanded. He spent an interim year in Barcelona teaching English, before returning to London in 1953 to embark on postgraduate study at the Royal College of Art. During this time he worked on the student publication 'Ark' and met artists and designers including Peter Blake, Joe Tilson, and the future spy novelist Len Deighton. 
Finding early 1950s London gloomy, Fletcher longed for the bright lights of the United States of America, a nation he understood largely through Hollywood films. In 1956 he arranged an exchange for himself between the Royal College of Art and Yale University. After marrying his long-term Italian girlfriend Paola ('b'. 1927), daughter of Raffaele Biagi, bank manager, at Kensington register office on 5 July 1956, he applied for visas for them both to enter the USA on the white Kenyan quota. Once at Yale he was exposed to the teaching of seminal modern art and design talents including Josef Albers and Paul Rand. He visited New York where he also met prominent designers including Robert Brownjohn, Ivan Chermayeff, and Tom Geismar. These young practitioners were an important inspiration for Fletcher, particularly in encouraging him to establish an independent studio on his return to London. 
Fletcher often made the modest claim that his career sprang from being at the right place at the right time. In 1957 he presented his portfolio to Lio Lionni, then the art director of the Time and Life publication 'Fortune'. He was immediately offered the opportunity to design the magazine's cover, on the strength of which he won a job in the marketing department of Time and Life. Setting up home in the West Village, Fletcher would have settled in New York, but for his wife's homesickness. After a tour across the USA, during which he worked briefly for the film titles designer Saul Bass, he and Paola returned to Europe via Venezuela. Their brief South American adventure was the product of a fantasy, Fletcher envisaging himself designing rugs to be woven by local artisans. The idea was cut short by the outbreak of a revolution on their arrival, which prompted the couple to take the last boat out of Caracas, heading to Genoa. Fletcher worked for a few months in Milan for the tyre manufacturer Pirelli before returning to London. 
In 1959 Fletcher set up home in Notting Hill and rented a desk in Colin Forbes's studio. His daughter, Rafaella, was born in 1961. Continuing to work for Pirelli, Fletcher was also a regular designer of Penguin paperback covers, commissioned by the innovative art director Germano Facetti. His bold, ideas-driven graphic style and his ability to communicate directly with top management indicated a formidable new direction in design. In 1962 Fletcher and Forbes teamed up with the American emigre Bob Gill to form the firm Fletcher/Forbes/Gill. Later the same year they teamed up with others, including David Bailey and Terence Donovan, to found the Designers and Art Directors Association, of which Fletcher acted as president in 1973. 
Between 1962 and 1972 Fletcher/Forbes/Gill evolved into the multidisciplinary design studio Pentagram. During that period Gill resigned and Fletcher and Forbes were joined by the architect Theo Crosby, the product designer Kenneth Grange, and the art director Mervyn Kurlansky. Occupying a large former warehouse in Paddington basin, Pentagram acquired many large-scale corporate clients, including the news agency Reuters and the cruise line Cunard. Fletcher remained at Pentagram for two decades, successfully reconciling his taste for graphic play with his facility for consummate professionalism. In 1993 he left to establish a studio in his mews home in Pembridge Crescent. 
Working independently, Fletcher combined an emphasis on long-standing personal projects with the position of art director, both at Phaidon Press and at the Novartis Campus, a pharmaceutical research facility in Basel. He retained these appointments until the end of his life. He received many honours during his career, including appointment as a royal designer for industry in 1972, presidency of the Alliance Graphique Internationale in 1982, and fellowship of the Royal College of Art in 1989. He was inducted into the New York-based Art Directors Club hall of fame in 1994. His numerous books included the monograph 'Beware Wet Paint' (1996) and the 1066 page masterwork 'The Art of Looking Sideways' (2001). After a short illness he died of lung cancer on 21 September 2006 at his daughter's house, Merrilies, Woodcote Road, Forest Row, Sussex. Both she and Paola survived him. He was described in his obituaries as 'a man uniquely responsible for defining British graphic design... from the late 1950s onwards' ('The Guardian', 25 Sept 2006), 'the father figure of British graphic design' ('The Independent', 26 Sept 2006), and 'the most highly regarded graphic designer of his generation' ('Daily Telegraph', 29 Sept 2006). A later tribute described him as 'Britain's best ever graphic designer' ('The Observer', 12 Nov 2006). 


@@@@@


doc= 97740


Foggon, George (1913-2006), civil servant and industrial relations adviser, was born at 88 Station Lane, Hebburn, co. Durham, on 13 September 1913, the elder son and eldest of five children of Thomas Foggon (1891-1965), copperworks labourer, and later laboratory technician, and his wife, Margaret Burn, 'nee' Martin (1892/3-1957). He attended Hebburn colliery board school, from where, in 1924, he gained a scholarship to Jarrow grammar school. Entering the civil service at 16, he began his working life as a clerk in the Ministry of Labour at Felling labour exchange, Gateshead, in 1930. The 1930s were his formative years. He saw the Jarrow marchers, and he dealt daily with large numbers of the unemployed. This experience imbued him with great compassion, kindness, and a sense of fairness. He had already inherited a marked desire for knowledge and improvement. He read widely and developed an interest in modern history. His regional controller where he began his working life was Jameson Adams, who had been with Sir Ernest Shackleton in 1908 on his historic journey to within 97 miles of the south pole. This sparked such an interest in Foggon that he studied in great detail all of Shackleton's expeditions and he later regaled his friends with his knowledge of this topic, with infectious enthusiasm. On 25 June 1938, at the church of St John the Evangelist, Hebburn, he married Agnes McIntosh (1912-1968), daughter of James Robert McIntosh, carpenter. They had one son, Miles ('b'. 1951). 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War, in 1940 Foggon volunteered for the Royal Air Force and trained as an armourer. Commissioned in 1943, he led the RAF armaments team at the Normandy landings, finding himself among the first members of the RAF to go ashore after D-day. In the course of following the armies from Normandy to Berlin he rose in rank to wing commander. He was appointed MBE in 1945. Shortly after hostilities ceased he was seconded to the Foreign Office to work on the staff of the British military government in Berlin, as an adviser for labour affairs. In this capacity he assisted in the restoration of German social structures in West Berlin and contributed to the efforts of the Allied Control Commission in the re-establishment of the West German trade unions and employers' organizations. He was promoted OBE in 1949. 
Later in 1949 Foggon entered the Colonial Office as a principal. After two years' service in London he was promoted to assistant secretary and appointed to the West African Inter-Territorial Secretariat, based in the Gold Coast. In 1952 he became commissioner for labour in Nigeria. During his service in Africa he argued for the establishment of properly democratic trade unions and employer organizations as well as governmental and legal institutions to support social and labour affairs. His pleasant personality and fairness towards all sides gained the trust of many leading African politicians, trade unionists, and employers. He did much then and later in pursuit of these essentials and, in doing so, contributed greatly to limiting Soviet and later Chinese influences, which were intruding into this facet of developing countries. 
In 1958 Foggon was brought back to London as labour adviser to the secretary of state for the colonies. In 1961 he was appointed CMG. In 1962, when most of the colonies began to move towards independence, he became a member of the Secretariat for Technical Co-operation. In 1965 his appointment was transferred to the Ministry of Overseas Development. By then he was emerging as a considerable expert in all matters of international labour affairs and industrial relations legislation. He was clearly one of the most appropriately qualified civil servants when appointed, in 1966, to the post of overseas labour adviser to the Foreign Office, in which post he remained until his retirement from the civil service in 1976. He established close working relationships with the Trades Union Congress and the Confederation of British Industry, particularly with their international departments. He pressed for the secondment to his office of representatives of both bodies, and, until the election of the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, TUC officers were attached to the overseas labour adviser's office of what was now the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Meanwhile Foggon strove, with the help of a diminishing number of Labour attaches, to ensure that his knowledge of international labour problems was accurate and up to date. In one year he covered 100,000 miles, with visits to Egypt, Turkey, Iran, and Sri Lanka. In the same year he went to advise on the resolution of a general strike in the Gilbert Islands. Such journeys gave him much enjoyment as well as hard work, and provided him with a fund of stories always told with masterly detail and with kindly humour. His great strength was his ability to make the acquaintance of a wide mix of people and to see which of them were, or would become, key figures. 
Such was now his standing, internationally as well as in the UK, that Foggon had already been invited by the International Labour Office in Geneva to head their London office. He took up this new task on retirement from the British civil service and served until his ultimate retirement in 1982. All those with whom he worked, then as before, liked him, sought his advice, and enjoyed his company. His great knowledge and efficiency, his charm, kindness, generosity, humour, and dedication all contributed to his popularity. 
Following the death of his first wife, on 30 August 1969 Foggon married Audrey Clarissa (1932-2002), the daughter of Joseph William Blanch, diplomat. There were no children of the marriage. They lived for most of Foggon's retirement in Pimlico, which provided easy access to his office and his clubs. He had long been a member of the Athenaeum and the Oriental Club, and his joy was to entertain his many friends to long and informative lunches in these venues. In 2000 he and Audrey moved to 3 Castle Hill House (the former Wylam Manor), in Wylam, Northumberland, where they bought an additional guest apartment to accommodate their visitors. Foggon died, at Castle Hill House, on 18 February 2006, of prostate cancer. He was cremated at Newcastle crematorium on 25 February and his ashes were later buried in Hebburn cemetery. He was survived by his son, Miles. 


@@@@@


doc= 97743


Freeman, Alan Leslie (1927-2006), disc jockey, was born on 6 July 1927 in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, the son of a foreman in a timber yard and his wife, a waitress. After leaving school he worked in the accounts office of a timber company. As a teenager he studied classical music and had early ambitions to be a professional singer but realized that his baritone voice lacked the qualities required for a successful career in opera, and so decided to develop his distinctive communication skills and work in radio. His first job in radio was in 1952 as an announcer on the 7LA station in Launceston, Tasmania. The following year he joined the Melbourne station 3KZ as a presenter and disc jockey, reading out the commercials and, utilizing his musical training, even singing the occasional ballad. In 1957 he visited England, ostensibly for a holiday. His visit coincided with the arrival of American rock 'n' roll music on the British music scene. Unimpressed by the BBC's musical output of the time, which largely ignored this teenage-oriented music genre (he recalled a BBC Light Programme announcer saying stiffly with a BBC accent 'and that was a new gramophone record sung by Frank Sinatra'), Freeman decided to stay on in Europe and became a summer relief disc jockey for the rather more pop-conscious listeners of Radio Luxembourg. 
Freeman's broadcasting skills came to the attention of BBC radio and he was invited to join the Light Programme two years later, initially presenting 'Housewives' Choice', followed by his own show 'Records Around Five' in 1961, when he first introduced his familiar signature tune, 'At the Sign of the Swinging Cymbal', written by Brian Fahey. In September 1961 he was asked to present 'Pick of the Pops', which was then a segment of the Saturday evening radio show 'Trad Tavern'. It was the programme that saw the birth of his familiar catchphrase, 'Greetings, pop pickers'. His later catchphrases included 'Not 'Arf', 'Erm...', and 'Alright?'. His fellow BBC Light Programme disc jockey David Jacobs had already been presenting 'Pick of the Pops' for some time when Freeman took over. Freeman later recalled: 'Trad was happening and I loved the music. David Jacobs was presenting 'Pick of the Pops' and they wanted to incorporate that into 'Trad Tavern', a live show with an audience. David didn't care for standing up in front of a jazz audience, so I was asked to do it. It was a suit, collar and tie job for me, and all the jazz freaks wondered who I was. ('The Independent', 29 Nov 2006)' Such was the success of Freeman's stewardship of 'Pick of the Pops' that the BBC decided to move the programme to Sunday afternoons. However, his early years with the show were not without in-house controversy, and he was frequently censured by BBC bosses for his ebullient presenting style. Indeed, the urbane David Jacobs was reinstated as 'Pick of the Pops' presenter late in 1962 but two years later Freeman returned to the helm and remained with the show for the next eight years. In 1972 he took over from Terry Wogan as an afternoon presenter on Radio 1, and in 1973 he introduced the first Radio 1 roadshow and also launched the long-running documentary series 'The Story of Pop'. 
In 1973, with the emergence of the progressive rock genre, Freeman became the host of Radio 1's 'Saturday Rock Show', championing the likes of Genesis, Led Zeppelin, Jethro Tull, Bachmann Turner Overdrive, Yes, Vangelis, and Rush. He eventually left the BBC in 1979 and spent the next ten years at the London station Capital Radio, presenting 'Pick of the Pops Take Two' on Saturday mornings, although he continued his association with the BBC through television's 'Top of the Pops', which he had regularly introduced since its arrival in 1964. 
In 1987 Freeman was awarded the Radio Academy's outstanding contribution to UK music radio award and the following year he was named Sony Radio Awards' personality of the year. On the strength of these prestigious accolades he was in 1989 invited back to Radio 1 to present a new version of 'Pick of the Pops' as well as returning to the 'Saturday Rock Show'. In 1994 he returned to Capital Radio for a second stint, presenting 'Pick of the Pops Take Three', while also hosting a regular rock programme for Virgin Radio. 
Freeman found time for other professional activities, including television commercials (most notably for Brentford Nylons and OMO soap powder) and even dabbled in some lightweight film acting. He appeared in 'Dr Terror's House of Horrors' (1965) and as a disc jockey in the Dirk Bogarde film 'Sebastian' (1968). In Julien Temple's musical 'Absolute Beginners' (1986) Freeman played the sleazy TV host, 'Call Me Cobber'. In 1984 he poked fun at himself in the television special 'Smashey and Nicey: the End of an Era', the final appearance of the two spoof disc jockeys created by the comedians Harry Enfield and Paul Whitehouse. Freeman's ebullient style was wickedly parodied by Enfield as the disc jockey Dave Nice. He also appeared as God in drag in the television comedy 'The Young Ones'. 
By the late 1990s Freeman was suffering from encroaching arthritis and from the age of seventy-two he was forced to use a walking frame. However, his broadcasting days were not yet over: he joined Radio 2 in 1997 to present, once again, 'Pick of the Pops', and also the Tuesday night show 'Their Greatest Bits', which harnessed his great knowledge and love for classical and opera music. In 1998 he was appointed MBE. In early 2000, after two falls at his Maida Vale penthouse, he became a resident at Brinsworth House in Twickenham, a retirement and respite home for people who had worked in the entertainment industry. For some time, however, he continued to pre-record his shows for Radio 2, being chauffeur-driven to the BBC studios. Eventually he passed on the mantle of 'Pick of the Pops' presenter to the television and radio personality Dale Winton. 'I didn't have the bite I used to, and if you're frightened of doing something then it's probably a good idea to pack it in', he said ('The Independent', 29 Nov 2006). His last show was broadcast on 21 April 2000. In May 2000 he was presented with a lifetime achievement award at the Sony Radio Awards in London and received a standing ovation as Dale Winton described him as 'a man who has served and is held in the highest affection by every sector of our industry' ('BBC News', 28 Nov 2006). 
During his long career Freeman, known affectionately as Fluff (either on account of the woolly jumpers he wore, or because he occasionally fluffed his lines), became one of the best-known voices on radio in the UK. His long-time personal manager Tim Blackmore summed up Freeman's style succinctly: 'He cared passionately for music of all kinds, for his family and his friends, yet through all this professional success he retained a total bewilderment that so much success and affection should have come his way. His was the creation of the chart countdown, his was the stunning combination of rock music and classical music, and his was the creation of minimalism in the art of the DJ. ('BBC News', 28 Nov 2006)' Freeman died at Brinsworth House retirement home, 72 Staines Road, Twickenham, on 27 November 2006, of broncho-pneumonia. His funeral was held on 7 December at South-West Middlesex crematorium, followed by a wake in the great hall of Hampton Court Palace, which was attended by friends, former colleagues, and contemporaries. His niece Louise travelled from Melbourne to deliver one of the eulogies. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 97749


Halliwell, David Wiliam (1936-2006), playwright and theatre director, was born on 31 July 1936 at Lynn Lea Maternity Home, Clifton, Yorkshire, the elder son of Herbert Halliwell, company secretary, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Spencer. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 24 Upper Green Lane, Brighouse, Yorkshire. As a child he had ambitions to become a comic actor, and his hero was Charlie Chaplin. Educated at Victoria secondary modern school, Rastrick, and Hipperholme grammar school, he attended Huddersfield College of Art (1953-9), from which he was expelled and then allowed to return. The incident inspired him to write his most famous play, 'Little Malcolm and His Struggle against the Eunuchs', in which the protagonist, Malcolm Scrawdyke, is expelled from a technical college before starting the Dynamic Erection Party, whose main purposes are power and revenge against the college's principal. The anti-hero Malcolm is an instantly recognizable human figure, a mixture of frustrated ambition and absurd self-delusion. 
Halliwell studied acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), and, after graduating, worked as an assistant stage manager at Nottingham Playhouse. He moved back to London (living at 28 Chepstow Court) and in 1964 wrote 'Little Malcolm'. 'It occurred to me that if I could write a successful play I might rocket to the top of the profession', he said ('The Times', 21 March 2006). Initially running for six hours, the play was first directed by Mike Leigh at London's left-wing Unity Theatre in 1965. When first produced, it was seen as a ground-breaking political satire and was noted for its extraordinary display of verbal fireworks. Substantially rewritten, it was revived at the Garrick Theatre the same year, with John Hurt giving a critically acclaimed performance in the title role. The play won for its author the 'Evening Standard''s most promising playwright award for 1967. It was seen in Dublin and then in New York (where it was pointlessly retitled 'Hail Scrawdyke!'), filmed in 1974 (again starring John Hurt, and with George Harrison as producer) and revived at the Hampstead Theatre in 1998 in a sell-out production starring Ewan McGregor. Reassessing the play after three decades Michael Billington commented: 'If the play makes for a good evening it is because it pins down the bedsit revolutions of much of 1960s student life and accurately shows how dreams of power spring from emotional deprivation' ('The Guardian', 19 Nov 1998). 
In 1968 Halliwell set up, with David Calderisi, his own pioneering fringe theatre company, Quipu, which operated until 1973 variously at the Arts Theatre, the Mercury Theatre in Notting Hill, and the Little Theatre, off St Martin's Lane. Halliwell's purpose was to create 'a new kind of organisation in which the means of production are owned, controlled and developed by the artists whose work is being produced' ('The Guardian', 22 March 2006). As well as directing premieres of new works, including his own, he oversaw successful productions of Shaw, Strindberg, Poliakoff, and Pinter. A staple of 1960s fringe theatre was his own play 'The Experiment' (1967), in which a group of actors struggle to explore the significance of the assassination of the American president James Garfield in 1881. Throughout the 1970s Halliwell continued to write prolifically, notably 'K. D. Dufford' (1970), a shocking and controversial drama in which a man seeks notoriety by murdering a child. Other plays included 'A Last Belch for the Great Auk' (1971) and 'The Freckland Bum' (1975). In 1976 he spent a year as the literary manager of the Royal Court Theatre in London. 
In his later writing career Halliwell's nuanced psychological stage plays began to fall out of fashion, but he did write a host of well-received television dramas including 'Triple Exposure' (1972) and 'Steps Back' (1973). He also contributed scripts to several television crime series, including 'Crown Court' and 'The Bill'. Radio plays included 'Was It Her / Spongehenge', 'There's a Car Park in Witherton', 'Crossed Lines', and, most famously, 'Who's Who of Flapland', which brought two of his paranoiacs together, characteristically using language drawn from his native Yorkshire as the site of their confrontations. 
Few British dramatists have enjoyed such international acclaim with their first play as Halliwell did with 'Little Malcolm and His Struggle against the Eunuchs', and although he never repeated the triumph he remained a highly influential figure in British theatre during the 1960s and early 1970s. His work, both as an experimental and political dramatist, and as a visionary fringe theatre director, was championed by such figures as Alan Strachan, Mike Leigh, and Dan Crawford. A bluff northerner, who never married, he was renowned in theatrical circles as being a maverick, a loner with few social graces. His close friendships were few but to those who knew him well he remained a fiercely loyal and witty companion. He died alone on 17 March 2006 at his home, 8 Crawborough Villas, Charlbury, Oxfordshire, following a heart attack. His brother Roger survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 97785


McLean, (John David) Ruari McDowall Hardie (1917-2006), typographer and author, was born on 10 June 1917 at Herouncroft, Minnigaff, Newton Stewart, Kirkcudbrightshire, the only child of John Thomson McLean, a customs and excise officer, whose own father had been a shoemaker from Stranraer, and his wife, Isabella Mary (Isabel), 'nee' Ireland, a publisher's editor and primary school teacher. A childhood spent in Oxford, where his father had been posted, was a happy one. His parents had artistic and literary leanings and sent him to the Dragon School and Eastbourne College. After failing to gain a classical scholarship to Oxford and unsure of his future, at the suggestion of a family friend, Basil Blackwell, he entered the Shakespeare Head Press to learn printing. At the Shakespeare Head he was guided by the distinguished book designer Bernard Newdigate, who helped him to obtain work experience in a German printing firm. After attending Edinburgh School of Printing he undertook further training at 'The Studio' and Percy Lund Humphries, a forward-looking Bradford printing firm, where he discovered his lifelong influence, Jan Tschichold, whose book 'Die neue Typographie' (1928) trumpeted a revolutionary style of asymmetric design. For the rest of his life McLean retained a receptiveness to modern influences. 
Despite pacifist leanings, at the outbreak of the Second World War McLean volunteered for the Royal Navy, serving first in submarines as a liaison officer on the Free French submarine 'Rubis' (which, he was delighted to find, carried few torpedoes because of the space required for 900 litres of red wine), and then as a naval intelligence officer, becoming a member of COPP (combined operations pilotage parties) conducting dangerous reconnaissance surveys of Japanese-held beaches in the Far East. He was awarded the Croix de Guerre in 1942 and the DSC in 1943. Much later he wrote a memoir of his wartime career, 'Half Seas Under' (2001). On 24 January 1945 he married Antonia Maxwell Carlisle (1919-1995), a 25-year-old history teacher (and daughter of Henry George Carlisle, medical practitioner), with whom he had two sons and one daughter. 
In 1946 McLean, who had been in touch with Allen Lane before the war when he was sharing a flat with Edward Young, designer of the Penguin emblem, became responsible for the design of the lively 'Puffin Picture Books' series, which introduced him to many artists who became his friends. He was one of the small band after the war making typography a new profession. In 1947 Tschichold, now embracing a classical approach, had been brought in to advise on design. McLean was able to cement his friendship with him and was later to translate his writings and write two books about him, 'Jan Tschichold, Typographer' (1975) and 'Jan Tschichold: a Life in Typography' (1997). 
McLean left Penguin in 1949, and, besides teaching for a period at the Royal College of Art, became involved in the planning and design of the children's magazine 'The Eagle', the brainchild of the clergyman Marcus Morris, whose parish magazine for Colnbrook, near the Penguin headquarters, McLean had initially redesigned. In 1951 he joined George Rainbird to found Rainbird, McLean, a pioneering firm devising 'package' books, where McLean's skill designing complex illustrated books with Rainbird's business acumen produced, notably, the 'About Britain' guides, edited by Geoffrey Grigson, and reproductions of flower and bird books. Always helpful to others, he gave work to Rowley Atterbury, whose printing firm the Westerham Press grew to become the major printer of illustrated books in the country. These books were widely copied and changed the face of illustrated book publications. Through the influence of Robert Harling, who had published and written a series of influential journals including 'Typography' and 'Alphabet and Image', McLean founded his own periodical, 'Motif'. Its lively and original thirteen issues, published between 1958 and 1967, added modern sculpture and painting to its typographical content. 
McLean maintained that to survive a book typographer needs to write. Books soon poured from his pen: 'Modern Book Design' (1951, updated 1958) was followed by the pioneering 'Victorian Book Design and Colour Printing' (1963), 'Victorian Publishers' Bookbindings in Cloth and Leather' (1973), and 'Victorian Publishers' Bookbindings in Paper' (1983). His influential 'Thames and Hudson Manual of Typography' (1980) was widely translated and much reprinted. From the early 1960s he enjoyed being an assessor of graphic design at art schools all over the country. He gave the Sandars lectures in bibliography at Cambridge in 1983. He also wrote monographs on the contemporary illustrators Joan Hassall, Edward Bawden, and Nicolas Bentley, as well as on the pioneering Victorian publishers and printers Joseph Cundall and Benjamin Fawcett. He amassed a huge collection of magazines, besides his collection of Victorian coloured books, useful when writing the first book on the subject in 1969, a practitioner's manual, 'Magazine Design'. The appeal of the balance of illustration and type to McLean probably originated in a childhood spent in bed with recurring tonsillitis, when he preferred reading magazines to books. 
Leaving Rainbird in 1958, McLean had formed Ruari McLean Associates in partnership with Fianach Jardine, daughter of the England cricket captain Douglas Jardine, setting up an office with their corgi, Slocum, in Villiers Street, London. Besides being consultant to the new 'Observer' magazine and the 'New Scientist', he became honorary adviser to the Stationery Office in 1966, for which he was appointed CBE in 1973. 
Also in 1973 McLean and his wife moved to Dollar, Clackmannanshire. The 'Concise Scots Dictionary' and Lorimer's 'New Testament in Scots' were two of the many books he designed there. Eight years later, at the time he was appointed a trustee of the National Library of Scotland, they moved to a row of fishermen's cottages at Carsaig on the Isle of Mull. A large Scandinavian log cabin was constructed to accommodate his 10,000 volumes, some of which were later housed in the University of Toronto. There he wrote his autobiography, 'True to Type' (2000), 'anecdotal, engaging, laddish and sometimes a bit chaotic', as James Fergusson aptly put it ('The Independent', 8 April 2006). Courageous, a lover of humour, fine wine, and the company of beautiful women, McLean had above all the capacity to enjoy life to the full. In his autobiography are reproduced his witty line drawings. He delighted his friends with his skilfully drawn Christmas cards, and his godchildren with rebuses. He could have been a cartoonist, as evidenced by his illustrations for 'McLean's Silly Diving Signals', published by the Scottish Sub-Aqua Club in 1990. Following the death of his wife, Antonia, in 1995 he moved to Tillicoultry, near Dollar. He died at the Royal Infirmary, Stirling, on 27 March 2006, of bronchopneumonia and acute kidney failure due to rhabdomyolysis. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97788


Ingram, Vernon Martin (1924-2006), molecular biologist, was born Werner Adolf Martin Immerwahr on 19 May 1924 in Breslau, Germany, the younger son and youngest of three children of Kurt Immerwahr, timber merchant, and his wife, Johanna, 'nee' Freund. He had a brother, Heinrich (later Henry), and a sister, Hilde (later Hilda), who were respectively eight and four years older than him. The children were brought up as Christians, although their parents were of Jewish descent. 
'I knew from the age of 10 that I was interested in science, in how things work', Ingram later said (Davis, 14323). He constructed his own radio receiver in order to listen to foreign broadcasts, despite this being banned in Nazi Germany. In 1939 he, his sister, and his parents fled Germany for Britain; his brother, Heinrich, who was studying in Italy, left separately for the United States, via Greece. On the outbreak of the Second World War Kurt Immerwahr was briefly interned as an enemy alien before being released. Vernon escaped this fate, and from 1941 to 1945 worked for Thomas Morson and Son Ltd, a pharmaceutical company based in north London, manufacturing drugs such as amphetamines for the war effort. At the same time he studied chemistry, mathematics, and zoology part-time at Birkbeck College, University of London, where he was particularly impressed by the animal physiologist Graham Jackson, whose teaching 'made the dinosaur walk in front of your eyes' (ibid.). He graduated BSc in 1945, and was immediately offered a post as demonstrator in chemistry, and an assistant lectureship in 1947. In 1949 he completed a PhD in physical organic chemistry under Fred Barrow. At Birkbeck he was also influenced by Desmond Bernal, the professor of physics there. In 1950 Ingram married Margaret Young, with whom he had a son, Peter, and a daughter, Jennifer. 
In 1950-52 Ingram spent two years as a postdoctoral fellow in the United States, the first as a Rockefeller Foundation fellow at the Rockefeller Institute, New York, studying protein preparation with Moses Kunitz, and the second as a Coxe fellow at Yale, working on peptide chemistry with Joseph Fruton. Looking for a post in England, he heard from Freddie Gutfreund, a newly arrived postdoctoral student from England, about a vacancy for a protein biochemist at Max Perutz's Medical Research Council Unit for the Study of the Molecular Structure of Biological Systems at Cambridge; he applied for the post and was duly appointed. 
In Cambridge it did not take long for Ingram to produce a derivative of haemoglobin with two atoms of mercury attached (one in each half-molecule), the isomorphous replacement needed to solve the phase problem and therefore the protein's crystal structure. At Perutz's suggestion he then set about comparing the molecular structure of normal haemoglobin and sickle-cell haemoglobin. Perutz had already identified the peculiar one-dimensional, crystal structure of sickle-cell haemoglobin (which deforms red blood cells, thereby causing sickle-cell disease, which can be fatal). The haemoglobin in sickle-cell disease had previously been investigated in the laboratory of Linus Pauling at the California Institute of Technology, where Harvey Itano and S. Jonathan Singer, two postdoctoral fellows, had shown that sickle-cell haemoglobin differs in electrophoretic mobility from normal haemoglobin. Building on methods for separating peptides developed by Fred Sanger in Cambridge in his studies of the amino acid sequence of insulin, Ingram employed a two-dimensional method to separate the peptides derived from haemoglobin: a combination of chromatography and electrophoresis, a technique he called 'fingerprinting'. As a result he was able to show that in each half-molecule of haemoglobin, consisting of nearly 300 amino acid residues, there is only a single amino acid difference between the normal and sickle forms, sickle-cell haemoglobin having valine whereas normal haemoglobin has glutamic acid. This result agreed closely with the prediction from the Pauling laboratory, based on electrophoretic properties, that sickle-cell haemoglobin has two to four more net positive charges than normal haemoglobin. Ingram's discovery showed for the first time that a change in a single amino acid, the consequence of a mutation in a single base pair, can be the cause of a specific disease. The results, published in 'Nature' in 1956 and 1957, provided important support for the 'one gene, one protein' hypothesis of George Wells Beadle and Edward Lawrie Tatum. They also led Ingram to be widely known as the 'father of molecular medicine'. 
Ingram continued to work for many years on the evolution, abnormalities, and embryology of haemoglobin (adult haemoglobin differing from foetal haemoglobin), and published 'Haemoglobin and its Abnormalities' (1961) and 'The Hemoglobins in Genetics and Evolution' (1963). By this time he had moved to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), in Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, having in 1958 accepted a one-year assistant professorship, which was extended (Ingram having decided that he liked the atmosphere at MIT and in the USA) and in 1961 converted into a full professorship. 
The biology department at MIT had recently decided to focus on the new field of molecular biology and Ingram was a natural fit. Also, from 1961 to 1973, he lectured part-time in medicine at Columbia University in New York, where he collaborated in research on haemoglobin with Paul Marks. His first marriage ended in divorce, and in 1984 he married Elizabeth (Beth) Hendee, and with her he served as a much-loved housemaster at Ashdown House, an MIT graduate residence hall. In 1988 he succeeded John M. Buchanan as the John and Dorothy Wilson professor of biology. From 1989 to 1999 he served as director of the MIT experimental study group, initiating annual teaching seminars for student instructors and contributing to innovative teaching methods. He never retired, and continued working in the laboratory until his death. 
Ingram's later research shifted to thalassaemia (he discovered that thalassaemia has two variants, alpha and beta), and thence to Alzheimer's disease. His interest in the latter was sparked by his second wife, Beth, who worked with people with Down's syndrome. (Nearly all people with Down's syndrome develop Alzheimer's disease by the age of forty.) His research focused on trying to identify compounds that obliterate the plaques composed of mis-folded greekLetterbeta-amyloid protein that form in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Although he was unable to reach any definite conclusion by the time of his death, his research opened up several fruitful lines of enquiry, and had important implications for the study of Alzheimer's and of such other protein-based diseases as Huntington's disease and prion diseases (including Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease). They also provided tools for the investigation of a new class of functional amyloid proteins. These final papers capped a history of publication spanning more than fifty years. 
Ingram was an extremely modest man, who always acknowledged the work of others, and described himself as simply a lucky link in the chain of human discovery. He nevertheless received many honours, including election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1970, fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1987, and member of the (American) National Academy of Sciences in 2004. In 2002 a former Ashdown House resident successfully petitioned to have an asteroid named 6285 Ingram, after Vernon and Beth Ingram. He was an accomplished pianist, an active supporter of the Rockport (Massachusetts) chamber music festival, and a talented photographer, specializing in close-up photographs of plants and flowers. He died at Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, on 17 August 2006 after surgery for injuries sustained in a fall, and was survived by his wife, Beth, and the two children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 97796


Orr, Robert Kemsley (1909-2006), composer and musical administrator, was born on 2 June 1909 at Glebe House, Trinity Road, Brechin, Forfarshire, the elder child of Robert Workman Orr, linen manufacturer, and his wife, Florence Mary, 'nee' Kemsley, who came from a farming family in Essex. His sister Kirsteen was born in 1911. Both his parents were amateur musicians and Orr's first taste of music was in regular family musical evenings in the home. After a few years at Brechin high school he was sent to a preparatory school, Hurst Grange, in Stirling. There he was taught music by J. W. Kinnear, who encouraged his first attempts at composition. From Stirling he went to Loretto School, on the outskirts of Edinburgh. At that time there was little to encourage the young musician there, so he left early and studied privately before entering the Royal College of Music, in London, at the age of sixteen. There he studied organ with Walter Alcock, piano with Arthur Benjamin, and composition with Henry Moule. In 1929 he became organ scholar at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he came under the influence of Cyril Rootham and Edward Dent. Later he studied with Alfredo Casella in Siena and with Nadia Boulanger in Paris. From 1933 to 1936 he was director of music at Sidcot School in Somerset. He was then an assistant lecturer in music at the University of Leeds (1936-8) before becoming organist and director of studies in music at St John's College, Cambridge. On 29 December 1937 he had married Margaret Ellen Mace, the 24-year-old daughter of the Egyptologist Arthur Cruttenden Mace. They had three children, twins, Alison and David ('b'. 1940), and Jean Kirsteen ('b'. 1945). 
During the Second World War Orr served as a photographic intelligence officer in the RAF. On demobilization with the rank of flight lieutenant in 1945 he returned to Cambridge, where he was appointed university lecturer in music (1947-56) and became a fellow of St John's in 1948. It was during those post-war years that he began to devote more of his time to serious composition. Professorships followed at the Royal College of Music (1950-56), at the University of Glasgow (1956-65), and at Cambridge (1965-76). He was also founder chairman of Scottish Opera (1962-76), director of the Cambridge Arts Theatre (1970-75), and a director of Welsh National Opera (1977-83). He was elected to honorary fellowships at St John's and Pembroke colleges, Cambridge, and was appointed CBE in 1972. His first marriage ended in divorce in 1979, and on 14 July the same year he married Doris Ruth Winny-Meyer, a 56-year-old art historian from Switzerland, and daughter of Leo Meyer, watch manufacturer. 
Notwithstanding Orr's gifts as a musical administrator and the consequent demands on his time and energies, he still found time to produce a formidable output of interesting and assured works in a language very much his own. Although marked by a passing resemblance to other composers, which makes his music quite difficult to categorize, there is an innate sense of lyricism and Scottish grittiness that runs through many of his important works. He had a certain success with his first orchestral venture, the overture 'The Prospect of Whitby' (1948), but the orchestral work that brought him into prominence was the 'Symphony in One Movement' (1963) which, although modelled on Sibelius's seventh symphony, was in no way a mere shadow of this work. It has drama and a lucid compactness which appealed to audiences of the time. Championed by Sir Alexander Gibson and the Scottish National Orchestra (as were so many of Orr's orchestral works) it had several performances by this orchestra. Two more symphonies were to follow, also both in one movement, in 1970 and 1978. 
Orr's first opera, 'Full Circle', in one act, to a libretto in Scottish dialogue by Sydney Goodsir Smith, was commissioned by Scottish Television and premiered by Scottish Opera in 1968. It shared a double bill with Stravinsky's 'The Soldier's Tale', and had a similar sparse orchestration. It also broke new ground by being set in the Scots vernacular, which few composers had attempted before. A more ambitious three-act opera, 'Hermiston', followed in 1975. The libretto was by Bill Bryden, after Robert Louis Stevenson's 'The Weir of Hermiston', and it was premiered at the Edinburgh international festival. Its bleak drama and scenes of a hanging, rape, murder, madness, and suicide, probably contributed to its failure to find a regular place in the repertoire. Nevertheless it showed Orr's growing mastery of the operatic genre. His next opera, an adaptation of Tom Stoppard's comic 'On the Razzle' (1988), was brilliantly produced by the students of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow, and enjoyed a greater success. 
Orr excelled in music for the church, much of it written for St John's College. For its 450th anniversary he wrote a fine anthem 'Come and let yourselves be built' (1961). In addition there were songs and chamber and instrumental music, as well as a 'Rhapsody' (1956) for string orchestra, and a delightful song cycle, 'From the Book of Philip Sparrow' (1969), for mezzo-soprano and strings, which was premiered by Janet Baker and the Scottish National Orchestra. 
Orr's approach to teaching and administration was the opposite of didactic. His generous nature and open-mindedness made him much sought after as a champion of new music and as someone who could get things done. During his nine years in Glasgow he teamed up with the young Alexander Gibson, who had just taken over as musical director of the Scottish National Orchestra, and assisted him with his Musica Viva concerts. These concerts brought Stockhausen, Schonberg, Stravinsky, and several Scottish composers including Iain Hamilton, Thea Musgrave, and Orr himself into prominence with the Scottish public. When Gibson approached him for support with the formation of Scottish Opera in 1960, Orr enthusiastically agreed. The company became highly successful and at the time of his death, in spite of government cuts, was still one of the most successful of British opera companies. 
Robin Orr was a man who had time for many other interests besides music. After an article he wrote for the 'Glasgow Herald' concerning a visit to the Wexford festival, and mentioning at length its gastronomic and liquid delights, he was invited by the editor to write a weekly food column. This was followed by other invitations from gastronomical journals eager to share his knowledge and experience. His reputation as a bon vivant was legendary and he endeared himself to many as a perfect and generous host, as well as a delightful raconteur. To those who didn't know him well, he often gave the impression of being a little vague, but beneath this he was the shrewdest of men who had a rare gift for dealing quite quickly with the poseur and the bore. In later life he enjoyed walking in the Swiss Alps (he took Swiss nationality in 1995) near his second home in Klosters. There he composed his last orchestral work, 'Sinfonietta Helvetica' (1990), to mark the 700th anniversary of the Swiss confederation. His musical autobiography, 'Musical Chairs', was published in 1998. He died at the Cambridge Nursing Centre, 5 High Street, Chesterton, Cambridge, on 9 April 2006, of a urinary tract infection, and was survived by his wife, Doris, and the three children of his first marriage. Orr's funeral was held at Pembroke College, Cambridge, and a memorial service took place at St John's College, Cambridge, on 4 November 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 97802


Posner, Michael Vivian (1931-2006), economist, was born on 25 August 1931 at Queen Charlotte's Hospital, Marylebone Road, London, the son of Jack Posner, millinery manufacturer, and his wife, Lena, 'nee' Buck. Bopth his parents were of Jewish descent. He was originally named Vivian Michael; at what point he reversed the order of his names is unclear. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 40 Mayfair Avenue, Ilford, Essex. The family moved from there to Croydon, where he attended Whitgift School. He won a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, where after enrolling as a student of modern history he switched to philosophy, politics, and economics. He graduated with first-class honours in 1953. On 7 August the same year he married a fellow student, Rebecca Reynolds ('b'. 1929), daughter of William Reynolds, a packer at a coal mine. A distinguished scholar, and professor of the Romance languages at the University of Oxford (1978-96), she remained his companion for the rest of his life. They had a daughter and a son. 
After graduation Posner worked first as a research officer at the Oxford Institute of Statistics (1953-7) and then briefly in Wesleyan University in the USA (1957-8). He then joined Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he moved to Pembroke College, Cambridge, as a fellow in 1960, relinquishing his fellowship in 1983. Between 1958 and 1979 he also worked in the faculty of economics and politics of Cambridge University, successively as assistant lecturer, lecturer, and reader. He played an important role as secretary of the Cambridge economics faculty for ten years before serving as its chairman in 1974-5. He had the gift of getting the best out of his students with his friendly but firm guidance, and always came forward to help any student suffering from shyness or other difficulties. 
Posner's life and work can be seen as a very active intertwining of three passions. First, he was committed to public service in which intelligent policy making in a highly imperfect world restrains unjust outcomes of the working of the market or malfunctioning governance. Second, he followed a Cambridge tradition of applied economics among the pupils of Marshall and Keynes in which theory plays an important but unobtrusive role in reasoned policy advice. In his books on public enterprise, fuel policy, or energy policy, he was careful to set out the possible alternative strategies, depending on changes in assumptions about the real world. His moderation, fair-mindedness, and firm adherence to a concept of public interest won him the loyalty of his co-workers but might have obscured the extent of his achievement in setting out the conceptual elements that would go into policy advice. Finally, he believed that research into real life issues in a world fraught with unexpected changes and uncertainty must accompany teaching of the social sciences in the universities. In his quest for the right mix of evidence and theory to guide policy, he wrote 'Italian Public Enterprise' (1966, jointly with S. J. Woolf), 'Fuel Policy' (1973), and 'Energy Economics' (1981, with Richard Eden and others), as well as editing 'Resource Allocation in the Public Sector' (1977) and 'Demand Management' (1978). His advice to the government on matters of energy policy, railway electrification, and macroeconomic management in general was informed by research. 
Posner's association with government policy making started in 1966 when he became director of economics at the Ministry of Power. He then served successively as economic adviser and economic consultant to the Treasury (1967-71), energy adviser to the National Economic Development Office (1973-4), economic adviser to the Department of Energy (1974-5), and finally deputy chief economic adviser to the Treasury (1975-6). In between he had a stint as consultant to the International Monetary Fund (1971-2). He was chairman of the Social Science Research Council (SSRC) between 1979 and 1983. In 1985-6 he was economic director of the National Economic Development Office. He was secretary-general of the European Science Foundation from 1986 to 1993. He also served the British Railway Board and the Post Office Board as member. He was appointed CBE in 1983. 
As a public servant Posner's crowning achievement was the rescue of the Social Science Research Council from the destructive zeal of Sir Keith Joseph, education minister in the first Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher. Joseph was persuaded to choose Lord Rothschild, former chairman of the policy review committee, to report on the future of public funding for social science research, hoping that he would recommend outright abolition of the council. Posner mobilized all his political and intellectual contacts to convince Rothschild that public funding was essential for social science research, and Rothschild's report, submitted in May 1982, endorsed that view. Posner's strategy and hard work helped save the research council, though the word 'science', which offended Joseph's Popperian sensibilities, was expunged, and the council was renamed the Economic and Social Research Council. 
In his monographs on fuel policy, public enterprise, and energy policy, and in his proposal of 1972 for a 'minimal reform programme' of the world monetary system, Posner provided for alternative scenarios and resulting solutions. But in 1973 the price of oil rose steeply and governments eventually turned to financial and economic liberalization, which conflicted with Posner's views. Even in that era, however, in his work at the European Science Foundation, Posner used his gifts as a leader who listened to others but was firm in his recommendations. At the foundation he emphasized the necessity of forward planning and of retaining the national councils to fund scientific research instead of shifting the entire responsibility to the European Commission. 
The qualities of judiciousness and fair-mindedness that had earned Posner the loyalty of his co-workers in the government, the Social Science Research Council, and the European Science Foundation may have deprived him of the credit he deserved for being a pioneer in two interrelated areas of international trade theory: his 'International trade and technical change', published in 'Oxford Economic Papers' in 1961, contained the germs of the theory of product cycles characterizing trade in manufactures and the signalling of the vastly increased role of intermediate products in global trade flows. In his later work he continued to analyse the effect of technical change on international trade and its policy implications. But he always tried to show that his theory was an outgrowth of received doctrine rather than a break with it. His very modesty in this respect diminished the recognition he deserved in a subject given to shouting of the cheerleaders. 
Posner lived latterly at Rushwood, Jack Straw's Lane, Oxford, where he died on 14 February 2006, of heart disease. He was survived by his wife and their two children. A memorial service was held at Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 7 October 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 97803


Pounds, Norman John Greville (1912-2006), geographer, was born on 23 February 1912 at 13 Kensington Gardens, Walcot, Bath, one of three sons of John Greville Pounds (1883-1935), a type compositor, and his wife, Camilla Martha Minnie, 'nee' Fisher (1884-1963), a schoolteacher. From explorations of Bath and its environs on foot and by bicycle, from a growing awareness of the impact of the First World War even on Bath, and from reading his father's books on famous battles through the centuries, Pounds developed his lifetime enthusiasm for geography and history. Sensitive to the fundamental importance of education during early childhood, Pounds's parents sent him successively between the ages of five and eleven to three schools. The first two were Church of England schools: they underpinned his lifelong hostility to organized religion but not to its history. From 1923 to 1931 he was a scholarship boy at King Edward's, the local independent grammar school where he became head prefect and captain of rugby. Aside from development of his critical faculties, Pounds acquired from his parents an abiding passion for classical music and from King Edward's his enduring commitment to rugby as player, coach, referee, and spectator. 
In 1931 Pounds went to Fitzwilliam House, Cambridge, then a non-collegiate institution of the university. After obtaining an upper second in part 1 of the historical tripos in 1933 he transferred to read part 1 of the geographical tripos, being placed in the first class in 1934. He had been able to attend lectures by distinguished historians (including the medievalists Helen Cam and G. G. Coulton) and geographers (including the historical geographers Bernard Manning and H. Clifford Darby). After graduating BA in 1934 he returned to Cambridge for a further year to acquire a diploma in education. 
Pounds taught geography and history at Falmouth grammar school in Cornwall from 1935 until 1944. He married Dorothy Josephine Mitchell (1910-1989), daughter of Joseph Mitchell, cabinet-maker, on 30 July 1938: she was then said to be living in Bath and he in Falmouth. Unfit for war service because of poor eyesight, Pounds served as a fire-watcher but also used his time, registered as an external student of the University of London, to obtain in 1942 a first-class BA degree in geography and history and to write a dissertation on the historical geography of Cornwall, for which he was awarded the degree of PhD in 1945. Pounds returned to Cambridge in 1944, as director of studies in geography and tutor at Fitzwilliam House. Although not holding a university appointment, he lectured for the geographical tripos on economic and political geography, but not every year, and he was never a tripos examiner. 
Disappointed at not being integrated fully into the university's department of geography, and despairing of constantly mediating between two disputatious colleagues at Fitzwilliam House, Pounds sought new pastures. For the Michaelmas term of 1949 he went as visiting professor to the University of Wisconsin-Madison, attracted there because its staff included Richard Hartshorne, whom Pounds revered as a political and historical geographer. While there he also visited, by invitation, Indiana University. He returned to Cambridge for two university terms before leaving to take up an offered appointment as professor of geography at Indiana. He held that post until 1968, when it was transformed into a professorship of geography and history, reflecting his teaching and research interests and his work with Indiana University's Institute of East European Studies. 
Pounds was involved in university administration, as tutor at Fitzwilliam House (1944-50), as chairman of Indiana's Institute of East European Studies (1952), and as head of Indiana's department of geography (1962-5), but he derived little satisfaction from it. Instead he devoted his vitality and creative intellect to teaching and writing. He only stopped teaching when he was ninety-two (in 2004, after lecturing to audiences of more than 100 members of the University of the Third Age in Cambridge) and he was still writing at the time of his death (an unfinished book on postage stamps and politics). His beautifully structured lectures were full of information and anecdotes, made surprising connections, and paraded his profound enthusiasm for his subject. At Indiana University in 1961 he was voted 'the most popular professor' on campus; the class of 1969 presented him with the distinguished teaching award 'for his excellence in teaching as exemplified by mastery of his academic field, effective classroom presentation, and sensitivity to the needs of his students'; and in 1980 a survey of Indiana's graduates about the teaching of more than 1200 professors placed Pounds in the top 16. He was an outstanding and captivating lecturer. 
Pounds's desire to communicate with large audiences also found expression in his writing of books -- many, but not all of them, student textbooks -- on economic geography, political geography, the historical geography of Europe, the history of material culture, medieval castles, and medieval cities. In addition he wrote books on the historical, economic, and political geographies of particular countries and regions, including Germany, Poland, the Soviet Union, the Ruhr, eastern Europe, North America, the Mediterranean, and Upper Silesia. For these he travelled widely and read publications in many European languages. He wrote and published his first book while teaching at Falmouth, in his thirties, but probably the most enduring of his writings were his two significantly original books published in retirement, in his late eighties and early nineties, on the history of church and parish in England as a whole and in Cambridgeshire in particular. 
Pounds had no children. He was a workaholic, addicted to lecturing and publishing. He retained affection for Cornwall and Cambridge. Royalties from his books enabled him during periods of his life to have homes in both places as well as in Bloomington, Indiana. Retired from Indiana University in 1977, he moved back to the United Kingdom, ultimately settling down in Cambridge. An active retirement led to his being elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1980), president of the Royal Archaeological Institute (1987-90), and president of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society (1992-4). He was elected to an honorary fellowship of Fitzwilliam College in 1990. He was generous in giving time to his students and friends, and money to his favoured institutions: he funded musical activity and a bronze statue, 'The First Undergraduate, 1869', at Fitzwilliam College (the college had been founded as Fitzwilliam Hall in 1869), and he established a development and welfare fund to support the staff of Cambridge University Library in recognition of the unstinting help they gave him during his declining years when increasingly confined by arthritis to a wheelchair. He died at his home, 189 Huntingdon Road, Cambridge, on 24 March 2006 of leukaemia, bronchopneumonia, and heart failure. His funeral service, held on 6 April at Fitzwilliam College chapel, was followed by burial at the woodland burial ground at Barton, near Cambridge. A memorial service was held at Fitzwilliam College on 4 November 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 97811


Schofield, Sylvia Anne Terry (1916-2006), writer and traveller, was born on 28 May 1916 at 113 Ramsden Road, Balham, London, the elder daughter of William Horace Smith, architect and chartered surveyor, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Terry, a Salvation Army officer. Her father took the name Terry-Smith when his office began sharing a building with the stationer W. H. Smith; she became known as Sylvia Terry-Smith. She left Wimbledon Technical College at the age of sixteen, but took evening classes at Wimbledon School of Art while working as a freelance journalist. 
After the outbreak of the Second World War Sylvia Terry-Smith joined the monitoring service of the BBC, where she met Angus Matheson (1912-1962), son of Malcolm Matheson, a minister in the Outer Hebrides. They married at Kingston and Surbiton Presbyterian Church on 19 December 1941, and although the marriage ended in divorce in 1950 she later published all her non-fiction books under the name Sylvia A. Matheson. A monitor at the BBC at the time of their marriage, Angus Matheson went on to become professor of Celtic languages and literatures at the University of Glasgow. After her transfer to the political intelligence department of the Foreign Office, the cover name for the political warfare executive, Sylvia Matheson prepared news reports and wrote propaganda pamphlets to be dropped behind enemy lines. Shortly before the end of the war she went to Florence as a field correspondent attached to the headquarters of General Mark Clark, commander-in-chief of the allied forces in Italy, and in May 1945 she witnessed the unconditional surrender of all the German troops in Italy. 
Interested in Asia ever since she was a child, Sylvia Matheson went to India after the war, working as a journalist and advertising copywriter, and in 1946 made her first visit to Baluchistan. After collecting potsherds and beads at a prehistoric site at Nushki, in the Chagai district of Baluchistan, she took her collection to Delhi to Mortimer Wheeler, director-general of the Archaeological Survey of India, and he suggested she take it to London, to the Institute of Archaeology and the British Museum. This led to a year's study of field archaeology at the Institute of Archaeology, before she took a job as a copywriter with the advertising agency J. Walter Thompson. But she never gave up the idea of going back to Asia, and in 1955 she accepted an invitation from the leader of the prehistoric section of the French archaeological delegation in Afghanistan to join an excavation of a site dating back to 3000 BC at Mundigak, near Kandahar, in Afghanistan. She described her five months in the high, bare, mountainous, desert area in 'Time off to Dig' (1961), not so much an account of the excavations as a description of her travels, her French colleagues, and the Afghan workers and their families, the meals and parties, and the scorpions, beetles, and ants. As Wheeler wrote in his introduction to the book, 'all that the professional archaeologist ignores in his record is here chronicled with shameless gusto' ('Time off to Dig', 9). She left Mundigak feeling that she had caught a glimpse of the lives of people who had lived there two or three thousand years before the birth of Christ. While still in Afghanistan she was asked by 'The Times' to report on the visit of Bulganin and Khrushchov to Kabul: as part of the entertainment there was a performance of the ancient game of 'buzkashi' -- 'dropping the goat' -- a game so rough it had been banned in Russia. Involving teams of horsemen armed with whips, and a dead goat, the game is described in great detail in 'Time off to Dig'. 
Before returning to London in December 1955 Sylvia Matheson flew to the recently discovered Sui gas field, the first and largest natural gas field to be developed in Pakistan, in the Bugti tribal area, to prepare a talk for the BBC and a piece for 'The Times'. There she met, and in 1956 married, Henry Beaumont Schofield (1916-1990), a petroleum engineer in charge of exploiting the gas field for Pakistan Petroleum Ltd. During her five years there, living in the middle of one of the world's hottest deserts, she travelled around Baluchistan accompanied by her personal bodyguard, Mohammed Mondrani of Mut, a famous murderer. As well as chronicling and photographing local tribal customs, she recorded ancient songs, and also songs commemorating recent events such as the discovery of the Sui gas field and the arrival of the company. She described these experiences in 'The Tigers of Baluchistan' (1967). 
Sylvia Schofield and her husband left Baluchistan in 1961, when he was posted to Burma, and after Burma nationalized the oil industry they moved to Assam for a year, before returning to England. During these years she published four 'Crime Club' novels under the pseudonym Max Mundy (the name of her dog), adventure thrillers featuring a news photographer named Russell Jones. 'Death is a Tiger' (1960) was based on her experiences in Baluchistan, 'Dig for a Corpse' (1962) was set in the mountains of central Asia, 'Pagan Pagoda' (1965) in Burma, and 'Death Cries Ole' (1966) in Spain. From 1967 until 1979 they lived in Iran, leaving at the time of the revolution. She published 'Persia: an Archaeological Guide' (1972), a guide to sites and excavations from prehistoric times to the end of Seljuk rule, most of which she had visited herself, followed by 'Leathercraft in the Lands of Ancient Persia' (1978); she also travelled as a lecturer for the cruise company, Swan Hellenic. In 1979 they moved to Abu Dhabi. 
Following Henry Schofield's retirement in 1981, he and Sylvia moved to a villa in Javea on the costa blanca in Spain. She continued to lead tours to India, Burma, and Afghanistan, and in 1984 published 'Rajasthan, Land of Kings', a big, glossy book about the history, art, handicrafts, costumes, and religion of Rajasthan, lavishly illustrated with photographs by Roloff Beny. At the end of her life she suffered from failing eyesight, and spent her final years in the Finca San Antonio nursing home near Sagra, Benissa, Alicante, Spain. She donated her collection of archaeological items from Baluchistan and Afghanistan to the Soler Blasco Museum in Javea. She died in the Finca San Antonio nursing home on 2 March 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 97823


Tomlinson, (Philip) Richard Henry (1943-2006), teacher and theatre director, was born on 10 August 1943 at 32 Mansion House Road, Glasgow, the only son (there were two daughters) of David Alan Tomlinson, chartered accountant and teacher, and his wife, Dorothy Maria, 'nee' Owston. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 66 Newlands Road, Glasgow. The family had moved to Glasgow from Cheltenham during the war, and returned afterwards. Tomlinson was educated at Cheltenham College, which instilled in him his lifelong love of cricket. After reading history at London University he travelled across South Africa, where he met (Yvonne) Mavoureen Bryceland, the daughter of the actress Yvonne Bryceland. They married in 1967 and later had two daughters, Jemimah and Maisie. 
After their marriage Tomlinson and his wife hitchhiked back to Britain through Europe, and Tomlinson began teaching history at the National Star College, Cheltenham, which specialized in students with physical disabilities and associated learning difficulties. He moved in 1970 to the Sandford Centre, Cheltenham, then in 1971 to Hereward College for the Disabled in Coventry. It was there that in 1973 he met the aspiring actor Nabil Shaban, during an interview for a place on a business studies course. Having been rejected by every drama school in the country because of his disability, Shaban had reasoned that the only way he would get into the theatrical profession was to set up his own company. By coincidence Tomlinson's only question was whether or not Shaban was interested in drama. (Tomlinson had the previous year begun a series of drama workshops at the college.) Shaban sought Tomlinson out as soon as he arrived at Hereward, and became part of the stage management team on a show Tomlinson and his cast were devising called 'Never Mind You'll Soon Get Better'. The show took its name from the platitudinous nature of attitudes towards the disabled, and, in particular, a remark a doctor had made to a young man who had broken his neck in a diving accident. It explored the stories of the cast and their experiences of being disabled. Their next show, 'Ready Salted Crips' (1974), expanded on this theme and consisted of sketches focusing in a satirical way on 'disabled people's perspectives and experiences of education (which was usually second-class), the medical profession and model, family, parents, employment, lack of employment' (Shaban). A key part of the show was 'Blind, Crippled, and Black', a parody of 'Young, Gifted, and Black'. Shaban and Tomlinson shared a sense of humour influenced by Monty Python and the Goons and a determination to shock people out of their complacent and patronizing attitudes to people with disabilities. 'Ready Salted Crips' toured Warwickshire, performing in schools, colleges, and amateur dramatic groups as well as in Coventry Cathedral and at Warwick University. The group followed this with Harold Pinter's 'The Dumb Waiter', which also toured and garnered excellent reviews from the local press. In 1975 Shaban and Tomlinson made a pact to set up a theatre company when Shaban had finished his degree. Tomlinson meanwhile went to the University of Illinois to study for an MA degree in education, specializing in child psychology, and while there he directed American students in a version of 'Ready Salted Crips', which he called 'Sideshow'. He returned to London in 1976 to take up the post of senior adviser to disabled students at the Open University and began to plan the establishment of the theatre company with Shaban. 
When the United Nations announced that 1981 would be designated international year of disabled people Tomlinson and Shaban decided that their company would need to be ready with a show by 1980. An opportunity to perform at an international conference on disability and rehabilitation in Canada in 1980 spurred them on, and by the end of 1978 the company had a show, 'Sideshow', and a name, Graeae. The Graeae were three sisters in Greek legend with only an eye and a tooth between them, betrayed by Perseus and left blind, screaming, and defenceless. The company's work was dedicated to overturning this popular perception of the disabled and providing work and a showcase for disabled practitioners. 'Sideshow', coupled with a BBC documentary about the group broadcast in 1981, gained the company international recognition. In the same year Tomlinson became headmaster of the Thomas Delarue School for the disabled in Tonbridge, where once again he used drama to challenge the preconceptions of the staff and students. One of the latter, Jamie Beddard (who would go on to work for Graeae), later described him as 'a man with no preconceptions and an absolute faith in the individual'. Tomlinson's book 'Disability, Theatre and Education' (1982) was a manifesto for theatre as a unique means of communication between the disabled and the able-bodied. 
Tomlinson remained at the Thomas Delarue School until its closure in 1989. From 1993 to 2003 he was client services director for a national consultancy for people with learning disabilities, MacIntyre Care. He and his family had moved to Plaxtol in Kent where he resumed his cricketing career and joined the local amateur dramatic society, writing and appearing in pantomime. When Mavoureen died, in 1998, he moved to Manchester and set up a management training consultancy before becoming chief executive of the Royal School for the Deaf and Communication Disorders in Cheshire in 2004. He moved back to Tonbridge to live with his daughter Maisie when he became seriously ill with bone cancer. He died at her home, 37 Mortley Close, on 3 May 2006. Both daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 97833


Whitelaw, James Hunter (1936-2006), engineer, was born on 28 January 1936 at 87 Stewart Crescent, Newmains, near Wishaw, Lanarkshire, the only child of James Whitelaw, a clerk in an ironworks, later an accountant and manager with the National Coal Board, and his wife, Jean Ross, 'nee' Scott. He was educated at Glasgow high school and Glasgow University, where he followed a sandwich course in mechanical engineering with industrial placements in the UK and Bahrain. Shortly after his return from Bahrain he met Elizabeth (Elspeth) Shields ('b'. 1935), a schoolteacher, and daughter of David Dewar Williamson Shields. They married on 10 July 1959 at Cardonald church, Glasgow, and had three sons, Alan ('b'. 1962), Stuart ('b'. 1964), and Jamie ('b'. 1968). 
Following the completion of his undergraduate studies in 1957 and a brief period with Rolls-Royce as a graduate trainee, Whitelaw returned to Glasgow University to pursue doctoral studies on the thermo-physical properties of gases, for which he was awarded his PhD in 1961. He subsequently continued his research as a Fulbright scholar under the supervision of Joseph Kestin at Brown University, Rhode Island, in 1961-3. The guidance provided by Kestin was a lasting influence. Whitelaw returned to the UK in 1963 as a lecturer in the mechanical engineering department of Imperial College, led by Owen Saunders, to work in the thermodynamics and fluid mechanics division headed by Brian Spalding. The focus of the group's activities was on the development and application of 'universal' calculation methods for turbulent flows. The advent of such computational methods required experimental confirmation, and Whitelaw's groundbreaking research resulted in the development and application of non-intrusive laser-based instrumentation for flow characterization. 
The early helium-neon lasers were highly unstable in operation, and difficulties in aligning the different optical components made progress slow. A key development, pursued jointly by Whitelaw and his research assistant, Franz Durst, resulted in a compact integrated system that formed the basis for subsequent commercial instruments. Further contributions were made in the area of counter-type processors and in the treatment of data through time-averaging. Together with Adrian Melling, Whitelaw and Durst wrote the first, highly influential book on the subject of laser Doppler anemometry (a technique for measuring the direction and speed of fluids). The experimental techniques developed under Whitelaw's charismatic leadership found wide application, for example in the study of the dynamics of combustion processes in furnaces and engines. Whitelaw's main research goal was to reveal the nature of aerodynamic and thermo-physical processes rather than simply to develop instrumentation. His research covered fundamental topics, like the anisotropy of turbulent stresses and the extinction/re-ignition of turbulent flames, as well as practical devices, including complex industrial burners, automotive engines, and gas turbines. Further developments followed, such as the phase-Doppler anemometer (PDA) for spray research and the shadow-Doppler anemometer for irregular particles, the latter in collaboration with colleagues at Keio University in Japan. During thirty-six years at Imperial Whitelaw published over 300 research papers and successfully supervised eighty-six PhD students. In addition, with colleagues from around the world, he organized a series of symposia on the application of laser-based methods to fluid mechanics at the Gulbenkian Institute in Lisbon. With Wolfgang Merzkirch he launched the archival journal 'Experiments in Fluids' in 1981, and served as editor from 1983 to 1999. 
Whitelaw advanced rapidly at Imperial College, becoming reader in 1969 and professor of convective heat transfer in 1974. He held the position of deputy head of department and was head of the thermofluids section for twenty-five years. He also developed close links with colleagues at overseas institutions and held visiting professorships at the universities of Arizona, California at Berkeley, and Minnesota, and at Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He received honorary degrees from the Technical University of Lisbon (1980), the Polytechnic University of Valencia (1996), Trinity College, Dublin (1999), and the National Technical University of Athens (2001). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering (1991), a fellow of the Royal Society (1996), a fellow of the City and Guilds Institute (1998), and a foreign associate of the US National Academy of Engineering (2000). 
Whitelaw's enthusiasm for life and research was evident to the very end of his typically determined and dignified battle against the advance of motor neurone disease, during which he was fully supported by his wife, Elspeth, and their three sons. He died on 16 August 2006 at his home in Kingston upon Thames, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 97836


Wilson, John (1927-2006), police officer, was born on 24 February 1927 at 25 Amos Avenue, Newton Heath, Manchester, the son of Joseph Wilson, linen salesman, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Pinch. The family moved to Lincoln where he was educated at the City School. Called up as the Second World War was ending he served in the intelligence corps in Palestine, a fitting background for his later career, and an experience that also gave him his first brush with terrorists when Irgun gunmen, fighting for an independent Jewish state, infiltrated his base. The terrorists, disguised as British soldiers, arrived on a jeep and planned to raid the officers' mess for hostages. Nineteen-year-old Wilson found himself lined up against a wall with a sten gun stuck in his back and later dryly recalled that the only thing he could think of was his mother. 
Demobilized in 1948, Wilson drifted through a number of jobs, including working as an advertising salesman for the 'Lincolnshire Echo' and trading in fruit and vegetables in the London docks. He started an economics course at Manchester University, which proved to be a poor choice; Wilson, uninspired, played squash by day and bridge by night. On 23 September 1950, while still a student, he married (Marjorie) Joan Suthrell (1928-2003), a chiropodist. Unsure of his career, Wilson consulted his former headmaster, who advised him to join the police. 
Wilson began his career in the Metropolitan Police at the age of twenty-seven. After two unhappy years on the beat he decided to apply for special branch. The branch was then regarded as an elite in which officers often stayed for the rest of their careers. Formed in the 1870s as the special Irish branch to combat Fenian terrorism, the department by the 1950s covered counter-terrorism, extremism, subversion and counter-espionage, the protection of politicians and VIPs, and also ran a national ports unit monitoring passenger arrivals and departures. Wilson had been turned down when he first applied but succeeded the second time. His introduction was inauspicious; a senior officer greeted Wilson's intake by telling the young officers that they should abandon hopes of reaching high rank because none would rise above sergeant. By the late 1960s Wilson was indeed still a detective sergeant after working in the branch's C squad, watching suspected political extremists, and A squad, which provided protection for VIPs. On one embarassing occasion he was guarding General Ne Win, the Burmese dictator, and was chased round the garden of the general's London home by a curious guest who demanded to see his gun. Wilson, who loathed firearms, had left his weapon at home. 
The re-emergence of the IRA was the spark that ignited Wilson's career after he was drafted into the branch's largely dormant B squad, devoted to Irish terrorism. In 1971 Wilson received intelligence that the Provisional IRA was planning its first major attack on London under cover of a rail strike. Extra police were poured into central London. They could not prevent car bombs from being planted outside the Old Bailey, where one man was killed, at Scotland Yard itself, and at two other establishment targets; but the bombers, the 'Belfast ten', were caught within hours and the chaos could have been far worse if the police had not been alerted. Wilson received commendations from the commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, Sir Robert Mark, and from the trial judge for his work. 
Throughout the 1970s Wilson, awarded a second commissioner's commendation in 1974, was a key figure in the fight against the IRA and loyalist extremists, repairing and building strong relationships with the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the Garda Siochana, the cabinet office, and politicians. He became an acknowledged expert on Irish terrorism and in 1976 was promoted to chief superintendent and head of the Irish section. Often blunt and forthright, he was also extremely loyal and supportive of his officers. In 1977 he was appointed MBE and in 1978 became commander heading all special branch operations. He was awarded the queen's police medal shortly before he retired in 1983. 
Wilson spent eight years as security chief for Britoil, based in Glasgow, before settling in North Walsham, Norfolk. Always loyal to his service, in retirement he lobbied against the expansion of MI5 in the 1990s into Irish counter-terrorism. He argued that other threats like Islamic extremism might be ignored. He died at his home, South Cottage, Crostwight Hall, North Walsham, Norfolk, on 6 February 2006, of alcohol poisoning, and was cremated at St Faith crematorium, Horsham St Faith, Norfolk. He was predeceased by his wife and was survived by two daughters and a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 97837


Young, Priscilla Helen Ferguson (1925-2006), social worker, was born on 25 November 1925 at her grandparents' home, Walcot Rectory, 22 The Circus, Bath, Somerset, the elder child of Fergus Ferguson Young, a teacher and social worker, and his wife, Helen Frances Graham, 'nee' Murphy, who had worked at the Foreign Office until her marriage. At the time of her birth her father was secretary of the Bradford Council of Social Service, and lived at 14 Cleveland Road, Heaton, Bradford. There were relatives of Scottish, Irish, and English descent. 
When Young was four she went to Kenya with her parents, where her father taught in a rural area. Her brother, Angus, was born there in 1933. As a young white child she was relatively isolated. She did not go to school but was taught by her mother and examined by her father. She spent a good deal of time on her own, watching the dung beetles scurry around, and practising the skills to avoid charging rhinos, seeing every day the tall Maasai passing by. She developed a sturdy self-reliance and a capacity to enjoy her own company. 
Young returned to England with her parents and infant brother in 1936. She went to Kingsley School in Leamington and thence to Edinburgh University where, after an honours degree, she took a course in social studies. She then worked in London for four years with the Family Welfare Association. From 1948 there were opportunities to work in the newly created children's departments in local government to provide services for children who had to live away from home. Young worked in Somerset from 1951 to 1953 and then from 1953 to 1958 in Oxford, where she became deputy children's officer. In the late 1950s she decided to widen her experience by working with the Child and Family Services in Portland, Maine, USA, where she remained for three years. 
On returning to the UK in 1961 Young took a post as lecturer in social work at the University of Leicester, where she remained, becoming a senior lecturer, until 1971. This was a time of very rapid expansion both within social work and in education for an emerging profession. In 1971 the government decided to set up a statutory body to promote and validate social work training, the Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work (CCETSW). Young was appointed to head it and she began fifteen years of unremittingly demanding work, based in London. These years coincided with a period of heavy caring responsibilities, as her parents aged and grew ill. 
For more than ten years the council of CCETSW was unwieldy and too big. Young herself said that 'it was like trying to work with a parliament without a government' ('Social Services Insight'). CCETSW was pulled hither and thither by the conflicting interests of employers, trade unions, and academics, as well as service users. Young and her colleagues had to modify, reconcile, resist, or accept the diverse influences. In the years of her leadership there was a sharply increased awareness of the role of social workers in the area of children's services, especially in relation to child protection. The government had set a target -- that the numbers in training should increase by 60 per cent in the first five years. This was achieved, but against a background of difficulties in resourcing and disagreement about ways forward. CCETSW had been set up without earmarked finance and was thus exposed to the chill winds of the oil crisis in the 1970s. The newly formed British Association of Social Workers, fleeing from 'elitism', removed professional qualification as a criterion for membership. Trade unions resisted post-qualifying training as the knowledge base grew. Educational establishments clashed with employers about the shape and content of courses. Issues concerning race began to emerge and caused much pain to many. Politicians were ambivalent and unclear about direction. Behind it all lay big questions about the range of tasks which should be described as social work and the extent to which a common basic training was appropriate. 
Throughout the difficult years at CCETSW Young kept the ship steady. She remained true to her professional values, underpinned by a deep but unostentatious religious faith. She had a particular gift for making good working relationships with people at all levels in the organization from the chair to the cleaning ladies. She was least comfortable in adversarial situations, such as arose with trade unions or in relation to racial issues. She commented that 'one of the greatest stresses of the job was the diversity and levels of things that had to be dealt with' ('Recollections'). These years took their toll because CCETSW became an easy target for those with vested interests. She said -- ruefully -- that 'there have been times when I have thought of trying to establish a self-help group for Aunt Sallies' ('Social Services Insight'). Nevertheless she led CCETSW with a powerful commitment, integrity, humanity, a sense of proportion, and a keen sense of humour, and played an important role in establishing social work as a valuable and recognized profession. 
Young was appointed CBE in 1982 for her services to social-work education. Her retirement in 1986 was marked by the award of an honorary DLitt by the University of Ulster. She lived in the west country for most of the time after she retired and engaged in a range of charitable and voluntary activities, enjoying her talent for home-making. She spent her last few years at The Rectory, Church Road, Leonard Stanley, Gloucestershire, with a friend, the Revd Sue Phillipson-Masters, who cared for her at home in her last illness. She died there, of cerebrovascular disease, on 8 January 2006, and her funeral was at the local church. She was survived by her brother, Angus. 


@@@@@


doc= 97841


Mumford, Enid Mary (1924-2006), social scientist, was born on 6 March 1924 at Iona, Groveland Avenue, Wallasey, Cheshire, the daughter of Arthur McFarland (1893-1966), a hospital secretary, and later a prominent barrister and chief stipendary magistrate of Liverpool, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Evans, a headteacher. Her family and intellectual heritage were in the north-west of England. She attended Wallasey high school before joining the social sciences department at Liverpool University, where she took a special interest in social psychology and graduated BA in 1946. She then went to work in industry, first with Rotol Ltd, aeronautical engineers, as a personnel manager responsible for industrial relations strategy for a large number of female staff, and subsequently with the Liverpool clock and watch maker J. D. Francis as a production manager. The experience of working in industry close to the shop floor proved invaluable for her later academic work as a teacher and researcher. On 28 July 1947, at the parish church of St Nicholas, Wallasey, she married James Muir (Jim) Mumford, a dental surgeon one year her senior (son of James Montgomery Mumford), who was later to become professor of operative dental surgery at Liverpool University. They made their home at 4 Windmill Close, Appleton, Warrington, Cheshire, situated conveniently between the universities of Liverpool and Manchester. They had two children, Michele and Colin. 
Much of Enid Mumford's intellectual development and identity was forged in the social science department of Liverpool University which she joined as a research associate in 1948, working with some of the key figures then making Liverpool University one of the foremost centres in the world for the study of industrial sociology, including Joan Woodward, Olive and Joe Banks, A. H. Halsey, and Tom Lupton. She became interested and involved in research on technical change and its impacts in a variety of industries including coalmining, steelmaking, and the Liverpool docks. In particular, one of the problems faced by the UK after the Second World War was that, despite heavy investment in machinery to make industry more efficient, productivity did not get the expected boost. Mumford discovered that researchers at the Tavistock Institute were at this time developing an understanding of the importance of a socio-technical approach: that investment in technology alone was not sufficient to gain the benefits of new technology, social factors being as important as technical factors. But what equally attracted her to the approach espoused by the Tavistock Institute researchers was their insistence that the object of technical change was more than financial benefit, and had to include the enhancement of the quality of working life. She was also influenced by the writings of Mary Parker Follett, the pioneering American management teacher of the early twentieth century, whom she regarded as having helped to inform her own thinking and values. Follett's ideas on negotiation, power, and employee participation became a critical component of Mumford's own methodologies. Throughout her life as an academic and researcher she placed her values and beliefs at the centre of her work. This was reflected most clearly in one of her last books, 'Systems Design: Ethical Tools for Ethical Change' (1996). Her work with the Tavistock Institute led to her becoming a council member of the institute. 
From her experience of working in industry Mumford realized that if she were to understand properly how technical change in industry could be made to achieve its objectives she had to immerse herself in the workplace, to soak up the attitudes, preconceptions, capabilities, and desires of the workforce at all levels. Thus when she studied the coalmining industry to analyse why the investment in mechanization by the National Coal Board had not yielded the expected increases in productivity, she went down the mines for several months to watch and talk to the face workers as well as to the deputies who acted as supervisors. Again, when studying industrial relations at Liverpool docks in the context of changing work practices in the 1950s, she first enrolled as a catering assistant in order to get closer to the stevedores without her becoming suspect as a management spy. Her account of these experiences in her later book 'Redesigning Human Systems' (2003) made fascinating reading. 
A year at the University of Michigan followed in 1956-7, when Mumford studied at the university's bureau of public health economics. On returning to England she took up a lectureship at Liverpool and took her PhD at the University of Manchester, before in 1966 joining the staff of the new Manchester Business School (initially as a lecturer, then as a senior lecturer, reader, and from 1979 as professor of organizational behaviour and director of the computer and work design research unit). In the 1950s and 1960s computers began to be used to support and automate business processes. Once again there were questions about the impact of these new technology-based systems, and this was a problem Mumford set out to address. In 1967 she published, with Olive Banks, 'The Computer and the Clerk', their study of the impact of computers on the workforce of an Irish bank. This was one of the first studies of the way computer systems affected work practices, and crucially also of the response of the workforce at all levels to the use of computers. 'Computers: Planning for People' (1968), co-written with Thomas Ward, demonstrated the values she held to all her life. 
More studies followed, at Turner and Newall, the asbestos manufacturers, Rolls-Royce, ICI, and many other places. Mumford's earlier studies had convinced her that the accepted methods of introducing computer systems were oriented towards the technology rather than the people who had to use that technology as part of their everyday jobs. She turned her attention to devising an improved methodology for introducing computer systems into organizations. Her methods were based on the socio-technical approach espoused by the Tavistock Institute and the ideas she had inherited from Mary Parker Follett. They included the conviction that if computer systems were to deliver both financial value and improved working conditions and job satisfaction, all those involved, and in particular those who had to work with the new systems, had to participate in the design process. Her experience in industry and her earlier research studies had convinced her that the capability for designing systems was not confined to 'experts' but could be learned by employees at all levels, and that often design ideas stemming from members of the workforce were more radical (and realizable) then those put forward by the experts. 
These new ideas for design were encapsulated in Mumford's book 'Effective Systems Design and Requirements Analysis: the ETHICS Approach' (1995), a restatement of work first published in 1979 with her co-author Mary Weir. The acronym ETHICS stood for Effective Technical and Human Implementation of Computer-based Systems. Her ETHICS approach evolved through its use in many action research studies, mainly in the UK but also including a major study with the Digital Equipment Corporation in the USA. In the evolution of ETHICS Mumford drew on many sources. Thus she took on the different notions of 'job satisfaction', re-examined all of them, and synthesized her own, more comprehensive model. To test the validity of new designs emerging from the ETHICS approach she adopted the 'viable systems model' developed by the cybernetician Stafford Beer and the notion of 'requisite variety' from Ross Ashby. She was a scholar who quickly got to the heart of practical concerns, but at the same time never forgot the humanistic values she espoused. Each of her many action research studies was carefully documented in a monograph or paper in a journal. These provided examples of her participative approach, its rationale, and a narrative that included the voices of the participants themselves. At the same time difficulties encountered were recorded and the lessons that could be derived from their analysis were spelled out. Nevertheless most of the action research projects had successful outcomes. She was a superb facilitator. Her charisma, her smile, and her arguments persuaded hardened managers of the old, more authoritarian, top-down school to give her methods a chance. 
Mumford retired in 1988, with the title of emeritus professor. But retirement did not end her contributions as a scholar, and a stream of articles and books followed, including, in 2003, 'Redesigning Human Systems', in which she provided a reprise of her most important studies. Her work was recognized internationally, and she received many honours, including the J. D. Warnier prize for her contribution to information science, the Association for Information Systems top prize, the LEO award for her lifetime contribution to the study of information systems in 1999, and an honorary doctorate from the University of Jyvaskyla in Finland in 1996. She was also made a companion of the Institute of Personnel Development, and a fellow of the British Computer Society. Perhaps the clearest indication of her reputation was the publication in 2006 of 'Enid Mumford: a tribute', with contributions from leading scholars from many parts of the world, in the 'Information Systems Journal', followed in 2007 by a special edition of the 'Journal of the Association for Information Systems' devoted to analysing her contributions. 
Throughout her career and into retirement Mumford worked for the improvement of the position of women in a variety of situations. She was affronted by the treatment of women in her local golf club, which led to a long campaign to gain recognition and culminated in her appointment as club captain. She was interested in modern art and became an accomplished artist herself. She died at Riverbank Nursing Home, Egerton Street, Howley, Warrington, Cheshire, on 7 April 2006, after a massive stroke, and was survived by her husband, Jim, their daughter, Michele, a businesswoman based in Australia, and son, Colin, a consultant neurologist in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 97842


Sir Osmond Thomas Grattan Esmonde, twelfth baronet (1896-1936). The latter was born at Gorey, co. Wexford, on 4 April 1896 and educated at Downside Abbey and Balliol College, Oxford, where he was a pupil of the Catholic tutor F. F. Urquhart, and took a third in modern history in 1917. Active in Sinn Fein from 1918, he was a republican envoy to the USA and the dominions in 1920-21 (thus following his father's example as an Irish nationalist envoy). He was refused permission to disembark in Australia, in March 1921, following his refusal to take the oath of allegiance and loyalty to the crown, and was subsequently deported from Canada after being arrested for 'sedition' in Vancouver. He was Cumann na nGaedheal and Fine Gael TD for Wexford from 1923 to 1927 and again, after a short interval, from 1927 until his death. In 1927 he became estranged from his father, who complained that he had taken to drink. In May 1933, in a publicity stunt to ridicule De Valera's rural policy and the Irish government's proposal to remove the statue of Queen Victoria from outside Leinster House in Dublin, Esmonde placed a wreath of cauliflowers and leeks at the foot of the statue, accompanied by a fellow Cumann na nGaedheal TD wearing a peasant smock and holding a bunch of rhubarb to represent a mace. He was later allegedly involved with Francis Stuart in a harebrained plot to stage a coup and install a member of the O'Neill family as king of Ireland, but this progressed very little beyond fantasy. Latterly in poor health, he died suddenly of a heart attack in Dublin on 22 July 1936, less than three weeks after the high court upheld his father's will. As he was unmarried, the baronetcy passed to his uncle, Sir Laurence Grattan Esmonde, thirteenth baronet (1863-1943), a barrister, who had served with the British forces in the South African War and in the First World War, holding the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 


@@@@@


doc= 97843


Middlemore, Sir John Throgmorton, first baronet (1844-1924), social reformer and politician, was born in Weoley Park Road, Birmingham, on 9 June 1844, the fourth son in the family of thirteen children of William Middlemore (1802-1887), leather merchant, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Groom (1808-1892). His father, a Baptist, was a prominent Birmingham businessman, who owned a large saddlery and was active in the town's Liberal and nonconformist politics; elected one of the original Birmingham councillors in 1839, he was a vice-president of the Reform Union (1858) and a founder of the Birmingham Liberal Association (1865). 
Middlemore was educated at the progressive Edgbaston Propriety School by Dr Charles Badham. As a young man, he was sent to America to study at the Medical School of Maine in Brunswick and graduated with a diploma in medicine, but he never practised. He was baptized at the Congregational chapel in Portland, Maine, in 1867. On his return to Birmingham, he worked in the family business and married, on 25 September 1878, Marion, the daughter of Richard Bagnall, of Severn Stoke. She died shortly after the birth of a daughter in 1879. He married, second, on 29 December 1881, Mary (1863-1935), daughter of Thomas Price, vicar of Selly Oak. They had a further nine children, eight girls and one boy. He lived for most of his married life at Brookfield House, Belbroughton, Worcestershire, and became director of a patent enamelware company based in Birmingham. 
Middlemore was an admirer of Charles Dickens and Dr Barnado and, through his religious faith and his friendship with Sir Josiah Mason, he was inspired to address the problem of child poverty in Birmingham. Having seen conditions in America, he believed that prospects of destitute children, described as 'street arabs' or 'waifs and strays' and thought to be living on the margins of criminality, would be significantly improved if they could be removed to adopted families in Canada. With the support of the Cadbury family, Middlemore founded the Children's Emigration Home for Boys, on St Luke's Road, Birmingham, in September 1872 and the smaller Children's Emigration Home for Girls on Spring Road in December 1872. The aim of the homes was later described as being 'to save boys and girls from lives of crime and pauperism. The principle adopted for this end is that of permanently removing them from criminal and pauper surroundings and transferring them by means of emigration to entirely different and hopeful associations. (25th Annual Report of the Children's Emigration Homes, 1897, Birm. CL, MS 517)' Parents or guardians (if they could be traced) had to give permission for the child to emigrate before a child could be taken into the homes.Middlemore took twenty-nine children (thirteen girls and sixteen boys) to Canada with him on 1 May 1873 and took subsequent groups of between 70 and 120 children at least once every year until 1883. After this, he employed an agent to lead the parties to Canada. The first party of children were placed with families in Toronto and London, Ontario, where a receiving home was established in 1875. Parties of children were also taken by Middlemore to Quebec, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Maine, and Prince Edward Island. Most children who emigrated were between five and fifteen years of age. Initially, Middlemore, with financial help from his father, ran the scheme privately, but subsequently a management committee was constituted, and funds raised from the public, though Middlemore remained the chief supporter. 
As the scheme developed, local police courts frequently made orders for children to be sent to Middlemore's establishments in the face of opposition from parents or guardians. In these cases, as in the cases of those deemed physically or mentally unsuited to emigration, children were rehoused in Britain. By 1891, 1963 children had emigrated and by 1932, when the job of settlement was handed over to the Fairbridge Society in British Columbia, over 5000 children had emigrated. General criticisms of child emigration to Canada had been voiced since the report of an investigator sent there by the Local Government Board in 1874. Middlemore's own scheme was criticized by the immigration agent in Halifax in 1894 for failing to take adequate care in choosing homes, and not keeping records of where the children were placed. In 1901 Middlemore answered his critics by pointing out that all families receiving children had to sign an agreement to treat the emigrants as if they were their own children. The history of child emigration remained controversial in Canada where accusations were made in the late twentieth century that Middlemore children were exploited, abused, or discriminated against. 
Middlemore was a member of Birmingham council, representing Nechells ward from 1883 to 1892. His political trajectory followed that of most Birmingham Liberal politicians: inspired by the moral leadership of John Bright, the campaigning of those such as George Dixon and Jesse Collings and most of all the political leadership of Joseph Chamberlain, Middlemore, along with Joseph Powell Williams and William Kenrick and most local councillors, followed them in 1886 into the National Radical Union and later the National Liberal Union and finally the Midland Liberal Unionist Association. He was elected unopposed as Liberal Unionist MP for North Birmingham, in succession to William Kenrick, brother-in-law of Joseph Chamberlain, at a by-election on 14 February 1899. Middlemore was returned unopposed at the general elections of 1900 and December 1910, and defeated Liberal opponents in 1906 and January 1910. His tenure in parliament coincided with the period when the Liberal Unionist Party central administration merged with the Conservative Party, except in Birmingham, where the two remained separate until 1918. He spoke little in the House of Commons except on naval questions, in which he was influenced by his friendship with the Liberal Unionist minister of war H. O. Arnold-Forster. Convinced of the inevitability of conflict with Germany, he strongly supported the Navy League's campaign for a considerable reinforcement of the Home Fleet. In December 1918 Middlemore announced his retirement from parliament, owing to ill health and the imminent abolition of the constituency as a result of boundary changes. He received a baronetcy in May 1919. 
Middlemore mixed freely with intellectuals and artists such as Leonard Huxley and Holman Hunt. He donated a number of major Pre-Raphaelite works to Birmingham City Art Gallery by artists such as Hunt, Madox Brown, G. F. Watts, and Burne-Jones. He died at his home, Woodside, Lark Hill, Worcestershire, on 17 October 1924 and was buried in Belbroughton churchyard. On his death, the homes were renamed 'the Middlemore Emigration Homes'. In 1945 the organization ceased to send children abroad and the organization focused on providing care homes for children, after the model created by Dr Barnardo. 


@@@@@


doc= 97860


Hill, Sir John (1774-1855), naval officer, was born at Portsea, Hampshire, in 1774, the second son of Thomas Hill ('bap'. 1738, died 1819), foreman of the mastmakers in the royal dockyard, Portsmouth, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Alms. He entered the navy in September 1781 as captain's steward on the 'Infernal' (bomb vessel) under his uncle Captain James Alms, where he remained until March 1783. From June 1787 until June 1791 he served on the 'Goliath' and 'Bedford' (both 74 guns) in the channel and with the sloop 'Nautilus' on the Newfoundland station, as captain's servant, midshipman, or able seaman. On 24 June 1791 he joined his uncle again, this time in the 'Proserpine' (24 guns) in the West Indies as master's mate. 
Hill was appointed lieutenant on 28 July 1794 and joined the 'Invincible' (74 guns) in the Channel Fleet under Thomas Pakenham, where he served until his appointment on 7 October 1795 to the 'Juste' (84 guns), a French prize that had been taken by the 'Invincible' during the first major battle of the French revolutionary wars on 1 June 1794. He was with the 'Juste' until the Spithead mutiny in the spring of 1797, when he was set ashore together with four other lieutenants. He joined the 'Repulse' (64 guns) in June 1797 but after three months he was appointed flag-lieutenant to Sir John Orde on the 'Princess Royal' (98 guns), part of the Mediterranean Fleet. On 23 May 1798 he was appointed by Lord St Vincent as first lieutenant of the 'Minotaur' (74 guns) under Captain Sir Thomas Louis and took part in the battle of the Nile during which, in his own words, he was 'slightly wounded but did not return myself as such never having left my quarters' (TNA: PRO, ADM 9/36/1868). His ship received the surrender of the 'Aquilon' (74 guns) after a two-hour duel and Nelson directed him to take command of the 'Aquilon' and sail her to Lisbon. He was confirmed as commander on 8 October 1798 and left the 'Aquilon' in November 1798. 
Hill's first full command was of the 'Heroine' (32 guns) in February 1800 and he spent two years in the Bay of Biscay and the Mediterranean conveying troops; he also served with the army ashore in Egypt. On 31 March 1804 Hill took command of the 'Humber' (16 guns) in the channel and spent four years conveying troops. In April 1804 he married Lucy (1765-1862), with whom he had three daughters and one son, John Thomas, who became a general and colonel of the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry. In March 1813 he was appointed to the Agency of Transports and in October 1813 resident agent of transport. He spent a number of years in troop transport ships in the North Sea and off the Dutch and French coasts, and in the Baltic where he embarked and disembarked the Swedish army to Pomerania before the battle of Leipzig. In 1815 he disembarked the duke of Wellington's army and materials before the battle of Waterloo 'without a single accident to a soldier and with the loss of only two horses' (TNA: PRO, ADM 9/36/1868). After the battle he took on board the wounded British soldiers and a large number of French wounded and prisoners. On Wellington's recommendation he was promoted to post captain on 28 October 1815 and, at Wellington's request, was sent with the army of occupation to Calais, where for three years all seaborne troop movements were under his direction. 
On 18 February 1820, again on Wellington's recommendation, Hill was appointed agent victualler at Deptford, one of the navy's three yards with responsibility for feeding the navy; he was promoted to comptroller of victualling on 3 August 1822 and appointed a victualling commissioner on 6 December 1827. When famine struck the west coast of Ireland in June 1831 he was chosen by Sir James Graham, the first lord of the Admiralty, to be the agent of government to administer relief. Hill's duty was to inquire as to the real state of the distress, its probable duration, and the numbers affected. He was to avoid raising expectations as to the extent of government aid, which was to be strictly limited; he was to encourage local efforts and, above all, ensure that government aid did not stifle the contributions from private charity and the landed interest which, because there was no funded poor law, should be the principal source of relief. In his frequent reports to Graham he made it clear that he had suffered considerable pressure from the proprietors and others and that while he accepted that the distress was very great, it had been exaggerated. On his return Graham wrote to Earl Grey that Hill 'has been so much abused by the Irish landlords whose hands he kept with difficulty out of the public purse, that I propose to ask the King to knight him as a proof we approve his conduct' (Graham to Grey, 25 Aug 1831, CUL, MS 26, bundle 6). Hill received his knighthood from the king on 31 August 1831. 
Hill was appointed captain superintendent of the victualling and dockyards at Deptford on 12 June 1832. When famine again struck Ireland in 1836 Hill was sent to Donegal in July, this time under the direction of Thomas Spring Rice, the chancellor of the exchequer. His instructions were to establish the exact state of the distress and to ensure that government relief was limited strictly to that necessary for the preservation of human life. The onus of providing relief was to be placed on local proprietors. On his return to England in October 1836 he was able to tell Spring Rice that he had saved the crown a considerable sum. After only six months back at Deptford, Hill was sent by Spring Rice in March 1837 to take charge of government relief for the people of the highlands and islands of Scotland, where there was a severe famine caused by crop and potato failure. Considerable funds were raised by public subscription, and in his four months in Scotland he spent only $7000 of the $10,000 he had been allocated by government for the purchase of seed. He toured the distressed districts to establish if government aid was required for food and he reported it was not; the people, he said, were very healthy, indeed in a far superior condition to those he had seen in Ireland, though he made some unfavourable comments on their industriousness as crofters (Hill to Spearman, 7 June 1837, TNA: PRO, T 1/4201). The destitution committees in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Aberdeen and the government praised his efforts, as did the queen, who expressed 'her gracious approval' (Spring Rice to Hill, 11 Aug 1837, NL Scot., MS 1054, fols. 197-200). Hill was granted a civil list pension for his service in Ireland and Scotland. 
In 1838 Hill moved from Deptford to be captain superintendent of the dockyard at Sheerness, where his responsibilities included the command of the guard ships 'Ocean' and 'Temeraire'. He was the last captain of the 'Temeraire' before its removal for demolition as marked by J. M. W. Turner's celebrated painting. He returned to Deptford in 1842, and in 1845, at the outset of the potato famine in Ireland, Sir Robert Peel sought his advice as to relief arrangements, but he was not called on to take charge of famine relief. On his retirement from Deptford in 1851 Hill moved to Walmer; Wellington promised to do everything in his power to make Hill's residence there agreeable, and he appointed Hill captain of Sandown Castle, the last person to hold that position. He was promoted rear-admiral of the blue on 2 April 1851 and of the white on 28 May 1853. He died of old age at his home, Walmer Lodge, Walmer, Deal, Kent, on 20 January 1855 and was buried at St Mary's, Walmer. 
Hill's naval career was marked not by heroic exploits in ships of the line but rather by a reputation for intelligence, reliability, solidity, and integrity earned in the less colourful, but nonetheless vital, area of transport and supply. These qualities, and the support of the duke of Wellington, commended him to the governments that appointed him to 'three special missions in Ireland and Scotland' (TNA: PRO, ADM 9/36/1868) at times of famine. 


@@@@@


doc= 97861


Frederick Victor Rubens Branford (1892-1941), poet, was born at 10 Colville Road, Kensington, London, on 4 April 1892. Although his name was registered at birth as Powell, he never used that surname in later life. He was brought up at St Mary Bourne, near Andover, Hampshire, by his aunt Dorothy Branford until her separation from her husband, Lionel Branford, after which she and Frederick moved to Ardgay, Bonar Bridge, Ross-shire. He attended Crux Easton church school, Hampshire, Dumfries Academy, Tain Academy, and Edinburgh University, where he matriculated in 1910 and graduated MA in 1916. While serving as a captain in the Royal Naval Air Service during the First World War he was shot down over the Somme, and lived on a disability pension for the rest of his life. He was a war poet of repute, publishing under the name Frederick Victor Branford. His best-known poems are collected in 'Titans and Gods' (1918), which contains the autobiographical 'To D. C. B', dedicated to his aunt, 'Five Poems' (1922), and 'The White Stallion' (1924). Hugh MacDiarmid was among the admirers of his work. He was married, first, to Martha Munro and, second, in 1937, to his cousin Margaret Ave Branford, playwright, daughter of John Branford. He died at Hillside, Monk Sherborne, Hampshire, on 12 December 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 97864


Robert Tennent (1679-1757) was the eldest of seven sons of Patrick Tennent (1650-1715), a maltman and gardener, and his wife, Janet, the daughter of Ninian Anderson, provost of Glasgow. Robert Tennent is described in various records as a market gardener and vintner. In 1738 Glasgow's town council employed him to clear land and plant new trees on the old Glasgow Green at the Broomielaw, and to supply 300 ash trees for the New Green nearby. In 1756 he was engaged to lay out a tree-lined walk on the New Green. 
By the 1740s Robert Tennent had became the tenant of the White Hart Inn on one of Glasgow's main thoroughfares, the Gallowgate, where he also brewed beer and distilled spirits from malt produced in his own maltings. He did so without becoming a member of the Incorporation of Maltmen, which fined him for malting without paying his dues to the incorporation. In 1749 he went to the court of session to challenge the incorporation's right to control malting activity in the city. He lost the case, but his challenge encouraged other Scottish brewers who wished to free themselves from restrictions imposed by the guilds. 
In 1750 Robert Tennent purchased 13 acres on the Gallowmuir outside Glasgow and built houses alongside his market garden there, in a development that became known as Tennent's Toun. He sold the land and houses four years later and invested the proceeds in the construction of a new inn on the Gallowgate called the Saracen's Head. It became the most famous hotel and fashionable meeting place in Glasgow, with a ballroom that held 100 people and thirty-six bedrooms that, according to an advertisement placed in the local newspapers, contained beds that were 'all very good, clean and free from bugs'. However, the expense of the venture bankrupted him and, according to a newspaper report, he died in Glasgow in 1757 'broken-hearted through disappointment'. His widow, Catherine Liddell (sometimes recorded as Siddell), had to rent the hotel from his creditors in order to continue the business. 
Robert's brother Hugh Tennent (1693-1776) was a deacon of gardeners in Glasgow and a market gardener and quarryman, as well as the owner of a number of buildings and brewhouses in the city. Two of his sons, John Tennent (1732-1827) and Robert Tennent (1749-1826) began renting a brewery in the Drygate in the 1770s, trading as J. and R. Tennent. They extended the premises, acquiring land that included an adjacent brewery and distillery at Wellpark belonging to the brothers James and John Maclehose. By the beginning of the nineteenth century J. and R. Tennent's enlarged brewery was known as Wellpark. 
J. and R. Tennent became well known for their Scotch ale and also for porter, which they began to brew at Wellpark in the 1780s. The firm established thriving markets for their products in England (supplied primarily by sea through Liverpool and Bristol) and in Ireland. It began exporting beers to the Americas in the 1790s. 



@@@@@


doc= 97865


Tennent family (per. c.1740-1890), brewers, were descended from tenant farmers who farmed on land to the north of Glasgow. By the seventeenth century many were engaged as market gardeners, maltmen, and brewers. 

Robert Tennent (1679-1757) was the eldest of seven sons of Patrick Tennent (1650-1715), a maltman and gardener, and his wife, Janet, the daughter of Ninian Anderson, provost of Glasgow. Robert Tennent is described in various records as a market gardener and vintner. In 1738 Glasgow's town council employed him to clear land and plant new trees on the old Glasgow Green at the Broomielaw, and to supply 300 ash trees for the New Green nearby. In 1756 he was engaged to lay out a tree-lined walk on the New Green. 
By the 1740s Robert Tennent had became the tenant of the White Hart Inn on one of Glasgow's main thoroughfares, the Gallowgate, where he also brewed beer and distilled spirits from malt produced in his own maltings. He did so without becoming a member of the Incorporation of Maltmen, which fined him for malting without paying his dues to the incorporation. In 1749 he went to the court of session to challenge the incorporation's right to control malting activity in the city. He lost the case, but his challenge encouraged other Scottish brewers who wished to free themselves from restrictions imposed by the guilds. 
In 1750 Robert Tennent purchased 13 acres on the Gallowmuir outside Glasgow and built houses alongside his market garden there, in a development that became known as Tennent's Toun. He sold the land and houses four years later and invested the proceeds in the construction of a new inn on the Gallowgate called the Saracen's Head. It became the most famous hotel and fashionable meeting place in Glasgow, with a ballroom that held 100 people and thirty-six bedrooms that, according to an advertisement placed in the local newspapers, contained beds that were 'all very good, clean and free from bugs'. However, the expense of the venture bankrupted him and, according to a newspaper report, he died in Glasgow in 1757 'broken-hearted through disappointment'. His widow, Catherine Liddell (sometimes recorded as Siddell), had to rent the hotel from his creditors in order to continue the business. 
Robert's brother Hugh Tennent (1693-1776) was a deacon of gardeners in Glasgow and a market gardener and quarryman, as well as the owner of a number of buildings and brewhouses in the city. Two of his sons, John Tennent (1732-1827) and Robert Tennent (1749-1826) began renting a brewery in the Drygate in the 1770s, trading as J. and R. Tennent. They extended the premises, acquiring land that included an adjacent brewery and distillery at Wellpark belonging to the brothers James and John Maclehose. By the beginning of the nineteenth century J. and R. Tennent's enlarged brewery was known as Wellpark. 
J. and R. Tennent became well known for their Scotch ale and also for porter, which they began to brew at Wellpark in the 1780s. The firm established thriving markets for their products in England (supplied primarily by sea through Liverpool and Bristol) and in Ireland. It began exporting beers to the Americas in the 1790s. 

Hugh Tennent (1780-1864), eldest son of Robert Tennent (1749-1826), of the J. and R. Tennent partnership, and his wife, Christian Neilson, was born at Wellpark, Glasgow, on 16 February 1780, and matriculated at Glasgow University in 1794. He became a partner in Middleton and Tennent, West Indies merchants, and in 1804 married Christian Rainy (died 1863), the sister of Harry Rainy, professor of medical jurisprudence at the University of Glasgow. They had five sons and two daughters. Hugh Tennent inherited the business of J. and R. Tennent after the deaths of his father and uncle in the 1820s. Under his direction, and in close association with William Middleton & Co., the firm increased the volume of sales abroad and exported to the West Indies, the southern USA, South America and the East Indies. In 1855, with the firm valued at $220,000, he retired from business to his villa at Fairlie in Ayrshire. In 1862 he moved again, after purchasing the Errol estate in the Carse of Gowrie, Perthshire. 
Hugh Tennent was a committed Christian who donated generously to church-building projects in the city and provided a site for the construction of Wellpark Church near the brewery. After the Disruption in 1843 he joined the Free Church of Scotland and was a generous benefactor: in 1855 he paid for the construction of Wellpark Free Church in Glasgow and he contributed to scholarships intended to assist young men studying to enter the ministry. He also provided substantial funds for the construction and maintenance of both day and night schools in the east end of the city. He was the first chairman of the parochial board of Barony parish and a director of Glasgow Royal Infirmary and of the Glasgow Athenaeum. 
A Liberal in politics, Hugh Tennent served as a town councillor in Glasgow (1833-8) and as a JP. He was a keen yachtsman, crossing the Atlantic and sailing in the Baltic and Mediterranean. He contributed large sums of money to the Italian nationalist Garibaldi and visited him in Caprera. He died on 15 July 1864 aboard his yacht, the 'Ursula', while sailing in Bantry Bay in Ireland. 
Hugh Tennent's fifth son, Charles Stewart Parker Tennent (1817-1864), had trained as a brewer and worked for his father at Wellpark. In 1854 he married Arabella Jane (died 1888), daughter of Archibald Argyll Hay. He purchased the firm in a series of instalments after his father's retirement. Charles's ownership of the brewery was contested by his brother Gilbert Rainy Tennent (1814-1889), who had previously forfeited his inheritance in return for assistance in settling his debts, only to renege on his agreement. The dispute was not finally settled until 1870, when the trustees of Charles Tennent (who had died on 19 February 1864, predeceasing his father) were victorious in a case taken to the House of Lords. 
Charles Tennent's sons, Archibald Tennent (1861-1946) and Hugh Tennent Tennent (1863-1890), known as Hugh T. Tennent, who was born at Mount Vernon, Old Monkland, Lanarkshire, on 21 October 1863, were infants when their father died and so the business was managed on their behalf for twenty years by the trustees. Tennents continued to prosper under the trustees and the firm's famous red T trademark, registered in 1876, became one of the most famous in the British brewing industry. By 1886 the brewery covered 11 acres and produced 3 million gallons of ale and 1.5 million gallons of stout per annum. Two-thirds of the output was sent for export and it was claimed that Tennents was the largest exporter of bottled beer in the world. 
In 1869 Charles Tennent's widowed mother, Arabella Tennent, married Richard Frederick Fothringham Campbell (1831-1888) of Craigie, who was Liberal (later Liberal Unionist) MP for Ayr from 1880 until his death. Hugh T. Tennent, his brother Archibald, and sister Annie were raised at Craigie House in Ayrshire, where Arabella had five children with her second husband. The brothers suffered from poor health but Hugh was able to start work at the brewery in the late 1870s and was trained in management. He became sole owner of J. and R. Tennent on his twenty-first birthday in 1884, having purchased his brother Archibald's share in the firm. 
During the early 1880s Hugh T. Tennent travelled to Europe with the family physician and friend, J. F. Wyllie Clarke (died 1905), and was impressed by the qualities of German lager beer. Lager was being imported in increasing quantities to the United Kingdom and was popular in many of Tennents' export markets. Hugh decided to begin brewing lager in Glasgow and employed a German and a Danish brewer to set up operations there. The firm began brewing lager in the late 1880s and in 1889 Tennent engaged the German firm L. A. Riedinger to build a specialist lager brewery at Wellpark. The new brewery was completed in 1891, after Hugh's death. Tennents lager was the first to be brewed and marketed successfully by a British company and it became one of the country's most famous beer brands. 
Hugh T. Tennent died, aged only twenty-six, of 'acute fever' and 'fatty heart' (d. cert.), at 40 Westbourne Gardens, Kelvinside, Lanarkshire, on 3 February 1890. Unmarried, he was a wealthy man, and his estate, which included the extensive Dunalistair estate in Perthshire, was divided among his relatives and friends. The management of J. and R. Tennent passed again to trustees and in 1901 to a limited company, J. and R. Tennent Ltd, which was controlled by members of the Campbell family. 


@@@@@


doc= 97868


Charles Francis Tetley (1848-1934), was born at Foxhill, Weetwood, near Leeds, on 24 October 1848. Unlike his father and grandfather, about whose education no details are known, he and two of his brothers (who went on to be employed in the firm as company secretary and head brewer respectively) attended Leeds grammar school and Harrow. In 1868 he went on to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1872 with honours in the classical tripos. After spending a year learning the trade at two southern breweries he joined the Tetley firm in 1873. On 2 June 1875 he married Alice Margaret ('b'. 1852/3), daughter of John William Atkinson, a Leeds solicitor; they had three sons and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 97869


William Smith (1829-1886), who was baptized at St Peter's, Leeds, on 17 September 1829. Since he was also unmarried, the brewery was entailed to Samuel's heirs. But William, who according to the census of 1871 had carried on his father's tanning business, introduced his two Riley nephews -- Henry Herbert ['see below'] and Frank ['see below'] -- into the brewery after John's death. There they were given a sound training in every aspect of brewery management. They were the only children of Henry Wilkinson Riley (1837-1898), a woollen cloth merchant in Leeds who had married John Smith's only sister, Sarah. 


@@@@@


doc= 97870


Henry Herbert Riley-Smith (1863-1911), the more competent of the two brothers, was born at 2 Hillary Place, Leeds, on 23 March 1863, and was educated at Leeds grammar school. He lived at Toulston Lodge, Tadcaster, and on 21 December 1886 married Annie (died 1899), daughter of Ralph Heaton of Edgbaston, manufacturer. In charge of a flourishing brewery at the age of twenty-three, he combined its management with hunting, golfing, and office in the principal trade organizations of the brewing industry. Genial and a good speaker, as early as 1896 he was reputed to have presided at more dinners and spoken at more meetings of the trade than anyone else in Yorkshire. Chairman of the Country Brewers Society in 1896 and of the Institute of Brewing in 1910, he was one of the foremost defenders of the brewing industry when it came under increasing attack from the temperance movement and the Liberal Party. Serving on the royal commission on the licensing laws in 1896-9, and called to the bar in 1897, he was a county councillor and a member of the court of the University of Leeds, and unsuccessfully contested York as a Conservative at the election of January 1910. He died at Toulston Lodge on 19 May 1911. He was buried at Newton Kyme, Yorkshire. His estate was valued at $500,000. He left two daughters and one son. The latter, William Riley-Smith (1890-1954), who was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, became chairman of the company and a high sheriff of Yorkshire; a keen promoter of polo, he created grounds for the sport at Toulston and also, in 1934, made a large donation for a students' union building at Leeds University. 


@@@@@


doc= 97871


Frank Riley-Smith (1865-1912), born at Hillary Place, Leeds, on 16 December 1865, was less prominent in the affairs of the industry, and was said to have been more concerned with the practical side of the brewing operations. Resident at Kirkgate House, Tadcaster, he married, on 3 September 1890, Mary Mortimer, daughter of John Addinell Bromet, solicitor. Like his brother a keen volunteer, serving in the west Yorkshire rifles, he was also a vigorous devotee of the chase. In the late 1890s he settled in Suffolk, where he rented Barton Hall, near Bury St Edmunds, from the Bunburys and hunted various packs of hounds in the county between 1900 and his death. After succeeding his brother as chairman of the brewery he died at Barton Hall on 20 March 1912. His will was proved at $540,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 97872


Simonds family (per. c.1768-1960), brewers, traced its origins in that trade to William Simonds ('bap'. 1733, died 1782), who was the second son of a yeoman of Arborfield, Berkshire, Thomas Simonds (1700-1765), the owner of extensive estates. On his father's death William Simonds, who was married to Mary Blackall (1730-1797), resolved to forsake the land and become an industrialist. He moved to nearby Reading, which the excise department records show to have become the most important malting area in Britain. There Berkshire barley was converted into malt and shipped down the River Thames to the large-scale breweries in London, such as Barclay Perkins. Having established a malting business at Reading, about 1768 he began brewing as well. 
Simonds's town centre premises were, however, too cramped to permit much expansion, and it was his only son, William Blackall Simonds (bap. 1761, d. 1834), baptized at Broad Street Independent Chapel, Reading, on 13 August 1761, who created the more considerable brewery that brought his family both celebrity and wealth. In 1789 W. B. Simonds acquired a greenfield site on what were then the outskirts of Reading, because it adjoined a tributary of the Thames, the River Kennet, convenient for transporting in bulk such ingredients as hops and malt by barge and for dispatching the brewed beer. To design the brewhouse and a family residence he employed his friend the architect John Soane. He met the set-up cost of $6400 partly from inherited wealth, including $1000 from his maternal grandfather, William Blackall ('b'. 1690), and a $2000 dowry for his wife Elizabeth (1734-1842), daughter of Daniel May (1734-1773), miller of Pangbourne, Berkshire. They married at Pangbourne in 1783 and had five sons and two daughters. Elizabeth's uncle, Thomas May (1737-1800), founded May's brewery of Basingstoke, eventually bought by H. and G. Simonds in the late 1940s. 
Simonds's taste for luxury was evident in the coloured silhouette he had made of himself as a young man, with fashionable powdered hair, fancy cravat, and sky-blue coat decorated with silver buttons. In 1799 he replaced the horse-driven rotary mill for grinding barley with a Boulton and Watt steam engine, only the second to be installed in a Berkshire brewery, and a very confident gesture that provided significantly greater capacity than was needed at that time. 
As early as 1791, newly appointed receiver-general of taxes for west Berkshire, Simonds was co-founder of Micklem, Stephens, Simonds, and Harris's bank in Reading. However, the refusal by local magistrates to issue licences for new public houses frustrated his ambition to offer Simonds' high-quality beer to a wider clientele. The consequent lack of competition in the town allowed rivals to sell a poorly made product at inflated prices. By 1814, seeing no future in brewing there, he was anxious to give it up and concentrate on his banking activities. Having withdrawn from the original bank he established a new wholly family-run bank; in addition to himself and his second son, Henry, the partners were John and Charles, sons of William Simonds's elder brother, Thomas; it was later entitled John Simonds, Charles Simonds & Co., Reading Bank. Having served as mayor of Reading in 1816, as four of his descendants did by 1882, W. B. Simonds retired to London and then to Pangbourne, where he died on 13 January 1834. Instead of taking capital out of the brewery, he accepted an annuity and left $1000. 
The Simonds bank survived the financial crisis of 1825. When news arrived at Reading that its correspondent bank in London, Williams & Co., had failed, Charles Simonds travelled overnight to the capital and next morning opened an office opposite Williams' bank, displaying a notice 'Reading Notes paid here'. By the late 1860s Simonds' had five banking branches in neighbouring towns from Basingstoke to High Wycombe. In 1871 John Simonds was joined by his sons John and William and by his nephew James; the latter trio ran the bank until 1905. Although it held the brewery account, relations were not particularly close, the brewery partners declining to subject themselves to what they termed the clutches of their bankers. Despite obtaining the account in 1889 of the newly established Berkshire county council, the bank never earned more than moderate profits, which rose from $4800 in 1844 to $25,000 in 1912. During the following year the fourth generation of Simonds banking partners sold out to Barclays Bank, which continues to operate from the original Simonds premises in King Street after nearly 200 years. 
Meanwhile, W. B. Simonds had handed over the brewery assets to his eldest son, Blackall Simonds (bap. 1784, d. 1875), who was baptized at St Lawrence's, Reading on 20 July 1784. A boisterous regency character, he energetically involved himself in the rough-and-tumble of unreformed national and local politics and in arduous fox-hunting. A member of the south Berkshire hunt, he and his groom used hunt outings to track down potential sites for public houses around the county. His foresight was rewarded when in 1830 the 'Beer Act' permitted the opening of beer shops without a magistrate's licence, and he was able to move speedily, ahead of his competitors, to acquire new public houses. 
During the 1830s the brewery's reputation grew so that annual production rose from 11,000 to 15,000 barrels. Steadily overtaking rivals who failed to improve their inferior brands of beer, it was already the largest brewery in Reading when in 1834 it introduced the earliest of its novelties, a less strong pale ale, at first solely for export, shipped even as far as Australia. Burdened by having to run the brewery single-handed, Blackall Simonds saw a decline in demand over the next decade. Then in 1845, having no children, he handed over to his brothers Henry Simonds (1785-1874) and George Simonds (1794-1852), who since 1814 had been building up a nearby wine and spirits business. Retiring to the Isle of Wight, Blackall followed his father's practice in receiving annuities for himself and his wife, Emma Jane (1796-1885), daughter of Thomas Usborne of Reading. He died at Ryde on 18 February 1875. 
The new partners inaugurated an era of rapid expansion, during which brewery output increased from 12,000 barrels in 1850 to 40,000 barrels in 1868. When George Simonds died in 1852 members of the third generation, grandsons of William Blackall Simonds and nephews and executors of Blackall Simonds, entered the firm: Henry Adolphus Simonds (1823-1910) and his cousin Henry John Simonds (1829-1896), a scholar at Eton College and later a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, who became a barrister. Early in the same decade they began to market pale ale in Britain. Now that much manual labour was being eased by machinery, consumers were demanding beer of lower strength. Within three decades that brand -- sold in bottles from 1858 onwards -- accounted for half the brewery's output. 
A plentiful supply of male Simonds descendants of the founder gave the partners scope to select the most able to join their ranks. They expected junior members to devote their entire time to the business, and to be supervised at a distance by the senior partners, who permitted them considerable discretion. That combination of energy and experience allowed growth to take place through tangible innovations as well as through imaginative expansion of the market for beer. On the technical side the firm's laboratory, one of the earliest in the brewery industry, employed scientists who tested both the ingredients and the standard of each brew. Moreover, George Simonds's eldest son, Blackall Simonds junior (1839-1905), who joined in 1868 when Henry Simonds retired, was a trained engineer. In the mid-1870s he designed the first ever concrete industrial store on four levels to hold stocks of the firm's beer and wine. A decade later the firm introduced a new system of fermentation, the Burton Union method. While being labour-intensive, it led to marked improvements in the palatability of the pale ale. 
The younger partners were in the meantime planning to open fresh outlets, to supplement their many tied houses. Now that Aldershot, twenty miles from Reading, had been designated as the headquarters of the British army, in 1872 they arranged to set up the first canteen for the troops stationed there. The popularity of that initiative encouraged the firm to establish branches in Gibraltar and Malta so as to make beer available to overseas garrisons in those colonies. Between 1877 and 1883 they followed up that move by securing contracts for supplying railway refreshment rooms. By 1885 the partners' technical and market strategies had caused output to rise from 40,000 barrels in 1868 to 114,000 barrels, while net profit was up from $10,000 to over $25,000. 
That year the firm was registered as a limited company, under the name of H. and G. Simonds Ltd, with capital of $500,000. The directors and senior Simonds managers held all the issued preference and ordinary shares. The family thus retained full control over the business, and avoided the kind of scramble by private investors for their shares that other brewery companies were experiencing. The latter had sought outside capital in order to buy up further outlets for their beers; to achieve the same goal without extending its capital, in 1896-9 the Simonds company created no less than $275,000 worth of 4 per cent debentures. As a result it doubled the number of its tied houses. 
Meanwhile Blackall Simonds junior's younger brother, George Blackall Simonds (1843-1929), sculptor, was achieving fame in an altogether different field. Born in Reading on 6 October 1843, the second of the three sons of George Simonds and his wife, Mary Anne Boulger, he had been educated at Bradfield College, which his family had helped to found. Having decided on an artistic career in preference to joining the brewery, he studied sculpture under Johannes Schilling in Dresden, and later with Louis Jehotte in Brussels. During a twelve-year stay in Rome, in 1877 he married (Emily) Gertrude Prescott (1859-1940), an American citizen whom he had met there. George Prescott Simonds (1881-1914), their only child, was killed very early in the First World War. 
In Italy Simonds displayed the family's scientific aptitude by pioneering the Victorian effort to reintroduce the Renaissance technology of casting bronzes from wax moulds. The 'lost wax' ('cire perdue') method involved fashioning a wax model, forming a mould, and then melting away the wax before pouring in metal between the core and the mould. Simonds used that technique to make what is widely hailed as his finest work in that genre, 'The Falconer' (1868). That represents a life-sized youth in steel breastplate, jerkin, tights, and cap slipping, or unleashing, a peregrine falcon of impressive wing span, at least half the young man's height. 
Following its display at the Vienna International Exhibition of 1873 a massive bronze replica, over 11 feet high and cast at Florence in a single piece, was commissioned for New York's Central Park, where it was dedicated in 1875; after weathering and constant vandalism, it was repaired and repatinated in 1982. The trouble Simonds took over its creation reflected his abiding recreational interest in falconry, a sport he worked hard to revive in the UK, becoming founder president of the British Falconry Society. 
Simonds made a number of statues for his native town of Reading, most notably one of the largest bronzes hitherto cast, which took him two years to design and execute, the 31 foot long Maiwand lion (1886) in the Forbury Gardens. It commemorates the 328 officers and men of the Royal Berkshire regiment who died at Maiwand during the campaign of 1879-80 in Afghanistan. His bust of the engineer Sir Joseph Bazalgette was erected on the Victoria Embankment in London, one of more than 200 works in an unusually wide range of materials, including marble, bronze, plaster, terracotta, silver, brass, wood, and cast iron. 
Having returned to Britain, an imposing figure with the widest of moustaches, George Blackall Simonds achieved celebrity in London's art world. There he became in 1884 a founder and the first master of the Art-Workers' Guild, which provided a forum where artists, architects, and craftsmen could share their views: an organization familiar to the studio life of Rome, but not found hitherto in northern countries. In 1879 he and a relative by marriage patented their invention of an iconograph, which allowed the dimensions of sculptures and other solid objects to be magnified or reduced. 
In 1903, aged sixty, Simonds retired from sculpting, and became a director of the brewery company. Two years later, on the death of his brother Blackall, he took the name of Blackall-Simonds. In 1910 he succeeded Henry Adolphus Simonds as chairman of the brewery, and remained in that office until his own death, at his home, Bradfield House, Bradfield, Berkshire, on 16 December 1929. He was buried at Bradfield. Shortly before his death the company received for the first time the royal warrant for supplying its products to the royal households. His family remembered him as not having much of a head for the intricacies of business, but he related well to the brewery staff and was a ready mediator at company meetings. He led the company through the five-month general strike and other industrial disputes of 1926. Despite crippling shortages of raw materials and transport, he refused to lay off any of the 1200 employees. After its close the grateful workforce subscribed to buy the directors a long-case clock for the boardroom. 
A succession of elderly chairmen did not seriously hold back the brewery's more recent progress, thanks to the activities of some very dynamic younger directors. The most noteworthy during George Blackall-Simonds's reign was Frederick Adolphus Simonds (1881-1953), brewer. Born in Reading on 2 January 1881, he was the eldest son of Louis de Luze Simonds (1852-1916) and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (1857-1930), daughter of Gavin Turnbull, an army surgeon. Eric had three younger brothers and a sister. His brother Gavin Turnbull Simonds (1881-1971), a lawyer of distinction, served as lord chancellor in Winston Churchill's second government from 1951 to 1954. 
Frederick William Simonds (1819-1896), a younger grandson of William Blackall Simonds, had emigrated to New York in 1845 and in the following year married Sophie de Luze, the Swiss consul's daughter. Their son, Louis de Luze Simonds, was recalled by his childless great-uncle, Henry Adolphus, to Reading, where he became the first company secretary when H. and G. Simonds Ltd was registered in 1885 and then managing director, and later still Henry's heir. 
Educated at Eton and at Magdalen College, Oxford, Eric Simonds served with the Royal Berkshire regiment in the South African War of 1899-1902 before becoming a trainee with the company. He was made a director in 1905. He initially focused on building up business in Gibraltar, Malta, Cairo, Belgium, and other overseas branches, with considerable success, although the joint venture with East African Breweries Ltd in Kenya did not turn out to be profitable. In 1909 he married Amy FitzGerald (1883-1969), daughter of John Sheriff Hill, a banker. They had a daughter who died in infancy, and three sons, Louis, Duncan, and Kenneth, all of whom became directors of Simonds companies. He succeeded his father as managing director in 1916. The company had hitherto relied entirely on internal growth, all its 350 outlets being in or close to Reading. He took advantage of developments in motor transport, and the ever increasing network of trunk roads, to plan the company's expansion by means of outside acquisitions. 
Eric Simonds began that strategy by purchasing breweries mainly in south-west England, including the Tamar Brewery in Devonport, W. J. Rogers in Bristol, and R. H. Stiles at Bridgend in Glamorgan. In the home counties around London he bought Ashby's in Staines and Wheeler's in High Wycombe. By the beginning of the Second World War in 1939 H. and G. Simonds was recognized as one of the most rapidly expanding breweries in the whole of southern England, at a time when regional brewery companies were becoming common throughout the British industry. In 1938 Eric Simonds took over the chairmanship from Stephen Shea-Simonds. 
After 1945 he resumed his ambitious programme of acquisitions; those included Phillips' brewery in Newport, Monmouthshire, May's brewery in Basingstoke, and Pool & Sons in Penzance. With the four acquired breweries that were maintained in production, H. and G. Simonds' output in 1953 reached almost 500,000 barrels, up from 175,000 barrels in 1900. Retaining the company's capital structure intact, he paid for these acquisitions by a series of debenture issues. After a final acquisition in 1955 of the Octagon Brewery in Plymouth, by the time of its merger the company had 1132 public houses and 63 off-licences. Eric was high sheriff of Berkshire in 1928-9 and president of the Royal Warrant Holders' Association in 1937 and 1945. A full-bodied man with a florid complexion, he would have made a 'good model for John Bull' ('The Times', 25 Aug 1953), revelling in his many sporting activities and friendships. He died in a London nursing home, 30 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, on 17 August 1953 and was buried at Cliddesden, Hampshire. 
His successor was the first non-family chairman, General Sir Miles Dempsey, who had commanded the British 2nd Army from Normandy to the Rhine in the Second World War, and was colonel of the Royal Berkshire Regiment. Dempsey had joined the Simonds board in 1947 as vice-chairman on retirement from the army. His fellow directors included members of the sixth Simonds generation, including Eric's son Duncan Simonds (1916-2002) and Richard Quarry (1912-2003) as joint managing directors. In 1960 the company's board agreed to a merger on equal terms with the two great and recently merged London breweries, Courage and Barclay Perkins, which together had net operating assets of $21 million, compared with H. and G. Simonds' $9.8 million. 
Initially registered as Courage Barclay and Simonds Ltd, the new company later adopted the first of those names, one of the three main subsidiaries, Courage (Central) Ltd having its head office in Reading. Then in 1980 all the latter's operations were moved from William Blackall Simonds's original site on Bridge Street to a new brewery on the southern outskirts of the town, close to the M4 motorway at Worton Grange. 
The brewery the Simonds family had founded and managed in Reading remained under its control throughout a period of almost two hundred years. Thanks to a large supply of able family members, financial prudence in husbanding their corporate capital, a drive to innovate, and marketing skills, the Simondses achieved the very rare feat among large-scale British manufacturing industry of continuous profitability and growth into the sixth family generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 97873


Phipson, Wilson Weatherley (1838-1891), engineer, was born in Ladywood, Birmingham, on 31 August 1838, the third son and third of six children of Samuel Ryland Phipson (1803-1887), merchant, and his wife, Ellen Emma Elizabeth (1813-1899), daughter of a Captain Lamb. The Phipson family were prominent Unitarians, at the centre of Birmingham literary circles. They were also talented musically: his mother was an accomplished singer, while his elder brother Thomas Lamb Phipson (1833-1908), who later became a chemist, was a virtuoso violinist. His father was financially ruined by the collapse, in 1847, of the North of England Joint Stock Bank, of which he was both a depositor and a shareholder with unlimited liability, and took the family to Belgium, where the cost of living was lower. 
In Brussels Phipson became a student pupil of Dr Van Hecke who had invented a new method for ventilating and heating hospitals, which was shown to be effective and economical. About 1854 he entered the Ecole Imperiale des Ponts et Chaussees in Paris, the French school of engineering, and after completing three years' study he joined Van Hecke in Paris where he worked on the Necker and Beaujon hospitals and then accompanied him to the Netherlands, where similar systems were fitted in government buildings. His musical accomplishments helped to gain him entry into high society on the continent; as well as excelling at the piano he had a fine tenor voice, and several of his musical compositions were published. 
After returning about 1859 to England, where the family lived at the Cedars, Putney, London, Phipson promoted the engineering importance of the new Van Hecke heating and ventilating systems for hospitals. They combined efficient ventilation with uniform warming in an economical way that depended on careful control of the supply of air and heat. Fresh air was propelled along an air channel by means of a patented fan, and warmed and moistened in a warming chamber before being distributed over the building in controlled volumes. In summer the air was cooled. He presented a paper to the Metropolitan Association of the Medical Officers of Health in November 1861 describing the benefits of this system. In 1862, at his own cost, he demonstrated to the lords of the Admiralty at Portsmouth dockyard a new form of ventilation below decks to improve the living conditions for the crews on board warships. Through business contacts of his father he gained his first design commission, the installation at Baron Rothschild's private house in Piccadilly, and later the premises of Rothschild's bank in the City of London. The success of his systems soon interested leading architects and his business then thrived. He opened his first office, at 1 Salisbury Street, Strand, London. 
Phipson became an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1869 and was elected a full member of the institution in 1878. On 28 May 1867 he married Elizabeth Humberstone Newcombe (1845-1892), the daughter of a solicitor. They had no family, so he adopted and educated one of his wife's nieces. 
During his productive period from the 1860s until his death Phipson was responsible for installing his heating and ventilation systems in a large number of prestigious building projects, including the Royal Albert Hall (1868), the University of Glasgow (1869), the Natural History Museum (1872), Alexandra Palace (1874), London Aquarium (1875), Mount Stuart House, Isle of Bute (1877), Cardiff Castle (1881), and Birmingham town hall (1890). The latter, his final project, was to remedy the town hall's poor ventilation in advance of the city's triennial musical festival. He worked with and became the friend of many distinguished architects. 
The number of contracts in which Phipson was involved placed such demands on his time that he often spent many nights away sleeping in a Pullman railway coach. In the final month of his life he travelled 3000 miles to supervise his works and attend consultations. His professional services were also in demand as an arbitrator. Latterly he complained of the highly competitive nature of contracting, which drove down prices to the extent that he lost money on some of the projects he undertook. 
An active member of the Surrey rifle volunteers, Phipson was popular in society, despite 'his somewhat abrupt, boisterous manner' which, his memoirist explained, 'had been acquired by the daily contact of rough artisans' ('Memoir', 17). He died suddenly of heart failure at his home, 40 Charlwood Road, Putney, London, on 21 October 1891 and was buried in Putney cemetery in the same grave as his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 97874


Boys, Sibylle, Lady Boys (b. c.1370, d. in or after 1455), literary patron, was the daughter and heir of Sir Robert Illey of Plumstead Parva in Norfolk (died 'c'.1398) and his wife, Katherine Gymyngham (died 1417). Early evidence for Sibylle's considerable spirit is evinced by her mother's will, granting Lady Illey's goods to her daughter 'provided she behave herself civilly, and did not disturb her executors' (Blomefield and Parkin, 7.243). Sibylle married Sir Roger Boys of Honing and Ingham (died 'c'.1422) and they had two children, who both predeceased their mother, Thomas dying in 1432 and Robert in 1450. Thomas left his mother all his silver, the furniture of his Norfolk chapel, and a horse called Powys, while Robert may well have been dominated by her, since in 1444 he gave her authority to oversee all his lands. Both Roger and Robert Boys joined the prestigious and influential Guild of St George at Norwich, whose members included leading members of important East Anglian families and of the Lancastrian court. 
Sibylle Boys remained very wealthy throughout her long widowhood. In 1427 she sold the manor of Frenze, but she still had estates at Crostwight, Wilton, and Ridlington as well as Plumstead and Honing. She was well connected too, having business and social dealings with people who included members of the Paston family, Sir John Fastolf, and William de la Pole, successively earl, marquess, and duke of Suffolk. Her principal claim to fame has long been her appearance in the 'scribbling papers' of the Norfolk justice and correspondent William (I) Paston who about 1430 received from her a recipe for a 'faire holsom drynk of ale' ('Paston Letters and Papers', 1.14); like many late medieval widows, she was involved in the brewing industry. Sibylle Boys also appeared in the Paston correspondence in the summer of 1451, in letters concerning the forcible occupation of her manor of Holme Hale by Richard Southwell, an act that followed the abduction of her daughter-in-law Jane, Robert's widow, by Robert Langstrother. Jane's hand in marriage had been promised to Southwell, but the trouble at Holme Hale had a wider context in the disorders perpetrated by the men of the third duke of Norfolk in East Anglia following the fall of the duke of Suffolk and Jack Cade's rebellion. According to Margaret Paston, in June 1451 Sibylle went to London 'to compleyn to pe Kyng and to pe lordys there-of' (ibid., 1.241). 
On 22 July 1451 Sibylle Boys was reportedly unable to go on pilgrimage to Rome due to old age and 'a certain hindrance' -- no doubt an allusion to Southwell's activities ('CEPR letters', 10.525). Her excuses on this occasion were genuine, but she was not always regarded as a woman to be trusted. Probably in November 1452, in a correspondence about the possible sale of Holme Hale, Agnes Paston wrote that Sibylle 'hath seide a largely of oper thing pat hath not be so' ('Paston Letters and Papers', 1.38), and in a chancery action about the same time she was accused of having forged the will of her son Robert (of which she was herself the executor) in order to sell part of his estate, disregarding his intention that it should pass in its entirety to his wife and daughter. 
Whatever her moral shortcomings, Sibylle Boys enjoyed a rich cultural life. In part she owed this to her marriage. In the fourteenth century the Boys family had made donations of land to local communities of women religious -- Franciscan nuns at Bruisyard and Augustinian canonesses at Campsey Ash -- and were responsible for commissioning the magnificent tomb of their ancestors Roger and Margaret Boys, which can still be seen at Ingham. Ingham Priory was itself a centre for the production of sophisticated art, architecture, and book crafts. Sibylle's own wealth was probably responsible for the rebuilding of St Andrew's Church at Holme Hale between 1431 and 1462 and for the mid-fifteenth-century benches there, beautifully carved with animal figures. She has also been identified as the patron of two of the poems of John Lydgate. She is the probable dedicatee of the 'Epistle to Sibille', a verse paraphrase of the description of the ideal housewife, or 'mulier fortis', whose virtues are enumerated in 'Proverbs' 31: 10-31 (references in the poem and an annotation by John Shirley allude to 'Cibille'). The 'Epistle' offers a fitting model for Lady Boys, presenting the household as a little factory and emphasizing industriousness and female management skills. It also contains numerous allusions to Chaucer's 'Clerk's Tale' -- the story of patient Griselda, a rather different kind of exemplar. Sibylle has also been identified, though speculatively and without clear supporting evidence, as the patron of Lydgate's 'Tretise for Lauandres', a poem of advice on the correct ways to clean fine fabrics. Like the 'Epistle to Sibille', the 'Tretise for Lauandres' illustrates the aesthetics of the gentry household, and shows Lydgate adapting his role as princely counsellor to gentry, and specifically domestic and female, audiences. 
Described as being about eighty years old in 1451, Sibylle Boys is last recorded as still alive in a document of 1455 or 1456. Probably she died shortly afterwards. She was apparently buried at the Trinitarian priory at Ingham, next to her husband. A rubbing of the now vanished brass shows her with her hands clasped in prayer, an adoring small dog at her feet. Her husband is also shown with a dog, identified by a cartouche as 'Jakke'. Following her death Sibylle Boys's considerable wealth was administered by her friend Sir William Calthorpe, who used the money in the 1490s to rebuild Creake Abbey, an Augustinian house near the north coast of Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 97877


Mitrinovic, Dimitrije (1887-1953), philosopher and social critic, was born into a Serbian Orthodox family at Donje Poplat, a small village near Stolac in Herzegovina, on 21 October 1887, the eldest of ten children. His father, Mihailo Mitrinovic, was a civil servant in charge of an experimental farm and his mother, Vidosova, was a schoolteacher. He attended the Mostar Gymnasium and, in 1907, enrolled at Zagreb University where he studied philosophy, psychology, and logic. He became a significant figure in the Young Bosnia movement, a nationalist grouping of south Slavs who sought a cultural and moral renaissance as part of the struggle against the yoke of the Austro-Hungarian empire, and between 1907 and 1913 he wrote regularly for the journal 'Bosanska Vila'. 
By 1914 Mitrinovic was attending Munich University, where he studied the history of art under Heinrich Wolfflin. He became associated with circles around the artist Wassily Kandinsky and the Blauer Reiter group. Through Kandinsky he became involved with Erich Gutkind and the Dutchman Frederik van Eeeden in trying to establish a network of world figures from the arts, humanities, and sciences who would be able to exercise a positive influence on the course of history through their cultural and spiritual leadership, and avert the slide to war. 
The outbreak of the First World War placed Mitrinovic in a vulnerable position, as he was liable to conscription into the Austro-Hungarian army, and was also under suspicion as a Serbian passport-holder known to the secret police. He made his way to London where he was to live until his death. He never married and never took British citizenship. On his arrival in August 1914 he obtained a position within the Serbian legation in London, and busied himself learning English, proselytizing for the cause of a Yugoslav federation, and forming friendships with exiled Serbs including the Serbian Orthodox priest Nicolai Velimrovic and, later, the leader of the Serbian Social Democratic Party, Dusan Popovic. He promoted the work of the sculptor Ivan Mestrovic: at an exhibition of Mestrovic's work at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1915 he encountered Philip Mairet who described him as 'a tall dark handsome man, attired in the black frock coat of an official or a business executive, who spoke with a strong foreign accent but with noticeable freedom, fluency and even eloquence' (Sisson, 85). He studied at the British Museum library and gave private classes in oriental and ancient philosophy to a small group of people who were attracted to him, including Mairet, the art collector Gladys MacDermot, and Valerie Cooper, a Bloomsbury-based musician and teacher of dance. 
Mitrinovic was out to make his intellectual mark and eventually he was introduced to Alfred Orage, the editor of 'The New Age', a leading weekly of that period with a political orientation towards guild socialism and financial reform along social credit lines. Commencing in August 1920 Mitrinovic contributed a series of articles to 'The New Age' under the collective title of 'World affairs'. The overall theme was the portrayal of the world as a complex evolving organism, whose organs were constituted by the different races and nations, each having its own character relating to its appropriate function in the context of the world as a whole. The individual was likened to a single cell within this organism, each a constituent part of a common humanity sharing a single world. He affirmed that history was evolving in the direction of the conscious realization by individuals of their membership of this unified whole. In sketching out this vision Mitrinovic was drawing on a long tradition, but was particularly influenced by the ideas of the Russian theologian Vladimir Solovyov. 
While he was developing these ideas Mitrinovic was widening and deepening his circle of friends and associates in London, seeking to involve them in his project. For him the spirit of organic unity could only be born within the minds and spirits of individuals. If the world was to change, individuals must change. The competitive individualism and egotism of the contemporary age had to be transcended. The key transformative process was the assumption by individuals of responsibility to live their lives in association with others in full consciousness of their responsibilities as members of a common humanity. The organic growth of 'universal humanity' could start with individuals prepared freely to commit themselves to one another in open and equal alliance. 
This was to become the dominant motif in Mitrinovic's life -- the preparation of groups of individuals for a new world-transforming initiative, to which he gave the name Senate. Their function would be to work in and through all levels of society, helping people and groups to relate to each other as constituent members of a common human household. Their key resource would be the ability to view all human problems from the perspective of the world as a whole. 
In 1927 Mitrinovic founded the British section of the Adler Society (International Society for Individual Psychology) to develop this project. He was particularly taken with Alfred Adler's emphasis on the responsibility of individuals for their own feelings and actions, and his belief in the innate potential of human beings for co-operation and mutual aid. The Adler Society in London became a centre for lectures, seminars, and workshops exploring different dimensions of the relationship between the individual and the macro-level of global transformation. He was also associated with the establishment in 1926 of what became known as the Chandos Group, named after the hotel where they met fortnightly to explore ways in which Britain might be transformed in accordance with the principles of guild socialism and social credit. Among their number were Mairet and the Christian sociologist Maurice Reckitt. 
Another initiative was the New Europe Group. Launched in 1931 with Patrick Geddes as its first president, its proclaimed aim was to promote European federation from below, as a step towards world federation. In 1932 the New Europe Group spawned the New Britain Group as another medium for the propagation of Mitrinovic's vision. Drawing on the ideas of Rudolph Steiner with regard to the 'threefold state', the New Britain Group, whose members included the chemist Frederick Soddy, advocated the functional division of public life into three spheres, economic, political, and cultural. Each should be guided by different principles -- equality in the economic realm, fellowship in the political domain, and liberty in the cultural sphere. From the start the New Britain Group pursued a very active propaganda programme and in 1933 a weekly newspaper was published under the editorship of Charles Purdom, the propagandist for garden cities. Sales grew to over 32,000, and Mitrinovic availed himself of the paper's columns to write a second series of 'World affairs' articles under the pseudonym of M. M. Cosmoi. Local New Britain groups were established around Britain and a movement grew up around the paper. 
Tensions soon emerged between those who sought to turn the new movement into a political party, and those around Mitrinovic who saw the initiative as just one phase in the deeper process of sowing the seeds of a new world order. At its first national conference, held at Leamington in March 1934, the New Britain movement was split asunder. 
Mitrinovic was associated with a number of other public initiatives in the years before the Second World War, including the House of Industry League, which sought to promote guild socialism. However, the main focus of activity was with his inner core of friends and associates with whom he embarked upon a sustained educational experiment aimed at developing their capacities as 'universal individuals' or what might now be called cosmopolitan citizens of the world. The bulk of his associates at this stage were idealistic, middle-class, young people who had become involved in the New Britain movement and had gradually been attracted to the central group at its heart. Alan Watts later recalled that 'the atmosphere of Mitrinovic fascinated me -- his humour, the power of his eyes and voice, his secretive and night-owl habits, his oracular way of writing (under the pseudonym of M. M. Cosmoi) and his exotic tastes in art and literature' (Watts, 110). Others who were part of Mitrinovic's circle during this period included Winifred Gordon Fraser, Harry Christian Rutherford, Ellen Mayne, Violet MacDermot, the linguist David Shillan, Watson Thomson, and Ralph Twentyman. Throughout these years Mitrinovic received financial support for the initiatives and their publications from those in his circle who had the necessary funds. He also received a small pension from the kingdom of Yugoslavia. 
With the outbreak of the Second World War the intensive group-work came to an end. Mitrinovic spent the war years in London. His health began to deteriorate and by 1950 he had moved to a house in Richmond where he was cared for by members of his most intimate circle. He died at his home, 114 Richmond Hill, Richmond, Surrey, on 28 August 1953 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. A memorial service was held at the Greek cathedral, Moscow Road, London, on 7 October 1953. Those who had been closest to him during the final years of his life established the New Atlantis Foundation to continue his work and spread his ideas by means of public lectures, publications, and related activities. 


@@@@@


doc= 97880


Cairoli, (Humbert Jean) Charles (1910-1980), clown, was born in Affori, near Milan, Italy, on 15 February 1910, the son of Jean Marie Cairoli, who was Italian, and his wife, Eugenie Ricono, who was French. His parents, who were circus performers, were descendants of circus families with a solid background in circus skills and music. As the youngest child (he had a brother ten years his senior) Charlie was an unwelcome addition to the family, owing to the uncertainty of circus artists' income, and his childhood memories were not happy. His father taught him the basic circus skills (acrobatics, juggling, musical instruments) but was a strict disciplinarian. On one occasion a flute was broken over his head for not progressing fast enough: later, he became proficient in many musical instruments, but never mastered the flute. 
By 1917 Cairoli's parents were presenting a successful musical comedy act in which, aged seven, he had to dress as a bell boy and blacken his face with burnt corks. His role was to interrupt their act and generally make a nuisance of himself in the ring. His father formed a partnership with a Portuguese 'Auguste' (slapstick clown) named Porto and they secured a contract for the 1927 season at the Medrano circus in Paris, where they successfully competed with the Fratellini Trio, the stars of the rival Cirque d'Hiver. Charles was part of the act and, on account of his youthful appearance, was given an outrageous make-up, copied from another 'Auguste', Bario. It was a perfect apprenticeship for him, as they had to produce two different entrees every fortnight during the season. During their four years at Medrano they presented over 100 different entrees, and Charles revealed himself as a good Charleston dancer. When the Medrano was closed during the summer season the trio travelled and made successful appearances in circus shows, theatres, and cabarets around Europe. On 22 December 1934 Charles married Violette Laura Maximilliene Fratellini (1914-2004), the youngest daughter of their competitors at Cirque d'Hiver (she had an Italian father and a Scottish mother). They had three children, Regina, Mary Diane, and Charles. Shortly afterwards Charles's elder brother, Philip, gave up his career as a juggler and replaced Porto in the trio. Tensions arose when Jean Marie and Philip felt that Charles was stealing the limelight. 
In 1938 the Cairoli trio obtained a contract to play their musical number in Birmingham in a Christmas pantomime, followed by a contract for the 1939 summer season at the Tower circus in Blackpool. They were an immediate success with the Blackpool audiences and their contract was renewed for the next season. At the outbreak of war Philip went to Spain. Charles requested French naturalization, but while waiting for this to come through, in June 1940 he and his father, as holders of Italian passports, were interned on the Isle of Man as enemy aliens. They were released when the French documentation arrived. During the war years he and his father honoured their English contracts but missed the 1944 and 1945 seasons at Blackpool as they were playing at the London Palladium, returning to Blackpool for the 1946 season. At the end of the 1947 season his parents retired to France, but Charles remained in England and during the 1950s was naturalized as a British subject. 
During the post-war seaside holiday boom Charlie Cairoli was the dominant figure at the Blackpool Tower circus, whose popularity rivalled that of Bertram Mills's circus at London's Olympia. Each year he had to present two different entrees, one musical and one slapstick. He found that the audiences in Blackpool had a liking for 'water' or 'slosh' (soapy water) entrees, and completely satisfied their expectations, though he did not often utilize the Blackpool circus's famous sinking ring (which could be lowered to allow water to rush in), believing that the effects were too predictable. His musical entrees, in which he ingeniously devised a variety of instruments, provoked as many laughs as his slapstick, and illustrated the range of his abilities. He wore minimal make-up -- simply a red nose and highlighted lips and eyebrows -- and his usual costume for the slapstick act was chef's check trousers, braces, a shirt, and his trademark bowler hat, while for the musical entrees he wore a formal frock coat. He developed a special rapport with children in the audience, who made repeated visits to watch 'Uncle Charlie's' new 'misadventures'. From 1948 until 1979, during thirty-two Blackpool seasons, he had four different white-faced clowns as partners, all called 'Paul': Paul Freeman (1948-59), Paul King (1960-67), Paul Connor (1968-73), and his own son Charles (1970-79). In 1953 he also began to employ a carpet clown adept at deadpan expressions, Jimmy Buchanan (Little Jimmy), a combination which proved an immediate success. In April 1955 he appeared in a royal variety show at the Blackpool Opera House. 
As the Blackpool season only lasted from Easter to September, Cairoli appeared in many shows in Europe and the United States, notably a few appearances in the famous Ed Sullivan show. At Christmas he always secured pantomimes in premier theatres or ice shows, appearing as characters as well as providing the slapstick. He starred in a BBC children's programme 'Right Charlie', which was first broadcast between 1972 and 1976. It was, however, his forty-year association with Blackpool Tower circus for which he is best remembered. Ill health forced his retirement in November 1979 and he died at his home, 129 Warley Road, Blackpool, Lancashire, on 17 February 1980. He was cremated at Carleton crematorium, Blackpool. An exhibition in Blackpool Tower commemorates his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 97881


Valerie Susie Meux, Lady Meux (1852-1910), was a matter of conjecture as she was reticent about both her age and her family background. Contemporary rumour indicated her seniority in years (though her death certificate exaggerated her age) and dubious personal history. Recent research has revealed her to have been born Susan Langdon, on 27 February 1852, at the hamlet of Crockernwell, Drewsteignton, Devon (where she was baptized on 4 June 1852), the second daughter in the family of four daughters and two sons of William Langdon (1824/5-1861), a butcher and victualler (he was described as 'gentleman' on her marriage certificate) in the village, and his wife, Lydia Jane 'nee' Ellis ('b'. 1826/7). Her father died in 1861 leaving a young family of six children. She followed her brothers to London and as a voluptuous beauty quickly made her mark. But it was not on the stage, where her appearances were limited to a season's engagement in a pantomime at the Surrey Music Hall, London. Latterly she had become the mistress of a Corporal Reece of the Life Guards and took his name, being known as Val Reece. She seems to have met Henry Meux at the Casino de Venise in Holborn, where she was possibly engaged as a hostess. The gossip magazine 'Truth' reckoned 'Miss Reece had landed the biggest fish which has floated in the matrimonial water for some time' (14 Nov 1878, quoted in Galassi and Burnham, 159). 
The 1881 census reveals the Meuxs living at Dauntsey with nine servants, her age falsified to match her husband. He showered her with diamonds (the bill for one St James's Street jeweller alone came to $13,859, a court case revealed) and she famously sat for three full-length portraits by Whistler in 1881 -- a $1500 commission he was eager to undertake after his bankruptcy of two years earlier -- wearing her diamonds in one, 'A Study in Black'. The portraits were powerful images of wealth and bravura that did little to bolster her reputation. As she told Margaret McMillan, briefly her secretary, a decade later, men, some of them distinguished, dined with her and her husband at their house in Park Lane, or stayed at Theobalds, Dauntsey, or the estate they rented each year in Scotland, 'but not their women. I am outside' (Galassi and Burnham, 161). 
Henry Bruce Meux slipped quietly into the shadow of his overwhelming wife, though he took some part in the social life of Wiltshire in the 1880s. They hunted; she carried out her duties in the village. He served as high sheriff of Wiltshire in 1886, was an officer in the Royal Wiltshire yeomanry, and, with an interest in the excavation of tumuli, was president of the Wiltshire Archaeological Society for three years. Theobalds was opened up again and the house greatly extended with a tower, giant conservatory, a Turkish bath, and, to cater for the craze of the 1880s, a roller skating rink. Sir Christopher Wren's great Temple Bar, dismantled from its site in London to allow street widening, was re-erected to form the main entrance to the house in 1888. Theobalds was filled with raffish guests each weekend. But in the midst of all the jollity and extravagance Sir Henry, aided by drink, withdrew into his own world during the last decade of his life. 
After the death of his father the third baronet had been effectively excluded from all management of the brewery when the terms of its partnership were renegotiated and on its becoming a public company in 1888. The brewery, like other London breweries that had paid, with big debenture issues, wildly excessive prices in the scramble to buy public houses in the late 1880s and 1890s, did less well after the turn of the century. Others struggled in comparison with the boom years, but Meux's problems were in a class of their own. The brewery badly needed moving to a new, less confined site and its public houses badly needed modernization. Any initiative was circumscribed by the concentration of share ownership in the hands of the Meuxs and Lord Tweedmouth. 
In fact the Meuxs' wealth was barely dented, at least before 1900, in spite of the company's ordinary shares returning small dividends or, in many years, none at all. On the death of his wayward mother in 1894 Sir Henry received her $15,000 jointure and estate (valued at nearly $43,000); he held a massive half share in the brewery; and his estates totalled 15,110 acres and produced a gross rental of $23,507 in 1883. Even when the rents of the latter declined after the mid-1880s he remained a very rich great landowner. On his death at Theobalds on 11 January 1900 he left an estate valued at nearly $700,000. 
As the Meuxs' marriage was childless, this fortune was inherited by Lady Meux. Now one of the wealthiest women in Britain, she lived the life of a rich widow to the full even after the brewery's affairs became so dire in 1905 as to necessitate a drastic reduction in its share capital. Then her income was seriously dented. She sold much of the land at Dauntsey, but not the house. She also had houses in London and Brighton and a chateau fifteen miles from Paris. At her stud at Theobalds she bred the 1901 Derby winner Volodyovski, although he turned out to be a most indifferent sire when retired to stud after winning no further race. Lady Meux died at the Coburg Hotel, Grosvenor Square, London, of cirrhosis of the liver and dropsy, on 20 December 1910, and was buried in the Meux family vault at Cheshunt parish church, leaving an estate valued at just over $200,000. Intelligent and bold, she was reckoned 'acute in business affairs, taking the keenest interest in the management and improvement of her estate' ('The Times', 21 Dec 1910). 
Certainly her will, dated 25 January 1910, was as remarkable as her life. The major part of her estate passed to Admiral Sir Hedworth Lambton ['see 'Meux, Hedworth], third son of the second earl of Durham, on condition that he changed his name to Meux. Lady Meux had funded at the cost of $20,000 six naval guns used in the defence of Ladysmith during the South African War. On his return from South Africa Sir Hedworth had called on Lady Meux to describe their use and afterwards showed an interest in her racing affairs. He became the principal beneficiary of her estate, largely to the exclusion of members of her late husband's family who, she complained, had never accepted her as his wife. But others were not neglected. $20,000 was set aside in vague terms for her own family (some had long ago emigrated to New Zealand with her assistance). The long list of smaller bequests was largely confined to names from 'Debrett'. Her dozen dogs were each provided with 5's'. a week for their upkeep, a generous sum in 1910 when Hertfordshire agricultural labourers were paid little more than twice the amount for six days' work. 
Lady Meux's collection of Egyptian artefacts was left to the British Museum. Begun on her honeymoon to Egypt in 1877, the collection had been much extended with the advice of Sir Wallis Budge, keeper of oriental antiquities at the museum. She had built a museum for the collection at Theobalds of which Budge produced a catalogue (1893; 2nd edn, 1896). But the British Museum could not agree to the terms of the bequest and the collection was sold the following year. Budge also edited and translated, with beautiful coloured facsimiles, two privately printed volumes (1898, 1900) of her collection of five early Christian illustrated manuscripts from Ethiopia. The most notable collection of such material in private possession, the manuscripts had been acquired by a British officer after the capture of Magdala in 1868 and were purchased by Lady Meux in 1897. Moved by the reverence shown to them by Prince Ras Makonnen when, accompanied by three Ethiopian bishops, he visited Theobalds in 1902, she made provision in her will for the manuscripts' return to Emperor Menelik of Abyssinia. This intention was thwarted by Menelik's death in 1913 and by objections that the manuscripts should not leave the country (they were eventually dispersed). 
The Meux name continued beyond its use by the childless Sir Hedworth who died in 1929. The brewery at last moved to Nine Elms Lane, Wandsworth, in 1921. The company, Friary Meux Ltd from 1956, was bought, in the midst of the post-1960 mergers of brewing companies, by Allied Breweries in 1964. Brewing ceased at the Horseshoe brewery two years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 97883


Marston, John (1836-1918), vehicle manufacturer, was born in Ludlow, Shropshire, on 6 May 1836, the son of Richard Marston (1792-1866), a chemist, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' White (1810-1876). His father served as a JP, an alderman, and mayor of Ludlow. He began his education at Ludlow Free Grammar School. Then from 1845 to 1851 he was a boarder at Christ's Hospital in London. At the age of fifteen his parents unsuccessfully apprenticed him to Alfred Darby's ironworks at Coalbrookdale, Shropshire. Later that year, he was apprenticed instead to the prominent Wolverhampton tinsmith and japanner, Edward Perry. Upon the completion of his apprenticeship in 1859 Marston purchased the London Works in nearby Bilston, a japanware, tin, and iron plate works employing some seventy workers. On 19 April 1865 he married Ellen (1843-1918), daughter of Charles Edge, architect, of Edgbaston, Birmingham. They had ten children, of whom two died in infancy. In 1866 one of his warehouses was destroyed in a fire but the whole of his losses were covered by an insurance policy with the Old Birmingham Fire Office. 
After Perry's death in 1869 Marston purchased his Paul Street Works iron and tin smithing and japanning business in 1871 to meet unprecedented demand. He took his skilled work force with him from Bilston to Wolverhampton, which by 1881 numbered 138. During the mid-1880s the japanware business went into decline. In 1887 Marston, who was a keen cyclist, decided to apply his knowledge of the tinsmith's craft to cycle manufacturing. He registered the brand name Sunbeam in 1888 and began manufacturing cycles. The Paul Street Works was renamed Sunbeamland. The cycle business was a success and in 1889 a showroom and a depot were opened in London. Three more depots were opened in 1895, the year when the business was incorporated as John Marston Ltd. The company later claimed that 'In all the chicanery of the cycle boom, they were the one firm which remained true to legitimate traditions and resisted all the blandishments of the company promoter' ('The Times', 13 May 1905, 6). 
Marston also developed two new businesses during the second half of the 1890s. The first manufactured Koh-i-noor solid sheet metal letters for use as shop signs. The second, the Villiers Cycle Component Company, founded in 1898 on a separate site on Villiers Street in Wolverhampton, manufactured pedals and other accessories for Sunbeam bicycles. 
In 1899 Marston moved his business to a larger factory, the Moorfield Works, on Upper Villiers Street, Wolverhampton. Here he experimented with a number of prototype motor cars before deciding in 1901 to manufacture a prototype designed by Maxwell Maberley Smith, the Sunbeam Mabley. Its unusual body closely resembled the early Victorian 'S' sofa. The following year the remaining metalware and japanning business was sold to enable the company to focus on vehicle production. In 1905 the Sunbeam Motor Car Co. Ltd was founded to take over John Marston Ltd's motor car manufacturing business. Sunbeam quickly became a leading British motor car producer. In 1909 Louis Coatalen was employed as Sunbeam's chief engineer. One of the cars he designed, the four-cylinder Nautilus, had overhead valves, nickel chrome steel connecting rods, and an air compressor. Years later when the 'super-charger' was hailed as a new development which would revolutionize engine efficiency, Sunbeam was able to point out that it had successfully exploited the idea in 1909. 
Marston also experimented with motorcycles but abandoned the work when an employee was killed on an experimental prototype. However, he revived the work on motorcycles in 1911 and the following year chose a prototype to be manufactured as the Sunbeam motorcycle. In 1909 he started manufacturing radiators for aeroplanes and certain other component parts. During the First World War the company was a major producer of aircraft engines designed by Coatalen. The company claimed that it produced more instruments for aeroplanes than any other manufacturer in the world during the war. 
Marston was active in local politics. He was chairman of the Wolverhampton Conservative Club during the 1890s and vice-president of the West Wolverhampton Conservative and Unionist Association. In November 1882 he was elected to the Wolverhampton school board and in the following month was elected the board's chairman after the election of a nonconformist had been blocked. He served for six years, before standing down in 1888. He was also elected to the Wolverhampton town council in 1885. The council elected him mayor twice: in November 1889 and November 1890. As mayor, Marston sought to consolidate the legacy of his 'municipal socialist' predecessors. Wolverhampton had been one of the earliest English towns to address market failure in the provision of public utilities. The town council decided to construct a municipally owned sewerage works in 1863 and also purchased the local waterworks in 1868. Marston was one of the prime movers in obtaining for the sewerage committee compulsory powers for the purchase of additional land for the Barnhurst sewerage farm, and the completion of the pumping machinery at the Cosford Waterworks. He also obtained the royal assent to build a power station to supply electricity for electric lighting throughout Wolverhampton. 
In 1891 Marston gave up his council seat on becoming an alderman and chairman of the finance committee. He was an alderman for the rest of his life. During his year as finance committee chairman he successfully negotiated a readjustment of Wolverhampton's financial relations with Staffordshire county council necessitated by the town's elevation to a county borough in 1888. Then as the borough's waterworks committee chairman from 1892 to 1917 Marston worked to improve Wolverhampton's water supply, overcoming strong opposition in parliament to the necessary legislation for the construction of the Tettenhall auxiliary waterworks, which was finally opened in 1911. The freedom of the borough of Wolverhampton was conferred upon him in 1909. 
Having retired in 1916, Marston died of a cerebral haemorrhage on 8 March 1918 at his summer home, Coed Emrys, Coed Pella Road, Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Colwyn Bay, Denbighshire. He was buried there on 13 March in the parish church. The John Marston Ltd cycle business was sold in 1919 to Explosive Trades Ltd in order to pay death duties on Marston's estate. The following year the Sunbeam Motor Car Co. Ltd was merged with A. Darracq and Co. (1905) Ltd to form STD Motors, Limited. 
Marston's eldest son, Sir Charles Marston (1867-1946), purchased the Villiers Cycle Component Company in 1902 and incorporated it as Villiers Engineering Company Ltd in 1912. Charles Marston, who was knighted in 1926, was active in business and Conservative politics, but was best known for his religious fundamentalism, which led him to sponsor archaeological research in Palestine to establish the literal truth of the 'Bible'. 


@@@@@


doc= 97888


Vaughan, Arthur Owen (1863-1919), author and patriot, was born at Tulketh Street, Southport, Lancashire, on 6 September 1863, the son of Robert Mills (1829-1863), master stonemason, and his wife, Jane Ann, 'nee' Scowfield or Schofield (1835-1869). His name at birth was Robert Scowfield Mills. His father died before his birth was registered. In 1865 his mother married Luke Etchells, an iron moulder; she too died while he was an infant. Brought up in the household of his stepfather in Droylsden, he was raised by his maternal grandmother, Ann Jones Gill, a native of Tremeirchion in Flintshire, who heavily influenced his character with romantic tales of Wales and Welsh martial heroes. 
When his grandmother died in 1879, the fifteen-year-old Mills set out for America, where he worked as a cowboy, prospector, and hunter in the open ranges and mountains of Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana. He returned to Manchester in 1886, adopting the name Milne. After failing in his attempts to join Stanley's Emin Pasha expedition in 1887 he joined the 1st (Royal) Dragoons. He proved to be a talented soldier but ran into financial trouble and class prejudice. In 1890 Elizabeth Surtees-Allnatt, aged seventy-one, a wealthy and socially well-connected widow, took him under her wing, encouraging his interest in history, literature, and invention. She purchased his commission and he left the army in 1890 to travel and continue literary pursuits with her. At some point in the 1890s the relationship between them was severed. 
By the spring of 1896 Milne was living in a cottage in Conwy, Caernarvonshire. Excited by the Young Wales movement, he came to identify the Welsh people as his own. Envisaging himself as a Cymric Sir Walter Scott, he wrote for local papers, published short stories, contributed to O. M. Edward's periodical 'Wales' and other nationalist journals, and wrote a series of swashbuckling Welsh historical romances under the pen name Owen Rhoscomyl, an amalgamation of his birth names. He claimed to have worked as a mercenary, fighting in South America and in the Spanish-American War. 
When the South African War began in 1899, Milne made his way to South Africa under the alias Arthur Owen Vaughan, as he would henceforth be known. The former cowboy found good company in a series of hard riding irregular units, including Rimington's Guides, Damant's Horse, and the Canadian Scouts, in which he was commissioned as a captain in 1901. He was known for his bravery, was mentioned in dispatches and received the Distinguished Conduct Medal. In December 1900 he married a young woman of the veldt, Catherine Lois Geere (1882-1927), in a ceremony kept secret from her family, some of whom were fighting the British. His wife was later interned in the Vredefort concentration camp, where three members of her family died, before being reunited with Vaughan following the war. As a leader of scouts, Vaughan was involved in the war's brutality. In January 1902 he led an assault against a farmhouse marked as a Red Cross hospital, shooting a nurse several times in the confusion. The protests of General de Wet were dismissed by General Kitchener, who claimed the attack on the hospital had been provoked by a body of armed Boers who had fled the farmhouse some moments earlier. Although badly wounded, the nurse, Lily Rautenbach, forgave him at the site and came to outlive him. After the war he led a frustrated effort to relocate the Welsh colony in Patagonia to South Africa. 
After returning to Wales Vaughan settled with his family at Arthog in Merioneth, and later at Dinas Powys in Glamorgan. He wrote novels, short stories and essays, including his semi-autobiographical novel of the South African War, 'Old Fireproof' (1906). While fiction was his main source of income, Welsh history and lore remained his true passion and ambition. In 1905 he published 'Flame-bearers of Welsh History', a romantic history of Wales written in English for the nation's youth. He was determined to establish that the Welsh were the descendants not of the demoralized and defeated Britons who had fled from the Saxons but of a vibrant, conquering race, the sons of Cunedda from the north. Believing that the medieval Welsh genealogies were the key to proving his theories, he threw himself into the study of these materials in the hope of producing a definitive history of Wales. 
With the support of the nationalist Sir Thomas Marchant Williams, Vaughan was invited to script the National Pageant of Wales in Cardiff in 1909. A grand spectacle performed by a cast of thousands, the pageant gave Vaughan further fame and popularized his highly romantic vision of Welsh history. Through his work on the pageant he met his friend and patron Thomas Scott-Ellis, Lord Howard de Walden. Fascinated by his own Welsh heritage, Howard de Walden took up residence in Chirk Castle and engaged in a variety of projects to support the culture of Wales. Vaughan was placed at the forefront of these efforts, acting as manager of Howard de Walden's project for the National Theatre of Wales (1913-14). Vaughan pursued his own campaign of patriotic activity, launching projects and championing causes further to dignify and develop the sinews of the Welsh nation. He organized a movement in Cardiff to revive the investiture of the prince of Wales (1911) as a public celebration of Welsh nationhood. Although the 'Western Mail' hailed the event as Vaughan's personal triumph, the royal ritual took place in circumstances that denied Vaughan any official role. His projected multi-volume historical masterpiece, 'The Matter of Wales', never materialized except for a poorly received preliminary volume that appeared in 1913. 
While devoted to Wales, Vaughan saw himself as an active patriot of the British empire. In 1904 he helped found the Legion of Frontiersmen, the brainchild of the adventurer and writer Roger Pocock. Rather than a mere fraternal order, the legion was envisioned as a far-flung network of volunteers whose frontier and maritime skills equipped them to carry out acts of espionage for the British empire. When the Secret Service was formed in 1909, Vaughan claimed to be connected to it and is said to have played some role in the planning of counter-espionage and insurgency during the German invasion scare. Known as a quick draw and expert shot, Vaughan was called upon to attend the king as a discreetly armed bodyguard during the royal visit to south Wales in 1912. 
During the First World War Vaughan advocated that Wales raise a distinctly national unit, led by Welsh officers, marching beneath the dragon standard and equipped with items of Welsh manufacture. With the idea of creating the nucleus of a Welsh regiment of guards, he quickly raised a regiment of Welsh horse but the War Office denied him command in favour of Lord Kensington. Eventually joining the Northumberland Fusiliers as a major, he was lent to other regiments and served in a variety of places on the western front. The London correspondent for the 'Western Mail' believed that in his wandering Vaughan was acting as the agent of David Lloyd George. He was promoted to temporary lieutenant-colonel in 1917 and given a series of commands in the labour corps, where he was said to have restored morale and discipline. He was twice mentioned in dispatches and was appointed to the DSO. 
Vaughan died in a London nursing home, at 49 Beaumont Street, of liver cancer, on 15 October 1919. He was buried three days later in the churchyard of St Thomas, Rhyl, where after some difficulty a Celtic cross was raised by public subscription. On Lloyd George's recommendation he was posthumously made MBE. He left a very small estate, and despite the aid of Howard de Walden, his widow and their four children, Rhys ('b'. 1903), Olwen ('b'. 1904), Nest ('b'. 1906), and Emrys Llewelyn ('b'. 1907), struggled with poverty. 


@@@@@


doc= 97889


Meux family (per. 1757-1910), brewers, was descended from an old landed family from the Isle of Wight that had possessed a baronetcy from 1641 to 1705. On the original baronetcy's extinction the family's standard passed to Thomas Meux, who had established himself as a merchant in London. He married well, taking as his wife Elizabeth (died 1738), the daughter and eventual heir of Sir William Massingberd, second baronet (1677-1719), of Gunby, Lincolnshire. Their elder son, William Meux, inherited Gunby and assumed by act of parliament the name of Massingbird; the younger son, Richard (died 1751), who in 1732 married Hannah Bradshaw, was rector of Weddington, Warwickshire. 
It was the latter's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 97890


Richard Meux (bap. 1734, d. 1813), who first dipped his toes into the swirling vat of London brewing. Baptized at St Giles's, Cripplegate, London, on 4 October 1734, he acquired with a Scottish partner, in 1757, aged only twenty-three, a run-down brewery in the Long Acre district, famed as the centre of London's leading coach building and cabinetmaking workshops. The business was valued at about $15,000, and the young men had to raise half its purchase price from several lenders, including $2000 from William Massingbird. Progress at first was modest. Loans were not paid off. Output barely grew. In a list of the amounts of malt consumed by London breweries, Meux came thirty-first. Then in January 1763 Meux's brewery was badly damaged by fire. Quickly they built the new Griffin (the crest of nearby Gray's Inn) brewery in Liquorpond Street (now part of Clerkenwell Road). The new brewery slowly began to prosper. By 1787, when Richard Meux appears to have been its sole proprietor, it was producing close on 50,000 barrels of porter a year. Although this was less than half of the amount brewed by each of its major rivals, Barclay Perkins, Whitbread, Trumans, and the two Calvert breweries, growth had been impressive since 1780. Further growth was promised. For the first time, in 1795, the brewery's output exceeded 100,000 barrels, clearly placing it among the capital's half dozen market leaders. 
Richard Meux had a good eye for publicity. This was achieved by brewers erecting larger and larger vats in which to mature their porter. In 1790 Meux had constructed one sixty feet across and over twenty feet high. On its completion 200 people dined inside it with a similar number standing around to toast its builder. Five years later he was constructing one designed to hold 20,000 barrels and costing $10,000 (equivalent to the cost of a large country house). Richard Meux's success attracted new partners into the firm: Andrew Reid, a well-to-do merchant and distiller in 1793, and five years later the incredibly energetic Sir Robert Wigram, an even richer East India merchant, shipowner and shipbuilder, cable maker, drug importer, and the owner of Blackwall docks. Although both brought large amounts of capital into the firm to extend the brewery, to acquire the freeholds and leases of more public houses, and to make large loans to publicans to tie their trade, its management sharply deteriorated. 
Richard Meux had married, on 31 July 1767, Mary, daughter of Henry Brougham, of Brougham Hall; his wife was the aunt of Henry Brougham, the lord chancellor. They had three sons and two daughters. His wife died at their home in Bloomsbury Square, London, on 8 December 1812; he died on 2 July 1813, at Castlebar Hill, Ealing, Middlesex. He had withdrawn from the brewery's day-to-day affairs in his sixties, and introduced his three sons into the firm. With Reid and especially Wigram busy elsewhere, running the brewery in the early years of the nineteenth century was left largely to them. Heavily indebted to their father for their shares in the business, the sons proceeded to fall out among themselves. Matters were not helped when the eldest son, Richard Meux (1768-1824), was declared insane in 1806. 
The second, and dominant, son, 


@@@@@


doc= 97891


Henry Bruce Meux, third baronet (1856-1900), was born at 41 Brook Street, London, on 21 November 1856 and, following his father's insanity and mother's absence abroad, was left to the care of trustees who had him educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, which he entered in 1875. When he came of age in November 1877 the world appeared to be at his feet: he had an income of $28,000 a year and immediately bought, at the top of the market, the 12,000 acre Dauntsey estate near Malmesbury in Wiltshire. After his leaving Cambridge without a degree at Easter 1878 there was no period of training in the brewery. Instead, having left his yacht in Rouen, he was 'running wild with... low people' in Paris (Surtees, 116). Three months later he contracted a disastrous marriage, which caused him to abandon any thoughts of the parliamentary career for which he appeared previously to have been destined. 
Anticipating the wave of marriages between members of the nobility and actresses in the 1880s, Henry Bruce Meux was married, without the knowledge of his family, on 27 October 1878 at All Souls', Langham Place, London. The precise identity of his wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 97894


Taylour, Helen Frances (1904-1983), racing motorist and political activist, was born at Oxmanton Hall, Birr, King's county (later co. Offaly), Ireland, on 5 April 1904, the daughter of Herbert Fetherstonhaugh Taylour (1868/9-1952), a district inspector in the Royal Irish Constabulary, and a former colonel in the British army, and his wife, Helen Allardice, 'nee' Webb (1868/9-1925), whose father was a surgeon general of the Royal Army Medical Corps. One of Helen Taylour's sisters became an active suffragette and was imprisoned in Holloway gaol, where Fay was taken to see her. Later Fay Taylour would also be imprisoned there. 
Taylour was educated at Miss Fletcher's boarding school in Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, before moving, in 1919, to Alexandra College, Dublin. She left Alexandra College in 1922, having won the school's tennis trophy and a $50 prize for housecraft. Her family had already moved to Burghfield Bridge Lodge, Berkshire, following the creation of the Irish Free State and the disbanding of the Royal Irish Constabulary. Although Fay Taylour had been able to drive since the age of twelve it was not until she moved to England that she learned to ride a motorcycle, using her school prize money to buy, in quick succession, a number of increasingly powerful motorcycles. 
Taylour's first competitive motorcycle race was a women's event held by the North London Cycle Club in February 1927. She was unsuccessful, but this event marked the beginning of her motorcycle career. She rode in a number of events that spring, and her success in the Southern Scott scramble in March, when she won the Venus cup for ladies, and the Camberley meeting in May led her to be taken on by the AJS motorcycle firm as a works team rider. She soon won a succession of races in different classes -- grass track, cross country, hill climbs, and trials -- and demonstrated from the outset that she was 'a rider of consummate skill with a striking determination and a courageous spirit' (Belton, 27). 
Within a few months of starting her racing career Taylour was making a living from prize money; she moved from AJS to the Rudge team, and turned to dirt track, or speedway, racing. Her first speedway competition was at the Crystal Palace track in June 1928. She quickly made a name for herself in the sport, riding a Douglas against men and, notably, against the other leading woman dirt racer, Eva Askquith, whom she beat at Cleveland Park Speedway in Middlesbrough on 4 September 1928. In 1929 Taylour went to Australia to race in what was seen as the home of speedway. She defeated many Australian stars, including the most famous of the day, 'Super' Sig Schlam. She drew record crowds and took $1500 in prize money in four months. She returned to Australia in the winter of 1929, racing there and in New Zealand until the following summer. But when she returned to Britain she found that women had been banned from speedway racing by the Auto-Cycle Union. Although Taylour continued to race in speedway in Europe the ban had effectively ended her speedway career, forcing a move to motor car racing. 
In 1931 Taylour went to India, where she won her first major car race, beating the course record for the Calcutta to Ranchi event. She went on to race in a range of classes. In October 1931, driving a Talbot, she won the ladies' handicap at Brooklands at a speed of 98.37 m.p.h., and regularly competed there until 1938. In the 3600 mile round Italy race, in May 1934, she drove a 1500 cc Aston Martin along with J. W. Bezzant. The same year she won the first Leinster trophy cup, the only woman driver in a field of twenty-nine. In 1939 she raced in the South African grand prix, but mechanical failure forced her out of the race. From South Africa she went to Germany, where she hoped to get a chance to drive the latest German cars, but frustrated in this she returned to England. 
Taylour returned to England on 26 August 1939, a week before Britain's entry into the Second World War. Exactly two months later 'Action', the newspaper of the British Union of Fascists, announced: 'Miss Fay Taylour, the famous woman racing car driver, has just joined the British Union, and has placed her services at the disposal of the Peace Campaign' ('Action', 26 Oct 1939). She was active in the British Union's anti-war campaign, but she was also involved with other anti-war and pro-Nazi groups. She was one of a number of largely women members of the Right Club who remained active despite the formal disbanding of the group by its founder, Captain Maule Ramsay MP. This activism led to her internment on 1 June 1940, and she was held, without charge or trial, until October 1943, first at Holloway gaol, then on the Isle of Man. 
Following the war Taylour moved between the United Kingdom and Ireland, and was involved in the re-emergence of Mosleyite politics in London. But in 1949 she emigrated to the United States, where she sold British sports cars in Hollywood. She also returned to motor sport, racing midget cars on dirt tracks, racing in the USA, Europe, and Britain. In 1952 she travelled from the USA to her father's funeral in England, having been assured that there would be no visa problems on her return to the USA. However, she was refused re-entry into the USA as a security risk. This was a major blow to Taylour as it cut short her new racing career in America, although she was finally permitted re-entry in 1955. She continued to race throughout the 1950s, but by the end of the decade had retired. She continued to move around in her retirement, living for a year in South Africa. In August 1975 she moved to Winterborne Tomson, Dorset, where she lived in straitened circumstances, suffering from arthritis in her spine and hips. It was not until March 1976 that the British security services closed the file on her. She died, unmarried, at the Dorset County Hospital, Dorchester, on 2 August 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 97895


Twyford, Thomas William (1849-1921), sanitary ware manufacturer, was born at Hanover Street, Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, on 23 September 1849, the eldest son in the family of four sons and one daughter of Thomas Twyford (1827-1872), earthenware manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Jones (died 1874). He came from a long line of north Staffordshire potters and was a descendant of Joshua Twyford ('bap'. 1640, died 1729), a potter in Hanley. His father established two earthenware factories, the Bath Street works in Hanley and the Abbey works in Bucknall, and in 1849 began the manufacture of sanitary goods at the Bath Street works, building up a substantial trade and exporting to markets across Europe and to the United States. 
Twyford's father died at Shelton in September 1872 and, after a period when the sanitary ware business was run by trustees, he assumed control. He had married, on 20 June 1872, Susannah, daughter of Edward Whittingham, farmer; they had a son and a daughter. He released his first sanitary ware catalogue in March 1879. The 1870s marked a critical period in the development of the water closet when expert opinion from several leading sanitary reformers advocated the use of simple basin and trap closets made entirely of earthenware in place of the complicated and expensive mechanical water closets generally preferred at the time by the well-to-do. Basin and trap closets were either made in two parts with an upper basin attached to a water-sealed trap or were made in one piece. From about 1875 the 'wash-out' closet emerged as the preferred type of basin trap closet, and Twyford's new range of 1879 included his own version, the National. Like all wash-out closets the basin of the National held a shallow reserve of water which was forced through the water-sealed trap when the device was flushed. The National was awarded honours at sanitary exhibitions in 1881 at South Kensington and Brighton and in 1882 Twyford added a second wash-out closet, the Crown, to his range followed by a third, the Alliance in 1883. 
These three models were not freestanding and required the support of a wooden enclosure surmounted by a fixed wooden seat. During the early 1880s freestanding closets, which were easier to clean and, therefore, more hygienic, developed and Twyford was again quick to adopt the latest thinking. About 1884 he introduced his first freestanding closet, the Unitas. The earliest model retained an exposed trap but he persuaded his best potters to undertake the complicated manufacture of a pedestal version that enclosed the basin and trap within an exterior casing all in one piece of earthenware. Twyford cannot be given the credit for introducing the first commercially successful one-piece pedestal water closet -- that innovation is probably attributable to the London firm of George Jennings -- but in the Unitas Twyford produced one of the most celebrated wash-out closets of the 1880s. The exterior of the more expensive versions was finished with an elaborate oak leaf and acorn design in relief, while the interior of the basin was decorated with an underglaze printed floral design in blue. A second exterior styling called Florentine made its debut in the 1886 catalogue. 
In 1884 Twyford took out his first patent for a ceramic baffle or 'fan' placed near the flush inlet to assist in the distribution of water around the basin. Further patents followed in 1886 and 1887 for improvements to the flushing rim and the outlet and then, in 1888, he took out patent protection for an 'after flush' chamber that allowed for a quantity of clean water to refill the shallow basin once the closet was flushed. Twyford's 'architect's catalogue' of 1887, however, shows that Twyford had first added the 'after flush' chamber to his four wash-out closets the previous year. 
From about 1878 support slowly grew for another type of basin and trap closet -- simpler than the wash-out -- with just one reserve of water in the basin and trap. Twyford had included one in his 1879 catalogue calling it the Lillyman: it was not granted the same prominence as its more illustrious wash-out counterpart the National, sharing a page towards the end of the catalogue with some of the cheapest (and worst) basin and trap closets intended for use by servants and the poor generally. Indeed this type of closet was but an improved type of the widely condemned short-hopper or cottage basin and trap. However, by the mid-1880s the simplicity and effectiveness of this type of closet -- by now generally known as the wash-down closet -- was widely acknowledged. The first pedestal version (devised by Frederick Humpherson of Chelsea) made its debut in 1885 and in 1889 Twyford followed with his own pedestal version, the Deluge. Like the Unitas, the best models were given a superb finish with a liberal use of both relief and transfer printed decoration. 
In the late 1880s Twyford made improvements to other items of ceramic sanitary ware. About 1887 he introduced earthenware handbasins made with improved holes for the taps, integrated overflow chambers, and facias designed to hide the iron brackets supporting the basin. He also introduced a pedestal bidet with hot and cold taps, standing waste, overflow, and flushing rim. In 1890 and 1891 he took out patents for improvements to the draining and trapping of sinks and also in 1891 patented an improved siphon operated 'water waste preventer', the Victorian term for a toilet cistern. 
In 1887 Twyford consolidated his manufacturing operations on a new 9 acre site at Cliffe Vale, Stoke-on-Trent, alongside the Trent and Mersey Canal and the North Staffordshire Railway. Determined to reduce the incidence of industrial disease caused by inhaling sharp, fine particles of silica dust, he ensured that the new factory was spacious and well ventilated and kept scrupulously clean. In late 1890 he began the manufacture of fireclay sanitary ware. Fireclay was coarser than earthenware but stronger and tougher, and therefore ideal for the robust sanitary ware required in such public facilities and institutions as schools and workhouses. As fireclay potting was little known in Staffordshire, he recruited a team of experienced fireclay potters from Scotland and brought them to Hanley where, using local fireclays, he got them to experiment with the making of large pieces. By 1894 the firm was producing a wide range of porcelain enamelled fireclay sanitary ware of enormous size and strength including baths, large sinks, trough closets for use in institutions and urinals including a splendid arrangement of six stalls arranged in a full circle. Initially sold as 'Cliffe Vale porcelain enamelled fireclay', in 1899 the trade name was changed to Adamant. 
Twyford added to his range of water closets in 1894 when he introduced the Twycliffe, the first really effective single-trap syphonic closet. The same year he introduced his first low level cistern; a close coupled closet and cistern followed in 1899. The firm's range of water closets, ceramic cistern casings, and wash basins reached its apogee in the profusely illustrated 'twentieth century catalogue', released in 1900, which offered an impressive range of superb decorative finishes including the use of relief ornament, coloured slips, and gold leaf as well as transfer printed and hand painted designs. In 1899 a new material, Vitrina ware, a hard impermeable material that did not require a glaze, was introduced. 
Between the mid-1870s and 1900 sales increased more than fivefold and Twyford established showrooms in Berlin, Cape Town, and Sydney. Twyford also traded in other parts of Europe, Russia, and South America. In order to combat high German import duties he established a new fireclay works in Germany at Ratingen, near Dusseldorf, which opened in 1903. Further expansion occurred locally in 1911 when a new fireclay works was built opposite the Cliffe Vale works and about 1912 a new works was established in Garner Street, Etruria. 
In 1896 the firm became a private limited company, Twyford serving as chairman. From 1898 he lived at Whitmore Hall in Newcastle under Lyme, and was increasingly prominent in public life, becoming high sheriff of Staffordshire in 1906. Active in local politics, he supported the Liberal Unionists, founding the Unionist newspaper the 'Staffordshire Post', which later amalgamated with the 'Staffordshire Sentinel', of which he became chairman. He stood unsuccessfully as the Conservative Party's candidate for North-Western Staffordshire at a by-election in July 1907. In the years before and during the First World War he was active in promoting recruitment to the Territorial Army and new armies. A tall man with a military bearing and an abrupt, even peremptory manner, he was also capable of showing great humour and kindness. He had musical interests, and was also a breeder of Labrador retrievers. He died on 21 March 1921 at the Chine Hotel, Boscombe, near Bournemouth, where he was staying after a period of illness, and was buried in Whitmore churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 97898


Josiah Lane (bap. 1753, d. 1833), who was baptized at Tisbury parish church on 9 September 1753, helped, at a young age, in the work at Painshill. The next important commission saw Joseph and Josiah Lane working in full partnership. The grotto at Oatlands, Weybridge, Surrey, only a few miles from Painshill, had been designed by Stephen Wright for the ninth earl of Lincoln as a two-storey construction with a large banqueting room above and three separate chambers and a corridor below. The grotto was fairly formal architecturally, but in the 1770s Lord Lincoln (perhaps in emulation of, or inspired by, Painshill) had it transformed inside by the Lanes. The upper room was decorated with crystals, ammonites, and shells (possibly by the women of the house -- the Lanes did not normally do shellwork), while the three lower rooms comprised a bath room, a dressing or gaming room with zig-zag pebble patterns, and a central chamber simply described as 'grotto', which had the stalactite decoration of Painshill. The connecting corridor contained spar and quartz, with star patterns. Although the exterior remained architectural, some separate rockwork seems to have been added on each side. 


@@@@@


doc= 97899


Strong, Philip Nigel Warrington (1899-1983), archbishop of Brisbane, was born on 11 July 1899 at the vicarage, Sutton on the Hill, Derbyshire, the third son of John Warrington Strong (died 1942), Church of England priest, and his wife, Rosamond Maria, 'nee' Wingfield Digby, fourth daughter of John Digby Wingfield Digby, of Sherborne Castle, Dorset. His childhood was spent at his father's vicarage at Dodford in Northamptonshire and at his maternal grandfather's second family seat, Coleshill Park in Warwickshire. He was educated at King's School, Worcester (1909-17), where the services in the nearby cathedral became ingrained into his consciousness. Brought up at home in a devoutly evangelical tradition emphasizing preaching and the scriptures, at Worcester he became accustomed to a more sacramental religion, with frequent communion services. He had no particular aptitude as a scholar and failed to win the scholarships for which he entered at Oxford and Cambridge universities. At Selwyn College, Cambridge, in 1917, however, he was awarded a Patteson studentship, established for prospective missionary candidates in memory of John Coleridge Patteson, the first Anglican bishop of Melanesia. 
In early 1918 Strong was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers, at a time when the tide of war was turning against Germany. He joined the 33rd division under the command of his cousin Major-General Sir Reginald Pinney. After returning to Cambridge in 1919 he studied for the theological tripos, obtained a first class in his early examinations, but did not proceed to honours. His other main interests, besides taking a prominent part in the religious societies, were in the debates of the Cambridge Union and in rowing for his college. He graduated BA in 1921 and proceeded MA three years later. 
On 21 December 1922 Strong was made deacon in the chapel of Auckland Castle, the episcopal palace of Hensley Henson, bishop of Durham. He was ordained priest in the chapel exactly a year later. He was assistant curate at St Mary's, Tyne Dock, South Shields, from 1922 to 1926, and vicar of Christ Church, Meadow Lane, Leeds, in the diocese of Ripon, from 1926 to 1931. Henson had a high opinion of him and in 1931 called him back from Ripon to the diocese of Durham as vicar of the church of St Ignatius the Martyr at Sunderland. Another who was impressed was Cosmo Gordon Lang, archbishop of Canterbury, who in 1936 was entrusted by the Australian bishops with the choice of a bishop of New Guinea to succeed Henry Newton. 
In his room at Lambeth Palace on 27 October 1936, the night before Strong's consecration as bishop in St Paul's Cathedral, London, Lang pointed dramatically to the crucifix and said to Strong, 'There will be more of that in your life than there has been in mine' ('The Times', 8 July 1983). Strong's trials came six years later, when Japanese forces invaded Papua New Guinea. In the panic that followed an unauthorized radio message from the government headquarters at Samarai ordering the evacuation of white expatriates, Strong broadcast on 31 January 1942 urging his staff to stay: 'missionaries do not think of themselves in the hour of danger and crisis, but of the Master who called them to give their all' (Wetherell, 222-3). Though he later counselled young women missionaries to leave, as a result of his leadership the Anglican staff elected to remain. Twelve were killed, including the Papuan teacher Lucien Tapiedi. He himself experienced bombing and machine-gunning by a Japanese plane. He suffered deeply from bitter personal criticism in Australia for not having insisted on the removal of his staff to safety. Yet his much publicized visits to Australia, as bishop of a diocese partly occupied by enemy forces, undoubtedly made him something of a national figure in Australia for a brief period in 1942 and 1943. 
A further crippling blow was suffered in January 1951 when Mount Lamington volcano in northern coastal Papua, in the heart of the densest Anglican population, erupted and killed 3500 of Strong's flock, as well as almost all his Papuan and expatriate staff in the area. Among Strong's clergy active in the rehabilitation of the Mount Lamington population was David Hand, who had been advanced to the episcopate as first assistant bishop of New Guinea in 1950. Another of Strong's more significant decisions was to nominate, ten years later, the first Papua New Guinean national bishop, George Ambo, at a time when the appointment of Papuans as heads of organizations was still thought by many to be decades away. 
During the Pacific war Strong had been nominated to the vacant archbishopric of Brisbane but had declined. In 1962 the archbishop election committee again nominated him. This time he accepted. Like other former missionary bishops, he found it hard to adjust to church government through a diocesan synod, council, and committees. He had grown accustomed to wielding supreme power and he sometimes did not find it easy to reconcile himself to a shared form of authority. Moreover, he found it difficult to accept many of the liberal changes of the 1960s. He opposed any relaxation in the six o'clock closing of Queensland hotels. In his attitude towards alcohol he did not differ from his teetotal cousin Sir Reginald Pinney, who in 1916 had stopped the 33rd division's customary tot of rum at the dawn 'stand-to'. Strong also believed all forms of gambling to be wrong, and opposed the remarriage of divorcees as contravening the command of Jesus. He had little sympathy with theological trends in this period and regarded Bishop John Robinson's controversial book 'Honest to God' (1963) as an onslaught on the church's traditional faith. By theological conviction and social habit Strong tended towards an unquestioning support of government. He was innately deferential to people of rank and title. He saw little value in the student street marches in Brisbane that broadened from opposition to the Vietnam War to resistance to the Queensland state government's constraints on civil liberties. 
Elected primate of the Church of England in Australia in 1966, Strong presided over its general synods of 1966 and 1969. In his presidential addresses as primate at the two synods he depicted the 'new theology' as a symptom of 'defeatism' and its advocates as a 'kind of fifth column' within the church, contributing to a widespread undermining of faith in the Christian religion (Church of England in Australia, 'Proceedings of the Second General Synod', 1966, 26, and 'Proceedings of the Third General Synod', 1969, 24). Many younger clergy regarded him as out of touch with the modern world. 
After retirement in 1970 (in which year he was knighted KBE; he had been appointed CMG in 1958) Strong lived in the cathedral close at Wangaratta, Victoria, assisted by his long-time secretary, Elsie Manley. In retirement his preaching, though it continued to be criticized for its length, lost nothing of its punch and power. (Strong's preaching had reached a worldwide audience at the memorial service to Harold Holt, prime minister of Australia, in Melbourne in December 1967.) He died, unmarried, at Wangaratta Hospital on 6 July 1983 and was buried in Wangaratta cemetery on 11 July after a funeral service at Holy Trinity Cathedral, Wangaratta. A memorial service was held on 21 October 1983 at St Paul's Church, Knightsbridge, London. 
Significant though his work was in Australia, Strong's greatest impact was felt in Papua New Guinea. There his influence outlived his twenty-eight-year rule and persisted into the 1990s through the episcopates of his successors David Hand and George Ambo. Something of a missionary bishop's spiritual authoritarianism came through in the monarchical style of Strong's episcopates. He had much leeway to make up in developing some form of conciliarity, but his authoritarian rule was conditioned by an intense personal humility. 


@@@@@


doc= 97900


Bronhill, June (1929-2005), singer, was born on 26 June 1929 in Broken Hill, New South Wales, Australia, a mining town some 700 miles west of Sydney. Broken Hill had always had a strong connection with the arts, and as a daughter of this fiercely proud town June Gough was encouraged by friends and family to pursue her early aspirations as a singer. At the age of nineteen she travelled to Sydney, where, encouraged by her singing teacher, Marianne Mathy, whom she described as a 'second mother' (Carmody, 329), she entered and won the coveted Sun aria competition in 1950, a prize awarded the year before to Joan Sutherland. 
Like many young Australians before and since, June Gough felt the need to visit Britain, where she hoped to realize her dream of becoming a professional singer. The cost was daunting, if not prohibitive, but outback communities had a habit of rallying around in times of need and it was decided by family and neighbours to raise the necessary funds to send her. She arrived in London in 1952. As a young singer competing in a market awash with graduates from leading conservatories in Britain and abroad she attempted to stand out from the crowd by changing her name. Her teacher suggested that she should adopt the name Chrystal Belle, but she dismissed this as too undignified and decided instead (and in tribute to those who had financed her journey) that her stage name should be Bronhill, a contraction of Broken Hill. 
In London Bronhill studied with Dino Borgioli before making her European debut as Adele in the Sadler's Wells production of Strauss's 'Die Fledermaus' in 1954. That performance marked the beginning of a long relationship with the company, during which she explored much of the soprano literature. Her ability to hold the stage, her secure coloratura voice, and her capacity for hard work made her the natural choice for such roles as Norina in Donizetti's 'Don Pasquale', Gilda in Verdi's 'Rigoletto', the Queen of the Night in Mozart's 'Die Zauberflote', and Zerbinetta in Richard Strauss's 'Ariadne auf Naxos'. As a member of a busy ensemble company she was also expected to perform works that were new to Sadler's Wells and was cast as Lucy in Menotti's 'The Telephone', and as Vixen Sharpears for the British premiere of Janacek's 'The Cunning Little Vixen' in 1961. But it was her work as an operetta singer that was most popular with audiences, and it was her performances in works like Strauss's 'The Gypsy Baron', Offenbach's 'Orpheus and the Underworld' and 'La vie parisienne', and Lehar's 'The Merry Widow' that defined her career. Of these 'The Merry Widow' was the operetta with which she was most frequently associated. During her career she gave some 200 performances of the operetta, both in Britain and in Australia, and the Vilia aria soon became known in musical circles as 'June's tune'. With William Reid, a British conductor who ended his career with the Australian Opera, she recorded the work for EMI, one of a series that the company made with Bronhill and the Sadler's Wells troupe performing works from the operetta canon. 
Bronhill's success was not restricted to the Sadler's Wells Theatre; she also made an impact with other companies and in other genres and media. In 1959 the distinguished Australian soprano Joan Sutherland was indisposed during a regional tour of England with the Covent Garden company. She was scheduled to sing the title role in Donizetti's 'Lucia di Lammermoor' at Oxford but was replaced at short notice by Bronhill. Although Sutherland was near the beginning of her long career, she had already made this role her own and subsequently recorded it with her husband, Richard Bonynge, and the renowned British conductor John Pritchard. For some the prospect of replacing such an illustrious colleague might have been daunting, but Bronhill rose to the challenge, performed with distinction, and won the admiration of the critics. 
Having carved a niche for herself in British operatic life by the mid-1960s, Bronhill decided to explore the possibilities that the West End and television had to offer. In 1964 she was cast in Ron Grainer's 'Robert and Elizabeth', a musical version of the play 'The Barretts of Wimpole Street'. Directed by Wendy Toye, the show was an outstanding success. It ran for 948 performances and was later taken to Australia. The fame that she achieved in live theatre and her easy manner with audiences meant that she was also an ideal choice for radio and television. In the 1960s and early 1970s she was a regular guest on BBC radio's light music programmes 'Friday Night is Music Night', 'Variety Playhouse', and 'Palm Court', and on Yorkshire Television's religious musical programme, 'Stars on Sunday'. 
For Australians living abroad the need to return to their homeland in maturity is often overwhelming. Bronhill eventually left Europe for Australia and made her home in Sydney from 1976, the year she was appointed OBE. At that time, however, she had no intention of retiring, and appeared successfully in a variety of opera, theatre, and television roles ranging from Rosalinde in the State Opera of South Australia's production of Strauss's 'Die Fledermaus' in 1979, through Mrs Slocombe in Australian television's version of 'Are You Being Served?' (from 1980), to the mother in Peter Williams's production of 'Straight and Narrow' (1994). She published her autobiography, 'The Merry Bronhill', in 1987. She continued to work until 1995, when deafness caused by tinnitus forced her to retire. She was twice married: first, before leaving Australia for England, to Brian Martin, and second, in 1963, to the television producer Richard Finny, with whom she had one daughter. Both marriages ended in divorce. She died of breast cancer in Sydney, New South Wales, on 25 January 2005. She was survived by her daughter, Caroline. 


@@@@@


doc= 97905


Jackman family (per. 1763-1976), horticulturists and nurserymen, based in Woking, Surrey, came to prominence as breeders of new clematis cultivars in the mid- and late Victorian period. 
William Jackman (1763-1840) founded the nursery in 1810 on 50 acres at St Johns, Woking. He was married to Sarah, with whom he had four sons. In 1830 the nursery passed to two of his sons, George Jackman (1801-1869) ['see below'] and Henry, but the partnership did not prosper and within two years was dissolved, Henry going his own way. William's other two sons, James (died 1865) and William, were both involved in the nursery trade in the vicinity of Woking. In 1852 William the younger married Ruth Waterer of another well-known nursery family whose nursery was at Hook Hill, Woking. By 1865 James was employing eighteen men and five boys at his Goldsworth Nursery at Hook Hill, Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 97907


Hancock, (Clarence Henry) Ralph (1893-1950), landscape architect and garden designer, was born at 20 Keppoch Street, Cardiff, on 2 July 1893, the eldest of three sons of Clarence Hancock (1868-1923), estate agent and auctioneer, and his wife, Clara Adelaide, 'nee' Thomas (1870-1937). He followed his father into the auctioneer's business. On the outbreak of the First World War he enlisted as a private in the Territorial Army. In December 1915 he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Welsh (howitzer) brigade in 1915, but was invalided out in 1916. He married at Penarth on 17 September 1917 Hilda Muriel (1897-1969), daughter of Harold Bramley Ellis, clothing manufacturer of Letchworth, Hertfordshire. They had two sons and a daughter. 
In his early career Hancock was a marine and general insurance broker, working in Cardiff, but following business failure in 1921 he moved into professional gardening and in 1926 he became a fellow of the Royal Horticultural Society. In 1927 he undertook the first of his more famous garden projects, designing and constructing a rock and water garden for Princess Victoria, sister of George V, at her home, Coppins, Iver, in Buckinghamshire. In May 1930 he sailed to New York to promote his work in the USA, publishing a brochure, 'English Gardens in America', which referred to his royal patronage as a landscape gardener and illustrated Hancock's characteristic design features, such as the use of low Cotswold stone walls combined with wrought iron gates. He designed a garden at Erie Station in New Jersey to exhibit his work. He also staged exhibits at the Massachusetts horticulture show, where he won several awards including in 1933 the president's cup. He was one of the designers of the Lydia Duff Gray Hubbard garden in New Jersey, which became part of the Garden Club of America collection. 
Between 1933 and 1935 Hancock undertook his most ambitious project, a series of roof gardens called the Gardens of Nations on the eleventh floor of the RCA building in the Rockefeller Center, New York, designed to reflect the cultural styles of gardens from Holland, France, Spain, Italy, Japan, and England. Construction of the gardens involved hauling up 3000 tons of earth, 500 tons of brick, and 100 tons of natural stone by means of the service elevator. Trees which proved to be too tall to fit in the elevator were brought up the side of the building using a block and tackle. Throughout the project he was in regular correspondence with both John D. and Nelson Rockefeller. The roof terrace gardens opened in April 1935 and were illustrated in Hancock's book 'When I Make a Garden', which was published in the same year. The book, which was reprinted in 1950, illustrated many of the gardens he had designed in Britain and America, and set out some of his practices, notably his experience that the transplanting of mature trees was both possible and not prohibitively expensive. 
The gardens at the Rockefeller Center led to Hancock being commissioned by Trevor Bowen, the managing director of Barkers, who had taken over Derry and Toms department store in High Street, Kensington, to create a similar effect in the heart of London. After returning with his family to Britain he created three gardens on the rooftop of Derry and Toms: a Spanish garden, a Tudor garden, and a woodland garden with a stream, a waterfall, and a rustic bridge. The gardens, which occupied an acre and offered views out to the Surrey hills, opened in May 1938. During this period Hancock was also a successful exhibitor at the Chelsea flower show, winning gold medals for his display gardens in 1936, 1937, and 1938. These award-winning gardens moved away from his earlier naturalistic rock garden style towards the more arts and crafts style with which he became associated. He also exhibited gardens at the Ideal Home Exhibition in 1936, 1937, and 1938, collaborating with the author Rafael Sabatini on the 1938 garden, which took as its theme 'novelists and their gardens'. 
In June 1940 Hancock returned to military service with the rank of captain. His second son, Denys, was killed in action in the following year. After the war he worked with his elder son, Bramley (1918-1989), as Ralph Hancock & Son, and designed gardens of peace at Temple Newsam in Leeds, but these were not constructed. In 1948 Sir David Evans Bevan, a director of Barclays Bank, commissioned him to build the gardens at Twyn-yr-Hydd House, Margam. In Wales he also designed and built a garden in Llanblethian near Cowbridge that was regarded as one of the finest landscaped gardens in the Vale of Glamorgan. These were probably the last gardens he created before his death, from heart failure, at the National Heart Hospital, London, on 30 August 1950. He was cremated at Golders Green and his ashes were later scattered in the Thames by his widow and his daughter, Sheila. 


@@@@@


doc= 97908


Coulson, Noel James (1928-1986), scholar of Islamic law, was born on 18 August 1928 at 341 Manchester Road, Blackrod, Lancashire, the son of George Frederick Coulson, paperworks beaterman, later papermill manager, and his wife, Marjorie Elizabeth, 'nee' Moore. He was educated at Wigan grammar school and won an open scholarship to Keble College, Oxford, where he secured firsts in classical moderations in 1948 and oriental languages in 1950. He then joined the Parachute regiment for his national service, serving as an intelligence officer and reaching the rank of lieutenant. This work took him to Cyprus and the Suez Canal zone. On 24 February 1951 he married Muriel Adelaide Ivatts, a 22-year-old student nurse and daughter of Henry Ivan Ivatts, bank official. They had two daughters. 
On his demobilization Coulson began research for a DPhil under the direction of Joseph Schacht at Oxford. At the time Schacht was widely regarded as the foremost scholar of Islamic law in the world and Coulson's brilliant undergraduate record had attracted his attention. However, Coulson soon came to the notice of J. N. D. Anderson, the new professor of oriental laws at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London. Anderson was beginning to make a name for himself as an expert in modern legal reforms in the Middle East and he hoped to secure another specialist in Islamic law for the law department at SOAS. Anderson wrote to Coulson asking him to join the department as a lecturer, and in 1954 Coulson accepted the invitation and abandoned his doctoral studies. His relations with Schacht cooled considerably thereafter. Moving from the guidance of Schacht to the mentorship of Anderson prompted a shift in Coulson's interests from oriental studies to comparative legal studies. In order to develop the legal expertise necessary for his work he embarked upon the study of English law and was called to the bar at Gray's Inn in 1961. While he maintained a strong interest in the early formation of Islamic legal schools that reflected the priorities of Schacht, his subsequent work under Anderson's tutelage signalled a new focus on the status of Islamic law in contemporary legal systems. Coulson balanced these interests in historical and modern legal developments throughout the rest of his career. 
Coulson's association with Anderson was a close one. Coulson referred affectionately to Anderson as his 'tutor and... colleague' ('Islamic family law: progress in Pakistan', in 'Changing Law in Developing Countries', ed. J. N. D. Anderson, 1963, 240) while Anderson related, 'It would be difficult to over-emphasise how closely he and I worked together... over many years' (Anderson, 339). Despite this close relationship, Coulson directed his attention towards Pakistani family law and developed his own unique perspective on recent reforms in the Muslim world. For example, in matters of succession, Coulson preferred Pakistan's scheme of representational lineal succession to Egypt's system of obligatory bequests favoured by Anderson. Though Anderson believed that the Pakistani reforms unwisely departed from the Middle Eastern reformist paradigm, Coulson concluded that the Pakistani reforms represented an appropriate and welcome development. 
Coulson quickly established his own scholarly reputation. Despite Schacht's ground-breaking analysis of early developments and Anderson's incisive survey of recent modifications, there was a need for a wider-ranging English-language introduction, synthesizing current scholarship on Islamic law. Coulson satisfied this need admirably with his first book, 'A History of Islamic Law' (1964). This remained for many years a classic introductory text, written in an accessible style and peppered with many original insights. For example Coulson was less sceptical than Schacht about the early origins of certain hadith. He also evinced a marked sympathy with modernist jurisprudence, arguing for the 'Koran' and the 'Sunna' as the main religious sources of law and affirming that 'Qur'anic precepts' were capable of supporting 'modern legal structures' ('A History of Islamic Law', 225). In 1982, to Coulson's great satisfaction, his book was translated into Arabic under the auspices of the Cairo Institute of Letters. 
In 1965-6 Coulson contributed to the development of legal education in newly independent Nigeria, serving as the dean of the faculty of law at Ahmadu Bello University in Zaria. During his tenure he founded the Centre of Islamic Legal Studies and the accompanying 'Journal of the Centre of Islamic Legal Studies'. He also encouraged the school to develop a legal curriculum that integrated Islamic law into a comparative legal framework reflecting the mixed nature of the contemporary Nigerian legal system. 
In 1967 Coulson was named professor of oriental laws at SOAS, a position he held until his death. Students attested to his skill as a teacher. In the following years he accepted an increasing number of lecturing opportunities in the United States. He also continued to write, and publications such as 'Conflicts and Tensions in Islamic Jurisprudence' (1969) and 'Succession in the Muslim Family' (1971) established his reputation as one of the foremost scholars of Islamic law in his generation. His last book, 'Commercial Law in the Gulf States: the Islamic Legal Tradition' (1984), broke new ground by directing the attention of scholars, business people, and politicians to the importance of Islamic law in modern commercial transactions. As Coulson's reputation grew, he was increasingly in demand for consultation in international arbitrations and expert testimony in English courts. At the request of the American state department he wrote a report entitled 'Commercial Law and Practice in Iran: Recent Developments' (1982). He also served on the editorial board of 'Arab Law Quarterly'. 
Coulson died unexpectedly on 30 August 1986 at his home, Oak Tree Cottage, Chase Lane, Haslemere, Surrey, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife and their two daughters. Following his death, SOAS established the Noel Coulson memorial lectures in his honour. In some quarters he was criticized for his flawed assessment of the nature and direction of Islamic legal reform. Yet Muhammed Selim el-Awa, who became one of the most prominent legal scholars in Egypt following his time in London as a PhD student under Coulson's supervision, called him 'a pioneer' whose 'broadly positive attitude may have far-reaching consequences for the way Islamic law and jurisprudence, and indeed Islamic studies as a whole, are taught and studied in the West' (el-Awa, 143). Coulson's scholarly contributions were indeed immense. 


@@@@@


doc= 97912


Kempster, John (1836-1916), police journalist and temperance campaigner, was born in Congleton, Cheshire, on 3 April 1836, the son of John Joseph James Kempster, a minister in the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Captain Joseph Westbeech RN. 
After attending schools at Norwich, Ramsgate, and Hatfield, Kempster was apprenticed to a firm of stationers in Norwich and then became a traveller for Jarrolds, Norwich, supplying stationery and books to schools. On 5 June 1860 he married Eliza, daughter of Thomas Jennings, baker, of Milton, Cambridgeshire; they had a son and a daughter. At the time of his marriage he was in business as an auctioneer and estate agent in Norwich. He went on to set himself up as a supplier of school books in Birmingham, where he was subsequently appointed -- at the instance of Sir Josiah Mason -- general manager to the Educational Trading Company. From at least 1868 he also managed, in London, a partnership supplying books and a patented school desk to the growing elementary education sector. His career did not follow any consistent business trajectory: 'ordinary routine... did not appeal to him unless, as in the case connected with some reform, he was really interested in it' ('Police Review', 12 January 1917). 
In 1877, following the discovery of serious fraud at a firm that since 1867 had purchased land in London to provide housing to working-class families, Kempster was appointed emergency secretary of the Artizans', Labourers', and General Dwellings Company. Between July 1877 and March 1878 he rescued the company. His ability reassured investors (Ruskin quoted one of Kempster's circulars in 'Fors Clavigera') and helped to prevent any flight of capital after the prosecution of the former secretary, William Swindlehurst, and chairman, Baxter Langley, at the Old Bailey in October 1878, and the sentencing of each to eighteen months' hard labour. On the appointment of a new secretary from April 1878, Kempster was elected to the board and remained an active member until his death, becoming also a director of the Temperance Building Society. The Artizans' Company was, from 1890, the largest supplier of social housing in London until overtaken by the London county council in 1905. 
Kempster, favouring total abstinence and local option, was also a stalwart of the temperance movement. He held senior London office in the United Kingdom Alliance, and various posts in the Grand Lodge of Good Templars, a body founded on masonic lines in New York in 1851 and planted in Birmingham from 1870 by Joseph Malins. At his own expense Kempster founded, edited, and published the 'Good Templar's Watchword' from 1874. He spoke publicly for these causes (representing the Templars in an important arbitration case) and in 1892 organized a vast temperance procession to Hyde Park. In addition he supported the Liberation Society, the leading nonconformist pressure group favouring separation of state and religion, and served on its executive council in the 1890s. He stood as a Gladstonian Liberal parliamentary candidate for Enfield (1885), North Paddington (1886), West Staffordshire (1892), and Clapham (1895), all unsuccessfully. 
In 1882 Kempster took over from an ailing relative the role of reporter for 'The Times' at the chief metropolitan magistrates' court at Bow Street. This threw him into contact with officers of the Metropolitan Police whose terms and conditions of service attracted his campaigning interest. The growth of trade unionism drew attention to the absence of any form of collective representation for policemen, who were allowed to vote in national elections only from 1887, and who had no guaranteed pensions until 1890. A demonstration by Metropolitan officers at Bow Street that year was met with instant dismissal. 
Kempster was impressed by the extent to which the board schools had begun to produce a more educated and thoughtful officer. In 1892 he conceived the notion of a campaigning newspaper addressed to police officers, previous police journalism having been of modest reach. In the hope of gaining the support of senior police management, he floated his ideas to the Metropolitan commissioner, Edward Bradford: 'I need hardly state that I should desire to conduct it on such terms as would secure the entire approval of the ruling authorities' (14 Sept 1892, TNA: PRO, MEPO 2/9170). Bradford received him but gave him no encouragement. When Kempster launched the 'Police Review and Parade Gossip' in January 1893, the first number reassured the authorities that no subversive agitation was intended. 
Though initially a drain on his capital, the venture proved successful. In its first year the 'Police Review' campaigned in support of the MP Charles Schwann's bill to permit policemen to vote in local elections too, and gained credit when it passed. It went on to publish police-specific news, championed police professionalism over the importing of gentry outsiders into chief officer posts, opened lively correspondence columns, and included instructional articles relevant to police professional knowledge. 
Kempster also undertook two notable campaigns, one successful but the other with few immediate results in his lifetime. The first was in favour of guaranteeing policemen a weekly rest day as a right rather than as a matter of -- often fickle -- grace. Since policemen had no representative organization, Kempster in 1908 effectively spoke for them to the parliamentary committee that examined the question and recommended a change in the law on the lines for which Kempster had argued, in a model of well-organized lobbying. After the passage of the 'Police (Weekly Rest-Day) Act' 1910 he was rewarded with a public testimonial occasion presided over by the archbishop of Canterbury, when he was presented with an inscribed gold watch and a purse of $250. 
The second campaign did not produce an outcome until after Kempster's death, although the discussion he fostered did much to influence its shape. The question was whether the police should be allowed to form a representative body and, if so, of what character. At a time of general labour unrest this debate presented acute challenges to the police authorities: unaccountable to their workforces, they had ruled in a despotic and at times capricious manner. Kempster's initial approach was to found the Police and Citizen's Association (chaired by Charles Schwann but run by Kempster) as a way of holding police authorities to account. Its aims prioritized improved educational advantages for the police, competitive promotion, and the provision of legal assistance, but did not espouse any form of unionism. Although Kempster put much effort into the association and it claimed success in championing some grievances, the association could not become a police membership organization without official approval, and that was never forthcoming. 
For a period from 1910 Kempster supported the struggles of John Syme, the inspector dismissed from the Metropolitan police, who campaigned against what he called chief officer 'tyranny'. Kempster's enthusiasm waned in the face of Syme's egotism and after the 'Police Review' lost a libel action brought by Syme's erstwhile superiors. In early 1914 he disavowed Syme entirely after Syme and his colleagues at what became the National Union of Police and Prison Officers indulged in extreme vituperation. Seeking a more measured debate, Kempster tried to explore means of representation that were not threatening to the authorities and yet acceptable to policemen: 'There cannot be a permanent denial of this Human Right; and to say that it would interfere with the disciplinary requirements of any public service is to betray an ignorance of the first principles and strongest claims of good government. ('Police Review', 2 Jan 1914, 7)' Although Kempster died before the police strike that led to the establishment of the Police Federation, that body was formed on the lines of the 'representative committees' he had suggested. 
Kempster, whose red hair whitened with age, died on 13 December 1916 at his home, Westbeech, Bridge Lane, Hendon, Middlesex, an active magistrate almost to the end. Malins praised Kempster's temperance work, observing also that 'His 'Police Review' brought its own reward, for it made his fortune' ('Good Templar's Watchword', 23 Dec 1916, 445). Of his two children, his son John Westbeech Kempster (1864-1947) became managing director of Harland and Wolf, the Belfast shipbuilders, and his daughter Eveline married David R. Harris, principal of the Bangor Normal College, Caernarvonshire, who became chairman of the 'Police Review'. In a slightly tart obituary the 'Police Review' described Kempster's 'combative instinct of nonconformity with any rule, habit or institution that seemed to him to be wrong, or to block the road to progress... Indeed, he was too apt to assume that those in authority were wrong, and the underdog right. Frequently this was correct, or mainly so, but not invariably. ('Police Review', 12 Jan 1917, 12-13)' Kempster represents what nonconformist political activism could achieve against established interests and contribute to the evolution of more democratic forms in British society. The standards that he set in the 'Police Review' for the public discussion of policing issues established it as an intelligent forum for instruction and reflection within the police service at a crucial time in the development of that service's self-consciousness and professionalism. 


@@@@@


doc= 97913


Monro, James (1838-1920), police officer, was born in Edinburgh on 25 November 1838, the son of George Munro, solicitor before the supreme courts, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Anderson. After education at Edinburgh high school, Edinburgh University, and Berlin University, he was successful in the examination for the Indian Civil Service in 1857, as one of the earliest 'competition wallahs'. Posted to Bengal, he arrived in India in January 1858, and served as a magistrate and collector in Calcutta from 1864 to 1874, when he became a district judge. In 1863 he married Ruth (1843-1931), daughter of William Littlejohn, banker, of Aberdeen; they had at least two sons and a daughter. In 1878 the lieutenant-governor of Bengal, Sir Ashley Eden, appointed him inspector-general of police in Bengal, where he commanded a force of 20,000 men. He displayed a capacity for detective work, and became 'a veritable terror to the criminal classes' ('The Times', 30 Jan 1920). In 1882 he reported on village police forces in Bengal, and in 1883 became commissioner of the presidency division of Bengal. 
While on leave in Britain, Monro was appointed in June 1884 to take charge of the criminal investigation department (CID) of the Metropolitan Police, made vacant by the resignation of Howard Vincent. Unlike his predecessor, Monro was given the rank of assistant commissioner, placing him directly under the authority of the Metropolitan Police commissioner, initially Edmund Henderson. Monro's experience of tackling secret societies in Bengal was a recommendation in the eyes of the home secretary, W. V. Harcourt, as London was then the target of the Fenian dynamiting campaign. His swift action ensured the arrest of the perpetrator of the Fenian explosion at the Tower of London in January 1885, but he complained that his investigations were hindered by the activities of the Dublin Castle 'spymaster', Edward Jenkinson, who ran an independent counter-Fenian operation using Irish officers in London. Monro alleged that Jenkinson withheld intelligence, and that some of the plotters were found to be in Jenkinson's pay; Jenkinson regarded the Metropolitan Police men as inefficient, and Monro as insufficiently energetic to impose reforms. 
Monro's complaints led to Jenkinson's dismissal by the Conservative home secretary, Henry Matthews, at the end of 1886, leaving Monro to take charge of the newly constituted Metropolitan Police special branch from the beginning of 1887, alongside his CID duties. He oversaw operations against the so-called Jubilee Plot against Queen Victoria in June 1887, and in the following year his detectives deterred Irish-Americans plotting in Paris to assassinate the Irish secretary, A. J. Balfour, by keeping them under open observation. In April 1888 he gave evidence to a parliamentary select committee that Fenian dynamiters had gained access to the House of Commons as guests of an Irish Nationalist MP, allegations damaging to Parnell's home rule party. He was appointed CB in June 1888. 
Monro's relations with Sir Charles Warren, Metropolitan Police commissioner from 1886, deteriorated, as Warren regarded detective work as subordinate to that of the uniformed police constables. By 1887 Monro was complaining that his detective force was under strength, and inadequate to the task of supervising ex-convicts, those on licence, and habitual criminals. After a series of complaints that Warren was stifling the CID, and had thwarted his intended appointment of an Indian planter friend Melville Macnaghten as assistant commissioner, Monro resigned in mid-August 1888, but was given a position in the Home Office, as head of detectives, with responsibility for special branch operations. 
Warren resented Monro's continuing influence over the CID as undermining his position as commissioner, and resigned in November 1888. Monro was appointed his successor, with effect from December 1888, 'the first trained police official' (Dilnot, 108) to hold that office. He took over after the last of the Jack the Ripper Whitechapel murders, but it was left to him, in his annual report for 1888, to 'regret that in spite of most strenuous efforts on the part of the police, the criminal has up till now remained undiscovered' ('Report of the Commissioner', 4). He increased the number of detectives and secured Macnaghten's appointment. Speedy arrests of a gang of burglars who had shot a Muswell Hill householder during a break-in, in January 1889, and the passing of life sentences in their trial, in March, were accounted successes. A purge on gaming clubs in London's fashionable West End, carried out in April 1889 by his friend and fellow evangelical Christian Robert Anderson, now head of the CID, was a prelude to a campaign against gambling, seen as a source of poverty and crime lower down the social spectrum. He dealt with demonstrations of the unemployed and socialists with a lighter hand than Warren, and during the London dock strike, which began in August 1889 and where pickets were extensively deployed, 'the police kept themselves in the background as far as possible, and their conduct when action was necessary was friendly and forbearing in the extreme' (Clegg, Fox, and Thompson, 63). In 1890 a new headquarters for the force was nearing completion on the Thames Embankment, which he named New Scotland Yard. 
Monro's determination to address the concerns of his men at a time of growing agitation within the ranks on such matters as the quality of boots and uniform trousers, and the scale of allowances for the extra duty entailed in policing demonstrations in central London, brought him into conflict with the Home Office. The Metropolitan Police's officers had long considered that their pension rights needed improvement, yet a bill introduced in 1882 to deal with the issue failed to pass. Monro took his men's part on the Home Office departmental committee appointed in 1889 to investigate the subject. Monro announced his resignation as commissioner on 12 June 1890, when he decided that the pensions bill proposed by Henry Matthews would not go far enough. There was also a clash over patronage when Matthews attempted to install a Home Office civil servant with no police experience into a vacant assistant commissionership, which Monro wanted for a serving officer, Charles Howard, formerly of the Bengal police. 
Monro's resignation, after just seventeen months as commissioner, led to a House of Commons debate (20 June 1890), initiated by Harcourt. Before leaving office Monro presided over meetings of his superintendents, to discuss the pensions question. In the event the 'Police Act' of 1890 did meet the demand for a pension to be awarded as a right, and Monro claimed credit for forcing Matthews to improve the superannuation terms. Matthews also gave way over Howard's appointment. Monro recounted the history of the police pensions controversy in an article in the 'New Review' (3, Sept 1890, 194-207). He also wrote an account of the ethos of the 'London Police', asserting that its effectiveness was increased by the public's acceptance of policemen 'as their friends and protectors' whether in helping the 'timid' to cross busy thoroughfares or taking care of lost children, while 'protecting 'masses' as well as 'classes' from any infringement of their rights on the part of those who are not law-abiding' ('North American Review', 151, Nov 1890, 617-18). 
Popular within the force, Monro was not viewed so favourably by some politicians and the Home Office, the prime minister Lord Salisbury telling the queen that Monro 'posed not as your Majesty's servant', but 'as if he had been captain of a band of allied troops taken into your service' (Cook, 78). The later discovery of Monro's unpublished reminiscences brought to light an earlier personal history of 'professional quarrels and threats of resignation', and 'an implacable impulse to self-justification' (Fido and Skinner, 168). 
Monro had been a member of the Church Missionary Society's committee in India and after his resignation from the Metropolitan Police he left his London home, in Church Road, Norwood, and set out for Calcutta in November 1891, where he and his family began independent missionary work. He founded and himself financed the Ranaghat Medical Mission at a railway junction north of Calcutta, providing medical assistance on condition of attendance at religious services. With a Scottish staff of four men and eleven women, he made converts among the Hindu and Muslim population. Though a member of the Church of Scotland, he co-operated with the Church of England diocese. In December 1893 he gave evidence in Calcutta to the opium commission, insisting that the cultivation and consumption of opium did not hinder missionary work or increase crime, and opposing regulation of the trade as leading to greater problems. He returned to Britain in 1905, and lived for a while in Cheltenham. He died at his home, 15 Bolton Road, Chiswick, Middlesex, on 28 January 1920. 


@@@@@


doc= 97914


St Johnston, Sir (Thomas) Eric (1911-1986), police officer, was born at 48 All Saints' Road, King's Heath, King's Norton, Worcestershire, on 7 January 1911, the only son (he had a younger sister) of Thomas Gerald St Johnston (1882-1968), a wine and spirit merchant, and his wife, Ethel Mary Frances Flora, 'nee' Ryley ('b'. 1887), whose family were bicycle manufacturers in Coventry. After attending a preparatory school and Bromsgrove School (1924-9), he entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he took a third in part one of the mathematical tripos and a second in part two of the law tripos (1932) and excelled at sport. From 1929 to 1935 he held a commission in the Territorial Army. Influenced by his father's cousin, the colonial governor Sir Reginald St Johnston (1881-1950), he was a candidate for the colonial service, but the economic depression had reduced the number of posts, and he missed selection. He had started to read for the bar at the Middle Temple, and was called in 1934. 
Unlike nearly all of his ambitious contemporaries St Johnston saw the potential of a career in the Metropolitan Police under Lord Trenchard, who was keen to recruit more graduates. His first job at Scotland Yard, in 1932, was as a civilian junior executive officer in the crime department, initially on a salary comparable with a constable's. After Trenchard set up the Hendon Police College he gained a place on the third course in September 1935, passing out in 1936 at the head of his class of thirty-four. As with many able policemen of his generation, Hendon shaped his career. 'Hendon men' dominated the upper ranks of the British police in the 1950s and 1960s, often to the chagrin of those police officers who were not its graduates. 
Initially St Johnston followed the customary route for Hendon graduates without police experience: eight months as a constable and four as a sergeant, before being appointed to the rank of junior station inspector in 1938. But his career also exemplified the link between Hendon careers and the Second World War. In June 1940 he was advised by G. H. R. Halland, his commandant at Hendon, now working as an inspector of constabulary, to apply for the post of chief constable of Oxfordshire, and (despite arriving at the interview with a black eye sustained in an arrest the night before) he gained this position at the age of twenty-nine. The Oxfordshire force was run on essentially Victorian lines and had failed to implement many wartime measures. After rectifying this, his next task, at the behest of another patron and inspector of constabulary, Frank Brook, was an attachment in 1943 to the chiefs of staff to the supreme allied commander, the allied staff planning the occupation of Europe. With the rank of lieutenant-colonel he wrote the operating manual for the policing of liberated and occupied countries, and helped to train the officers who would staff the organization. He was in Paris for the liberation in August 1944, and shortly afterwards, in October 1944, took up a new substantive post as chief constable of co. Durham: the Home Office wanted an energetic chief in post to deal with any labour trouble in the event that the mines were not nationalized after the war. In Durham he continued to emphasize modernization, training, and technology: from there, in October 1950, he went to run Lancashire, which with over 3000 officers was the largest force outside London. 
As chief constable of Lancashire, with headquarters in Preston, St Johnston relished establishing uniformity over his wide command and modernizing its organization, accommodation, and equipment. In 1953 an advanced police radio system was inaugurated, and an underwater search unit of police divers was set up in 1955, followed in 1957 by a radar instrument to detect speeding motorists. He lobbied successfully to be allowed a year's sabbatical in 1957, and attended the Imperial Defence College, the only police officer to do so between 1946 and 1969. He was awarded the queen's police medal in 1958. 
St Johnston's greatest impact on British policing came about through the 1960 royal commission on the police. The Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) had agreed to arrive at a collective response to the commission and St Johnston was assigned the task of chairing a sub-committee on the scope of the police's role. He characteristically reinterpreted this remit to justify commenting on the best form of police organization. Like nearly all of his colleagues (and the Home Office) he wanted chief constables to be less accountable to police authorities; unlike most of the rest of them he shared the Home Office's desire to amalgamate the borough forces into their surrounding counties, having personally resented the need to co-ordinate the activity of the Lancashire constabulary with the many independent borough forces that were contained within or bordered the county. When his attempt to convince ACPO to send a minority report to the commission failed, he issued his own manifesto, with the tacit approval of the Home Office, which condemned most existing forces as too small to be efficient. A few chief constables supported its uncompromising demand for centralization, but most felt that St Johnston had stepped out of line and weakened their collective voice: he described the reactions of some as 'pretty violent' (St Johnston to T. A. Critchley, 23 Jan 1961, TNA: PRO, HO 272/105). 
St Johnston's submission set out options of regional, national, and county control of forces: when he gave evidence he strongly favoured the last of the three, 'countyization', while apologizing for the word itself. He was drawn to the efficiency of nationalization but did not 'think the country wants it or that we are ready for it' (TNA: PRO, HO 272/38). The commission, which was keen to receive his evidence, recommended a scheme akin to countyization, justified in the terms presented to them by St Johnston. This was embodied in the 1964 'Police Act', which brought about the amalgamation of forces. By the mid-1970s this had reduced the number of forces in England and Wales from over 120 to 43, in a structure that would endure for the rest of the century and beyond. 
St Johnston's innovations in Lancashire became known to a wider public through his enthusiasm for motorized policing. His use of special unmarked crime patrol cars, equipped with two-way radios, inspired the television series 'Z Cars', set on Merseyside and made with the initial co-operation of the Lancashire constabulary. First broadcast in January 1962, 'Z Cars' presented a less benign view of police work than the long-running 'Dixon of Dock Green', and early episodes aroused some disquiet about the less than perfect police characters they portrayed. St Johnston was also associated with the introduction in 1965 of an entirely motorized patrol system, using the so-called panda cars (painted light blue with a distinctive white band) so as to be instantly visible, to address policing problems in the new town of Kirkby, where juveniles represented a relatively large proportion of the population but a shortage of police manpower made it impossible to organize sufficient foot patrols to deal with outbreaks of vandalism and minor thefts. This mobile beat system was innovative, though not entirely original, given that similar developments had earlier occurred in Aberdeen and elsewhere. At Lancashire he also supported the development of an effective personal radio, which was issued to every policeman in his force from 1964. He regarded this as having 'revolutionised' the work of the man on the beat (St Johnston, 203). St Johnston was knighted in January 1967, when he left Lancashire. 
The royal commission on the police had recommended that the vacant post of chief inspector of constabulary be filled. On the early death in September 1966 of his friend and Hendon contemporary Sir Edward (Ted) Dodd, who had held the position since 1963, St Johnston was appointed his successor, from February 1967, with the promise from his patron, the home secretary Roy Jenkins, that he would be considered for the post of metropolitan commissioner. In the event, when that position fell vacant in 1968, Jenkins's successor James Callaghan preferred another Hendon man, John Waldron, perhaps seeing St Johnston as a better innovator, reorganizer, and staff man than he was an operational commander. 
As inspector of constabulary St Johnston was a strong supporter and public champion of 'unit beat policing' in which many foot patrols were replaced by cars, with universal wireless communication. Reliance on control of police by radio through a limited number of wavelengths, combined with a highly mobile population, also drove his desire for forces to amalgamate their command structures for the sake of efficiency. He complained to the royal commission: 'It is possible for someone to steal a car and to go through six different police areas within the hour, with six separate wireless systems' (TNA: PRO, HO 272/38). In 1969 he institutionalized the practice of sabbaticals for high-flying police officers. He travelled widely as a policeman and maintained an international outlook, notably with contacts in the USA including O. W. Wilson, the exemplar of police professionalism in the mid-twentieth century. Despite some lobbying on his own behalf for a larger global role, he never supplanted Sir Arthur Young as the government's choice for official police fact-finding visits in the 1950s and 1960s. 
St Johnston retired in 1970, having stamped his mark on the British police service since 1940. Unlike nearly all of his predecessors in leading positions within the police he was as much at home with trade union and Labour Party figures as he was with county society and Conservatives. Keen to make an impression upon any post he held, he was very quick to suggest detailed and thought-out courses of action to his superiors, and was noted for his 'forceful manner, his initiative, and his tireless energy' (Brigadier-General McSherry to Sir Frank Brook, 11 Dec 1944, St Johnston papers). His personal success was as much in opposition to his fellow officers as in conjunction with them: when comparing himself with Ted Dodd, he admitted that unlike himself Dodd was 'very popular in the Police Service' (St Johnston, 264). 
In retirement St Johnston settled at Great Rissington, Gloucestershire, where he pursued business interests as a company director of Group 4 security, chairman of Interflow Ltd, and as a member of Lloyd's. His autobiography was published in 1978. Throughout his life he was active in public life and welfare work, for such causes as the King's Camp in the 1930s, and the Sail Training Association in the 1960s. He also rose in the freemasons and in the Order of St John, sitting on its chapter general. His personal life was less happy than his professional one: his first marriage (3 April 1937) to Joan (Joanna) Wharton (1914-1974), daughter of Alwyn Wharton, physician and surgeon, ended in 1969 when she divorced him; they had one son and two daughters. On 12 December 1969 he married Margaret Emily ('b'. 1914), widow of Lieutenant-Colonel Stanley Jameson-Till MC, and daughter of Arthur Crust, landowner. A 'catastrophic error' (St Johnston, 290), this marriage ended in divorce in 1979. On 4 July 1980 he married Thelma Elizabeth Condy ('b'. 1932), daughter of George Barrington Thomas, company director, and former wife of Archibald Condy. St Johnston died in Cheltenham General Hospital on 17 March 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 97916


Popkess, Athelstan Horn (1893-1967), police officer, was born in Knysna, Cape Colony, on 23 November 1893, the third son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Edward Peter Popkess, a civil engineer, and his wife, Lilian, 'nee' Thorpe. His early years were spent in the small rural communities of the Cape before the family moved to Bulawayo, Southern Rhodesia. There was a 'boy's own' quality attached to his life in southern Africa, which he later recounted in his autobiographical 'Sweat in My Eyes' (1952), which covered his childhood adventures and war years in southern Africa, and thereafter retold in a series of articles and radio broadcasts. 
Popkess was educated at Queen's College, Queenstown, Cape Colony, and subsequently at St George's College, Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. A keen sportsman, he was a champion miler for Rhodesia, for whom he also played rugby against England in 1913. He spoke Afrikaans, Arabic, and Swahili, and later took a Russian language course at King's College, London. At the outbreak of the First World War he joined the Rhodesia regiment, serving in German South-West Africa before going to Britain, where in 1916 he was commissioned into the North Staffordshire regiment (1916). Returning to German South-West Africa, he shortly thereafter was seconded to 25th battalion, Royal Fusiliers (legion of frontiersmen), an irregular unit, and when this was disbanded, to the King's African rifles (1916-18). 
After contracting blackwater fever Popkess was invalided to England, where he worked briefly at the Ministry of Munitions. When the First World War ended he rejoined the 1st battalion, the North Staffordshire regiment, and was based at the Curragh, working as an 'Intelligence Officer in Ireland, in close co-operation with the Royal Irish Constabulary' (TNA: PRO, HO 45/24711) during the Anglo-Irish War of 1919-21. After Irish independence he was seconded in 1922 to the Palestine gendarmerie. On 11 June 1923 he married, at Long Ditton, Surrey, Gilberta Lilian (1897-1969), daughter of Richard Popkiss, civil engineer; they had two sons and two daughters. He returned to the 2nd battalion, North Staffordshires, in 1924, and in 1928 was seconded to be assistant provost marshal at Aldershot. 
Towards the end of 1929 Popkess was appointed chief constable of Nottingham. His appointment was controversial, as he lacked a civilian police background, while three serving chief constables who had formed an original shortlist had been passed over in his favour. In December 1929 a majority of Labour members of Nottingham city council moved a resolution that the Nottingham watch committee should reconsider Popkess's appointment, as 'his experience and outlook' was 'purely Military in character, and differing fundamentally from those demanded in the Civil Police'. Moreover, they contended that it was 'asking too much of the Nottingham citizen to accept as Chief Constable one of the Black and Tans' (TNA: PRO, HO 45/24711). The 'Police Review', the Superintendents' Association, and the Police Federation similarly and unsuccessfully protested to the Home Office that 'such appointments as these are causing great dissatisfaction in the Police Forces of the Country' (ibid.). On 16 November 1929 Nottingham city council, largely along party lines, voted to support the appointment and J. R. Clynes, the home secretary in Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government, declined to intervene, arguing that such matters remained the prerogative of the watch committee. 
Once in post Popkess proved an energetic leader, locally and nationally. He carried his enthusiasm for sport into his police career, and made an immediate impact; his Nottingham boxing team, coached by a former professional, came to prominence at the national police championships in 1932; controversially, he took the team on tours of Nazi Germany in 1935 and 1936. In 1931 a sports ground was acquired for the Nottingham force, which recruited several county cricketers. His influence was most considerable in the fields of road safety, and scientific and technological improvements in policing. By 1933 Nottingham had its own dedicated police forensic laboratory, which was contracting work for other forces. Perhaps his most visible contribution was the introduction of police patrol vehicles onto the streets of Nottingham. In 'Mechanised Police Patrol' (1954), which amounted to a handbook for other police forces, he argued that 'mechanizing' police patrolling enhanced significantly the capacity for surprise, mobility, concentration, and offensive action. Operational methods included the employment of 'special mission patrols', or Q-cars (vehicles camouflaged as tradesmen's vans, and the like). Roving mobility made two-way radio communication essential and Popkess was in the forefront of the introduction of this technology, which he described in 'Wireless communications and the mechanised crime patrol' (in W. B. R. Morren, ed., 'Advanced Lectures to Senior Police Officers in Scotland', 1936, 183-204). Personal radios for officers on the beat were successfully tested in Nottingham in 1958. 
Popkess was a strong advocate of measures to improve traffic management, particularly as this related to accident prevention, where losses, he thought, were comparable to numbers of wartime casualties. His ideas were set out in his comprehensive manual 'Traffic Control and Road Accident Prevention' (1951), where he pointed to evidence that where police were employed on accident prevention duty road casualties were reduced. He advocated the use of scientific testing of drivers to detect those driving under the influence of alcohol, believing that those who had consumed moderate amounts were more dangerous than those obviously unfit to drive, and deplored the acceptance of drink and driving, citing the provision of beer mats in public houses with the slogan 'Be a better driver' ('The Times', 7 Oct 1959). He also criticized the simultaneous end of the working day, which poured impatient homeward drivers onto city roads between 5 p.m. and 6 p.m., the peak period for accidents. 
Popkess had a gift for publicity, and his radio broadcasts brought the innovations of the Nottingham police to wider notice. He was awarded the king's police medal in 1935, and was appointed OBE in 1942 and CBE in 1956. Having obtained a divorce from his first wife, he married, on 27 January 1939, Dorothy Rosebudd (or Rosemary) Walsh (1905/6-1956), daughter of Patrick Walsh; she died suddenly from an overdose of sleeping pills ('The Times', 28 Feb 1956). 
During the late 1950s Popkess became involved in an escalating conflict with the watch committee, Nottingham's town clerk (Tom Owen), and the ruling Labour group of Nottingham city council, sparked, in part at least, by his preoccupation with traffic management. Tensions rose because of the refusal by the council to fund Popkess's requests for a new traffic warden corps, and more police housing. In the spring of 1959 he instigated a series of inquiries into alleged corrupt practices within the Labour group, having received anonymous information that three members of the Labour group who had visited the Zeiss optical factory in East Germany in connection with a council scheme to purchase a planetarium for Nottingham had received gifts of cameras valued at $10 each from their hosts. There was a further allegation that Nottingham corporation workmen had undertaken building work to the value of $25 at the home of a Labour councillor. Popkess brought in detectives from the special branch of Scotland Yard, who visited Nottingham in May 1959, but found no case to answer. The chief constable's opponents raised strong objections to the very public manner in which the initial investigations were conducted (including the leaking of confidential information about the police inquiries on the eve of local elections). 
In June 1959 the Nottingham watch committee instructed Popkess to submit reports on his inquiries into local corruption. Following his repeated refusal to comply the committee suspended him on 8 July 1959. R. A. Butler, the home secretary, asserted the independence of chief constables from local political control or interference in enforcing the criminal law, and stated that Popkess would have been in breach of duty had he complied with the instruction of the watch committee. Demanding the reinstatement of Popkess, Butler threatened to withhold grants to Nottingham unless this was done (claiming tenuously that any force was deemed inefficient without its chief constable). In the interim the Labour group in Nottingham turned in on itself, prevaricating and refusing publicly to debate the issues, much to the disquiet of the party nationally. Amid allegations of socialist intolerance, a petition for the reinstatement of Popkess gained 6000 signatures, and a public meeting in his support held in the Old Market Square, Nottingham, attracted a crowd of several thousand. On 30 July the watch committee 'reluctantly' agreed to reinstate Popkess, with effect from 9 August, but recorded its continuing lack of confidence in his impartiality ('The Times', 31 July 1959). 
Popkess was due to retire at the end of 1959, and he left Nottingham in November that year. An article by him ('Criminal Law Review', Oct 1960, 673-7) reflecting on the racial disturbances that had broken out in the St Ann's Well Road area of Nottingham in August 1958 attracted renewed controversy. He also wrote and broadcast children's stories. In retirement he lived in Babbacombe, Devon, and died at the St John of God Nursing Home, Torquay, Devon, on 29 April 1967. After a funeral at Babbacombe he was cremated at Torquay. 
The 'Popkess affair' was successfully deployed by the Home Office as an example of the dangers of direct control of the police by elected representatives, and led to the appointment in January 1960 of a royal commission on the police, chaired by Sir John Willink. The resulting 'Police Act' of 1964 significantly diminished the powers of watch committees and reduced the political representation on them, centralizing authority still further in the hands of Westminster and chief constables. 


@@@@@


doc= 97917


Brodie, John Alexander (1858-1934), civil engineer and town planner, was born on 5 June 1858 at Chyknell, near Bridgnorth, Shropshire, the fifth child of James Brodie ('b'. 1822/3), farm bailiff, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Freeland ('b'. 1821/2). By 1861 the family had moved to Woodside Cottage, Kettins, Forfarshire. 
In 1875 Brodie was articled as a pupil engineer to George Fosbery Lyster, engineer-in-chief to the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board. The Liverpool and Birkenhead docks were then undergoing a massive programme of extension and modernization, and Brodie's four-year involvement gave him a broad grounding in engineering under the supervision of Lyster's large team, including membership of the Liverpool Engineering Students' Society, later the Liverpool Engineering Society. Brodie went on to win Whitworth and Canning scholarships to read mathematics at Owens College, Manchester (1879-81), during which time he lodged in Chorlton upon Medlock, Lancashire. Returning to Liverpool, after a stint on harbour works in Bilbao, Spain, he gained a temporary position in the borough engineer's department before moving into private practice with J. T. Wood in 1882. These steps must have provided both knowledge and gainful contacts, for two years later he became general assistant to Liverpool's city engineer, and in 1898 was appointed city engineer. In this rapid progress he had worked on an astonishing variety of mechanical and civil projects. 
By then Brodie had already earned lasting fame for his patent (no. 19,112) for goal nets for football and other games -- first submitted in November 1889 and approved on 27 November of the following year. The football goal had initially consisted only of two upright posts, and although by 1882 a crossbar was required, there remained extensive scope for disputes. These were eliminated by Brodie's delightfully simple invention of a 'pocket in which the ball may lodge after passing through the goal' and, soon after, nets 'as under Mr Brodie's patent' were approved by the Football Association. First used in an FA cup final in March 1891 at the Oval, London, nets became compulsory for all league matches from September of that year and all FA cup ties from 1894. On 13 November 1897 at St Andrew's Episcopal Church, Uddingston, Lanarkshire, Brodie married Amelia Freeland ('b'. 1872), daughter of Hugh Freeland, messenger-at-arms; the couple had two sons and two daughters. 
In his new post as city engineer Brodie quickly applied himself to such problems as Liverpool's chronic shortage of acceptable working-class housing. His response was to adapt concrete technology, which he had encountered at the Liverpool docks and at Bilbao, to form a novel construction using large pre-cast concrete panels. This system was so cheap that his 'artisans' dwellings' were budgeted to yield a surplus, after interest costs, from a rent of 4's.' per week. During his time with J. T. Wood, Brodie had worked on developing what would now be called combined heat and power waste destructors. These plants used heat from burning refuse to produce steam for generating both electricity and hydraulic power, the latter being used for materials handling, and for crushing clinker, initially for forming street paving slabs. Low grade heat was simultaneously applied to warming an adjoining baths and laundry. It was at one of these destructor stations that the research for Brodie's pre-cast concrete panels was carried out, using furnace clinker for aggregate. His contribution to the development of waste destructors was acknowledged by H. Percy Boulnois, his predecessor as city engineer, in a paper given to the Liverpool Engineering Society in 1892. 
These achievements aside, Brodie's great vision for Liverpool lay in his 'circumferential boulevard' which was to extend round the outside of the city with carriageways, pavements, and electric tram tracks. This required a road of initially up to 120 and later 160 feet -- enormous widths for the period. Brodie's scheme was supplemented by improved radial roads and tramways, enabling people to move out to the suburbs more easily, and thus helping to solve the housing problem in the inner city. In the process Brodie deliberately invented 'ribbon development' by building so far as possible on agricultural land which he could obtain extremely cheaply or even gratis. Brodie's circumferential boulevard featured in the first issue of the 'Town Planning Review', the journal of the Liverpool School of Civic Design, of which Brodie was a founder member and an honorary lecturer. Construction of Brodie's Queen's Drive -- an orbital ring road connecting Walton in the north and Mossley Hill to the south -- began in 1904 with accompanying housing, much of it overseen by the city architect, Lancelot Keay, from the 1920s. 
Brodie's road-building schemes also opened up new opportunities for private as well as public forms of transport. With Henry Hele-Shaw, professor of engineering at the city's university college, Brodie was active in the Liverpool Self-Propelled Traffic Association which organized the city's famous trials of commercial motor vehicles between 1898 and 1901. He was also instrumental in the corporation's purchase of a Leyland steam wagon in 1899 and foresaw the future growth and importance of the motor lorry. Brodie's broader vision beyond the city was for a new highway to extend from Liverpool to Manchester (and preferably on to Leeds) in one direction and across the Mersey and the Dee to north Wales in the other. Work on the east Lancashire road (A580) -- one of the country's first purpose-built trunk roads, connecting Liverpool and Manchester -- began in 1929 and took five years to complete, while the (old) Mersey, or Queensway, Tunnel, was opened in July 1934. Other parts of the project remain unexecuted. 
In 1911 came the first references to one of the twentieth century's greatest town planning exercises, New Delhi. Informal soundings were made to find suitable experts for a planning committee, and while Edwin Lutyens remains the person most commonly associated with the project, John Brodie was invited and had joined the advisory group well before him. Brodie's involvement was entirely merited as the New Delhi scheme was the first occasion that a modern capital city, with its complex service infrastructure, had been planned from nothing. It was a job in which, as drainage and water supply problems in other Indian cities had shown, the engineering had to come first. Indeed Brodie was now such a respected figure that he was asked for his opinion on fellow committee members; this reputedly led to the exclusion of Stanley Adshead, the recently appointed head of civic design at Liverpool University, on the grounds that he was too academic. 
Brodie was an imposing and sociable figure who made a habit of leading the organizations he joined, becoming president of the Liverpool Engineering Society (in 1898 and 1923), the Royal Sanitary Institute, and the Institution of Municipal and County Engineers (1907). A member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, in 1920 he became the first 'municipal' to be elected president of the senior institution, of civil engineers. 
Still keen to face the big challenges, in 1926 Brodie resigned as city engineer in order to join in partnership with Sir Basil Mott to work on the construction of the Mersey Tunnel, which on its completion in 1934 became the world's longest and largest subaqueous road tunnel. Brodie lived to see it completed, but only by four months: on 16 November 1934 he suffered a coronary thrombosis and died at his miniature country estate, Aigburth Hall, Liverpool. His funeral, on 19 November, took place at Liverpool Cathedral, and was conducted by the dean in the presence of the lord mayor. His body was afterwards cremated at Anfield crematorium. His contribution to the city's civic design is commemorated by the naming of the appropriately wide Brodie Avenue in the south of the city and, from 2000, by an English Heritage plaque at his former residence, 28 Ullet Road, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 97918


Banks, Olive Lucy (1923-2006), sociologist, historian, and feminist, was born at 10 Riley Road, Enfield Highway, Middlesex, on 2 July 1923, the only child of Herbert Alfred Davies, a house decorator, and later builder and contractor, and his wife, Jessie Louise, 'nee' Tebby, the widow of his brother. Her parents came from a working-class background and her awareness of feminism arose at an early age when she observed the dissatisfaction of her hard-pressed mother. Although there were no books at home and neither of her parents encouraged her to succeed at elementary school, in 1933 she won a scholarship to the local grammar school for girls, determined that a full-time domestic life was not for her. It was at Enfield county school that she developed a love of reading, music, and the theatre, despite the fact that she felt she did not fit in well among her predominantly middle-class peers. Her feminist awareness was sharpened when, at fifteen years old, a debate with the boys' grammar school on the motion that 'a woman's place is in the home' angered her; she was horrified both by the arguments advanced by the opposite sex and by the feeble replies given by the girls. The lesson was brought home more forcibly a few months later when she applied for a job at the local public library and was promptly informed that only boys could apply. As she later commented, 'From that day my feminist commitment has never wavered' ('Reflections', 403). As expected, she left school at sixteen and then worked as a clerk and later as a laboratory assistant until, on 22 June 1944, she married Joseph Ambrose (Joe) Banks (1920-2005), also from a 'respectable' working-class family. During these years her appetite for further study had been awakened when she attended classes run by the local co-operative society and by the Workers' Educational Association. 
Marriage did not end Olive Banks's desire for an academic career of her own, and Joe was supportive of her ambitions. In 1947 both entered the London School of Economics to read sociology, and both stayed on for postgraduate work. Her PhD thesis, completed in 1953, was turned into a book, 'Parity and Prestige in English Secondary Education: a Study in Educational Sociology' (1955). This, with its emphasis upon the interplay between the educational system, the class structure of modern Britain, and the labour market, became very influential in the emerging discipline of sociology -- as well as in policy-based discussions about how to make Britain a more equal society. Yet despite the recognition that she received for her book, she found it difficult to find a post in higher education. Eventually, in 1954, she was offered a temporary research post in the sociology and social work department of the University of Liverpool, where Joe had been appointed a senior researcher. Typically for women academics, she was kept on short-term contracts until 1959, when her post was made permanent. This enabled her to investigate a topic she had long wanted to study, the history of British feminism. In 1964 she published, with Joe, 'Feminism and Family Planning in Victorian England'. However, this book attracted little notice until a decade later when a generation of feminist academics emerged in the USA. 
During the 1960s Olive Banks went through a period of depression about the discipline of sociology, largely due to the rejection of any kind of historical scholarship and the growing influence of Marxist theory, which emphasized the importance of social class rather than gender. By now she was teaching and publishing in the newly expanding field of the sociology of education. Her reputation as a leading scholar in the area was sealed with the publication of her highly successful and influential textbook, 'The Sociology of Education' (1965). In 1970 she was appointed a reader in sociology at the University of Leicester (where Joe had been offered a professorship) and in 1973 became the first woman to hold a chair at that university. 
During the 1970s, despite her regular attendance at the annual conferences of the British Sociological Association, Olive Banks's discontent with sociology increased. She found herself trapped in a field of expertise in which she had no abiding interest and in a male-dominated department that had no interest in gender issues. The advent of 'second-wave' feminism and the renewed interest in feminism generally among women academics at this time spurred her on to return to the subject that interested her, the history of feminism. 'Faces of Feminism', a historical and comparative study of feminism in Britain and the USA from the early nineteenth century to the 1970s, appeared in 1981. It sold extremely well, hitting the academic market at a time when women's studies courses were being established. The following year Olive and Joe Banks both took early retirement, thus helping to save the jobs of five younger colleagues. 
Retirement brought Olive Banks more time for such leisure interests as opera, the arts, and gardening, but especially for research and writing. Her two-volume 'Biographical Dictionary of British Feminists' (1985-1990) soon became an important reference source, while 'Becoming a Feminist: the Social Origins of 'First Wave' Feminism' (1986) pioneered collective biography as an approach to the subject. 'The Politics of British Feminism, 1918-1970' (1993) was her last book. With increasing age she began to suffer from deafness and arthritis. When Joe died in 2005 she was heart-broken. They never had any children and Olive lamented the lack of a close extended family. She died at her home, 30 Lismore Grove, Buxton, Derbyshire, on 14 September 2006, following a heart attack. 


@@@@@


doc= 97923


Martin, Lionel Walker Birch (1878-1945), motor vehicle dealer and manufacturer, was born at Nansladron, St Ewe, Cornwall, on 15 March 1878, the son of Edward Martin ('b'. 1843) and his wife, Elizabeth Emily, formerly Braithwaite, 'nee' Birch ('b'. 1850). His father was a proprietor of Martin Brothers China Clay Merchants in nearby St Austell. The family also owned the Lee Moor porcelain factory in Plympton, Devon. His mother came from Salford where her family were prosperous chalk and lime merchants. Singleton Birch & Sons Ltd was founded by her father, William Singleton Birch, with her brothers, William and Thomas, as his business partners. Emily was briefly married to Walter Braithwaite of Salford but was a young widow by the time she married Edward Martin in 1877. Their alliance brought together two powerful mining interests and the Martins maintained a comfortable lifestyle in London while their son was growing up. 
In 1891 Martin was sent to Eton College where he became a keen cyclist. He claimed that he was given his first bicycle as a reward for helping his mother learn how to ride. In 1897 he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, and was a leading member of the Oxford University Bicycle Club before joining the exclusive Bath Road Club (BRC). Known for his dedication to training and successful in breaking a number of cycling records, he was also an enthusiastic participant in the club's social activities and acquired a reputation for practical joking. In 1900 he migrated to Marcon's Hall, a private establishment connected with Oxford University run by an Anglican clergyman, Charles Marcon. There he took the examinations to qualify for a pass degree, and graduated BA in 1902. He marked his transition from undergraduate to gentleman by shaving off his long moustache. 
Through the BRC Martin met Montague Napier whose family ran an engineering firm which had just begun to expand into a new technology, the motor vehicle. Martin's interest was also turning in this direction and in 1903 the friends went into partnership to sell De Dion Bouton and Napier cars. In 1909 he married the 21-year-old Christine Murray of Auchendinny, Midlothian. The same year his motoring activities received a setback. After being fined in Richmond for driving at excessive speed, he refused to answer a summons for a similar offence in Guildford. As a consequence he was banned from driving for two years. His appeal, which concerned evidence of his previous speeding convictions, was dismissed in the High Court in January 1910. He filled the gap by racing tricycles, gaining several more records including the fastest journey from Edinburgh to York in 1911. By the time Martin's driving ban was lifted, he had become friends with a new BRC member, the engineer Robert Bamford. During 1912 they joined together to trade small cars from premises in Callow Street, Chelsea. 
1913 was a year of contrasting fortunes for Martin. Christine Martin died in April shortly after the birth of their son, John. In January, however, Bamford and Martin Ltd had been incorporated and moved to Henniker Mews in Kensington. The firm became an agency for Singer cars which they began to adapt for competition. In the spring and summer of 1914 Martin drove a Singer in the Motor Cycling Club's London to Edinburgh trial and won a two lap cyclecar race in the Oxford and Cambridge universities fixture at Brooklands. In the early years of the motor industry this was a common and enjoyable way of gaining publicity. The goal was, however, to build and sell their own car, designed for rich young men who were more interested in performance than price. Their cycling friends were typical of the potential market and in 1914 Martin placed an advert in the 'Bath Road News': 'If you must sell your birthright for a mess of petrol, why not purchase your car, cycle car or motor bicycle from Bamford & Martin Ltd, the most humorous firm in the motor trade'. 
A prototype was built and registered in March 1915. Searching for an evocative name Bamford and Martin combined reference to their sporting success at Aston Hill with Martin's name to create 'the Aston-Martin car'. Their efforts were temporarily frustrated by the First World War. Bamford joined the Army Service Corps and Martin worked for the Admiralty at Chepstow shipyards which were turned over to wartime contracts. 
On 25 January 1917 Martin married Katherine King (1888-1958), the divorced wife of Robert Henry King, a naval lieutenant, and the daughter of Harvey George Alexander, an Anglican clergyman in Barnstaple, Devon. Katherine Martin was known for her forthright character and took an active interest in her husband's business. She enjoyed driving and designed the AM radiator badge which went onto the early cars. 
In 1915 Martin became a director of Singleton Birch though he had no active role. His uncle Thomas Birch was now in charge and intended Martin to inherit his majority shareholding. The war heightened demand for minerals and the resulting prosperity of Singleton Birch provided Martin with funds to invest into his motoring business once peace returned. Bamford and Martin moved to Abingdon Road in Kensington but was a long way from producing anything suitable for sale in the competitive post-war market. Bamford became tired of the slow progress so Martin bought him out and Katherine Martin took his place as a director. 
A series of prototypes went through the workshops. Finally, in 1921, an Aston Martin was ready to go into production with a high-end price of $850. By then the company was struggling to stay afloat. In 1922 his friend the racing driver Count Louis Zborowski contributed $10,000 to build two cars for the Isle of Man tourist trophy but they were not ready in time. Instead, the cars were entered in the 1922 French grand prix with poor results. In July 1924 another wealthy friend and old Etonian, John Benson, joined the Martins on the board after his mother, Lady Charnwood, made a considerable investment in the company. Nevertheless Bamford and Martin failed in November 1925 and the receiver, Arthur Whale, dismissed Martin from his directorship. When Benson publicly criticized him for the way he had run the business, Martin sued him for slander. The court proceedings in October 1926 revealed that Martin had lost $31,000 of his own money. Though he won his case he was awarded a mere 13/4died in damages. 
The firm's assets were finally bought by Renwick and Bertelli who set up Aston Martin Motors Ltd, the first time the name would be applied to the business and not just the car. Martin turned back to Singleton Birch and in 1929 became its majority shareholder. He continued to buy and compete in motor cars but never owned an Aston Martin after 1925. The Second World War and the restrictions brought about by petrol rationing inspired him to return to cycling with fateful consequences. He was knocked off his tricycle when a car hit him at traffic lights near his home, Palings, Warboys Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey. A week later, on 21 October 1945, he died in Kingston Hospital. After a funeral at St John's Church, Kingston Vale, he was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 
Martin's social background differentiated him from other motor industry pioneers such as the engineer Herbert Austin or the businessman William Morris. It was perhaps this which gave the car from its earliest days a reputation far exceeding either its scale of production or its profitability. Aston Martin as a company would tread a rocky road over the years but the marque itself has always remained the stuff of aspirational dreams, epitomized by its long association with the glamour of the James Bond movies. 


@@@@@


doc= 97928


Mallows, Charles Edward (1864-1915), landscape architect, was born at 2 Charles Street, Chelsea, London, on 5 May 1864, the second son of Lucy Barrell (1829/30-1904) and George W. Mallows (1823/4-1892), a master shoemaker from Bedford. His parents married in 1866 and settled at Flatford Mill, East Bergholt, Suffolk, in the household of Mallows's grandmother, also named Lucy Barrell, the widow of a grocer; Mallows's uncle ran the mill. Its Constable associations may have encouraged Mallows's leanings towards drawing and painting. 
A student at the Bedford School of Art, Mallows was later articled to the Bedford architect Frank Mercer for three years from 1879. He gained experience working for Henry Hewitt Bridgman in the City of London for a year, then for Salaman and Wornum at 9 Old Bond Street. He attended the Royal Academy Schools. His final apprenticeship was his happiest, at the offices of William Wallace and William Flockhart from 1884 to 1886. He then set up on his own in London, accepting an offer to travel and make measured drawings of English and French cathedrals for publication in the 'Century Magazine'. These drawings were added to his Academy Schools portfolio, and won him the RIBA Pugin travelling studentship in 1889. 
After a breakdown caused by overwork Mallows returned to Bedford; he opened an office there in 1895 with the architect George Grocock, and worked with him in the arts and crafts tradition (much influenced by Richard Norman Shaw) on a variety of commissions, including cottages, schools, shops, and the restoration of churches. In 1900 he was made a fellow of the RIBA; by 1901 Mallows was the diocesan surveyor for Ely, and had designed an opera house for Bedford (though this was never built). He took a student, Frederick Landseer Griggs, whose drawings for him appeared in 'The Studio'. 
Mallows's work on gardens began with John Pyghtle White, who made well-crafted garden furniture, buildings, and ornamentation at the Pyghtle works in Bedford. Mallows was commissioned to draw for the catalogue. In 1898 White moved to Biddenham to King's Corner, a cottage designed by Mallows, who also designed the garden -- his first. In this can be seen the beginnings of his delight in the formality of the seventeenth century. Through White, Mallows designed other cottages in Biddenham, including Three Gables for Henry John Peacock, a farmer; and on 19 September 1899 Mallows married Henry's daughter Sybil Lindsay ('b'. 1874). Later Three Gables became home for Mallows and his family. 
From the turn of the century Mallows worked occasionally with the landscape architect Thomas Hayton Mawson. Mallows rented rooms adjoining Mawson's at 28 Conduit Street in London until his death in 1915. In 1901 Sir Robert Affleck of Dalham Hall in Suffolk asked for a new wing to be added and a garden to complement the house. Neither the building nor Mallows's Elizabethan garden design came to anything as Affleck lost his money almost immediately and the house was sold. 
Mallows's most important commission, Tirley Court (later Tirley Garth), was slow in its completion as it went through the hands of three successive owners. The Cheshire family house, with its central cloister, roughcast walls, and red stone dressing, was begun for a director of Brunner Mond, chemical manufacturers, in 1906, and not finished until after 1912, when Tirley Garth was leased to P. H. Prestwich, a manager of a textile firm near Manchester. Mallows asked Mawson to join him in planning the garden and landscape around the house in 1912. Mallows planned the 'garth' as a planted courtyard with its surrounding cloister walk, and steps down to a central pool with deep blue tessellations. The very geometrical design for the garden, based on circles and rectangles, was Mallows's. There were formal beds next to the southern front overlooking grass, trees, and shrubs. The steeply sloping eastern side had tennis lawns above a semicircular, terraced bastion. A long, axial path connected the bastion to a circular vegetable garden, ending in a magnificent wooden bothy, as large as a cottage. Mawson's planting plans were for herbaceous borders, a rhododendron bed, and the trees and shrubs of the surrounding landscape. 'The Studio' carried a series of articles by Mallows between 1908 and 1910 in which plans for Tirley Garth accompanied his thoughts on garden history and design. 
Mallows was commissioned, in 1910, to remodel the remains of the old house at Canon's Park in Edgware for the industrialist Sir Arthur Du Cros MP, and to lay out new, grand gardens. Rectangular pools made a focus for the north and south gardens, and there was a long herbaceous border and walk in the east garden, looking out over lawns to a lake. Stone was generously used for terracing, for seats for the north walk, for a pergola, and for patterned brick paths. The house was sold to the North London Collegiate School in 1929, which built over the north garden. One of Mallows's last formal garden commissions, between 1913 and 1915, was for Craig-y-parc, Pentyrch, near Cardiff, for Thomas Evans (died 1943), a businessman who had made money in coal and railways. 
An accomplished draughtsman and designer of architectural gardens, Mallows perhaps never wanted the resounding successes of which he was capable. But before he could achieve more houses and gardens like Tirley Garth he died very suddenly, of heart failure, at Three Gables, Biddenham, on 2 June 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 97929


Mawson, Edward Prentice (1885-1954), landscape architect, was born in Ambleside, Westmorland, in the Lake District on 16 July 1885, the eldest of the nine children (four boys and five girls) of Thomas Hayton Mawson (1861-1933), landscape architect, and his wife, Anna ('b'. 1862/3), daughter of Edward Prentice, a surgeon from North Walsham. He attended the grammar school in Windermere, and it was accepted that he would eventually take charge of the family firm of landscape architects. His father ensured that he received qualifications in architecture, as there were no schools for landscape architects at the time, and a good working knowledge of plants and design from the Lakeland Nursery, Windermere, established by his uncles, Robert and Isaac Mawson. He went to the Architectural Association School in London, and then to the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, where he adopted the formal style of design favoured by many Edwardian architects and garden makers. 
After articles served with a London firm of architects Mawson joined his father as a partner in 1910; by now the firm was established in Lancaster and had an office in London. He won the RIBA's Soane medallion in the same year. He was responsible for drawing up plans for two prestigious commissions awarded to his father in 1908, the Peace Palace garden at The Hague, and the garden and its tower for Queen Alexandra for her seaside house of Hvidore in Copenhagen. On 9 April 1913 he married Hilda ('b'. 1885/6), daughter of Thomas Bowhill, boot manufacturer, of Norwich. They moved to Hest Bank, north of Lancaster, and had two sons and a daughter, born in 1917, 1920, and 1925. 
In the early twentieth century Mawson and his brother John accompanied their father to North America to gain experience of town planning. 'En route' to Canada in 1913 Thomas Mawson received an invitation to design the palace gardens in Athens for the king of Greece, and Edward was dispatched to Athens where he prepared these designs and others in Greece. Preliminary studies were submitted in July 1914, though the outbreak of the First World War meant that the plans were not carried out. Unfit for military service, Edward and John worked on commissions with their father that included the redesigning of the town of Salonika, which had been damaged by fire in 1917, and the reconstruction of villages to the war-damaged north. Political infighting and financial difficulties again prevented the completion of this commission, though Edward was awarded the order of King George for his work in Greece, and he was called back again in the 1930s. 
In Silverdale, Lancashire, Mawson worked on Hazelwood Hall and its garden in 1916 and returned to Grey Walls in 1925. He designed the great hillside park and shelters at Rivington, north-west of Bolton, for Lord Leverhulme, and assisted his father in making The Hill garden, Hampstead, for the same client. Father and son worked together at Boveridge Park, near Cranborne in Dorset, for Charles W. Gordon in 1920, and for W. Gilchrist Macbeth at Dunira in Perthshire in the same year, creating singularly beautiful landscapes. After his father was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 1923 Edward Mawson was effectively in control of the family firm, his brother John Mawson moving to New Zealand as director of town planning for New Zealand in 1928. 
Between the wars more contracts were to be found in the public sector than for private clients, and Mawson designed many public parks, including Stanley Park in Blackpool from 1922 to 1926. This had a formal core of Italian gardens overlooked by an art deco social centre, a bandstand, and a boating pool, all surrounded by football and cricket pitches, bowling greens, and tennis courts. He designed a park with pavilion and a pergola in a formal water garden at Weston-super-Mare from 1923, and commissions for town centre improvements and seafront garden developments followed at Southend-on-Sea, Lytham St Annes, Hastings, and Bridlington. Plymouth Park, which opened in 1931, marked a current change in taste, concentrating on sports provision more than floral adornment. In the mid-1930s the firm designed popular outdoor facilities such as Droitwich Spa and Brine Baths in Worcestershire and Ruislip Lido in Middlesex with flower beds and shrubs; even Squires Gate holiday camp in Blackpool (later Pontins) had its formal gardens. 
Mawson's partners were Gordon H. Farrow, an associate of the Institute of Landscape Architects and a superb draughtsman whose illustrations provided the equivalent of the glossy brochure, and Thomas Prentice Mawson, Edward's younger son. They worked on a wide range of landscape commissions such as Mayesbrook Park in Barking, campsites in co. Antrim and Normandy, private garden creation and reconstruction, and large-scale town planning schemes ranging from London county council's St Helier estate in 1934 to the Ulster garden villages from 1947. 
A good public speaker and an honorary lecturer in landscape design at Reading University, Mawson assisted his father in the writing of the fifth edition of 'The Art and Craft of Garden Making' of 1926, and wrote 'Amounderness', a planning report on the Fylde, in 1937. He was a member of the Town Planning Institute from 1919 and of the Institute of Structural Engineers from 1921, a fellow and founder member of the Institute of Landscape Architects, acting president after his father's death in 1933, and president from 1936 to 1937. He died suddenly of coronary thrombosis at 4 Lonsdale Road, Hest Bank, Lancaster, on 22 December 1954, and was cremated in Blackpool. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97931


Lashly, William (1867-1940), polar explorer, was born at Hambledon, Hampshire, on 25 December 1867, the fourth of the seven children of John Lashly (1833-1903), a farm labourer and thatcher, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Tucker (1838-1918). He attended the village school in Hambledon until the age of thirteen, when he began work with his father. In 1889 he joined the Royal Navy, and saw service as a stoker in the Indian Ocean and West Indies. On 19 October 1896 he married Alice Cox (1870-1940), the daughter of Charles Cox, a carpenter, also of Hambledon; they had one daughter, Alice, born in 1900. 
In 1901 Lashly volunteered to serve on Captain Scott's 'national Antarctic expedition': the expedition ship 'Discovery' left British waters on 7 August. According to Scott, Lashly's appearance was 'the most deceptive' of any man he had ever seen. He was not more than ordinarily tall or broad, yet he had 'one of the largest chest measurements in the ship', and was, at 13 stone 8 pounds, surprisingly heavy. Quiet and unassuming, he neither smoked nor drank, and 'was never in anything but the hardest condition'. He gave the impression of having great strength and energy in reserve ('GJ', 96/4, 303). 
Lashly was a member of the 'Discovery''s six-man 'balloon section', which underwent training at Aldershot before departure. In Antarctica, though, only Scott and two others, one of them Ernest Shackleton, were able to ascend, on 3 February 1902, before rising winds stopped the experiment. Ashore Lashly proved himself an efficient and versatile handyman. He was well suited to the rigours of expedition life, and wrote home in February 1903: 'the best of it is the sledge trips which we did plenty... of course I don't mean to say it is all honey dragging 200 pounds behind ever[y] day for a month or 6 weeks but you are never healthier in your life' (William Lashly to Charles and Catherine Lashly, Feb 1903, Scott Polar RI, MS 1924/1). 
As the polar winter drew to a close Scott planned a major sledge journey up the Ferrar glacier, starting out on 12 October. The arduous man-hauling on the high plateau of Victoria Land forced Scott to reduce his six-man party to three, on 22 November, and he kept with him only Lashly and the Welshman Petty Officer Edgar Evans. For another month they pressed westwards. On 14 December, struggling to find their route in fog, all three fell 300 feet down an ice-fall. They were fortunate not to break any bones, and also to discover at the bottom that they were within 6 miles of the food depot for which they had been searching. While 'en route' for this depot, however, Scott and Evans fell to the length of their harness in a deep crevasse. Lashly managed to brace himself and prevent the sledge -- which now straddled the gap -- from falling in after them, and taking him with it. 
After the 'Discovery' returned home in September 1904 Lashly was promoted to chief stoker, and he was later made an instructor at the Royal Navy College at Osborne. When Scott began recruiting for the 'Terra Nova' expedition of 1910, with the south pole as his goal, he selected Lashly and Evans, alongside the Irishman Tom Crean, another prized veteran of the 'Discovery', from among the thousands who volunteered. The 'Terra Nova' left Cardiff for the south on 15 June 1910, and made a final stop at Port Chalmers in New Zealand on 29 November to take on more coal. The ship came close to foundering in a force 10 gale (1-3 December) and Lashly spent hours up to his neck in bilge water, with the ship rolling violently, trying to clear the hand pump. 
On 4 January 1911 the expedition began to disembark at Cape Evans, where Lashly functioned as 'second engineer' to Bernard Day, who was in charge of the expedition's three experimental caterpillar-track motors. One of these sank through the ice after being unloaded, and they were viewed, by Captain Oates in particular, as costly failures. After they were taken out of storage for the journey south, on 17 October 1911, the motors gave constant trouble. It was only by dint of Day's and Lashly's efforts that the motor party -- which included also Lieutenant Edward R. G. R. Evans and F. J. Hooper -- was ready to leave on time on 24 October. Thereafter the party made slow progress, never exceeding 7 miles a day -- ironically because the motors were constantly overheating. On one occasion Day and Lashly worked all night in -25 degree F to dismantle one of the engines, and replace a connecting rod, but by 1 November both machines had finally given out. They had carried a load of about 3 tons just over 50 miles: henceforth the four-man motor party would become a single man-hauling unit. For Lashly and Lieutenant Evans it was the beginning of three months harnessed together. 
On 21 November 1911 the motor party was overtaken by the main caravan, and on 11 December, at the foot of the Beardmore glacier, Scott organized his party into three four-man teams. On 22 December, after ascending the glacier, Scott reorganized again, sending home Edward Atkinson, Patrick Keohane, Charles Wright, and Cherry-Garrard. Lieutenant Evans and Lashly now joined 'Birdie' Bowers and Tom Crean in what was clearly a second string to Scott's own team, which included Oates, Edgar Evans, and Edward Wilson. Traversing the polar plateau with his new companions Lashly marked his forty-fourth birthday (Christmas day 1911) by falling into a crevasse. He was hauled up to safety by his comrades, who wished him a 'happy Christmas' and 'many happy returns'. According to them his reply was 'unprintable' (Evans, 201) but Scott observed 'His fall has not even disturbed his equanimity' (Ellis, 132). 
On new year's eve, working in intense cold, Lashly and Crean helped to shorten the party's sledges by 2 feet, thus improving their running. For both men it was a last service rendered directly to Scott. On 3 January 1912 Scott announced his decision to take his team, with the addition of Bowers, to the summit. Cherry-Garrard later lamented this outcome: 'If Scott had only taken a four-man party and Lashly to the Pole!' (Seaver, 247). Both Edward Wilson and Edward Atkinson also favoured Lashly over Edgar Evans (Huntford, 467-8). The latter, though, had established himself as the stronger man in Scott's mind, and when the decision was taken he must have appeared as such. On 27 December Scott had swapped Lashly and Evans in the traces, and found that his sledge felt lighter with the latter. And of the three teams that had ascended the Beardmore glacier it was Scott's, with Edgar Evans in it, that had proved the strongest. Lashly's own team had shown signs of tiredness, and understandably so, as he later explained: 'I should have most likely went to the pole only the party that went on had not been hauling so long as I had. Myself & Mr Evans had hauled 360 miles before the other[s] commenced' (William Lashly to Charles Lashly, 29 Feb 1912, Scott Polar RI, MS 1924/4). 
On 4 January 1912 the remaining two parties separated at lat. 87 degree 32' S after an emotional farewell. Lashly's party, led by Lieutenant Evans, and weakened by the loss of Bowers, was now obliged to make all speed. They began well, but three days of blizzards (8-10 January) pushed them off course, and on 12 January they found themselves at the top of the Shackleton ice-falls, with the equally unpalatable alternatives of a three-day detour around them, or an uncontrolled glissade down. On 17 January, in thick mist, they veered off course again, and were compelled to take extreme risks, traversing one ice bridge across a crevasse that Crean famously labelled 'the crossbar to the H of Hell'. Having survived the Beardmore glacier they made good time, but, just as things were looking up, Evans began to show the first symptoms of the scurvy that would soon incapacitate him. Though he won Lashly's admiration for his pluck he became a burden on his comrades. Refusing Evans's requests to leave him, Lashly and Crean strapped Evans to the sledge and dragged him until, on 18 February, he fell unconscious. By now they were at the limit of their own strength, and could pull no more. It was decided that Crean should attempt the last stretch to Hut Point, 35 miles away, alone, while Lashly nursed Evans. In a remarkable feat of endurance Crean had covered the distance by 3.30 a.m. next day, and raised the alarm. Lashly (whose name was often spelt Lashley in press reports of the expedition) and Crean were later (26 July 1913) presented with the Albert medal for saving Evans, who dedicated his epic 'South with Scott' to the two men, and maintained contact with them until they died. 
It was not until 10 April 1912 -- when news reached Cape Evans from Hut Point -- that it was known that Scott and his companions had perished. Lashly later wrote to his brother, 'we were almost certain they were gone before that, as the temperatures & the weather was beyond the endurance of any man' (William Lashly to Charles Lashly, stamped 18 Jan 1913, Scott Polar RI, MS 1924/5). Lashly and Crean were now included in the officers' councils, and were members of the search party that found Scott's tent on 12 November 1912, roughly 11 miles from One Ton Depot. Atkinson and Lashly were the first to enter, the latter emerging in tears. On 12 February 1913 the 'Terra Nova' entered Lyttelton harbour in New Zealand with the white ensign at half mast. 
After the expedition Lashly continued to serve in the navy, and was aboard HMS 'Irresistible' when it was sunk in the Dardanelles while bombarding the Turkish defences there on 18 March 1915. He later served on HMS 'Amethyst', and was discharged from the navy in February 1919. Thereafter he worked as a customs and excise officer in Cardiff docks. In 1932 he returned to live at Hambledon in a house in West Street that he named Minna Bluff -- after the landmark that welcomed parties returning to Cape Evans from the south. He lectured on his polar experiences, and kept in contact with his former colleagues, even making several visits to see Captain Oates's mother. He died on 12 June 1940 at the Royal Hospital in Portsmouth and was buried in Hambledon. 
Bill Lashly was perceived by his contemporaries as an archetype -- the utterly dependable, uncomplaining, ever ready 'other rank', upon whom Scott built two Antarctic expeditions. The impression is confirmed by the unwaveringly deferential tone of his diary, in which the officers and scientists of the expedition are always 'Mister', and his peers 'Crean', 'Evans', 'Keohane', and so on. But Lashly was also unusual as a rating in that he kept a diary at all; and posterity must be grateful that he did, for it is 'one of those ungrammatical plain statements which beat all eloquence' ('The Times', 5 Dec 1922). He is commemorated in Antarctica by the Lashly Mountains (lat. 77 degree 54' S, long. 159 degree 33' E) -- the most prominent of which is Mount Crean -- and the Lashly glacier (lat. 77 degree 57' S, long. 159 degree 50' E), both in Victoria Land. 


@@@@@


doc= 97932


Tandoh, Kwamina Faux (c.1877-c.1932), businessman and spokesman for west African interests, was born in Cape Coast, Gold Coast, the son of Robert Tandoh, a dispenser. It is thought that he was educated partly in Britain. Business opportunities led him to establish companies including Tandoh and Werompi (Ashanti) Gold and Rubber Concessions Co. Ltd, and Kendall, Wilson & Co., the latter with his English wife, Sarah Ellen Wilson (1888-1923), daughter of David Wilson, mechanical engineer. They married on 29 February 1912 at St Pancras register office, London, when he was aged thirty-five, a 'general merchant' living at 23 Regent Square, Grays Inn Road. They lived at 3 Highbury Hill, London, and had a daughter, Essie Mildred ('b'. 1919). They appear also to have adopted the daughter of one of Sarah's sisters. Both girls remained in Britain after Sarah's death. 
Tandoh, who became Chief Kofi Amoah III of Cape Coast in 1919, was reported as attending various black-focused activities in London, such as the Anti-Slavery Society's reception for the black American educationist and political leader Booker T. Washington in October 1910. In 1918 he was a founding member of the African Progress Union, a London-based body set up 'to promote the general welfare of Africans and Afro-Peoples... to spread knowledge of the history and achievements of Africans and Afro-Peoples past and present; and to create and maintain a public sentiment in favour of brotherhood in the broadest sense' ('African Telegraph', Dec 1918, 89-90). In a speech in London in December that year Tandoh declared that 'the African peoples everywhere claim an equal right with any European peoples'; 'Africans believe ourselves to be as well equipped as any race in the world'; 'the West African Colonies are not Imperial estates, but the home and possession of the inhabitants'; and that 'Self-determination, self-expression, self-rule, these are the rights of Africans equally with other peoples' ('West Africa', 1 Feb 1919). He served as the union's financial secretary under its first two presidents, the Liverpool-born John Archer and the Trinidad-born John Alcindor. He then headed the union from 1924 to 1927, working closely with John Barbour-James, a British Guiana-born postal official in the Gold Coast who had retired to London. In August 1925, with Tandoh 'in native dress', the union's seventh annual meeting was attended by the wife of the Labour politician Philip Snowden and Gordon Guggisberg, governor of the Gold Coast ('Acton Gazette and Express', 14 Aug 1925). 
Through his business activities Tandoh developed connections with the United States and the banking world. The Gold Coast exported 197,664 tons of cocoa in 1923, worth $6.5 million. Cocoa production brought radical changes; 100,000 peasant farmers grew the beans. Tandoh understood the mindset of the growers, and the risks in international trade. European import-export firms dominated the market. Tandoh and other Africans set out to challenge this. Tandoh met the bankers, and appears to have been instrumental in the move by the Colonial Bank to establish branches in the Gold Coast, ending the Bank of British West Africa's monopoly. Nevertheless the absence of security before the beans arrived at the beach -- traditional concepts of land-title meant there were no deeds, nor were there many substantial properties to sell if loans went bad -- led banks to refuse unsecured advances to growers. In March 1925, when a representative of the Colonial Bank spoke to the Union of Students of African Descent in London, Tandoh 'urged the setting up of a credit system for farmers' ('West Africa', 19 March 1925). 
In 1925 Tandoh travelled to New York to gain support for his credit scheme, attending a church in Harlem, where he was reported as wearing traditional costume, and as speaking of Africa for Africans, his contacts with the Trinidadian labour leader, Captain Arthur Cipriani, and his plan to visit Trinidad, whose authorities asked the Colonial Office about Tandoh. Unaware that Guggisberg knew Tandoh, they wrote to the Gold Coast, to be informed that Tandoh was a local chief of no great importance. By then Tandoh had been back in London for months, escorting Lady Guggisberg to the service at the cenotaph in Whitehall in November 1925. The Guggisberg connection had been encouraged through Tandoh's relative, the educationist James Kwegyir Aggrey. It was later Tandoh, who attended the Pan-African Congress in New York in August 1927, who cabled Guggisberg to inform him that Aggrey had died in a Harlem hospital. 
Tandoh had the recommendation of the Colonial Bank, and received excellent publicity in the USA. The 'Survey Graphic' in January 1926 described him as 'an African statesman' who was 'race-proud and race-conscious, but personally most modest and democratic, a supporter of English management but a staunch advocate of native initiative and autonomy'. Two years later the predominantly black-oriented 'Opportunity' reported his comment that 'Africa should develop economically but without losing her soul'. However the Strickler affair was fresh in peoples' minds: 9500 tons of cocoa shipped but sold for half its market value, leading to twenty years of legal conflict. Second, the ill-founded Black Star Line of Marcus Garvey had left Americans sceptical of Africa-centred investments. Third, Tandoh made a serious error in his choice of business partners, for his colleague Winifried Tete-Ansa's career verged on the fraudulent. Ansa's claims and statements were counter-productive, leading to Barbour-James resigning his connection with the scheme in July 1927 and Tandoh's credibility falling in American financial circles. American supporters moved away. Tandoh 'was too honest to stoop to the gross misrepresentations which Tete Ansa employed' (Holmes, 127). 
Tandoh was still seeking support for his credit scheme when in November 1929 he was found unconscious in the street and taken to Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn. Ansa stole his robes and regalia, and the sick Tandoh was repatriated to Africa. His death, probably in 1932, spared him from knowledge of the near-collapse of primary produce markets in the depression. He had tried to emancipate Gold Coast cocoa growers from foreign exploitation and in the process he 'came the closest [amongst West African businessmen] to gaining control of a large amount of capital for trade' (Holmes, 127). Despite failure in his most ambitious plans he was a successful businessman who presented positive images of West Africa in England for twenty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 97936


Wilkinson, Fanny Rollo (1855-1951), landscape gardener, was born at 19 Gore Street, Chorlton upon Medlock, Manchester, on 6 June 1855, the eldest child in the family of four daughters and two sons born to Matthew Alexander Eason Wilkinson (1813-1878) and his second wife, an American, Louisa Letitia, 'nee' Walker ('c'.1826-1889). Matthew Eason Wilkinson was one of Manchester's leading physicians and at the time of his death had just completed a term as president of the British Medical Association. As a result of a brief first marriage he had inherited two evidently prosperous estates, Dringhouses and Middlethorpe, on the southern outskirts of York. 
Fanny Wilkinson was educated 'privately and abroad'; no further details are known. However, by the end of 1883 she had taken what was then, for a woman, the very unusual step of completing an eighteen-month course at the Crystal Palace School of Landscape Gardening and Practical Horticulture, whose principal was Edward Milner. She later commented that 'I was always fond of gardening as a child, and I took it up because I felt it suited me, and I wanted to do something... When my father died we went to live at our own place, near York, and there I began to devote myself to gardening in a practical way' ('Women's Penny Paper', 8 Nov 1890). The extensive grounds surrounding Middlethorpe Hall, which included, in satisfying juxtaposition, all the classic country-house ingredients, must have stirred her creative imagination at a time when she was pondering a career. In the course of the 'Women's Penny Paper' interview Fanny Wilkinson made it clear that her admittance to the Crystal Palace classes, which were intended only for men, had been fraught with difficulty. Domestic gardening had long been considered a womanly pursuit; running a business that involved design, hard landscaping, dealing with horticultural suppliers, supervising the work of male gardeners, and keeping abreast with the accounts was not. 
On 5 February 1884, soon after completing her training course, Fanny Wilkinson was elected honorary landscape gardener to the Metropolitan Public Gardens, Boulevard and Playground Association. At some point, certainly by 1887, she also became landscape gardener to the Kyrle Society, the organization founded by Miranda Hill to bring beauty to the lives of the poor. In this capacity she was responsible, in 1887, for laying out a new London public park at Vauxhall. This commission owed something to her very close friendship with Millicent Garrett Fawcett, her sisters, and their friends, women who were pioneering the professionalization of work for women. Millicent Fawcett, who had lived in a house on the Vauxhall estate until the death of her husband, Henry Fawcett, in 1884, headed a campaign to save the land from further development. Once the site had been purchased Fanny Wilkinson was commissioned to lay out the eight acres, with help from Mr Holmes, the gardener, and C. Harrison Townsend, the Kyrle Society's surveyor. 
The creation of Vauxhall Park is the best-documented and the largest-scale operation undertaken by Fanny Wilkinson for the shadowy Kyrle Society. By way of contrast her work for the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association can be clearly traced through the minutes of its monthly committee meetings. For over nineteen years Fanny Wilkinson attended almost every one of these, preparing the plans, obtaining the estimates, and supervising the laying out of over seventy-five public gardens in London. Although at first her position was honorary, after a couple of years matters were put on a more businesslike footing and she received payment for her work, revealing herself a practical professional woman. In reply to a question from the 'Women's Penny Paper' interviewer about the charges she made for her work, Fanny Wilkinson responded smartly that 'I certainly do not let myself be underpaid as many women do. There are people who write to me because I am a woman, and think I will ask less than a man. That I will never do. I know my profession and charge accordingly, as all women should do'. 
The gardens designed by Fanny Wilkinson spanned London from Wandsworth to Plaistow and from Camberwell to Haverstock Hill. They varied in size from tiny Goldsmith's Square, Hackney, to the fourteen acres of Myatt's Field, Camberwell, and the eleven acres of Meath Gardens, a still-surprising oasis behind Roman Road, Bethnal Green. Fanny Wilkinson and the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association also effected change at the very heart of the capital, laying out, for instance, Red Lion Square Gardens, Holborn, Tower Garden, and the churchyard of St John, Smith Square, Westminster. She was also tangentially associated with the work of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, designing for them the garden of the Ironmongers' Almhouses, Hackney (now the Geffrye Museum). 
Fanny Wilkinson clearly enjoyed the work she did for the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association, but in 1904 resigned to concentrate on her role as first woman principal of Swanley Horticultural College. This college, originally founded in 1880 to train men in the practice of scientific horticulture, had slowly been transformed into a women-only establishment, its graduates later including Brenda Colvin and Sylvia Crowe. Fanny Wilkinson remained as principal until 1916 and then emerged from retirement to take control again during a period of crisis in 1921-2. 
In 1899 Fanny Wilkinson was a founder member of the Women's Agricultural and Horticultural International Union and during the First World War helped turn the union into a useful cog in the war machine. Renamed the Women's Farm and Garden Union, it repositioned itself as the body to which the government could turn when the necessity of recruiting women to work on the land became apparent. In 1916 the union launched the Women's National Land Service Corps to train 'educated' women for work on farms. 
During a long and active retirement Fanny Wilkinson occupied herself in breeding goats. She lived for many of these years at Snape in Suffolk, close to her sister, Louisa Garrett, who had married a brother of Millicent Fawcett. Fanny Wilkinson died, unmarried, at the age of ninety-five, on 22 January 1951 at Copsewood, King George's Avenue, Leiston, Suffolk, a few days after a fall at home. 


@@@@@


doc= 97938


Tremayne family (per. 1741-1901), politicians and gardeners, were wealthy Cornwall and Devon landowners whose seat was at Heligan, near St Austell in Cornwall. Their earlier lineage included the lawyer Sir John Tremayne. The Tremaynes were deeply involved in Cornish electoral politics during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, two being elected as tories to the House of Commons. Over three generations they developed the exotic gardens at Heligan, which, overgrown and 'lost' after the First World War, were rediscovered and gradually restored to public view from 1990 onwards. 
The pleasure gardens surrounding the older household gardens at Heligan were developed by 


@@@@@


doc= 97939


Henry Hawkins Tremayne (bap. 1741, d. 1829), who was baptized at St Ewe, Cornwall, on 17 July 1741, the second son of John Tremayne and his wife, Grace, 'nee' Hawkins. Educated at Blundell's School, Tiverton, and Balliol College, Oxford, from where he matriculated in May 1759, graduated BA in 1763, and proceeded MA in 1765, he was destined for a career in the church and was ordained deacon in 1766. His fortunes were changed by the death in that year of his elder unmarried brother, which made him heir to the Heligan estate. In 1767 he married Harriet (died 1805), daughter and co-heir of John Hearle, a former vice-warden of the stannaries who owned extensive property in Penryn. In 1808 a further inheritance brought him the Tremayne estates at Sydenham in Devon. 
This accumulated wealth allowed Tremayne to commission improvements at Heligan, including removing the parterre gardens introduced by earlier generations. He planned on a much bigger scale than hitherto, his first step being to plant protective shelter belts of conifers on the western and eastern boundaries. In 1785 he visited numerous gardens elsewhere in central and southern England, including Blenheim, Stowe, and Hestercombe near Taunton. Following this tour the landscape gardener Thomas Gray embellished and refined an earlier formal plan (1735) for the gardens at Heligan. Influenced by this, and perhaps by Humphry Repton who was in Cornwall in the 1790s, Tremayne proceeded to lay out the northern gardens, building two walled gardens (one of them for flowers), glasshouses, and a pineapple pit, which remains the only one of its type surviving in Europe. 
Tremayne combined his landowning, mining, and gardening interests with a close involvement in local politics. He was a tory and his activities may have been influenced by his brother-in-law Charles Rashleigh, a solicitor, who was a fierce opponent of the political ambitions of Sir Francis Basset and of Cornwall's whig reformers. During the 1770s and 1780s Tremayne was on several occasions mayor of Penryn, where he openly opposed Basset's briefly successful attempts to control the borough's parliamentary representation. He also voted against Basset's preferred candidate in the hotly contested county election of 1790, being one of the most prominent supporters of the victorious Francis Gregor, a follower of Pitt. Tremayne's political opinions were highly respected, and were sought by his fellow tories. On at least one occasion (in 1791) he chaired a protest meeting of those involved in the pilchard fisheries, and he attended several important county meetings from the 1770s onwards. Tremayne, who died at Heligan on 10 February 1829, was renowned for being charitable to all: 'his numerous tenantry knew him as their kindest and best friend' ('West Briton', 20 Feb 1829). 
He left an estate of more than 10,000 acres in Devon and Cornwall to his only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 97940


John Hearle Tremayne (bap. 1780, d. 1851), who was baptized at St Ewe, Cornwall, on 17 March 1780. Better known as a politician than as a gardener, he was educated at Eton College (1793-6) and Christ Church, Oxford, from where he matriculated in 1798 and graduated BA in 1802. He was elected unopposed in 1806 as one of Cornwall's two county MPs, replacing Francis Gregor. Tremayne retained his seat without opposition until 1826 when, facing a certain contest, he retired on the eve of the poll. This decision, which allowed a whig reformer to take his place, was deplored by many tories. While he was regarded as the personification of the independent country gentleman, Tremayne usually voted with the administration of the day, and he opposed both Catholic emancipation and parliamentary reform. He was also a watchful defender of the interests of the pilchard fisheries of the south-west. 
On 11 January 1813 Tremayne married Caroline Matilda (died 1864), ninth and youngest daughter of Sir William Lemon, first baronet, of Carclew, a whig, and Tremayne's fellow county MP. They had three sons and three daughters. Tremayne's lifelong connection with the politically powerful Lemon family, and especially his brother-in-law Charles, Lemon's only surviving son, weakened Cornwall's tories for more than a generation. From 1826 onwards family loyalties overrode political imperatives. Once Sir Charles Lemon, second baronet (1784-1868), became MP for West Cornwall in 1832 (the county was divided into two divisions by the 'Reform Act'), the Tremayne family's tory connections ensured that his seat was never threatened. On several occasions after 1832 Tremayne himself was approached to stand for either the East or West division, but always declined. Tremayne was a magistrate, a deputy lieutenant, and high sheriff of Cornwall in 1831. 
Tremayne's principal contribution to the Heligan gardens was to continue to implement the plan developed by his father. He created the long drive from the nearby village of Pentewan, planting many ornamental trees, and also in 1832 an avenue of 'Cornus capitata', a small tree with butter lemon flowers, few of which have survived. The seeds were collected in Nepal and supplied by his cousin, Sir Anthony Buller, who served as a judge on the Bengal bench from 1816 to 1827 and sat as MP for West Looe. Tremayne also began clearing the area known as the Jungle, a subtropical valley garden south-east of the house where he planted 'Cryptomeria japonica' Lobbii, named after the Cornish plant hunter Thomas Lobb. After a visit to Heligan in 1841 the young Quaker Robert Barclay Fox praised the tasteful way in which the gardens had been laid out, and the vistas. John Hearle Tremayne died on 27 August 1851 at Dawlish railway station in Devon. 
His eldest son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 97941


John Tremayne (1825-1901), was born in London on 15 April 1825 and educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford; he matriculated in 1843 and graduated BA in 1847. Early in life he was the victim of a crippling bone disease, after which he had to walk with the assistance of canes. He shared his father's dedication to public service: he was a magistrate, deputy lieutenant for Cornwall and Devon, and high sheriff of Cornwall in 1859. On 13 November 1860 he married the Hon. Mary Charlotte Martha (died 1917), daughter of Charles Crespigny Vivian, second Baron Vivian, a well-known Liberal. They had one son, Jack, and three daughters. 
John Tremayne's Lemon family connection delayed his entry into parliament; although he and his brother Arthur Tremayne (1827-1905) were sought after as prospective Conservative candidates, they were restrained by Sir Charles Lemon from contesting county seats. Following Lemon's death in 1868 (Arthur Tremayne was his sole heir) John Tremayne re-organized the fissiparous East Cornwall Conservatives, healing long-standing rifts and then, with the support of the politically fickle farmers, was elected in the 1874 general election. When the farmers withdrew their support in 1880 Tremayne was defeated, as he was again in a by-election in 1882. He represented South Devon in 1884-5. 
Like his grandfather and father John Tremayne left his imprint on the gardens at Heligan, most notably as a collector and hybridizer of rhododendrons. Sir Charles Lemon, who had noted gardens at Carclew, was one of Sir Joseph Hooker's sponsors for his 1847-9 expedition to Nepal and Sikkim. Returning to England in 1851 Hooker brought back new rhododendron seeds and seedlings, some of which were given to Lemon to plant. He in turn passed on a selection to Tremayne. Many of the original species, including 'R. arboreum', 'R. aucklandii', 'R. hodgsoni', and 'R. niveum', were planted close to the house, adjoining and between the walled gardens. Hybrids were planted around the rim of the area known as Flora's Green and elsewhere in the gardens, making a spectacular display. Tremayne also added conifers to the shelter belts and elsewhere, including 'Pinus montezeumae' given by Jonathan Rashleigh, as well as lilies, yuccas, camellias, magnolias, and a gingko. In 1880 he installed three hydraulic ram pumps, which supplied water for the gardens from a 40,000 gallon reservoir. 
The Jungle was further developed, with a second pond being added. Tree ferns imported from New South Wales by members of the Treseder family (well-known nurserymen) were widely planted, together with bamboos, Chusan palms, and such taller trees as a New Zealand yew. In the 1890s, when increasing frailty meant he was carried through the gardens in a wheeled chair drawn by a donkey, Tremayne constructed the Ravine, a large-scale Alpine themed rockery one hundred yards long and twenty feet deep, where ash, sycamore, ferns, and primroses were planted. Elsewhere Tremayne successfully introduced 'Eriobotrya japonica', an Asian shrub of the rose family brought from the south of France; he and his son also began planning the secluded Italian Garden. On his death, at Biarritz on 7 April 1901, a correspondent recalled his half-century involvement in county business, his handsome presence, courtly manners, and liberality; he epitomized 'a Tory country gentleman of the old school' ('The Times', 12 April 1901). 
The estate passed to his only son, John Claude Lewis (Jack) Tremayne (1869-1949), who shared his father's enthusiasm for hybridizing. He added a third pond and waterfall to the Jungle, the pond being deliberately obscured by the huge leaves of 'Gunnera mannicata' (giant rhubarb), and completed the Italian Garden with its summer house, and a pool rimmed by Mediterranean style garden beds. His marriage, on 18 November 1897, to Eleanor Elizabeth, daughter of Jonathan Rashleigh of Menabilly, Cornwall, and a former high sheriff of the county, 'had been looked forward to by the relatives on both sides'. But on his father's death Jack Tremayne deserted his wife amid public revelations about changes to his father's will unfavourable to his wife and any of her descendants. Disobeying a decree for restitution of conjugal rights, Jack Tremayne was divorced by his wife in 1904 ('The Times', 10 June 1904). After 1918 he lived mostly in Italy. Heligan, which was used as a convalescent home for officers in the First World War, was leased to families who could not afford to maintain the gardens in their entirety. Following Jack Tremayne's death in 1949, childless, the Heligan gardens became even more overgrown and neglected. Restored, and a major tourist attraction, the gardens are owned by a trust established for descendants of the Tremayne family. 


@@@@@


doc= 97942


Orde, Sir Julian Walter (1861-1929), secretary and general manager of the Royal Automobile Club (RAC), was born at Hopton House, Hopton, Suffolk, on 14 January 1861, the third of the seven children of James Henry Orde (1830/31-1880), a partner in Gurneys, Birkbeck, Brightwen, and Orde Bank (subsumed by Barclays in 1896), and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Gurney. He attended Haileybury College (1874-5), and then spent time travelling on the continent. On his return home he joined the Great Yarmouth branch of Gurneys as a clerk. He married at Baldock, Hertfordshire, on 7 July 1885, Alice Georgiana Archdale (1861-1945), the second of the eight children of Frederick Archdale (formerly Hogge), banker, brewer, and merchant. They had five children. 
Orde disliked banking and for a period ranched in the United States at Sibley, Iowa. After he returned permanently to England 'he became interested in political and other organisations' ('Daily Telegraph', 20 June 1929) and worked as a 'merchant' in the City of London ('Haileybury Register'). In 1903, through the influence of his friend the motoring promoter John Montagu (later Lord Montagu of Beaulieu), he was appointed secretary to the Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland (RAC from 1907). He held the post for twenty years and remains the club's longest-serving secretary. At first Orde was one of three in day-to-day control of club affairs, the others being William Rees Jeffreys, in charge of administration, and Basil Joy, responsible for technical matters. But Orde was 'first among equals' (Brendon, 100). In 1904, after 'Autocar' lamented the club's lack of a 'managing director' or 'master brain', Orde became sole secretary (ibid.). 
Orde was an effective organizer and administrator. He oversaw the RAC's transfer from its cramped clubhouse on Piccadilly to opulent new headquarters on Pall Mall (opened 1911) and, in 1913, its acquisition of an extensive country property at Woodcote Park, near Epsom, Surrey. In both locations full members of the club could enjoy the high life or, as some saw it, indulge in 'sloth and luxury'. In contrast associate members were treated as something like second-class citizens (Brendon, 152-3, 180, 184). 
Orde, who enjoyed motoring from its earliest days, had a particular interest in motor sport. He accompanied Montagu and Charles Rolls as an 'obligatory passenger' when they competed in the 1899 Paris to Ostend race (Tritton, 58). He assisted in creating Brooklands motor-racing track, was a committee member of Brooklands Automobile Racing Club (1906-29), and often served as a steward on race days. He helped organize and promote many motor races and trials including the Gordon Bennett race in Ireland (1903), Isle of Man Gordon Bennett trials (1904), Scottish reliability trials (1906), and Isle of Man tourist trophy (TT) races, where he was a 'ubiquitous and omnicompetent presence' as late as 1922 (Brendon, 116; 'The Observer', 25 June 1922). 
Orde initiated the RAC's 'get you home' scheme whereby the club guaranteed to get stranded members and associates home at its expense. The scheme was a 'masterstroke' that provided motorists with a valuable and unique service (Brendon, 156). Since the Automobile Association (AA) declined to emulate it, the club long held a significant membership attraction over its main rival. 
During the First World War, Orde faced several challenges. In 1915 the RAC banned as members or guests anyone with enemy alien connections. Orde justified the decision on grounds that it was in line with public opinion and would prevent friction. Falling membership led to financial difficulties which were met by axing the club's 'Journal' and opening up full membership to less exclusive sections of society, even shopkeepers. In 1917 the club successfully resisted a government proposal to commandeer its London premises under the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. Instead it opened its doors as the headquarters of the Royal Overseas Officers Club. Overall Orde was deemed to have presided over the wartime RAC in a 'masterly', even 'fatherly' way (Brendon, 184). He was knighted in 1919 for his 'exceptional services in providing for overseas officers during the war' ('The Times', 13 Aug 1919). 
Orde participated in several government inquiries during and soon after the war. He sat on a review of the use of partially disabled drivers on public vehicles (1919), served on the mechanical transport section of the committee for the disposal of government surplus (1919), and was a technical adviser to the advisory committee on London traffic (1920). 
Tall, 'elegant and imposing', with an 'outstanding personality', Orde was socially well connected and long considered an arbiter of motoring fashion (Brendon, 100; White, 229). He was a 'stickler for discipline' and colleagues and staff at the club knew him variously as 'His Ordeship', 'Lord Orde', and 'Orde God Almighty'. But he had a 'light touch' and RAC members admired him as an 'entertaining wit' (Brendon, 100). 'The Times' considered Orde the 'ideal secretary' (19 March 1909) and with a salary of $2500 p.a. in 1912 the RAC rewarded him well for his services (Brendon, 154). Between 1903 and 1919 club membership grew tenfold and revenue more than a hundredfold ('The Scotsman', 30 May 1923). Nevertheless the RAC was outstripped by its main rival, the newer and socially inclusive AA. Orde had other failures. During a lengthy controversy over the standards of country garages, including those approved by the RAC, an editorial in 'The Times' accused him of 'complacency' (19 Nov 1920). Only after he retired, in 1923, were RAC road guides 'organised into an efficient, full-time force' (Brendon, 206-8). 
For several years before his retirement Orde's health was poor. In 1921-2 he took six months' leave of absence during which he toured the Americas. His illness and absences have been deemed factors in initiating the RAC's long period of interwar decline (Brendon, 206-8). In the 1920s Orde was vice-president of the Auto Cycle Union. He also held directorships with several companies. He died of heart failure and fibrosis of the lung at his home, The Orchards, Raveningham, Norfolk, on 17 June 1929. His funeral was held in private. A memorial service was held at Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Street, west London. Two married daughters survived their father. One son was killed in action in the Dardanelles in 1915; another died in a flying accident in 1920. A third, Cuthbert Julian Orde, became a distinguished artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 97943


Cooke, Sir (Ernest George) Stenson (1874-1942), secretary of the Automobile Association and fencer, was born Ernest George Cooke at 9 Shrubland Road, Haggerstone, London, on 5 October 1874, the second of the three children of Silas Cooke (1850-1925), a clerk who worked in a stationer's business and who later became a dealer in wine, and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Walsh (1852-1894). Following his mother's death his father married Lizzie Frances Christmas ('b'. 1872). 
Cooke's early life was 'obscure' (Barty-King, 67), though the family is known to have lived in City Road and Finsbury Square, London. He claimed to be privately educated, and left school, possibly in Yorkshire, aged about fourteen. He then 'entered the world of commerce' in London, and may have worked for a time as a clerk on the stock exchange ('Sporting Life', 2 July 1918). At the time of his marriage he termed himself a 'wine merchant' (m. cert; census returns, 1901), though he may have been more a 'wine and spirits traveller' (Barty-King, 75). There is no evidence that the name Stenson, by which Cooke was known throughout his life as a public figure, was conferred by anyone but himself in adolescence. He had adopted it by the time of his marriage, on 20 June 1899, to (Sara) May Harriett Brooke (1876-1961), daughter of Charles Edward Brooke, provision merchant. They lived in Fulham, then Muswell Hill and at Stockleigh Hall, Regent's Park, and had a son, Ernest Stenson jun. ('b'. 1900), and a daughter, Joyce (Joy) ('b'. 1907). 
Between about 1891 and 1903 Cooke served in the London rifle brigade, which formed part of Britain's volunteer movement, initially as a 'sergeant instructor and in the ranks as a private' ('History of the London rifle brigade', 442). He was commissioned in 1893. He learned to fence in the London rifle brigade and became an accomplished practitioner of the sport. In 1902 he was a founding committee member of the Amateur Fencing Association. 
In August 1905 Cooke was appointed secretary of the recently formed Automobile Association (AA) which then had around ninety members and $100 in the bank. Charles Gulliver, personal assistant to an AA committee member, was 'mainly responsible' for securing his appointment (Barty-King, 67). The permanent staff of Cooke, a clerk, and an office boy occupied a single room in Fleet Street and had the use of only one borrowed typewriter ('The Scotsman', 20 June 1930). Cooke's annual salary was in the region of $200. At the time of his appointment he had travelled by car only twice and had little interest in or knowledge of motoring. He never learned to drive and never acquired a personal interest in motoring. 
Nothing in Cooke's background qualified him to lead, as he soon did, a large national organization. Yet soon after his arrival the association expanded rapidly, acquiring thousands, soon hundreds of thousands, of members. Such success led to vastly expanded staff numbers and much enlarged business premises. On the eve of the Second World War, when Cooke was receiving an annual salary of about $5000, the AA had 721,400 members and some 4000 employees. The association met a rapidly growing public need, but its success was also a testimony to Cooke's energy, determination, and exceptional organizational ability. He relentlessly promoted the AA and motoring through public relations stunts, letters and articles in the specialist and general press, and, later, radio broadcasts, books, gramophone records, and film. In addition he gave evidence to or served on several parliamentary inquiries into aspects of motoring -- always as a champion of the interests he was paid to represent, especially when questions of motoring taxes were at stake. 
In Cooke's capacity as secretary of the AA one of his first tasks was to organize the cycle and motorcycle patrols employed to warn members about the location of police speed traps. Use of these patrols brought the association into conflict with police and government. Famously, Sir Edward Troup, permanent under-secretary at the Home Office, likened it to 'an association of burglars employing scouts to warn them which houses are and which are not watched by the police' (Plowden, 90; TNA, HO 45/11117). A 1909 judgment ruled that the warnings were illegal. In response the AA instructed its patrolmen to desist from their regular practice of saluting members if police were carrying out speed checks in the vicinity, thereby providing to members a warning by default. 
Under Cooke's leadership the AA accomplished much, including the early provision of petrol stations, introduction of an extensive network of road signposts, creation of the star grading system for hotels, establishment of an aviation service, and development of links with overseas motoring organizations. In addition Cooke played an important role in amalgamating the AA with the Motor Union (1910). He also presided over some missed opportunities. Most notable were his refusal to contemplate an alliance with the Royal Automobile Club (RAC), of which he had an almost 'pathological' dislike (Barty-King, 148), and his rejection of suggestions that the AA should emulate the RAC by establishing a full breakdown and 'get you home service' for members (Barty-King, 156-7). This benefit was established only after Cooke's death. 
In September 1914, following the outbreak of the First World War, Cooke along with a contingent of AA patrolmen joined the 8th cycling battalion of the Essex regiment. He held the rank of captain. He did not accompany his battalion to France, but was attached to the War Office in January 1915 and promoted to the rank of major in June of the following year. At the Ministry of National Service in 1917-18 he was, first, controller of supplies, then inspector of stationery charged with checking 'the appalling waste of printing and stationery throughout the Government Departments' ('Truth', 23 June 1918). On two occasions the Liberal MP Percy Alden raised critical questions in parliament about the nature of Cooke's Whitehall post, the implication being that it was something of a sinecure ('Hansard', 105, 22 April 1918, cols. 682-3, and 2 May 1918, 1724-5). 'Motor' magazine suggested that Alden was 'hankering for the gallant major's blood' (30 April 1918). Throughout the war Cooke continued to perform his duties at the much-diminished AA. 
Cooke, known to his staff as 'the Chief', inspired contrasting feelings on the part of those who knew him. He was admired by some, but others regarded him as autocratic, patronizing, pompous, and humourless. He has also been termed a rabble-rouser who loved a skirmish. He had a keen appreciation of his own status and thought himself more important to the AA than the committee that ostensibly governed it. His sense of self-esteem and showmanship led him, in 1931, to install an intercom system that allowed him to address AA staff in London and, later, the regional offices. Cooke used this technology, reputedly the first such 'installation in any business house in the world' ('The Star', 31 March 1931), to maintain 'personal' contact with his staff and boost their morale. In one broadcast, in February 1933, he described at length his experience of receiving a knighthood from the king at Buckingham Palace. Some within the AA hierarchy thought Cooke's commitment to the association waned once he received his knighthood and that he effectively 'gave up' thereafter (Barty-King, 166). 
Cooke continued to fence at a high level until his sixties. In 1912 he took part in the Stockholm Olympics, where he failed to progress beyond the pool stage in any discipline. After many attempts and several near misses he achieved victory in the British amateur foils championship in 1923. He was the oldest winner of this title. Though selected for the men's team foil at the 1924 Paris Olympics, he did not compete. Over the course of four decades Cooke fenced for England and won many tournaments. In 1935 he won the Jean-Baptiste Mimiague trophy against opponents who were at least thirty years his junior ('Manchester Guardian', 21 Nov 1942). 
In appearance Cooke was well-groomed, handsome, and quite short. With his dapper dress sense and the waxed moustache he sported for much of his adult life, he was something of a dandy who 'fancied himself as a 'ladies' man''. He steadily 'became more and more fastidious about his public image' (Barty-King, 67). Though a regular drinker and heavy smoker of cigars and a pipe, he was also a keep-fit enthusiast who daily engaged in Swedish exercises. He enjoyed ballroom dancing and socializing. His wife disliked the social side of her husband's job, and seldom went to the many functions he attended, so his daughter often accompanied him. 
Aside from fencing and dancing Cooke's main leisure activity was writing for publication. A number of his short stories appeared in the magazine 'Britannia and Eve'; they were later published in book form as 'These Stories'. His best-known publication, 'This Motoring' (1931), was turned into a film (1935) with Cooke in the starring role and his daughter among the cast. It dealt with the development of the AA and, particularly, his role in the process. The book went through many editions, not least because it was given to resigning members in the hope of luring them back to the fold. A later critic held Cooke responsible for 'some of the most embarrassing prose of the interwar period' (Plowden, 53). 
An able linguist, Cooke travelled extensively in Europe and far beyond on AA business. He received many awards from overseas motoring organizations. In 1937 Joachim von Ribbentrop, the German ambassador in London, conferred upon him the Insignia of Honour First Class of the German Red Cross in recognition of his work on road safety. He was also awarded the French Legion d'honneur. He died at Eaton Lodge, London Road, Guildford, Surrey, where the AA was based during the Second World War, on 19 November 1942. He was buried in Hampstead cemetery. The AA awarded his widow a $10,000 gratuity and donated $1000 to Charing Cross Hospital to endow a bed in her husband's memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 97945


Wyles, Lilian Mary Elizabeth (1885-1975), police officer, was born at North Road, Bourne, Lincolnshire, on 31 August 1885, the daughter of Joseph Wyles, brewer, and his wife, Julia Grylls, 'nee' Symons. After education at Thanet Hall, Margate, and at a finishing school in Paris, she studied law, as her father hoped that she would become a barrister, but she broke this off to take up hospital nursing during the First World War; a period of illness then led to convalescence in South Africa. In June 1918 she joined the women patrols run by the National Council of Women Workers, headed in London by Sofia Stanley, and was one of the first twenty-five women officially employed by the Metropolitan Police as women patrols in 1919. Promoted to the rank of woman sergeant within a few months, Wyles supervised the work of women police in central London and the East End. She was rapidly promoted inspector in 1921 with the intention that she should be attached to the CID to deal with offences against women and children. Despite the 'Geddes axe' of 1922, which reduced public spending, she was kept on as a statement taker (Sofia Stanley was dismissed); she was attested and given full powers of arrest in 1923, and remained attached to the CID for the rest of her service. 
Wyles's career was not without controversy, most famously in relation to the Savidge inquiry of 1928. A member of parliament, Sir Leo Chiozza Money, and a young woman, Miss Irene Savidge, had been arrested by two uniformed policemen in Hyde Park for alleged indecency. The London magistrate Henry Cancellor dismissed the case and questions were raised in parliament about police perjury. Chief Inspector Alfred Collins was appointed to conduct an internal inquiry; Savidge was brought to Scotland Yard for questioning, Wyles accompanying her in the police car. Wyles later stated in her memoirs that she was abruptly dismissed by Collins when she offered to chaperone Savidge during the interview: 'as I was about to seat myself next to her, Mr Collins said to me sharply but decisively, 'You can go, that is all'' (Wyles, 190). Savidge claimed that Collins's subsequent questioning was improper and that he had touched her on the hand and knee. Further complaint led to the setting up of a tribunal of inquiry. Wyles was called to give evidence and at this point appears to have lied to protect both the force's reputation and that of her boss. She claimed not only that she had believed Collins to be 'most nice and kind' but also that she had only left the interview room after asking Savidge twice whether she would prefer her to stay ('The Times', 12 June 1928, 10). The tribunal report went on to recommend that in cases involving the taking of a statement from a woman 'on matters intimately affecting her morals', another woman should always be present ('Report of the tribunal'). Previously Wyles had been viewed with hostility by her male colleagues; the Savidge case 'proved a turning-point for her and from now on she was accepted by men of the CID' (Lock, 163). 
Wyles's duties as woman inspector in the CID were mainly concerned with statement taking from women and child victims of sexual assault. This had initially been the specialist work of a civilian welfare worker, Eilladh Macdougall, who had been appointed in 1907 as a 'lady assistant'. With Wyles's arrival the work was split, Macdougall taking responsibility for the area to the south of the Thames until her retirement in 1932, with Wyles covering the north. Communication between them was non-existent; Wyles claimed that Macdougall ignored her and 'withheld information that would have been of inestimable value' (Wyles, 119). Wyles herself struggled to carry out her duties as best she could with limited resources. She conducted interviews in her own flat, where she also stored spare clean clothes for girls who needed placing in hostels; a small allowance of 10's'. a week was granted to cover her costs in 1935. Nevertheless, her significance lies in pioneering a role for women officers within the Metropolitan Police as specialists working with female and child victims of sexual assault and abuse. In 1932 (with Macdougall's retirement) she was asked to supervise five further CID women officers employed in statement taking (the number had risen to twenty-one by the end of her service) and she regularly gave training talks to new recruits. She saw the police function as distinct from that of welfare workers, stressing the importance of being legally minded; nevertheless she liaised closely with voluntary welfare organizations, referring to them cases that required longer-term care. 
Upon her retirement in 1949 Wyles was awarded the British Empire Medal and went to live in Land's End, Cornwall. In 1952 she published her memoirs, 'A Woman at Scotland Yard', which has been described as 'somewhat self-serving' (Fido and Skinner, 496); Wyles herself has been characterized by those with whom she worked as 'rather boastful and proud' (Lock, 145). 'A Woman at Scotland Yard' is partial, subjective, and opinionated, but this is precisely why the book is interesting: it reveals the processes through which one particular 'pioneer' policewoman negotiated a new occupational role and identity despite endemic prejudice. 
Wyles died at her home, 15 Atlantic Crescent, Sennen, Penzance, Cornwall, of a heart attack, on 13 May 1975. She did not marry and had no children; indeed the marriage bar for women police in England and Wales was only lifted in 1946, towards the very end of her service. She described women of her generation as driven by 'energy, courage, hard work and self-sacrifice' (Wyles, 118). 


@@@@@


doc= 97947


Goddard, Henry (1800-1883), police officer, was born in the parish of Christ Church, Southwark, London, on 16 June 1800, the son of Joseph Goddard, fishmonger, and his wife, Catharine. He initially followed in his father's footsteps and became a fishmonger at Drury Lane. On 4 September 1825 he married, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, Hannah, 'nee' Davies (1805/6-1854), with whom he had at least two sons and five daughters. In the previous year he had enlisted, on 7 April 1824, in the Bow Street foot patrol. This body was part of the system of policing created in 1748 by Henry Fielding and his half-brother Sir John Fielding. He is listed in the foot patrol register as being 5 feet 9 inches tall -- above average height for the time -- and sturdily built. Goddard proved an able officer, and at the end of 1826 he successfully applied for the post of principal officer or 'runner' at Great Marlborough Street public office, run by the magistrate Frederick Roe. 
Great Marlborough Street was one of the seven public or police offices created by the 'Middlesex Justices Act' of 1792 and modelled on the Bow Street public office. At Great Marlborough Street Goddard operated as a plain-clothes detective; principal officers never wore uniform and never patrolled the metropolitan streets in the manner of the less senior patrol constables. Goddard acquitted himself well and in early 1834 he followed the recently knighted Sir Frederick Roe to Bow Street, where he was engaged as a principal officer. This would undoubtedly have been regarded as a promotion, as Bow Street was seen as 'primus inter pares'. As a principal officer Goddard took part in many daring and dangerous investigations. In March 1834 he was ordered to investigate the murder of the steward of Earl Arden at Epsom and he recorded that 'as I... would have to contend with desperate characters, I was not to forget to go armed with a brace of loaded pistols which Mr Stafford, the Chief Clerk would provide me' (Goddard, 78). Bow Street's early chronicler remarked that while 'their ensign of office... was a tiny baton with a gilt crown on the top malefactors knew perfectly well that their pockets held pistols as well as handcuffs' (Fitzgerald, 1.93). 
Goddard proved himself to be an able and quick-witted principal officer, as testified by the magistrates of Tunbridge Wells, who in 1836 praised him in a letter to Bow Street for his investigation of an arson attack at Frant: 'Considering the very slight clue we had as to the offenders, the conduct, activity and intelligence of Mr Goddard cannot be too much commended. I can only express my own appreciation and that of the principal inhabitants of this place of his exertions in this matter. (Goddard, 130)' He is often credited with being the first detective to carry out ballistic forensic analysis; in 1834 he solved a mysterious murder by proving that a projectile had been fired from a particular pistol by examining marks on the lead bullet and matching them to a bullet mould. In fact, this distinction belongs to one of Goddard's colleagues, Harry Adkins, who had done a similar analysis in 1812, though Goddard went one step further by locating and matching the ripped-up newspaper used for the wadding around the projectile, thereby proving his theory beyond doubt. 
The Bow Street principal officers were disbanded in August 1839, some ten years after the creation of the Metropolitan Police. Goddard was awarded a pension of $100 per year, and in April 1840 successfully applied for the post of chief constable of Northamptonshire at a salary of $250 per year. He was sworn in as Northamptonshire's first chief constable at the Easter sessions of 1840, but does not appear to have taken his role -- in charge of 215 subordinates -- very seriously, and in 1848 was reprimanded by the county magistrates for failing to attend quarter sessions. On 3 January 1849 he handed in his resignation (possibly as a result of an injury he had sustained). 
Goddard obviously disliked his period of inactivity, and in the following year he returned to London, where he joined the department of the gentleman usher of the black rod as a messenger, soon being promoted to the post of principal door keeper at the House of Lords, with a salary of $300 per year. This does not appear to have been a very onerous position, as his diary for 1856 records that he was only in attendance for a total of 89 days throughout the year. Goddard took full advantage of this by operating as a private detective for many years, working both in the metropolis and in the provinces. He seems to have been primarily hired by the brothers John and Daniel Forrester of Mansion House, who ran a semi-official detective agency throughout the 1840s and 1850s. 
Goddard married his second wife, Rose (1819/20-1910), daughter of Charles Pryor, miller, in Stepney on 13 July 1858. He remained as principal doorkeeper for another twenty-three years, and retired in August 1883 on the grounds of failing health. He was granted a superannuation of $165 per year and the Treasury also resumed its pension of $100 per year for his former services as a Bow Street principal officer. He died at his home, 42 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill, Middlesex, on 29 October 1883. 
Goddard kept a diary from early on in his policing career, and in the mid-1870s he drew on these sources to produce a four-volume manuscript of his memoirs. Although these seem to have been compiled with a view to publication, they remained unpublished and forgotten until 1949, the bicentenary of the founding of the Bow Street public office, when a descendant donated the manuscript to Bow Street. Published in 1956, Goddard's 'Memoirs of a Bow Street Runner' remains the only major published work by a former Bow Street principal officer and his writing is unusually candid and accurate; he clearly had an extremely good memory. His 'Memoirs' have proved an invaluable source of information about the workings of both Bow Street and Great Marlborough Street public offices. As well as providing evidence for the professionalism of the 'old police' in general and the Bow Street officers in particular, they have shown those forces' preoccupation with political as well as ordinary crime, and the extent of their reach outside London. Goddard's account of his own career after 1839 testifies to the continuing demand for private detective services in England after the creation of the 'new police'. 


@@@@@


doc= 97948


McHardy, John Bunch Bonnemaison (1801-1882), naval and police officer, was born at New Providence, Bahamas, on 3 December 1801, the only surviving son of Robert McHardy, who had emigrated from Braemar to join his brother in business, and his wife, Mary Dean, 'nee' Bunch (died 1807), daughter of a wealthy plantation owner. On his mother's death he went to live with her sister, who was married to William Vesey Munnings, chief justice of the Bahamas. On 25 May 1812 he joined the Royal Navy as a boy third class on the 'Tartarus' (32 guns) under John Pasco, who had been Nelson's signals officer at the battle of Trafalgar. After several years of seagoing experience and a navigation course at Portsmouth in 1821, he took part in actions against pirates around Cuba in 1823 and 1824 and was promoted lieutenant in August 1824. He was also active in the suppression of the slave trade. In June 1829, as commander of the schooner 'Pickle' (3 guns), he captured the more heavily armed slaver 'Voladora' (or 'Bolodora'), carrying a cargo of slaves from Africa, off the coast of Cuba. The action was commemorated in a painting by the marine artist W. J. Huggins, engraved by Edward Duncan. When 'Pickle' was paid off, in December 1830, McHardy was promoted commander. On 11 December 1830 he married Horatia Victoria Elizabeth Atchison (1808-1883), daughter of his former mentor, John Pasco; they had at least fifteen children. 
In March 1831 McHardy became inspecting commander of the Coast Guard at Burnham, Norfolk, and then Cromer (1835), moving to the Isle of Wight in 1836 to deal with an increase in smuggling. He was promoted captain in January 1840 and was placed on half pay. 
On 11 February 1840 McHardy (whose name was often rendered as M'Hardy) was appointed to the newly created position of chief constable of Essex. Essex was one of the first nine counties to adopt the 'County Police Act' of 1839, which permitted counties to set up a full-time, paid police force, financed from local taxation. Creation of county constabularies was voluntary, and only a minority of counties undertook this, and not all of those fully. The resolution of the Essex quarter sessions to establish the force had not been unanimous, and cost was a major consideration, but authority was given to recruit a chief constable, 100 constables and 15 superintendents. This was fewer than the maximum permitted ratio of 1 constable to every 1000 inhabitants, and in its early years the new force in Essex worked alongside existing part-time or volunteer parish constables. There had been thirty-one applicants for the chief constable's office, and McHardy was among the nineteen -- many of them former army or navy officers -- interviewed by the county's magistrates. 
Although he was not formally attested as a constable until 19 May 1840, McHardy quickly began work to plan the new force, gaining authorization from the Essex magistrates to buy a copy of the Irish constabulary's rule book. He also purchased a series of forms used by the Coast Guard and adapted them for police use. The Metropolitan Police rule book was consulted, and McHardy elected to use the same supplier of uniforms for his own officers. Interviews to find the first 100 constables were held in batches from 26 February 1840 until the end of May. Recruits were on probation for fifty-six days, and many were found unsuitable for reasons that included being 'wanting in bodily strength' (personnel register, Essex RO, J/P 2/1). McHardy was allowed to choose his own secretary, a naval purser, as he felt it 'absolutely necessary' that the postholder should not be a policeman in case he was perceived to be influencing the chief constable. 
One of the chief constable's responsibilities was to frame orders to guide his officers, and McHardy issued a detailed series of memoranda, some of which were published in local newspapers. His men were reminded that no one could be promoted without being able to write good letters and reports, so it was in their own interests to devote some time every day to reading, writing, and generally improving their minds. Although preventing crime and controlling public order were seen as the main objectives of the 'new police' McHardy steadily increased the volume and variety of their everyday work, believing that it helped to justify the cost of the force to local ratepayers. Some officers were appointed as inspectors of weights and measures and of nuisances; others became assistant relieving officers under the poor law. Liquor licensing was one of the earliest activities of the embryo police force in 1840, while public order was an increasing problem throughout the 1840s and 1850s. McHardy himself, while based at the constabulary headquarters in Arbour Lane, Chelmsford, was often present in courts around Essex as cases were prosecuted. His visibility throughout the county helped to make him widely respected, even when the system of policing was sometimes criticized as being too costly. With a modern eye for press relations he encouraged his superintendents to keep newspapers informed about problems and successes relating to crime. 
Under McHardy the Essex constabulary was regarded as a leading example of the new county police. Its effectiveness prompted counties adjoining Essex to establish their own forces, and it provided a policing model that was adopted elsewhere. McHardy was the most prominent witness to appear before a House of Commons select committee on the police, giving evidence on three occasions in May and June 1853, and submitting lengthy written appendices. He urged the superiority of the professional force, with its county-wide command structure, over the more numerous parish constables. Five of the other witnesses who appeared before the committee had served in McHardy's force before going on to other positions, and all testified to the great efficiency of policing in Essex. McHardy also promoted the idea that county constabularies could be self-funding, providing accounts from Essex to show that such benefits as reductions in vagrancy, attributable to police interviewing applicants for casual poor relief, and increases in agricultural land values, put down to improved protection of farmers' livestock and crops, might be set against the costs of policing. He went on to propose that constabularies might serve as the nucleus of a national defence force in case of emergencies. This more speculative proposal was never acted upon, but the select committee was followed by an act of parliament in 1856 that made it compulsory for every county and borough to have a full-time, paid police force, and established a government inspectorate to judge efficiency. 
While on naval half pay McHardy remained eligible for promotion and he was advanced to rear-admiral in February 1858, vice-admiral in September 1865, and admiral on 1 April 1870. He retired as chief constable of Essex on 31 October 1881. During his period of office the authorized strength of the Essex force had grown from 116 to 293. In his farewell address to the Essex magistrates he reflected that initially the police were viewed with some distrust as an unnecessary expense, but public confidence had gradually been won over. His influence went beyond Essex, as his force functioned as 'a sort of nursery for policemen' ('Chelmsford Chronicle', 6 April 1866), who went on to serve in many of the other constabularies. Two of his sons, after naval service, became chief constables: Hardy McHardy (1840-1919) was chief constable of Ayr from 1876 to 1911, and Wallace Bruce McHardy (1844-1896), who had served as deputy to his father in Essex, was chief constable of Lanarkshire from 1875 until his death. His fifteenth child, Malcolm Macdonald McHardy (1852-1913), became professor of ophthalmology at King's College, London. 
In retirement McHardy moved to live with his married daughter Malvina Blaxall and her husband at Clan Lodge, Sydney Gardens, Bath, where he died on 19 December 1882. He was buried in the family tomb at Holy Trinity Church, Springfield, Essex. An obituarist wrote of his 'rare administrative ability and tact' ('The Times', 21 Dec 1882), while an early historian of police commented on the good fortune of Essex to have 'entrusted the control of its rural police to a really brilliant chief-constable' (Lee, 301). 


@@@@@


doc= 97949


Syme, John (1872-1945), police officer and campaigner, was born at the High Street, Irvine, Ayrshire, on 15 January 1872, the eldest son in the family of at least four sons and two daughters of Thomas Dewes Syme (1841-1914), grocer, and his wife, Mary Miller, 'nee' Curzen (1842-1909). After working as a law clerk at Cadder, Lanarkshire, where his father had become manager of a brickworks, Syme moved to London and joined the Metropolitan Police on 8 October 1894. Intelligent and competent, he received rapid promotion to sergeant in less than five years. On 24 March 1900 he married, at Belgrave Presbyterian Church, Ellen Mary (1869-1948), daughter of Edward Burch, master picture frame maker; they had one son. He was promoted station sergeant in 1901 and inspector in February 1908. 
In 1909 occurred the incident that led ultimately to Syme's dismissal and the acute sense of grievance that lasted for the rest of his life. As duty inspector at Gerald Road police station on 17 August 1909 he refused a charge made by two constables. Summoned by neighbours to a noisy late-night street altercation in Pimlico, where two men in liquor were being refused admission by a householder, the two officers had arrested the men to bring the situation under control. It transpired, however, that unknown to the officers, one of the arrested men was in fact the husband of the woman who had barred the door and the other was their lodger. Syme therefore refused the charge. His two superior officers, Acting Superintendent Shervington and Subdivisional Inspector Reed, sought to discipline the constables and, during the proceedings, Syme intervened on the constables' behalf in a way his superiors found objectionable. The superintendent recommended to his chief constable that Syme be transferred to another police division on the grounds that he was too familiar with the men. Transfer to North Fulham was approved by the assistant commissioner not on the grounds of overfamiliarity but to relieve the evident tension at Gerald Road. 
Two months later, and as a way of challenging what was otherwise a discretionary, unappealable management decision, Syme made serious allegations about the competence and honesty of his two Gerald Road superiors. Failing in the opinion of an inquiry to substantiate his allegations, Syme was reprimanded and demoted to station sergeant. When his appeal (after inquiries about his state of mental health) was turned down by the Metropolitan Police commissioner, Sir Edward Henry, in a thorough and carefully worded adjudication, Syme claimed the decision was unjust and he would contest it publicly by appealing to parliament. After clearing his lines with the Home Office, where the home secretary, Herbert Gladstone, noted that police discipline could not be left to MPs, Henry dismissed Syme on 31 January 1910 with consequent loss of pension rights. However, Gladstone was succeeded on 19 February 1910 by Winston Churchill, who was not satisfied with the way in which the case had been handled, and gave a personal interview to Syme on 22 April 1910 during which he offered to reinstate Syme at his reduced rank provided he discontinued his public agitation. 
Syme refused and continued to campaign. He composed and printed pamphlets, wrote to MPs, peers, and the press, sent threatening letters to the king and others, held public meetings of the John Syme Defence League in Trafalgar Square, Hyde Park, Peckham Rye, and towns in Wales and Scotland, and in 1913 set up a policemen's union (with the motto 'Tyranny is not discipline'), which officers were forbidden by Henry -- on pain of dismissal -- to join. His first conviction was on 14 July 1910 when he was bound over for threatening to attack the king in a letter to the prime minister. In addition Syme was convicted on 4 July 1911 of threatening to kill Reed (in a letter to the leader of the Labour Party, Ramsay MacDonald) and sentenced to six months' imprisonment, upheld on appeal. 
Initially Syme enjoyed the support of John Kempster, editor of the 'Police Review'. That support waned in the face of the successful libel action Shervington and Reed brought against the 'Review' in 1911, and Kempster effectively dissociated himself from Syme in November 1913. Similarly Syme's colleagues tired of his use of the union to harp on his own case. In what became the National Union of Police and Prison Officers, they got rid of him well before the strikes of 1918 and 1919. The lack of police enthusiasm for Syme's actions was reflected both in the apparently meagre totals of collections made on his behalf and the fact that, as later claimed by the Police Federation, the number of paid-up union members in his time never exceeded forty-seven. 
The authorities were baffled in their attempts to close Syme down. Patient official explanations and even the unprecedented publication in 1911 of Henry's adjudication were to no avail. At a time of marked class conflict and labour unrest before the First World War, Syme attracted sympathy, particularly when his account of events stressed that he had been victimized because he had sought to stand up for the underdog. No one had experience of dealing with an intelligent, persistent, and resourceful opponent able to take advantage of a greatly expanded popular press and a general sympathy towards attempts to ameliorate the lot of working men. Syme's powerful trope of victimhood could be endlessly resuscitated for a succession of sympathizers -- some to grind their own axes -- even if some of those who supported him cooled as a result of the experience. 
None of this deterred Syme, who seems to have enjoyed and become dependent on the attention he provoked and whose life became centred on his cause. A procedure evolved where, when magistrates moved to bind him over to keep the peace, he would refuse to accept the conditions and, therefore, underwent short periods of imprisonment instead. Syme would refuse all food in prison and, because he was judged by medical staff not to be fit for force-feeding, he would be released temporarily under the 'Prisoners' (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act' of 1913, an act devised to deal with suffragette food refusal. In this way he would gradually work off the sentence, the remainder of which in the longer cases was sometimes remitted by home secretaries. 
There were two public reviews of his claims. The first arose from his prosecution for criminal libel in 1914 as a result of his wilder allegations against Henry. Reluctant at first to proceed against him, the authorities decided that Syme's language had become so extreme and offensive that it was subversive of discipline. Following a six-day trial in which Syme represented himself and during which the trial judge gave him every latitude (including more than one day of court time to sum up his defence) as he sought constantly to return to the merits of his grievances, Syme was convicted and sentenced to eight months' imprisonment on 16 July 1914. 
The second review was a judicial inquiry instituted by the minority Labour government in 1924. The prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, had taken up Syme's case and an inquiry was seen as offering the best means of closure one way or the other. In July 1924, after hearings over five days, the inquiry panel of two judges and a leading KC found comprehensively against Syme, who, having originally agreed to be bound by the findings, rejected them on the grounds that the proceedings had been biased against him. 
To the fury of the Metropolitan Police commissioner, William Horwood, who thought him certifiable, Syme recommenced his agitation, continuing to make wild allegations in order to get attention. Although the Home Office realized that Syme was engaging in a species of blackmail, Horwood had been firmly told in 1923 that there could be no question of permitting Syme to starve himself to death in prison unless he was convicted of a very serious offence, and the cabinet agreed. 
However, shortly after reception at Pentonville to serve another Bow Street sentence, Syme was certified on 28 November 1924 and sent to Broadmoor. While there, the home secretary (Joynson Hicks) wrote to Syme 'man to man' urging him to desist and explaining among other things that the act of 1913 did not apply to Broadmoor and that hunger striking was therefore best avoided. While Syme threatened to go on hunger strike in Broadmoor, he did not do so. Representing his transfer as punitive, Labour Party supporters rallied to Syme and the John Syme Lunacy Appeal Committee was permitted to send independent psychiatrists to examine him only to opine that he was properly detained on the grounds that he was suffering from paranoia of a 'querulent type'. 
Following release on 24 May 1925 Syme continued to plead his cause to anyone who would listen, and recommenced what became a saga of vague threats and attempted or actual minor attacks on public property (stones thrown at windows), particularly but not only the Home Office. Throughout he was kept under the eye of special branch in case he elected to do real harm, and the archives contain the meticulous reports of successive officers who, as relations were always cordial, were perhaps as close to Syme and his family as anyone. 
During the minority Labour government of 1929-31 a group of government MPs sought to arrange a financial settlement in response to the fact that Syme was virtually destitute. By means of a wholly extra-statutory arrangement Syme was treated as if he had been retired on medical grounds in 1910. J. R. Clynes, the home secretary, approached all the party leaders and his predecessors for their agreement. With the sole exception of Churchill, all agreed and Syme received a lump sum of $1233 and an annual pension of $72 12's'. 4died Despite signing an undertaking that he would accept the award without subsequent 'interpretation', Syme none the less then attacked the government on the grounds that the award was illegal and tried to persuade the comptroller and auditor-general to find against the government accordingly. 
Syme's last conviction was on 5 March 1941 for breaking a window in Grindlay's Bank in Whitehall. Refusing to pay the fine, he served twenty-eight days' imprisonment, which included nine periods of release in accordance with the act of 1913. He died at the London Homeopathic Hospital, Great Ormond Street, on 9 February 1945. His pension died with him but, as the result of a request from his son, Ronald, Home Office officials found a source for two 'ex gratia' payments of $100 for Mrs Syme, who died in September 1948. The last official word on her and, by implication, her husband may be taken from the report of the special branch sergeant who had spent much time in contact with them. Commenting on her condition after Syme's death he judged that 'although she may not have believed in his long campaign against authority, she never let him down' (11 April 1945, TNA: PRO, HO 45/24596/1193). 
While Syme's challenge to the legitimacy of unmediated managerial authority can be seen as one of the early milestones on the way to the form of police unionism finally endorsed by parliament, for Syme the real issue was always personal rather than collective. 


@@@@@


doc= 97950


Dodd, Sir Edward James (1909-1966), police officer, was born at 111 Wantage Road, Reading, Berkshire, on 19 October 1909, the son of James Dodd, a council meat inspector, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Razzall (whose father was the archbishop of York's gardener). He attended Reading School, 1920-25. A family seagoing tradition led to his becoming a cadet on HMS 'Conway' and then with the Cunard company. Having obtained his second mate's certificate and risen to fourth mate and a sub-lieutenant in the Royal Navy Reserve, he judged that the shipping depression meant there would be few opportunities in the merchant service and he decided to join the Metropolitan Police. 
Ted Dodd, as he was known, attested constable in October 1932 and served first at Tottenham Court Road. Benefiting from Lord Trenchard's police college scheme, he was selected in 1934 (in the category reserved for serving officers) for the first of the Hendon courses. Devoid of the more advantaged social and educational background of some of his peers, Dodd shone by reason of his personality, intelligence, and the confidence he had acquired from his time in the merchant service. He later reflected that his time spent at sea equipped him better for his police career than a university education would have done ('Birmingham Post', 2 Sept 1963). He was the leader of a party of three (including Joseph Simpson, later metropolitan commissioner) that visited the Paris Police in August 1934. After graduating in September 1935, he served as second in charge at Blackheath and Vine Street, was promoted station inspector in April 1938, and then sub-divisional inspector in charge of the Gray's Inn Road sub-division from December 1938. He married Evelyn Mary Mackenzie, a dancing mistress, aged twenty-six, at St Peter's, Early, Berkshire, on 10 July 1937. His wife, the daughter of Henry James Mackenzie, came from a well-to-do Reading family and provided social as well as personal support. They had a son and a daughter. 
In 1941 Dodd was the most junior member on a short list of seven for the post of second assistant chief constable at Birmingham, then one of the largest city forces and with a good reputation under its chief constable William Johnson. Dodd was successful and took up his post in a city about which -- he later admitted -- he knew little. The first assistant chief constable being called away in 1943 on war service, Dodd took his place -- in January 1945 substantively. Later in 1945 Johnson was called to HM inspectorate, and the Birmingham watch committee advertised for a successor. Appalled by the low calibre of the applicants except for Dodd, the watch committee badgered the Home Office to be allowed to appoint Dodd and this was, exceptionally, permitted, despite his relatively young age (thirty-five). 
Among Dodd's most pressing priorities was to build up a force both when its strength had become much run down during the war and when it had to battle for recruits in an adverse labour market. He set about this with his customary energy and far-sightedness. He was particularly supportive of the police cadet system which he introduced and which was designed to prepare school leavers from the age of fifteen for attestation at eighteen. (Cadets at one time produced 40 per cent a year of his constable recruits.) He widened the curriculum and fostered 'outward bound' activities and participation in the duke of Edinburgh's award scheme. He persuaded the council to give priority to the provision of police housing, and found money for improving social, sporting, and recreational facilities. He sought and always readily responded to speaking invitations in Birmingham, where his engaging style won friends and understanding for his force. Entirely without side (he made it clear, for example, that he was not a mason and did not wish to be), he had a direct personal manner, which exuded friendliness and approachability within a confident and firm management style. At a retirement interview, he could take the trouble to convince a senior but unpromoted constable that his service had been of real value and his contribution genuinely appreciated. When his chauffeured car met a Birmingham traffic jam, he did not think it beneath him to leap out, take point, and get things moving again. His encouragement helped to equip his best men for senior posts throughout the service, including as chief constables and, in two cases, as HM chief inspector of constabulary. 
Dodd's personality and evident competence played well with the Birmingham watch committee, then a group of the most senior city councillors and, like all watch committees, with considerable authority over the day-to-day running of the force until their powers were clipped by the 'Police Act' 1964. He also played an increasingly national role which was recognized as early as 1949 by his appointment as CBE. His most important operational innovation -- based on the experiment of setting up a Birmingham-wide crime squad -- was to create a cross-force detective squad where his charm and determination persuaded neighbouring chief constables to second detective officers to a wholly new form of joint working. The resulting Midlands crime squad became the pattern for a system that went national in 1964 shortly after Dodd arrived at the Home Office. Much crime might be local but a good deal was not. 
Dodd was the dominant figure in his regional conference area (which became known as 'Dodd's own country'). His many other roles included work at police training centres, in traffic committees, on the advisory board of what became the Bramshill Police College, and in the chief constables' association newly put together in 1949 from two formerly separate organizations. He was one of the leaders in the preparation and presentation of the Association of Chief Police Officers' evidence to the Willink royal commission on the police service, 1960-62. Representing an association many of whose members came from small forces entailed playing a conservative hand, which stressed the value of the really local and the relationship with the immediate local authority. Although the commission's recommendations on force areas favoured the views of the Lancashire chief constable Eric St Johnston, who argued for fewer and larger forces, the commission accepted the proposals favoured by Dodd and his colleagues as to the position of chief constables 'vis-a-vis' watch committees and the desirability of strengthening the role and resources of the inspectorate. 
Willink recommended that there should be a chief inspector of constabulary supported by a large staff and overseeing a research and planning branch. Although there had been a power to appoint such an officer since 1945, it had not been used. When it became public knowledge that the Home Office intended now to make such an appointment, speculation veered between Dodd and St Johnston as the most likely appointee. The officials involved probably never considered recommending anyone other than Dodd. From the beginning at Birmingham he had won unreserved praise from HM inspectors, who observed also how he ran not only an effective ship, but one where morale was high. 
Appointed chief inspector of constabulary with effect from 1 September 1963, Dodd reorganized the inspectors on a more professional footing with designated offices in the provinces and staff support. Retirements allowed him to bring into the inspectorate trusted former colleagues like Peter Brodie and Stanley Peck, chief constables of Warwickshire and Staffordshire respectively. He set up the police research and planning branch to create strategic focus for policing operations. Entering into Whitehall, he played an influential part in the post-Willink settlement as principal professional adviser, working harmoniously with officials and three home secretaries. He was knighted in 1964. He was associated also with the introduction of personal radios, experiments with helicopters, and other improvements in police equipment of lasting importance. 
Dodd suffered from asthma which had necessitated hospital treatment in the UK and then in Switzerland. On a second visit to a Swiss clinic, at Heiligenschwendi, for treatment, he died in a wheelchair on 16 September 1966 before reaching his room. Reckoned 'one of the most dynamic and effective police officers of his generation' ('Birmingham Mail', 19 Sept 1966), he was thought to have sacrificed himself in accepting his final post and had taken it only out of a sense of public duty: 'He brought tremendous reserves of energy to the task of remoulding the police service in the new conditions created by the 'Police Act', 1964 to meet the growing menace of organized crime' ('The Times', 19 Sept 1966). He was cremated at Mortlake on 23 September, and there were memorial services at St Margaret's, Westminster, and at St Martin's, Birmingham, the city force's church. 
Dodd's career typified, and to many vindicated, the product of the short-lived experiment of the Hendon Police College which closed in 1939. Many of its graduates later took on some of the most demanding senior roles in the service. Dodd defended the college: 'You have to have officers and leaders in any organisation and an 'officer class' surely means people who are capable of carrying out higher responsibilities.' ('Birmingham Post', 2 Sept 1963). Hendon accelerated his ascent and made possible his appointment to a senior role in a major city force at an early age. The new role of chief inspector could not have been given a better start, even in the short time that proved available to its incumbent. 


@@@@@


doc= 97952


Halland, Gordon Herbert Ramsay (1888-1981), police officer, was born at the vicarage, Witham on the Hill, Lincolnshire, on 13 April 1888, the elder son (there were also two older daughters) of John Thomas Halland (1857-1941), vicar of Witham on the Hill and later rector of Blyborough, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Amy, 'nee' Ramsay (1857-1939). He was educated privately, and then at the Royal Latin School, Buckingham, after which in 1906 he became science master at Kirton grammar school, Lincolnshire. In 1908, 'on the spur of the moment' ('Punjab patrol'), he joined the Indian police and chose to serve in the Punjab. After a period of training and probation he was second in command of the policing operation for the 1911 Delhi durbar, and after some successful special operations against bandits he had by 1914 attained the rank of district superintendent. 
In 1915, because of his experience in working among Sikhs, Halland was seconded to the Indian army's general staff as an intelligence officer with the task of countering subversion in the Sikh regiments of the Indian army. He married in 1916 Helen Claudine Blanche (died 1946), daughter of Major-General John McNeill Walter, adjutant-general in India; they had two daughters. Promoted major, he was appointed OBE in 1918, and in 1919 he was sent by the commander-in-chief's officer to investigate the situation in the Punjab following the shootings in Amritsar. Halland protested against General Dyer's infamous 'crawling order', which forced Indians to crawl past the site of an attack on a British woman. He opposed such collective punishment as contrary to British justice and likely to alienate otherwise loyal Indians. The order was rescinded soon afterwards. He did not condemn Dyer's actions in initially opening fire on the crowd in the Jallianwalla Bagh, but many years later he distanced himself from the massacre, condemning the indiscriminate shooting as disproportionate. 
Home on leave in 1920 Halland was 'lent' by the India Office to help the fight against the IRA during the Anglo-Irish war, although his exact role is unclear. On returning to India at the start of 1921 he became commandant of the Punjab police school at Phillaur, responsible for training the Indian middle ranks, and the largely British senior officers. Later he argued (unsuccessfully) against British clubs excluding senior Indian policemen, and was a supporter of the progressive 'Indianization' of the upper ranks of the Indian police and civil service as a necessary part of the imperial doctrine of trusteeship. 
After his leave in 1926, when he attended a training course at Scotland Yard and organized a squad of Indian empire officers as special constables during the general strike, Halland returned as the superintendent in charge of Amritsar district, but his routine service in the Punjab was again cut short. In 1927 several regiments of the Indian army were sent to Shanghai to protect the international settlement there as part of the international (but British-led) Shanghai defence force. Halland returned to the army with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, as an intelligence officer on the defence force's staff, monitoring potential subversion, before returning to India as senior superintendent in charge of Delhi. In October 1931 he retired from the Indian police (collecting a CIE and the honorary rank of colonel) to take up the post, at the age of forty-three, of chief constable for the police of Lincolnshire, his home county; this shift from colonial to county police forces was not unusual at the time. 
After a short and uneventful time in Lincolnshire, Halland began a second career in the mainstream of British policing. He made his mark when the commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, Lord Trenchard, selected him in 1933 to be the first commandant of the new police college at Hendon, which was designed to train high-flyers for top positions in the police service. It had that task in common with the RAF College at Cranwell in Lincolnshire, and Halland drew on this model and on that of Sandhurst in setting up Hendon's staffing, organization, and routine: matters in which Trenchard gave him wide discretion. As commandant at Hendon, although he mandated education in law, science, and police methods, he set great store by competitive games both within the college and outside it. He was as keen for the instructing staff at Hendon to be young, athletic, and 'gentlemen' as for them to possess up-to-date theoretical and technical expertise. Leading the college from its inception in 1934 until 1938, just a few months before it was closed by the outbreak of war, he had great influence on the cadre of senior policemen whose dominance of the service in the 1950s and 1960s inaugurated a new era of professionalism, even as it created strong opposition among both junior and senior police. 
The next ten years of Halland's career were dominated by war. In August 1938 he was appointed inspector of constabulary for southern England and almost immediately was preoccupied with the preparations for wartime police duties, which accelerated with the Munich crisis the next month. The wartime measures for emergency policing led to increasing Home Office intervention in the affairs of provincial forces, in which the inspectorate played a key role. He presided over a period of mechanization of the service, which he did not oppose, but his concerns were with men rather than 'materiel': in 1939 he was one of the first to express an anxiety, which became far more widespread in later decades, that the use of telephones, radio, and cars was making the job of policing more akin to that of the fire brigade, and taking them away from their traditional preventive role in which they enjoyed everyday contact with the public. 
In October 1942 Halland was sent to Ceylon to reorganize the police there. This was a tricky task since, unlike the police in India, the police in Ceylon reported to the locally elected government as well as to the governor. Everything went wrong in Ceylon: he was forced to resign in the spring of 1944 when his deteriorating relations with the home affairs minister, Arunachalam Mahadeva, broke down completely. This might have been expected, given tensions between colonizers and colonized, but he had also alienated all ranks of the police, the British settler establishment, and the governor-general himself. Perhaps his only supporters were the four Metropolitan Police officers (including Peter Brodie and John Waldron, both later to attain high rank) whom he brought over to help implement his plans. Despite his personal failure, however, his restructuring plan was successfully implemented. 
The Colonial Office had no further use for Halland's services, but in September 1944 the Home Office recommended him for one of the most important jobs in their gift, 'loaning' him to the Foreign Office to be director of public safety for the Allied Control Commission for Germany, setting up the structure (and, crucially, selecting the officers) for ensuring order in occupied Germany and remodelling its police along democratic lines. He then served in Germany as inspector-general of the public safety branch itself, competently and faithfully, despite the tragedy of the sudden death of his wife. The branch came in for criticism at the time because, following the priorities set out by Halland in 1944, it gave greater importance to establishing a German police service in the democratic style than to directly fighting crime and corruption in the British sector. In 1947 he was replaced as head by his deputy, Michael Sylvester O'Rorke, and reverted to his peacetime role as inspector of constabulary. 
Halland retired as inspector of constabulary in 1954, after which he served as a county councillor and deputy lieutenant for Lincolnshire until 1957. He was remarried in 1947 to Baroness Sigrid von der Recke, 'nee' von Lutzau (1909-1996), of Windau, Latvia. They settled in Gloucestershire, where he died at Broadlands, The Park, Cirencester Road, Minchinhampton, on 28 March 1981. 
Halland's personal style was autocratic, and his devotion to the empire was absolute, but the kind of policing whose virtues he extolled (often in the face of opposition) was civilian, law-based, and human-centred. In the 1930s the vicar's son described himself as 'not a very religious man' (Halland to Trenchard, 3 Oct 1933, TNA: PRO, MEPO 2/5846/16), although by 1978 his deep Christian faith -- along with his commitment to the police service, to order, and to anti-communism -- was apparent in a volume of poems, 'Clarion Call', which he published himself. His memoir of his time in India, 'Punjab patrol', was written in the 1950s, but never published. 


@@@@@


doc= 97953


Lindsay, Lionel Arthur (1861-1945), police officer, was born at Mansion House, St Mary's, Brecon, on 27 March 1861, the third son in the family of six sons and one daughter of Henry Gore Lindsay (1830-1914), army officer and chief constable, and his wife, Ellen Sarah (died 1912), the fourth daughter of Charles Morgan Robinson Morgan, MP for Brecon, who was created first Baron Tredegar in 1859. The theorist of mechanized warfare Major-General George Mackintosh Lindsay was his youngest brother. 
Lindsay's father, Henry Gore Lindsay, belonged to a landowning family, of Glasnevin House, co. Dublin, and served as a captain in the rifle brigade in the Cape Frontier War of 1852-3, the Crimean War, and the Indian mutiny. After his marriage he settled in south Wales, where he was lieutenant-colonel in the Brecknockshire rifle volunteers, and was the second chief constable of Glamorgan from 1867 until 1891, when he retired to Glasnevin House, which he had recently inherited. 
Lionel Lindsay was educated at the Royal Academy, Gosport, and in Germany. From 1884 to 1889 he served as adjutant-major and inspector of the Egyptian gendarmerie. In 1889 he became police superintendent of the Merthyr Tudful division of the Glamorgan constabulary, succeeding his father as chief constable in 1891. 
Lindsay's significance lies in the turbulent relationship he had with the labour movement for over forty years. An avowed Conservative, Lindsay aligned himself with the employers and landed gentry, in whose social circles he moved. He looked upon strikers, demonstrators, and union activists as lawbreakers and sedition-mongers. He was an enthusiast for the use of force to break up demonstrations (believing it to have a salutary effect upon protesters) and compiled dossiers on those he regarded as potential subversives. 
Lindsay's aggression was noted in 1898, when a body of striking but peaceful colliers crossed the county boundary from Monmouthshire into Glamorgan, to be met by baton charges led by Lindsay himself. This episode generated widespread criticism, but such notoriety was exceeded during the disputes in the Rhondda and Cynon valleys in 1910-11, the epicentre being the rioting outside the Cambrian colliery in Llwynypia and the looting of shops in Tonypandy in November 1910. The seriousness of the dispute led to 1500 police being concentrated in the coalfield and to the arrival of regular infantry and cavalry who stayed for months to provide the police with vital support. 
Lindsay has been criticized for his one-sided commitment to defending the coal owners' position while being unsympathetic to the workers, even to the point of objecting to peaceful picketing. The union leaders had no faith in Lindsay's even-handedness, and it was widely believed that his close identification with the employers generated alarmist overreaction. It was considered that Lindsay vindictively pursued prosecutions against miners' leaders widely regarded as having done their best to exercise a moderating influence. Finally, Lindsay's preference for the strategy of violent confrontation spilled over into instances of police brutality. 
In Lindsay's defence, police action in 1910 -- unlike many other times in his career -- was mainly responsive, not provocative. These were large-scale disturbances involving thousands of rioters determined to intimidate working colliery officials and committing extensive damage to property. The police had little choice but to intervene and call for military assistance if they thought themselves in danger of being overwhelmed. Lindsay's physical courage was undoubted: always in the thick of the action, he suffered injuries to his right leg and hand. Finally the home secretary, Winston Churchill, found it convenient to give the impression that Lindsay had acted immoderately, deleting from official accounts Churchill's own instructions to utilize 'vigorous baton charges'. General Nevil Macready, initially cautious when taking overall control of the dispute, increasingly came to adopt the direct methods favoured by Lindsay. 
At the time Lindsay was regarded as a hero by his fellow chief constables, but the Home Office came to view him as bellicose and provocative. This reputation was accentuated by Lindsay's behaviour during the First World War, in allowing patriotic crowds to break up anti-war meetings and ferociously instigating prosecutions against socialist activists. The Home Office was reluctant to join in a crusade regarded as expensive, indiscriminate, and potentially counter-productive. Whereas Lindsay had successfully brought thirty-five cases up to the end of 1916, only one of forty he recommended in 1917 was followed through. 
Lindsay's campaign against socialism and trade unionism continued into peace time, climaxing during the seismic industrial disputes of the 1920s. In 1921 Lindsay used troops and 'flying squads' of police in often stage-managed physical confrontations with pickets. He followed this with arrests of union activists, who sometimes had their houses ransacked by the police for good measure. At the end of the dispute the total of summonses in Glamorgan was much higher than those of other coalmining districts, despite its relatively peaceful nature. The vast majority of those committed for trial subsequently had the charges against them withdrawn for lack of evidence, Lindsay feeling aggrieved at what he regarded as half-hearted support from the Home Office and dismayed by the leniency shown by the courts. 
From 1926 Lindsay was sympathetic to the 'non-political' South Wales Miners' Industrial Union, which was threatening the longer established South Wales Miners' Federation. He urged his subordinates to protect working miners against intimidation from South Wales Miners' Federation loyalists, and again resorted to mass prosecutions: 395 charges were brought at the Glamorgan assizes of November 1926. The antipathy between the two unions eventually came to a head in the mid-1930s, with bitter and intense battles in collieries and communities between rival groups. Lindsay relished the conflict: in October 1935 he took direct control of the situation at the Taff-Merthyr colliery, supervising baton charges into a crowd hostile to the South Wales Miners' Industrial Union, action that triggered further disturbances in proximate valleys. Fifty-seven summonses were in due course issued in the biggest mass trial of industrial workers ever held in Britain, in March 1936. All were found guilty, but many observers complained at the 'political' nature of much of the evidence levelled against the accused. 
Lindsay never enjoyed an easy relationship with his standing joint committee. He was insulated from democratic accountability, happily ignoring repeated censures issued by Labour county councillors, often magistrates themselves, who saw Lindsay as articulating a distinctive anti-working-class ethos. 
Never married, Lindsay was devoted to his career, and expected his men to emulate his dedication and commitment. He was a vigorous advocate of their interests in matters of pay and conditions, founding a mutual benefit association in 1914. He was capable of inspiring deep loyalty in his subordinates ('one of the finest Chief Constables in the country' was how one remembered him in 1973), but by the 1930s some were uneasy with his inflexible approach to industrial conflict. When he passed the age of seventy-five, pressure from the standing joint committee on him to resign intensified, and he did so on 7 December 1936. 
Lindsay was appointed MVO in 1912 and OBE in 1920. Dedicated in his pursuit of personal fitness, he enjoyed sports, including boxing, cricket, cycling, hockey, horse riding, hunting, ice skating, polo, rowing, rugby football, shooting, swimming, and tennis, many of which he pursued well into his old age. He sang, played the violin, and participated in amateur dramatics and operatics. An Anglican, he died at his home, 94 Cardiff Road, Llandaff, on 15 April 1945 and was buried on the 20th at St James's Church, Leckwith, Cardiff. 
Lindsay remains a controversial figure -- 'the apotheosis of the atmosphere of conflict between police and labour' (Morgan, 'Police and labour', 16). Under his leadership the Glamorgan constabulary acquired a reputation for violence and brutality in industrial disputes. He was labelled an 'arch-thug' by Arthur Horner, president of the South Wales Miners' Federation, and many have concluded that he was autocratic and militaristic, his approach increasingly anachronistic and unnecessarily confrontational in a democratic society. The miners' historian Page Arnot provides an uncharacteristically witty verdict: 'Captain Lindsay had begun his career as part of the British Army of Occupation in Egypt: and... he never quite disabused himself of the notion that he was part of a Coalmasters' Army of Occupation in South Wales' (Arnot, 182). 


@@@@@


doc= 97954


Peacock, Sir Robert (1859-1926), police officer, was born at Hutts, Ryal, Northumberland, on 30 April 1859, the third son in the family of at least six sons and three daughters of William Peacock ('b'. 1829/30), miner, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Greagley ('b'. 1832/3). The family moved to Batley in Yorkshire and he was at work by the age of twelve. In 1878 he joined the Bradford police force as a constable, at that time not a job with many prospects. During the Fenian disturbances he displayed the calm assurance and courage that characterized his career, earning him promotion to acting sergeant in 1881. On 14 February 1882 he married, at Bradford register office, Betsy Scarr Lucas (1847/8-1904), a grocer. Later that year he moved to the Rotherham police force as sergeant. While he was making undercover observations during unruly parliamentary elections in 1886 his report on a riot implicated one local politician and angered another. Rather than withdraw his report he resigned with his good character intact. He briefly ran a pie business in Sheffield, but was drawn back to policing. 
Police forces wanted officers of Peacock's talent and integrity, and in 1887 he was recruited to the force in Bacup, Lancashire, with the rank of inspector. In 1888, just ten years after first becoming a policeman, he became chief constable of the Canterbury borough constabulary in Kent. In 1892 he moved back north as chief constable at Oldham, Lancashire, where he made the force 'one of the smartest in the country' ('Manchester Guardian', 19 Nov 1926). He instituted an eight-hour day, founded a recreation club, and led the St John Ambulance Association. His force dealt proficiently with four big strikes in local industries and shut down bogus clubs selling illegal alcohol and running gambling. At both Canterbury and Oldham he conducted police prosecutions in magistrates' courts, and at Oldham he was also chief officer of the fire brigade and chief inspector of weights and measures. 
Peacock's success attracted the attention of the watch committee of the Manchester corporation, whose force was shattered by scandal. From 1882 to 1896 a superintendent, William Bannister, owned brothels in his division and protected them from prosecution with help from two sergeants. A public inquiry into the Manchester police was set up by the Home Office and reported in July 1897, leading to the resignation in January 1898, on health grounds, of the chief constable of Manchester, Charles Malcolm Wood. In March 1898 Peacock was appointed his successor, at a salary of $800 a year, his candidature having been supported by testimonials ranging from the high sheriff of Lancashire to the MPs for Oldham and Canterbury and several clergyman. Before the First World War chief constables of such large boroughs as Manchester were, like their county equivalents, recruited from the military, colonial, or Indian police or the Royal Irish Constabulary; Peacock was unusual in having served in provincial constabularies in England, and could justifiably claim that 'few men could boast at his age of having had a more varied and complete experience of the duties of a police officer, from the ranks to the office of Chief Constable' ('Manchester Guardian', 25 March 1898). 
Peacock approached the challenge of restoring the force's morale and regaining public confidence in it by combining strict discipline with approachability. Much as in Oldham, he improved work conditions, for instance introducing regular breaks for meals so men could eat at stations. By 1900 his strategy was paying off, and one of his men declared, 'No one is more eager to see a P.C., on any subject whatever, than Mr. Peacock is' ('Police Review', 9 Feb 1900). As one example of his style, during a strike in 1911 he personally walked the rounds and discovered that many officers had been on duty for over twelve hours. He immediately told his superintendents that only in exceptional circumstances should men serve such long hours, and got the practice stopped. Peacock made a fair disciplinary system a top priority. Even though he was strict, penalties for defaults were more moderate than in many forces. A constable charged with gossiping might be fined half a crown, half the fine in Liverpool. Having started on the beat, Peacock understood the problems and resentments caused by fines that seemed out of proportion to offences. On the other hand he was a stickler for punctuality and set up a scale of fines for lateness, sixpence for every thirty minutes. 
Peacock understood that it was not fair to discipline men who had never learned their jobs properly. He set up classes through the Manchester school board in 1900 and put together a booklet of lectures on police duties for the first course. This was printed and distributed to other forces as 'Powers and Responsibilities of the Police in relation to the Betting, Gaming, Highway, and Licensing Laws' (1900), bearing on its cover the simpler title 'Police Constables' Duties'. The Manchester force's first instruction book, with conditions of service, standing orders, and local statutes, was issued in 1908 under Peacock's guidance. 
While a condition of Peacock's appointment prevented him from investigating the past conduct of his force's members, men who had thrived under the corrupt Superintendent Bannister grumbled under Peacock and left the force. Two magistrates accustomed to using influence to protect friends discovered in 1901 that Peacock had thwarted their plans, and they resigned from the bench. His most vocal opponent was the city councillor Ross Clyne, who was upset at Peacock's mostly successful efforts to make the force more autonomous from the watch committee. In 1905 Clyne accused Peacock of scandalous allegations including keeping a 'reserve of harlots', practising 'systematic burglary', robbing prisoners, and gambling. Not only was Peacock vindicated, but citizens presented him with an illuminated address, and donated funds to cover his legal expenses ('Police Review', 7 April 1905). In recognition of his having 'shown special ability in the organization and control' of the Manchester force he was awarded the king's police medal in January 1912. 
Peacock's wider interests included child protection and the prevention of juvenile crime; the employment of children in street trading was a particular concern, and he read a paper on the subject to the International Congress for the Protection of Children in 1902. In the early twentieth century he frequently gave evidence to parliamentary inquiries on such matters as Sunday trading, obscene publications, vagrancy, and betting. In 1910, as president of the Association of Chief Constables of City and Borough Police Forces, he gave evidence to the royal commission on divorce, based on his experience of enforcing separation and maintenance orders. 
In 1918 Peacock's prompt and intelligent action kept the Manchester police calm during the London police strike for better pay. In 1919 he was knighted in recognition of his long service to the police. He continued improving the Manchester city police, updating the instruction book, which remained in use for decades, in 1923. He included a history of policing and his policing philosophy: 'the Police Force to-day represents the disciplined organisation of the civil power, entrusted not only with the prevention and detection of offences, but with the carrying into effect of laws and regulations for the maintenance of public health, order, and safety. ('Police Instruction Book', 1923)' He was credited with maintaining normal police methods when policing Manchester during the general strike in May 1926. 
Off duty Peacock lived simply. He enjoyed playing golf, and 'could be the life and soul of a social party, dancing with vigour and with huge enjoyment, and joining in mirthful games with a sort of boyish enthusiasm' (Hewitt, 119, quoting the 'Manchester Guardian'). He was a member of the Wesleyan Methodist Church at Rusholme. In October 1926 he gave a wireless address during civic week on the history of the Manchester police force. Soon afterwards he caught pneumonia, and died in a nursing home at Victoria Park, Manchester, on 18 November 1926. He was buried in the southern cemetery, Manchester, next to his wife. 
One of the first nationally significant chief constables to have been promoted from the ranks, Peacock was also among the earliest to rise from humble origins to such a position in the police service. He helped create a model for a new kind of chief policeman, a career police officer who had walked a beat and could bring that experience to the administration of his force. His 'Police Constables' Duties' became a standard throughout England. Such was his influence that contemporaries spoke of the 'Peacock tradition' of policing: 'that has peculiarly distinguished the Manchester Force among the Police of the country. To define it is difficult, but its outstanding result is that in no other city in the country is there less sense of detachment between the Police and general public. ('Police Review', 11 March 1927)'. 


@@@@@


doc= 97960


Bakewell, George (1805-1883), police officer, was born at Kingstone, Staffordshire, where he was baptized George Webb Bakewell on 26 February 1805, one of ten children of James Bakewell (1765-1826), size manufacturer and (in 1815) likely insurance fraudster, and his second wife, Elizabeth. From the mid-1820s George Bakewell was in business in north-west England with his elder half-brother, also James Bakewell, in trades largely connected with bone dealing and glue manufacture. He worked, on his own admission with little success, as a size manufacturer, hide merchant, brewer, farmer, hop merchant, and victualler. He also claimed to have served briefly as a parish constable in the parish of Stowe, Staffordshire. In the early 1830s he spent sixteen months imprisoned for debt in Lancaster. This experience inspired his first and most successful pamphlet, 'Observations on the Law of Debtor and Creditor' (1836), a commentary on proposed reforms of the bankruptcy laws to abolish imprisonment for debt, which also described how those in debt could best negotiate the complex laws and processes that applied to them. It went through several editions and appears to have sold more than 16,000 copies. In 1836 he successfully supported his half-brother in legally complex court proceedings: James Bakewell, who was active as a radical in Manchester's local politics, had gone bankrupt for the third time with debts in excess of $50,000 when the settlement from his second bankruptcy was still in dispute. Always inclined to sudden bursts of temper, George fell out with James in 1838 over a minor business deal in Manchester. 
In 1840 Bakewell was reduced to joining the Birmingham police force as a constable. As an educated man (as indicated by his publications, though nothing is known of his schooling) he was unusual in a new police force, especially one like Birmingham's, formed by central government in 1840 specifically to cope with the Chartist threat, and run on militaristic lines. In his pamphlet 'Observations on the Construction of the New Police Force' (1842), an account of his experiences in Birmingham, Bakewell complained about the force's close discipline, not merely in barracks and on parade, but also on the beat, where the men were given very little discretion to act independently to uphold the law. Seeing himself as a cut above most of his comrades, he was prepared to use his initiative even in conflict with the rule book. Twice -- when he overpowered two thieves on the outskirts of Birmingham, and when he arrested two robbers -- this led to rewards and plaudits, but at other times, for instance when he arrested the respectable landlord of a coaching inn on the mistaken word of a drunken farmer, it led to reprimands, and a block on promotion. In late 1841 he was dismissed from the Birmingham force for drunkenness. In his 'Observations', published in 1842 to coincide with the debate in Staffordshire on whether or not to reform that county's police, he condemned the hierarchical nature of the job, and compared it unfavourably to the traditional role of the autonomous parish constable. 
After a period during which he tramped to London and back, staying in workhouses, Bakewell joined Sheffield's police force in 1846. His service here appears to have been meritorious until, in May 1847, he fell out with his landlord and fellow constable William Richardson and accused him of stealing his trousers. After threatening Richardson he was dismissed from the police and paid by the mayor to leave the town, but returned to argue that since his dismissal had followed irregular procedure it ought to be reversed. He pleaded his case though a series of four pamphlets published in 1847 in conjunction with Sheffield's radicals, who were keen to point out what they saw as oppressive conduct by officials, who had bypassed the elected watch committee. But during the committee's inquiry the fact that Bakewell himself had staged the 'theft' emerged, and his public support ebbed away. In 1849 he returned to Sheffield in a doomed attempt to sue its police chief for false imprisonment. 
In 1848, when local agitation against the death penalty was being fed by the controversial conviction of two men for murder at Mirfield, Yorkshire, Bakewell published in Sheffield 'Observations on Circumstantial Evidence', a pamphlet written with the ostensible benefit of his police experience, which described several cases of the execution of allegedly innocent persons. His final original pamphlet, on the unfairness to the parish of the new poor law, was published in Liverpool in November 1848, although he published what appears to have been a modified version of 'Circumstantial Evidence' under a new title in 1857. By 1851 he was described as a widower, though no further details of his marriage are known. He spent the last years of his life as an inmate of the Bolton union workhouse, Fishpool, Farnworth, Lancashire, where he died of apoplexy on 20 January 1883. 
Bakewell was the first rank-and-file member of a uniformed 'new' police to write about his experiences. Although fate cast his lot in with radicals, his political views were more overtly traditional, venerating a past in which the common law was taken seriously, and the elites had a sense of obligation to their inferiors. This was unfavourably contrasted with a utilitarian present wherein, as he complained, poverty was considered a crime and the freeborn artisan, in the shape of the parish constable, had been replaced by the regimented and disciplined policeman. Bakewell's obstinacy, combined with his consistent inability to fit into the world in which he found himself, doomed him to failure, but in railing against all comers he also provided a rare example of an articulate man who was losing his social standing. 


@@@@@


doc= 97965


Rafter, Sir Charles Haughton (1857?-1935), police officer, was born in Belfast, the son of William Pearse Rafter (died 1892), linen merchant, and Elizabeth Manning. He was probably born in 1857, which accords with census returns and his marriage certificate, but towards the end of his life, and in his obituaries, his year of birth began to be given as 1860 (Burke, 'Peerage', 1931, 2789). His 'Who's Who' entry gave no birth date, and two parliamentary questions shortly before his death failed to elicit an authoritative statement of his age ('Hansard 5C', 298.537, 303.562). 
In September 1870 Rafter entered the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast; he later studied at Queen's University, Belfast, before graduating from London University. He came top of the entrance examinations for the Royal Irish Constabulary, which he joined as a gentleman cadet in 1882. His first duty was to patrol nightly Phoenix Park, Dublin, shortly after the murders of Lord Frederick Cavendish, the chief secretary of Ireland, and his under-secretary, Thomas Henry Burke, by Irish republican nationalists. He was later promoted to district inspector, and served for sixteen years, being quartered at various times in Woodford, co. Galway, Ballinrobe, co. Mayo, Tipperary Town, co. Tipperary, and Boyle, co. Roscommon. On 13 January 1885 he married Olivia Lucinda (1853-1914), daughter of Arthur Nugent JP, of Crannagh, co. Galway. 
In July 1899 Rafter was one of fifty candidates to apply to succeed Joseph Farndale as chief constable of Birmingham. Of the eight short-listed candidates for interview only Rafter appeared in uniform. This impressed the city's watch committee, which unanimously decided to appoint him with a salary of $800. His age was given as forty-two. 
Rafter was recommended to the Birmingham watch committee as 'skilled in the preservation or restoration of peace in troubled districts where party feeling runs high' ('Irish Times', 22 July 1899). This ability was tested early in his time at Birmingham, when the radical Welsh MP David Lloyd George visited the city, at the invitation of the Birmingham Liberal Association, to deliver a speech at the town hall on 18 December 1901 critical of the government's conduct during the South African War. Birmingham was the Liberal Unionist stronghold of Joseph Chamberlain, the colonial secretary associated with the war policy, and Rafter anticipated trouble. He ordered 400 officers on duty within the town hall and neighbourhood. A large crowd, armed with stones, brick-ends, and other missiles, stormed the town hall and smashed windows and street lamps in Victoria Square; Rafter personally escorted Lloyd George from the platform to a secure room underneath, from which he enabled the future prime minister to get away safely -- disguised, according to some reports, as a police officer. During the melee a young man, Harold Ernest Curtin, was killed after being struck on the head with a police baton; the coroner's jury returned a verdict of manslaughter by an unknown police constable. A watch committee inquiry absolved Rafter of any blame in the affair. 
When Rafter was appointed there were 700 members of the Birmingham force, or one officer for every 654 people, manning fourteen police stations. The annual report of the inspectorate of constabulary that year criticized the Birmingham force for being under strength by 200 officers. In February 1901 Rafter convinced the watch committee to immediately recruit an additional 100 men with an additional annual incremental rise of 20 men for the ensuing six years. Upon his death the force numbered 1587, or one officer for every 632 people, manning more than 64 stations. 
Rafter was a noted modernizer of the service. One of his first acts was to introduce educational classes for the rank-and-file. At first only Birmingham police officers were eligible to attend, but Rafter soon opened the school to visiting officers, offering a combination of physical and mental education to prepare probationary constables for the rigours of police work. The curriculum included criminal law and procedure, police duties, arithmetic, English composition, dictation, gymnastics, swimming, drill, first aid, and practical tips for dealing with the public. Only with sustained training could officers perform their principal duty, which, as he liked to remind people, was 'the prevention of crime' ('Royal commission', 243, question 3666). Potential recruits were introduced to this educational regime the moment they arrived for interview: all of the 5000 candidates personally interviewed by Rafter between 1899 and 1928 heard his lecture 'Advice to police officers'. As he noted in his evidence to the royal commission on police powers and procedure in 1928, the selection of 'proper candidates for the Police Service... is a duty that cannot be adequately discharged by subordinates' (ibid., 230, question 3525). The Digbeth Police Training School, as it became known from 1913, was the leading educational institution for police officers in the country, and, when Rafter advocated establishing a national police school in 1918, he confidently urged the Home Office to use his school as a model of good practice. From 1918 he used his influence on the Chief Constables Association to press for greater uniformity and professionalism in police training. With Rafter's encouragement, the rugby-playing assistant chief constable who was his heir apparent from 1918, Cecil Moriarty, wrote and revised a set of model instructions for police, which became a national standard, albeit an unofficial one. 
Rafter managed the Birmingham police force during a period of transition. The city's boundaries were extended in 1911 to incorporate the outlying suburbs of Aston Manor, Erdington, Handsworth, Acocks Green, Yardley, King's Norton, and Northfield. The creation of Greater Birmingham, as it was known, trebled the city's acreage to 43,000 acres and increased its population from 523,000 to 840,000, creating new challenges for policing such a large urban area. Rafter formed a large branch of mounted officers attached to several of the outlying districts. Members of county police forces in these districts (214 men) were amalgamated with the Birmingham police. New police stations were built in Nechells, Bordesley Green, and Digbeth, among other districts; existing stations were substantially enlarged to accommodate the new intake of policemen, and the force invested heavily in subsidized housing for its officers. Upon Rafter's death the gross capital debt on police stations and housing in the city was almost $400,000, a large proportion of which had been borrowed in 1924 to buy land in Steelhouse Lane for the development of a new central station, which was officially opened in December 1933. A citywide network of pillar-post telephones was also installed to facilitate greater communication between the police and members of the public. This was later augmented by a motor patrol fleet and a network of police boxes. In addition to its patrol duties the force's transport department in Duke Street was also responsible for the city's ambulances, prison vans, and mortuary. 
Rafter was also one of the first chief constables to employ women in the service, first (and conventionally) as police matrons to look after female prisoners and juveniles, before recruiting female volunteers to patrol the city's parks and public spaces during the First World War. A women's police department was formed in June 1917 to deal with cases of indecent exposure, sexual assault, carnal knowledge, attempted suicide, obscene language, and shoplifting. A hostel for young women was opened on Newton Street in the following year with Rafter's sanction. In 1929 the royal commission on police powers and procedure praised the force for pioneering the appointment of women police constables. In his evidence to the commission, Rafter had outlined the preventative work of the women police ('Royal commission', 243, question 3667) and also noted that they protected male officers from the sort of complaints 'readily and glibly made' by 'the class of women who usually come into Police custody' (ibid., 235, question 7d). By 1935 the women's police department consisted of seventeen female officers, including uniformed and plain clothes women constables and a woman enquiry officer attached to the detective department, and had its own office in Steelhouse Lane, adjoining the new central station. 
Although Rafter was a strict disciplinarian, summarily dismissing 107 striking policemen after the national police strike in 1919, he was equally interested in police welfare. A long-distance runner in his youth, he encouraged his men to pursue all forms of rational leisure, including sport, reading, and music. He started an annual police sports' day, which was open to public spectators, and initiated inter-divisional competitions to encourage healthy rivalry among his men. He also started an annual police children's party, at which he could be seen dressed as Father Christmas. Rafter was a lover of music, and was keenly interested in the city police band (which was conducted for a time by Sir Adrian Boult) and the Municipal Officers' Guild Choir. Apparently he kept a flute in his office drawer, which he would sometimes pull out to entertain visitors. He was also a keen horticulturalist and spent much of his later leisure time cultivating hothouse plants and flowers at his Birmingham home, Elmley Lodge in Harborne. After the death of his first wife he married, on 21 September 1916 at Plymouth, Catherine ('b'. 1882/3), daughter of Denis Griffin, naval pensioner. 
Rafter's accomplishments were first recognized in July 1910 with the conferment of the king's police medal for 'a specially distinguished record of administrative service, success in organising his police force, and for special services in dealing with widespread outbreaks of public disorder'. He was made a CBE in 1920 and knighted in 1927. When he had completed twenty-five years' service as chief constable his men presented him with a life-size portrait of himself. Latterly there were moves to force his retirement, and questions were raised both about his age and mental and physical capacity. His appointment had predated legislation on police pensions in 1921 and he was unaffected by its provisions for compulsory retirement. The Birmingham watch committee and the home secretary permitted him to continue in office until his death. 
Rafter died at his holiday home in Galway, on 23 August 1935. One of the longest serving chief constables in the United Kingdom, Rafter was in the police service for almost fifty-three years. His memorial service at St Martin's parish church in Birmingham's Bull Ring attracted a large congregation of prominent citizens and police officers. On the journey to St Peter's Church, Harborne, where his body was interred, the streets were lined by between 800 and 1000 regular and special constables, the line of blue uniforms being described as 'the most impressive guard-of-honour that has ever been seen in Birmingham' ('Birmingham Gazette', 28 August 1935). 


@@@@@


doc= 97967


Handyside, Eric Charles (d. 1926), police officer in India, was a celebrated figure at the time of his death, yet details of his life and background are remarkably sparse. His father was said to have been from Cornwall, and his mother from Russia. No record of his birth has been found. He joined the Indian police in November 1901 and began his career in the Punjab, where he established a formidable reputation for his courage and tenacity, and was promoted superintendent in November 1909. He was awarded the king's police medal in January 1911 for his exploits, having apprehended a dangerous gang of escaped convicts after three days of hard marching in summer heat and with no food. He served in New Delhi for George V's durbar, and moved to become superintendent of police in Multan. After twelve years' service in the Punjab he was given a rousing send-off, with thousands turning out to wish him well. 
Handyside's new posting in the North-West Frontier Province was to secure his reputation. He arrived in the province in March 1913 to join the frontier constabulary. Recruited from the local Pathans, the frontier constabulary was established as the final stage of the reorganization of the north-west frontier's defences by the commander-in-chief, Kitchener. Handyside's arrival at the constabulary's headquarters at Dera Ismail Khan coincided with a policy change away from the 'outlaw conciliation committees' which allowed law-breakers in British territories on the frontier, who had found sanctuary as outlaws across the border, to return to their homes. This was found to lead to a cycle of repeat banditry; in future a tougher policy was implemented, and the search for outlaws would be more persistent. Handyside's qualities and methods were suited to the new policy, which involved incursions into the raiders' heavily armed villages. His first mission was the successful arrest of some men of the Khudakhel tribe who were offering shelter to criminals and refusing to pay fines. A succession of actions led to the award of a bar to his king's police medal in 1918: 'During the four years he has spent in the Frontier Constabulary he has acquired a reputation for fearlessness, tenacity and personal bravery which it would be hard to equal.' 
During the Anglo-Afghan War of 1919-21 Handyside defended Gomal, protecting the strategically important Gomal Pass, against a large force of Wazirs and Mahsuds; with only a small detachment of police he held the enemy at bay for three days despite having been wounded at the outset. On the arrival of an army relief force Handyside was reported to have saluted smartly to the brigadier and 'with the suspicion of a wink said 'This is your job, sir, I am only a civilian'' (Griffiths, 402). For this feat he was appointed OBE. 
In 1921 Handyside was promoted commandant of the frontier constabulary. A sortie he headed in March 1923 to recover a cache of.303 rifles stolen from the police armoury at Kohat by cross-border raiders received publicity as 'a tale of daring and well-planned enterprise seldom, if ever, equalled in the annals of frontier raiding and counter-raiding' ('The Times', 7 March 1923). Handyside and his men, under the cover of darkness, scrambled across mountainous terrain to encircle the suspected raiders' village across the border, backed by artillery on an overlooking vantage point. A search undertaken in the face of the protestations of the village elders revealed the rifles hidden in pits under the houses. 
Handyside was killed on 11 April 1926, in a hamlet ten miles from Peshawar, during a routine expedition to capture two outlaws. Handyside led the search, and on dashing across the empty space at the heart of the compound was shot twice and died there. Though a civilian (obituaries emphatically styled him 'Mr') he was buried with full military honours and an RAF flypast. 
Handyside's death prompted tributes to his heroism from the provincial government, the government of India, and in Westminster: 'Some of his exploits were of epic quality and he himself had become a theme of border legend and song. Even the wild tribesmen against whom he had so often fought shared the widespread grief at his loss' ('Annual Statement on the Moral and Material Progress of India', 207). The journalist Frank Herbert Brown located him within the traditions of initiative and leadership of the British defenders of the north-west frontier, his exploits showing 'that British servants of the Crown in India have not lost the powers of leadership, intrepidity, and personal valour which went in days gone by to the establishment of the 'pax Britannica'' ('The Observer', 18 April 1926). 'Short and stocky in build' (Curry, 338), he was celebrated as fearless, yet careful in his preparations and in his concern for the lives of his men. Chaotic with paperwork, he was unorthodox in his methods and dress, living a life of 'spartan simplicity' (Elliott, 95) in border forts. Sir John Maffey, chief-commissioner of the North-West Frontier Province, recalled ''Handy' in shorts with Pathan sandals on his feet, a revolver sling and full cartridge belt, a Balaclava cap, a heavy 'poshtin' coat, happy as a schoolboy, hard as nails, and ready to walk for a week on Pathan bread and water' ('The Times', 20 April 1926). He was credited with an understanding of Pathan traditions and language, and with a chivalrous respect for his notorious outlaw opponents. His compassion was recalled through his habit of paying the owners of itinerant dancing bears to liberate one of their animals for a day, feeding and watering it in what he called 'a bear's holiday' ('The Times', 16 April 1926). A fund in his memory paid for a memorial to him in St John's Church, Peshawar, and a memorial arch next to the police station in the Kohat Pass. The Handyside Memorial Fund in Punjab provides scholarships for the education of the families of those non-gazetted officers who die or are killed while serving. 


@@@@@


doc= 97968


McLaren, Bruce Leslie (1937-1970), motor racing driver and constructor, was born at Remuera, a suburb of Auckland, New Zealand, on 30 August 1937, the second of the three children of Leslie McLaren (1902-1985), garage proprietor, and his wife, Ruth, 'nee' Caundle (1906-2004). One sister was seven years his senior, the other ten years his junior. He grew up in Remuera, and attended Meadowbank primary school between 1942 and 1948. 
Around the age of ten and a half McLaren felt a pain in his left leg which was initially thought to be poliomyelitis. After a month in hospital he was diagnosed with Perthes disease, a childhood condition caused by inadequate blood supply at the head of the femur, and transferred to the Wilson Home for Crippled Children in Auckland, where his treatment comprised immobilization in a Bradshaw frame with weights dangling from his feet. His education proceeded through correspondence courses and he remained at the home for around two years until discharged in early 1950. As a result of the disease McLaren's left leg became one and a half inches shorter than his right. Particularly when tired or wearing racing boots he walked with a pronounced limp. 
After leaving the Wilson Home, McLaren resumed a normal life, though he was banned from playing football or rugby. He swam, cycled, and rowed; as an adult he was an enthusiastic water skier. Aged thirteen he enrolled at Seddon Memorial Technical College where his ability in mathematics led him to consider a career in civil engineering. He went on to study engineering at Auckland University in 1956-8 but left before graduating in order to pursue his racing ambitions. 
From an early age McLaren demonstrated a keen interest in motor vehicles. His father and paternal uncles had been champion motorcyclists before the Second World War. After the war his father raced cars, officiated at speedway meetings, and became a leading figure in the Auckland Car Club. Bruce, who initially aspired to do speedway, had similar interests. As a teenager he became a proficient mechanic, rebuilding with his father an Austin Ulster which he raced around the family garden before he acquired a driving licence. Once he obtained a licence, aged fifteen, he began to enter motor races and hill climbs in the Auckland area. He won his class in his first event and other successes followed. 
In the mid-1950s 'big-time motor racing' reached New Zealand (McLaren, 33). McLaren senior was closely involved, and the rising Australian driver Jack Brabham based his car at the McLaren Service Station. McLaren junior made his acquaintance and they became lifelong friends. In 1956 McLaren raced in a sports car event supporting the New Zealand grand prix, competing against Stirling Moss and other luminaries of motor sport. After a promising start he retired with engine trouble. 
Two developments helped McLaren to decide his future. First, he had the opportunity to purchase Brabham's Cooper sports car and boost his race competitiveness. Second, New Zealand International Grand Prix Inc selected him for its 'Driver to Europe' scheme. At the age of twenty and 'scared stiff', he put his university studies on hold and sailed from Sydney for the UK in March 1958 accompanied by a mechanic (McLaren, 60). He disembarked at Aden, completing his journey by air, in order to race a borrowed formula 2 Cooper at Aintree. He finished ninth and received a fee of $60, less $50 to insure the car. 
Many races and substantial success followed in Britain and on the continent. As a result, 'all ideas of an engineering degree flew out the window' (McLaren, 44). McLaren finished the 1958 season second to Brabham in the F2 championship and received several lucrative offers for the following year. He signed a sponsorship deal with Esso and joined Cooper, initially as its number two 'works' driver. Notwithstanding his growing success he shared a modest flat in Surbiton and, until 1961, drove between races in a second-hand Morris Minor purchased from Betty Brabham. 
McLaren's first formula 1 race (in an F1 car) was at Monaco in 1959, where he finished fifth (of five finishers). During his career he drove in more than 100 F1 races, achieving victories at Sebring (1959), Buenos Aires (1960), Monaco (1962) and, in a McLaren car, at Spa (1968). He achieved twenty-seven podium placings and twice finished second in the drivers' championship but never became champion or gained pole position on the starting grid. His victory at Sebring made him the youngest ever winner of an F1 grand prix. Thirty-seven of his F1 races were in McLaren cars, the last at Monaco in 1970. Between 1959 and 1967 he drove in eight Le Mans 24 hour races, winning in a Ford GT40, with his fellow New Zealander Chris Amon, in 1966. 
Charles Cooper's refusal to allow Cooper Climax Specials to go to the Tasman races of 1963 prompted McLaren to set about realizing his long-held dream of building cars and running his own team: Bruce McLaren Motor Racing Ltd. His wife, Patricia, 'nee' Broad, whom he married in Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1961, became one of its directors. Their marriage produced one child, Amanda, born in 1965. 
The new company was based first at New Malden in Surrey, then Feltham and, from 1965, Colnbrook trading estate near Heathrow. The plan was to race and also to build cars for public sale, though the idea of direct sales was shelved until 1967 when Trojan Cars began producing McLarens for the consumer market. McLaren continued driving for Cooper until 1965, by which time Charles was dead and the Cooper Car Company had been sold. 
McLaren, who first raced sports cars in the USA in the early 1960s, aspired to succeed on the lucrative North American circuits. In the late 1960s the McLaren team, with McLaren's fellow New Zealander Denny Hulme in its second car, dominated the Canadian-American (Can-Am) challenge cup series, winning substantial prize money as well as the Ferodo trophy (1968) and other awards. McLaren became wealthy and moved into a large house at Burwood Park, near the old Brooklands race circuit in Surrey. At the end of 1968 'Time' magazine estimated that he and his company were worth more than $1m (Ludvigsen, 161). 
McLaren died in an accident at Goodwood, Sussex, on 2 June 1970 while testing a McLaren M8-D. In the Lavant Straight, at a speed of up to 180 m.p.h., a section of the car's tail worked loose, causing 'immediate and total instability... beyond human control' (Young, 17). The car hit a concrete marshal's post and exploded. Fire and wreckage were strewn over a large area. An inquest, which returned a verdict of accidental death, deemed that McLaren died instantly of multiple injuries and burns ('The Times', 22 July 1970). A memorial service was held at St Paul's Cathedral on 24 June. Posthumously, the RAC awarded McLaren the 1969 Segrave trophy for winning every race of the Can-Am series in cars of his own design and construction. 
McLaren was slim, brown-haired, and somewhat below medium height. A relaxed, modest, thoughtful, and popular star of the world's motor racing circuits, he readily acknowledged the help that others, especially his family, gave him on his way to the top. John Cooper once questioned whether he was among the best drivers of his era but others have rejected such criticism (Ludvigsen, 43, 46, 72). McLaren may not have been the quickest or most brilliant driver in F1 history, but as a combined driver, designer, engineer, and businessman he was peerless. After his death his company remained highly successful. 


@@@@@


doc= 97969


Don, Kaye Ernest (1892-1981), motor racing driver and water speed record-holder, was born in Dublin on 10 April 1892, the elder son in the family of two sons and one daughter of Charles Ferdinand Donajowski (1851-1912), variously a shipping agent, publisher, and journalist, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bowry (1866-1948), of New Malden, Surrey. His paternal grandfather, born in Prussia, came to London in the mid-nineteenth century as a teacher of German. 
As Carl Don, the surname by which he was known throughout his life, he was admitted to Wolverhampton grammar school in 1899. From 1910 he was employed in the motor tyre trade, working for the Avon Rubber Company in Oxford Street, London, and after the death of his father he supported his mother and sister. He competed in motorcycle trials prior to the First World War. He joined the army in 1915, but was discharged on health grounds from the Royal Army Service Corps after nine months. In 1916 he joined the Royal Flying Corps, serving on the western front and at the general headquarters in France, and holding a commission in the RAF on its creation in 1918. After the war he served in Ireland. Demobilized in April 1919, he remained on the reserve list, relinquishing his RAF commission, with the rank of flying officer, in March 1927. 
After the war, now known as Kaye Don, he returned to the motor business, taking part in motorcycle reliability trials as a works driver. By 1922 he had gravitated to the motor racing fraternity based at the Brooklands racetrack in Weybridge. Tall and fair-haired, he fitted in effortlessly alongside the most renowned Brooklands personalities. He drove a single-seater AC there in 1922, lapping at 100.61 m.p.h. and achieving an hour record of 90 m.p.h., before racing in cars powered by the Wolseley Viper engine, originally developed as an aero engine. 
Don became mainly associated with Sunbeam cars as a works driver. Driving the rebuilt 2 litre Sunbeam car in which Dario Resta had been killed in a record attempt in 1924, he won a series of races at Brooklands, including victories over both Malcolm Campbell and John Cobb. His competitive appearances were mainly confined to Brooklands, where in May 1928 he beat Parry Thomas's lap record, his speed of 131.67 m.p.h. making him the first driver there to exceed a lap speed of 130 m.p.h. On 18 August 1928, in a Lea-Francis, he won the inaugural Ulster tourist trophy in Newtownards ahead of forty-three other competitors, completing the thirty laps (410 miles) in just under six hours at an average speed of 64.06 m.p.h. His peak year of track successes was 1929, when he held more British and international class records than any driver had previously achieved. 
Don was proclaimed as the new potential rival to Henry Segrave, whose triumphs in America had intensified public interest in the world land and water speed records. By September 1929 Sunbeam's designer Louis Coatalen had begun constructing a bespoke vehicle for Don to make an attempt on the land speed record. The resulting 31 foot long 'Silver Bullet' had an unsuccessful trial on Pendine Sands in January 1930, and Don followed Segrave's lead, opting to make his record attempt at Daytona Beach. After arriving in America in March he battled against poor weather and the technical limitations of 'Silver Bullet', considered by some not to possess adequate weight to counterbalance its central engines. On 15 March 1930 he was thrown around the vehicle's cockpit as he struggled to maintain an average speed of 180 m.p.h., well short of Segrave's 231.4 m.p.h. record. 
Don enjoyed greater success with his pursuit of the world's water speed record. Segrave had been killed as his 'Miss England II' crashed at Windermere in June. Lord Charles Wakefield's Castrol company, which had financed Segrave's water record attempts, identified Don as Segrave's successor and logical challenger to the American Gar Wood. Wood was the most successful powerboat racer in history, and in February 1931 set a new record of 102.1 m.p.h. The battle lines between the men were established when Don, piloting the salvaged 'Miss England II', attained a two-way average of 103.4 m.p.h. in April as part of the British Empire Trade Exhibition in Buenos Aires. In July 1931 Don raised the record to 110 m.p.h. at the Lake Garda regatta in Italy, and was received by Benito Mussolini in congratulation. 
In September 1931, in Detroit, Don, Wood, and Wood's younger brother George competed for the Harmsworth trophy. The elder Wood had held the trophy for a decade, and was familiar with the Detroit River where the contest took place. In front of half a million spectators Don claimed the first heat with a course record. The competition descended into farce when Gar Wood's 'Miss America IX' crossed the starting-line before the gun, with Don's 'Miss England II' in swift pursuit. Both men were disqualified, and George Wood completed the heat uncontested. America thus retained the trophy, though Gar Wood was roundly criticized by the transatlantic press for his apparent subterfuge. 
In 1932 the two men again tussled for the water speed record and Harmsworth trophy. In July, on Loch Lomond, Don set a new record in the newly built 'Miss England III', averaging 119.81 m.p.h. over the two runs, and having averaged 120.50 m.p.h. on the north run became the first man to travel two miles a minute on water. The Harmsworth contest again, however, proved anticlimactic, with Don's boat unable to mount a successful challenge owing to technical problems. Later that month Wood pushed the record up to 124.91 m.p.h. Don was unable to respond as Lord Wakefield abandoned his financing of powerboat racing, bringing an abrupt end to Don's period of success on water. 
Don married in New York, on 16 September 1932, an American heiress, Eileen, daughter of Leonard F. Martin, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. He was back at Brooklands in 1933, driving a type 54 Bugatti, while his sister, Rita Christine Don (later Driver) (1901-1955), drove Freddie Dixon's Riley. 
In 1934 Don, now predominantly focused on his business interests, travelled to the Isle of Man for a light car road race in an MG Magnette. During a practice session on a public road on 28 May his vehicle collided with a saloon car, resulting in the death of his onboard MG mechanic, Francis Tayler of Cowley, Oxford. Don was seriously injured. After a coroner's inquest found by a majority verdict that Tayler's death was due to the 'culpable negligent driving' of Don, he was tried for manslaughter before the Manx assizes in July 1934, found guilty, and sentenced to four months' imprisonment. His appeal at the end of September was dismissed, and he was imprisoned in Douglas gaol, but was released on 10 December before completing his full term. 
While serving his sentence Don was the subject of a biography by the extreme right-wing sporting journalist James Wentworth Day, with an introduction by Malcolm Campbell, justifying speed record attempts both as advertisements for British manufacturing and as leading to important technical improvements in the cars driven by ordinary motorists. 
After the Second World War, Don was chairman and managing director of the motorcycle manufacturers US Concessionaires, retiring in 1965. His first marriage was dissolved and he married, second, on 14 April 1954 (by then using the middle name Ernest), Valerie Evelyn Mary ('b'. 1921/2), daughter of Ronald Farquhar Chapman, civil engineer. Resident in Chobham, Surrey, he died at St Peter's Hospital, Chertsey, on 29 August 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 97970


Guinness, Kenelm Edward Lee (1887-1937), businessman and motor racing driver, was born at 24 Great Cumberland Place, London, on 14 August 1887, the second son of Benjamin Lee Guinness (1842-1900), formerly captain in the Royal Horse Guards, and his wife, Henrietta Eliza St Lawrence (died 1935), daughter of Thomas St Lawrence, third earl of Howth. The brewer Sir Benjamin Lee Guinness, first baronet, was his grandfather. Lee Guinness was educated at home before entering Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1906, but he did not take a degree. 
Lee Guinness's introduction to motor racing came when he rode as a mechanic to his elder brother, Algernon Arthur St Lawrence Lee Guinness (who succeeded as third baronet in 1915), before driving on his own account. His first major race as a driver was the 1907 tourist trophy race on the Isle of Man, but he had to retire early when his Darracq's rear axle failed. In the same year he drove in the Belgian grand prix at the Circuit des Ardennes. His involvement with the closely related Sunbeam, Talbot, and Darracq marques continued throughout his racing career. By 1913 he had become an official works driver for Sunbeam along with Henry Segrave, while the company's chief designer, Louis Coatalen, became a friend and his advice assisted Lee Guinness's racing career. Driving a Sunbeam, he broke world records at Brooklands in October 1913, and won the Isle of Man tourist trophy in June 1914. 
As a serious driver, rather than one driving purely as a hobby, Lee Guinness was led to set up the KLG business to make sparking plugs (as they were then known). Experience in racing competitions had revealed weaknesses in the efficacy and efficiency of the spark plugs in use at the time. In 1912 Lee Guinness and his brother, Algernon, formed a company and sought to experiment and so improve the quality of spark plugs. They acquired premises in a disused pub, the Bald Faced Stag, at Putney Lane, Kingston Vale, on the London to Portsmouth road. Until about 1912 existing variants of porcelain-insulated spark plugs had performed reasonably well, but the advent of smaller, higher revving engines demonstrated the deficiencies in their overall performance. Lee Guinness experimented with various materials and eventually discovered that mica-insulated plugs were a distinct improvement on their predecessors. When the mica was stacked in sheets and compressed by the central electrode being tightened on a thread, a more effective performance was achieved. Production began in a small way, but by 1914 the firm was producing 4000 plugs per week. 
At the outbreak of war Lee Guinness joined the RNVR, but because of his engineering expertise he was asked by the government to return to civilian life and concentrate his efforts in spark plug production. The firm was incorporated as a limited company, the Robinhood Engineering Works Ltd, in June 1916. Expansion in production meant that by 1917 the pub premises had been replaced by an extended building in Putney Vale, employing some 1200 mainly women workers making plugs for military purposes. A patent had been obtained in 1916 for mica-insulated plugs for use in aero engines and such was their reliability that by the end of the war they were extensively used by the RAF. KLG was registered as a trade mark in 1918 and in 1919 Lee Guinness sold the firm's distribution rights to S. Smith & Sons (later Smith's Industries). 
KLG spark plugs were used in the majority of motoring, motorcycle or flying achievements in the inter-war years. They were inserted into several hundred special engines and in two cars which broke world speed records: Sir Henry Segrave's 'Golden Arrow' and Malcolm Campbell's 'Bluebird', both of which were constructed at the Putney Vale factory. 
After the First World War, Lee Guinness resumed motor racing, achieving a 120 m.p.h. lap at Brooklands in a Sunbeam in 1921. In that year, with Segrave and Campbell, he drove a Talbot-Darracq in the 200 mile race at Brooklands, and won it in 1922. In May 1922, in a Sunbeam, he set a new world record over a measured kilometre at Brooklands, with a mean speed after covering the course in both directions, from a standing start, of 133.75 m.p.h. His speed over a mile was 129.17 m.p.h. He also set a new Brooklands lap record of 123.39 m.p.h. On 20 September 1924 he won the Junior Car Club 200 mile race at Brooklands in a Talbot-Darracq. A week later, driving a Sunbeam at the San Sebastian grand prix, he was involved in a crash which left him unconscious with head injuries for several days. His riding mechanic, Tom Barrett, was killed. 
The accident left Lee Guinness suffering from serious headaches, and he withdrew from record-breaking attempts and track competitions. In 1927 he sold the remainder of his interests in the Robinhood Engineering Works to Smiths, though he retained an advisory role. He also took up a directorship of the Guinness brewery firm. He married on 26 January 1928 Josephine, the younger daughter of Sir Thomas Joseph Strangman, barrister. They had a son and a daughter. He continued work on inventions, including a hydro-pulsator to treat gums by a pulsating jet of water. His health seriously deteriorated and he was diagnosed as suffering from a neurosis which left him suffering from delusions that he was being followed continuously. His marriage was dissolved in 1936. After spending time in a nursing home he was found dead in his bedroom at his home, Melbury, Kingston Hill, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 10 April 1937. The cause of death was asphyxia and carbon monoxide poisoning from coal gas. A coroner's inquest recorded a verdict of suicide. He was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 97972


Bentley Boys (act. 1919-1931), racing drivers, were a team of motoring enthusiasts who achieved remarkable fame as drivers on the racetrack and as playboys off the track during the 1920s. They attained the climax of their collective career between 1927 and 1930 when they won four consecutive victories in the 24 hour race at Le Mans; in 1929 they took the first, second, third, and fourth places in the race. While their success as drivers endowed Bentley motor cars with a high reputation for speed, performance, and reliability, their lives away from racing bestowed glamour and excitement on the struggling young company. Mostly wealthy men, the Bentley Boys epitomized the old-school amateurism of British sport. Obsessive motorists, they competed out of bravado and patriotism rather than for money or careers. As W. O. Bentley admitted: 'The public liked to imagine them living in expensive Mayfair flats with several mistresses and, of course, several very fast Bentleys, drinking champagne in nightclubs, playing the horses and the Stock Exchange, and beating furiously around racing tracks at the weekend... this was not such an inaccurate picture' (Bentley, 109). 
Even at the racetrack the Bentley Boys maintained their hedonistic lifestyle. According to one of their mechanics 'the pit they used [at Le Mans] was just like a small hotel... they'd have all the wine, champagne, eats, chickens, and everything that went with it. They'd have the head chauffeurs, butlers, secretaries... hangers-on too, plenty of them, and the womenfolk -- some beautiful women too' (Nagle, 134). One of the more sober drivers complained that the women 'were great fun but some of them could be a nuisance at times. Their girl-friends got in the way' (ibid., 128). However, for the British public this heady mixture of glamour, success, and recklessness proved immensely appealing. In the anti-climax of the post-war years they brought a vicarious element of excitement into thousands of ordinary lives. 
The founding father was W. O. Bentley, who enjoyed extensive pre-war experience in improving the speed and performance of engines. After the war, during which he had developed faster and more powerful aero-engines in the technical department of the Royal Naval Air Service, W. O. decided to produce his own motor car. From the outset everything was personalized and eccentric. He launched the enterprise by means of a party at a restaurant in Regent Street where a handful of investors agreed to guarantee a mere $4000, taking shares at ten shillings each. W. O. drew on the skills of three acquaintances to get the project off the ground in 1919. 

Clive Gallop ['see below'] was an old friend from wartime. After demobilization from the Royal Flying Corps in the summer of 1919 he accepted W. O.'s invitation to help design the new car and became works manager. Later that year, when the 3 litre Bentley had been assembled, Gallop could not resist taking it out for a test run with the mechanics. All went well until the tail of his dust-coat became wrapped around the cardan shaft and he began to disappear into the chassis; fortunately he stopped the car and was unwound. 
A different but equally important role was played by Sammy Davis ['see below']. Like Gallop, Davis was one of the Edwardian motoring enthusiasts, but was unusual in being a talented author and artist as well as a good driver. Davis came into contact with W. O. when the latter and his brother, H. M. Bentley, were making motorcycles. By the end of the war, when he had worked as an inspector of aero-engines, Davis had lost most of his friends and family; he suffered a breakdown but found a welcome escape in the world of motoring. As he and W. O. had kept in touch Davis was in on the original idea of the Bentley car and, as a journalist for 'Autocar' in 1919, he was perfectly placed to publicize it. In January 1920 he gave the 3 litre model a test drive. The car, he wrote, 'had the air of a lithe, active, and speedy animal straining a little on the leash'. He loved its powers of acceleration: 'instantly the exhaust changed its note from a purr to a most menacing roar, the white ribbon of road streamed towards the car, while the back seats pressed hard on one's shoulder blades' (Foulkes, 31; Hillstead, 40). 
As Davis saw immediately, the Bentley was designed for the big, straight continental roads where its speed and endurance were assets, but it was far from clear that it had a market in Britain, where few roads were suitable. 'We used a special bit of the Edgware Road for speed tests', recalled one driver. 'It wasn't used much then for anything else' (Nagle, 63). In effect Bentleys were offering the thrill of owning a racing car to the enthusiastic private motorist who shared their disregard for British rules and speed limits. But the car was expensive, selling at $750 initially and rising to well over $1000 at a time when most cars were becoming cheaper. 
This made it imperative for Bentleys to demonstrate that their cars could compete with vehicles built for racing. Hence the need for a professional driver, a role that was brilliantly filled by Frank Clement ['see below']. Unusually among the Bentley Boys he combined the talents of a professional driver and a first-rate mechanic. An experienced installation engineer, he had been a road-tester for Vauxhall before accepting W. O.'s invitation to join Bentley as development manager in 1920. 'There was nobody like Clement... he was always thinking something up -- experimenting all the time' (Nagle, 56). Recognizing that the company's success would depend on the skill of their mechanics he created the team that was the basis of the company's reputation. It was the mechanics who first attracted the 'Bentley Boys' tag after their hard partying at the Isle of Man TT in 1922, but the press applied it to the drivers after their performances at Le Mans from the mid-1920s onwards. A very consistent driver, Clement never got flustered and was famed for the speed of his pit-work. In 1921 he drove the first Bentley to win at Brooklands, he led the first Bentley team in the Isle of Man TT in 1922, and drove in every 24 hour Le Mans race from 1923 to 1930, being placed in all of them. 
In the early years Clement's co-driver was John Duff ['see below'], a tall, imposing figure always recognizable in his plus fours, roll-neck sweater, and tweed jacket. After service in the First World War he was in search of a new challenge and found it in fast cars, initially Fiats. But Duff wanted more power, moved to Bentleys, and emphatically demonstrated their endurance and his own stamina when he took the British double twelve record of 2082 miles at 86 m.p.h. at Brooklands in September 1922. He drove single-handed in a seat that was effectively a steel bucket; after twelve hours, with a raw back, he had to be lifted out of the car and carried off to the Hand and Spear in Weybridge, where he was helped into a bath; but he was fit to race the next day. In 1923 Duff insisted on entering the Le Mans 24 hour race for the first time. W. O. was sceptical, both because of the risk to the Bentley prestige and because of the expense. However, Duff's performance, followed by his victory in 1924 with Clement, proved that Bentleys could match the continental machines that had been designed as racing cars, thereby greatly boosting their reputation. 
Duff's 1923 race brought Bentleys to the attention of an improbable member of the group, J. D. (Benjy) Benjafield ['see below']. A thickset, balding individual, with a sunny disposition, Benjafield was a respected consultant bacteriologist, with a practice in Wimpole Street. He also possessed several of the attributes of a Bentley Boy, being a sportsman, 'bon vivant', and the husband of a rich wife who allowed him to indulge in expensive hobbies. In October 1923 he bought a Bentley and found its performance so impressive that 'I began to fancy myself' (Foulkes, 69). In this sense Dr Benjafield represented the Bentley dream made reality. On visiting the Bentley service department in 1924 he passed some jovial remarks about wanting a motor that would go faster and was promptly invited to Brooklands for a speed test. Benjafield confessed to being terrified by the run he was given, but as the experts thought he had what it took to become a Bentley Boy they offered him the services of a mechanic if he entered a small club race. By coming in fourth Benjafield passed the test and in 1925 was invited to race at Le Mans. Seen as the company's most reliable driver, he participated at Le Mans every year from 1926 to 1929; his most celebrated achievement was the 1927 24 hour race when, following a seven-car pile-up in the White House Corner crash, he and Sammy Davis, representing the third Bentley team, brought their car home to victory. 
Another customer-turned-driver was Sir Henry (Tim) Birkin ['see below'], an iconic Bentley Boy on account of his wealth, charm, eccentricity, and reputation as a ladies' man. After serving as a pilot in the war Birkin found post-war Britain too dull and took up racing in 1921 to restore some excitement to his life. He bought his first Bentley in 1925, but did not race for the team until 1927 and remained a semi-detached member. He competed regularly at Brooklands, where he won the lap record at 135 m.p.h. in 1930. A striking figure dressed in a dark blue shirt, white overall trousers, and a spotted scarf that fluttered, dangerously, in the breeze, Birkin filled his cars with oranges that he sucked steadily during races. He suffered from a stutter that, along with his wealth, made him appealing to women. 'Life was never dull with Tim around', recalled W. O., 'if only because of the abundance and wide variety of his girlfriends' (http://maisonblanche.co.uk/Bentley_boys.html). But his philandering resulted in divorce in 1928. 
Birkin's impatience to win races often led him to take undue risks with his vehicles and throw away his chances of victory: 'he really was a car-wrecker -- he'd do anything', complained Clement (Nagle, 128). As a result Bentleys used him in one of their three teams to set the pace so as to wear down and smash up the cars of rival teams. In 1928 Birkin hit on the idea of supercharging his 4.5 litre Bentley, thereby giving rise to the legendary 'Blower Bentley'. The car had terrific acceleration but was heavy, clumsy, and prone to overheating. Bentley's mechanics rightly saw it as a mistake because it undermined the company's reputation for reliability, but Birkin obtained funds from Bernard Rubin and the Hon. Dorothy Paget, a wealthy, eccentric racehorse owner, to sustain his own team. The Blower was the epitome of Bentleys: a car beloved by the fanatics that was a business failure. 
Birkin betrayed all the characteristics of a male obsessive spiced by an angry patriotism. He elevated his hobby into a great national cause capable of solving Britain's ills, using his autobiography for a long rant about the lethargy of the British motor industry, the failure to develop British racing cars and to build adequate racing tracks, the ignorance and apathy of the public, and the victimization of drivers for exceeding speed limits on the roads (Birkin, 29-31, 113-15, 201-5). The political side of the Bentley Boys emerged most blatantly in 1926 when they formed the Brooklands Squad of crack drivers to help the authorities break the general strike. 
Yet despite the publicity generated by their drivers' exploits on the racetrack, Bentleys failed to thrive as a business. Up to 1931 only 3037 motor cars were actually produced. As a result they were expensive, being virtually handmade, and in any case not suitable for the ordinary driver or chauffeur. 'What we badly wanted', admitted the chief salesman, A. F. C. Hillstead, 'was a bread-and-butter model that would appeal to the ordinary motorist of average means'. From time to time H. M. Bentley would instruct the sales staff: 'Nothing to pay the wages with next Friday. Go out and get some money' (Hillstead, 73, 111). 
Eventually in 1925 W. O. decided to rectify the company's under-capitalization by recruiting a prominent Bentley owner who was a great lover of fast cars. Already a multi-millionaire, Woolf Barnato ['see below'], who had recently inherited an extra $1.5 million, was an obsessive sportsman and outstanding athlete who excelled at boxing, cricket, and golf as well as racing. Boyish but self-assured, he was attractive to women. He routinely spent $900 each week, bred horses, loved betting, and became a leading playboy of the post-war era. In 1925 Barnato was given a test drive in the new 6.5 litre Bentley with a view to buying the company. But though he was no businessman Barnato was shrewd and hated lending money. In May 1926 his accountants imposed tough terms, devaluing the original shares to one shilling. Barnato eventually lost about $90,000 on Bentley Motors but admitted, 'I can't grumble'. He gathered the Bentley Boys to his parties in Grosvenor Square and to his huge red-brick mansion, Ardenrun, on a 347 acre country estate at Lingfield in Surrey. Though not quite respectable, he made Bentleys even more fashionable by associating the motors with a range of celebrities from the prince of Wales to Tallulah Bankhead. But Barnato was also a talented and obsessive racing driver. In September 1925 he and Duff had smashed the world speed record over twenty-four hours at Montlhery near Paris. He won at Le Mans in 1928, 1929, and 1930 and his determination to keep the company in the forefront of racing sustained the Bentley Boys legend in the later 1920s. 
In the process Barnato brought several acquaintances into the team including George Duller ['see below'], who was a regular guest at Ardenrun and nightclub companion, and had been Barnato's co-driver at Le Mans in 1925. Duller was a small, muscular man who enjoyed a brilliant career as a jockey; when driving a car he would periodically rise in his seat as though riding a horse and he claimed that driving kept him fit between horse races. Other regular drivers of Barnato's cars were Jack Dunfee ['see below'] and his brother Clive Dunfee ['see below']. Jack, who enjoyed acting as court jester to the group, won the Brooklands six hour race in 1929 as co-driver to Barnato. 
Another rich Bentley Boy who drove with Barnato in the 1920s was Glen Kidston ['see below']. Quiet by Bentley Boy standards, Kidston was a born adventurer, completely fearless and notorious for refusing to obey orders when he came into the pits. From 1920 he took up motorcycle competitions, representing Britain as an amateur. In 1929 he came second in the international grand prix at Le Mans and second in the Irish grand prix; in 1930 he and Barnato won the 24 hours at Le Mans covering 1831 miles at an average speed of 76 m.p.h. In 1928 Barnato also persuaded Bentleys to include another friend, Bernard Rubin ['see below'], a wealthy Australian who lived in a Grosvenor Square house next door to Barnato. He first raced at Brooklands in 1928, and the same year, co-driving with Barnato, he won the 24 hour race at Le Mans. 
By 1929 Bentleys had achieved fame on the racetrack and produced a 3 litre, 4.5 litre, 6 litre, and finally an 8 litre model capable of accelerating to 100 m.p.h. in fifty seconds. Yet they were still not selling enough and the onset of the depression undermined the market for luxury goods. As the annual cost of racing stood at anything between $2412 in 1925-6 and $3369 in 1927-8, substantial sums for a cash-strapped company, it was decided, after the sweeping success at Le Mans in 1930, to cut costs by withdrawing from racing to concentrate on production. Yet even this was insufficient and in June 1931 Barnato decided not to risk any more money. The company went into liquidation and was bought by Rolls-Royce. 
The Bentley name lived on, but by 1932 all but Birkin had given up racing. The Bentley Boys numbers dwindled, often through untimely and violent deaths: Kidston in a flying accident in 1931, Dunfee in a crash at Brooklands in 1932, Birkin from an infection from burns sustained in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933, and Rubin following surgery in 1936. Frank Clement retired from racing after his marriage in 1930. 
As Rolls-Royce had acquired the assets of Bentley Motors all the cups and trophies won by the drivers were carried off to Derby. Barnato, however, took his trophies and after a protracted argument Clement was allowed to keep one of his. It later transpired that the rest had simply been sold off for their value as silver. This mean-spirited act on the part of Rolls-Royce somehow encapsulated the story of the Bentley Boys, who had blazed brilliantly across the 1920s scene only to peter out amid the gathering gloom of the 1930s. 
The Bentley team also included, at various times, Herbert (Bertie) Kensington Moir (1899-1961) and the French drivers Jean Chassagne and Baron Andre d'Erlanger, while those associated with them included their chronicler Arthur Finch Clitheroe Hillstead (1894-1975). The principal figures are listed below. 

(Reginald) Clive Gallop (1892-1960), engineer, was born at Mena House, the Pyramids, Cairo, Egypt, on 4 February 1892, the son of Reginald George Gallop (died 1911), of Wimbledon, a barrister, and his wife, Helen Marion, 'nee' Duffield (died 1939). The diplomat and authority on Iberian folk culture Rodney Alexander Gallop (1901-1948) was his younger brother. After education at Harrow School (1905-10), he became a consulting engineer and pre-war racing driver. In the First World War he was commissioned in the Scottish rifles, gained a Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate at Hendon in October 1915, and went on to serve in the Royal Flying Corps. As well as designing cars for Bentley he built cars for Count Zborowski. He married on 29 September 1923 Barbara, daughter of Robert Dobb, with whom he had a daughter. Having divorced his first wife he married second, on 22 October 1932, Thora, daughter of Walter Waterhouse; they had two daughters and a son. In the Second World War he held the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the auxiliary military pioneer corps. Latterly resident in Leatherhead, Surrey, he was dead on arrival at Dorking General Hospital, on 7 September 1960, after sustaining a fractured cervical spine as a result of being thrown from a skidding motor car. 

Sydney Charles Houghton Davis (1887-1981), journalist and racing driver, was born at 68 Philbeach Gardens, Brompton, London, on 7 January 1887, the son of Edwin Charles Davis, tea merchant, and his wife, Georgina Maud Fielding, 'nee' Houghton. After Westminster School he attended the Slade School of Art, and then served an apprenticeship at the Daimler Motor Works (1903-7). He became a journalist and illustrator on motoring journals, starting the periodical 'Automobile Engineer' with A. Ludlow Clayden. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, where he served in the armoured car section. On 6 June 1917 he married Rosamund Sylvia Evelyn, daughter of Joseph Pollard, surgeon. After the war he became sports editor of 'Autocar', and went on to write a string of books on motor sport, notably 'Motor Racing' (1932). He was also a significant driver in his own right, competing at Brooklands in a variety of marques in the 1920s, and participating in rallies, hill climbs, and veteran car events in the 1930s. In the Second World War he served in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in north-west Europe, with the rank of major. His first marriage was dissolved and he married, second, on 5 January 1957, Susanna Aubrey-Hall ('b'. 1937/8), engineering tracer, daughter of John Leo Aubrey-Hall, foundry engineer. He died in a fire at his home, Sutton Lodge, Clandon Road, Guildford, Surrey, on 9 January 1981, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 

Frank Charles Clement (1886-1970), engineer and racing driver, was born at 33 High Street, Tring, Hertfordshire, on 15 June 1886, the second son in the family of at least two sons and five daughters of John Tripp Clement (died 1909), a jeweller and watchmaker, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Elliott (died 1890). He trained as a mechanical engineer and served with the Royal Engineers during the First World War. As well as his successes at Le Mans, he competed at Brooklands where, in October 1929, he and Jack Barclay won the 500 mile race, and in May 1930 with Barnato he won the double twelve, covering 2080 miles in twenty-four hours at an average speed of 85.68 m.p.h. On 3 August 1930 he married Kathleen Irene, daughter of William Smith, contractor. Latterly resident at Linnell Dene, Hexham, Northumberland, he died at St Mary's Hospital, Stannington, on 15 February 1970. 

John Francis Duff (1895-1958), racing driver, was born in Kiukiang, China, in January 1895, the son of John Lindlay Duff. His parents were missionaries, originally from Canada, where he was educated at Hamilton, Ontario. In March 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Berkshires, where he became known for leading from the front. He married, on 14 March 1917, Clarissa, daughter of John Henry Lindsey, brewer. After the war he became a car dealer in London, with an agency for Bentley. He moved to Los Angeles in 1926, where he ran a fencing school, but returned to Britain, where he was a horse breeder. He died at Whipps Cross Hospital, Essex, on 9 January 1958, from a fracture of the spine and crushed spinal cord after falling from a horse which he was training for a showjumping event. 

Joseph Dudley Benjafield (1887-1957), bacteriologist and racing driver, was born at Bletchenden, Church Street, Edmonton, on 6 August 1887, the son of William Barnett Benjafield (1856-1921), a general practitioner, and his wife, Miriam Alice, 'nee' Wilkinson. Educated at Marlborough College and London University, he qualified in medicine in 1909 and obtained the MD in 1912. Specializing in bacteriology and clinical pathology, he held appointments at the Western Skin Hospital, the Kensington General Hospital, and All Saints' Hospital for Genito-Urinary Diseases. He married on 28 July 1914 Elvera Helen (1886-1983), daughter of Gustave Caesar Edward Gelardi, director of companies. They had one son. In 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Army Medical Corps. By the 1920s he had become a respected consultant bacteriologist at St George's Hospital in London with a practice in Wimpole Street. He died at 78 Harley Street, London, on 21 January 1957 and was cremated at Enfield crematorium. 

Sir Henry Ralph Stanley Birkin, third baronet (1896-1933), racing driver, was born at Magdala Road, Basford, Nottingham, on 26 July 1896, the second son of Sir Thomas Stanley Birkin (1857-1931), second baronet, a lace manufacturer, and his wife, the Hon. Margaret Diana Hopetoun, 'nee' Chetwynd (died 1927). He had been known as Tim since a perceptive sister dubbed him 'Tiger Tim'. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Warwickshire regiment and later served in the Royal Air Force. He married on 12 July 1921 Audrey Clara Lilian, daughter of Sir Thomas Paul Latham, first baronet, textile manufacturer; they had two daughters. His wife divorced him in 1928. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in 1931. He wrote 'Full Throttle' (1932). He was injured in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933 when he burned his forearms when refuelling; this resulted in septicaemia which led to blood poisoning, from which he died in a London nursing home, at 7 Portland Place, on 22 June 1933. He was buried at Blakeney churchyard, Norfolk. His uncle succeeded him as fourth baronet. 

(Joel) Woolf Barnato (1895-1948), racing driver, was born at 27 St James's Place, Westminster, on 27 September 1895, the son of the wealthy South African diamond merchant Barnett Isaacs (Barney) Barnato (1852-1897) and his wife, Fannie Christiana, 'nee' Bees. Educated at Charterhouse School, he was admitted to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1913 to study for an ordinary BA degree, specializing in law. His university career was ended by the First World War, when he held the rank of acting captain in the Royal Field Artillery. He married at Marylebone register office on 7 December 1915 Dorothy Maitland (1892/3-1961), daughter of H. V. Falk of New York, with whom he had two surviving daughters, the younger of whom, Diana Barnato Walker, became a noted aviator. In May 1918, by deed poll, he renounced the Christian name Joel. He left his wife in 1921 and they subsequently divorced; she married Richard Butler Wainwright and, as Dorothy Maitland Wainwright, became a noted breeder of Guernsey cattle. As well as racing Bentley cars, he took part in motor boat racing, in 1925 winning the Duke of York's trophy on the Thames in his boat 'Ardenrun Manor'. He married second, in 1932, Jacqueline, 'nee' Quealy, of San Francisco, with whom he had two sons. He was commissioned pilot officer in the RAF in September 1940 and held the rank of wing commander. In December 1947 he married Joan Isachsen. He died from a coronary thrombosis at 90 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, on 27 July 1948, following an operation for bowel cancer. After a funeral service at St Jude's, Englefield Green, Surrey, he was buried in the churchyard there. 

George Edward Duller (1891-1962), racing driver and jockey, was born at 63 Edward Street, Plaistow, West Ham, on 26 January 1891, the son of George Henry Duller (1865-1930), a cab proprietor and later a trainer of racehorses at Epsom, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Green. He became a steeplechase jockey. During the First World War he was an air mechanic. On 17 September 1918 he married, at Epsom, Bessie Grace, the daughter of a racehorse trainer, George Godfrey Hyams. They had a daughter. Regarded as an 'outstanding hurdle race jockey' ('The Times', 8 Aug 1962), he rode Trespasser to three consecutive imperial cup wins at Sandown Park between 1920 and 1922. After retiring from riding he became a trainer. He died at his home, 78 Hookfield, Epsom, on 6 August 1962. 

Jack Lawson Dunfee (1901-1975), racing driver, was born at Albury, Putney Hill, London, on 19 October 1901, the second of four sons of Vickers Dunfee (1861-1927), a wine merchant and prominent figure in the corporation of the City of London, and his wife, Caroline Elizabeth, 'nee' Froy (1870-1922). He gave up racing after his brother's death in 1932. On 15 November 1939 he married the film actress Sandra Storme (1914-1979), born Eileen Violet Needham, daughter of Percy Needham, company director, and former wife of Arthur Griffiths. Jack Dunfee and his first wife divorced and she married Richard Francis Yarde-Buller, fourth Baron Churston. Dunfee married, second, on 19 July 1953, Margaret Audrey, daughter of John Francis White, company director, and third, in 1975, Jennifer Helen Oliver. He died at his home, Wychwood Manor, Ascott-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire, on 14 September 1975. His younger brother (Beresford) Clive Dunfee (1904-1932), racing driver, was born at 24 Gwendolen Avenue, Putney, on 18 June 1904. He became a member of the London stock exchange and married, on 11 December 1930, the actress Jane Baxter (1909-1996), who was born Feodora Kathleen Alice Forde, daughter of Henry Bligh Forde, civil engineer. During the 500 mile race at Brooklands on 26 September 1932, Clive Dunfee took over from his brother Jack driving Barnato's 8 litre Bentley. While overtaking another vehicle at a speed of 126 m.p.h. he went over the top of the high banking for which Brooklands was notorious, was thrown from the car, and was killed immediately. He was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 

(George Pearson) Glen Kidston (1899-1931), racing driver and aviator, was born at 54 Cromwell Road, Brompton, London, on 23 June 1899, the elder son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Archibald Glen Kidston (died 1913), a captain in the 3rd Royal Highlanders, and his wife, Helene Adeline Blanche, 'nee' Chapman. His family had established a firm of metal merchants in Glasgow. After his father's death, his mother married the naval officer and pioneer motorist and aviator Sir Walter Windham. Educated at Ludgrove School, Kidston passed through the Royal Naval College at Osborne (1912) and Dartmouth (1914). His life became a succession of dramatic escapes starting in September 1914 when, as a sixteen-year-old naval cadet, he survived two and a half hours in the sea when his cruiser, 'Hogue', sank after being torpedoed. Interned in Holland, he was repatriated and returned to naval service in the 'Orion' until transferring to submarines late in 1917. He was promoted to lieutenant in 1920, serving in submarines, and in December 1926 was given command of submarine H48 at Portsmouth. He retired from the navy with the rank of lieutenant-commander in 1928. He married on 25 November 1925 Nancy Miriel Denise (1906-1997), daughter of Edward Rowland Soames. They had a son. Debts incurred by her, while still a minor, were the subject of a high court action brought in 1927 by the firm of court dressmakers who had supplied her wedding trousseau. 
Kidston competed in motorcycle racing events from 1921, including the Ulster tourist trophy in 1928, when he crashed into a hedge at 95 m.p.h. In May 1927 he had survived an accident in the Solent when the motor boat he was racing split in two at 50 knots. He took up flying in 1928, gained his licence in April 1928, and became joint owner of a Fokker plane. Flying it on a big game expedition in east Africa he survived a landing in a swamp. In November 1929 he was the only survivor when a Junker airliner, on which he was a passenger from Croydon aerodrome to Amsterdam, crashed in dense fog near Caterham, Surrey. He was a keen promoter of commercial aviation and in April 1931 flew from Netheravon, Wiltshire, to Cape Town in six days to demonstrate the viability of a fast air postal service within the British empire. Kidston's luck finally ran out on a flight from Johannesburg to Durban, in connection with the affairs of Union Airways in South Africa, of which he was a financial backer. Crossing the Drakensberg mountains on 5 May 1931, the aeroplane disintegrated in a violent storm near Van Reenan, Natal, and Kidston and his co-pilot T. A. Gladstone were killed. It was later stated that Kidston had overloaded the plane with a heavy tea chest. Their bodies were returned to Britain, where Kidston was buried at Glasbury church, Breconshire. 

Bernard Rubin (1896-1936), motorist and aviator, was born at Carlton, Melbourne, Australia, on 6 December 1896, the eldest son of Mark Rubin (1867?-1919), a pearl merchant, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Davis. Educated at University College School, Hampstead, he served in the Royal Garrison Artillery in France where he was so severely wounded that he could not walk for three years. Subsequently he took up big game hunting, motor racing, and flying. On 22 March 1934 he set out from Lympne in a de Havilland Leopard Moth to fly to Australia, and starting the homeward flight from Darwin on 23 April 1934 reached Pevensey on 1 May. On 28 March 1935 he married, at the British consulate in Paris, Audrey Mary, eldest daughter of C. R. Simpson. He died at his home, the Old Cloth Hall, Cranbrook, Kent, on 27 June 1936, having contracted pulmonary tuberculosis following an operation for the collapse of a lung cavity. 


@@@@@


doc= 97973


Bentley Boys (act. 1919-1931), racing drivers, were a team of motoring enthusiasts who achieved remarkable fame as drivers on the racetrack and as playboys off the track during the 1920s. They attained the climax of their collective career between 1927 and 1930 when they won four consecutive victories in the 24 hour race at Le Mans; in 1929 they took the first, second, third, and fourth places in the race. While their success as drivers endowed Bentley motor cars with a high reputation for speed, performance, and reliability, their lives away from racing bestowed glamour and excitement on the struggling young company. Mostly wealthy men, the Bentley Boys epitomized the old-school amateurism of British sport. Obsessive motorists, they competed out of bravado and patriotism rather than for money or careers. As W. O. Bentley admitted: 'The public liked to imagine them living in expensive Mayfair flats with several mistresses and, of course, several very fast Bentleys, drinking champagne in nightclubs, playing the horses and the Stock Exchange, and beating furiously around racing tracks at the weekend... this was not such an inaccurate picture' (Bentley, 109). 
Even at the racetrack the Bentley Boys maintained their hedonistic lifestyle. According to one of their mechanics 'the pit they used [at Le Mans] was just like a small hotel... they'd have all the wine, champagne, eats, chickens, and everything that went with it. They'd have the head chauffeurs, butlers, secretaries... hangers-on too, plenty of them, and the womenfolk -- some beautiful women too' (Nagle, 134). One of the more sober drivers complained that the women 'were great fun but some of them could be a nuisance at times. Their girl-friends got in the way' (ibid., 128). However, for the British public this heady mixture of glamour, success, and recklessness proved immensely appealing. In the anti-climax of the post-war years they brought a vicarious element of excitement into thousands of ordinary lives. 
The founding father was W. O. Bentley, who enjoyed extensive pre-war experience in improving the speed and performance of engines. After the war, during which he had developed faster and more powerful aero-engines in the technical department of the Royal Naval Air Service, W. O. decided to produce his own motor car. From the outset everything was personalized and eccentric. He launched the enterprise by means of a party at a restaurant in Regent Street where a handful of investors agreed to guarantee a mere $4000, taking shares at ten shillings each. W. O. drew on the skills of three acquaintances to get the project off the ground in 1919. 

Clive Gallop ['see below'] was an old friend from wartime. After demobilization from the Royal Flying Corps in the summer of 1919 he accepted W. O.'s invitation to help design the new car and became works manager. Later that year, when the 3 litre Bentley had been assembled, Gallop could not resist taking it out for a test run with the mechanics. All went well until the tail of his dust-coat became wrapped around the cardan shaft and he began to disappear into the chassis; fortunately he stopped the car and was unwound. 
A different but equally important role was played by Sammy Davis ['see below']. Like Gallop, Davis was one of the Edwardian motoring enthusiasts, but was unusual in being a talented author and artist as well as a good driver. Davis came into contact with W. O. when the latter and his brother, H. M. Bentley, were making motorcycles. By the end of the war, when he had worked as an inspector of aero-engines, Davis had lost most of his friends and family; he suffered a breakdown but found a welcome escape in the world of motoring. As he and W. O. had kept in touch Davis was in on the original idea of the Bentley car and, as a journalist for 'Autocar' in 1919, he was perfectly placed to publicize it. In January 1920 he gave the 3 litre model a test drive. The car, he wrote, 'had the air of a lithe, active, and speedy animal straining a little on the leash'. He loved its powers of acceleration: 'instantly the exhaust changed its note from a purr to a most menacing roar, the white ribbon of road streamed towards the car, while the back seats pressed hard on one's shoulder blades' (Foulkes, 31; Hillstead, 40). 
As Davis saw immediately, the Bentley was designed for the big, straight continental roads where its speed and endurance were assets, but it was far from clear that it had a market in Britain, where few roads were suitable. 'We used a special bit of the Edgware Road for speed tests', recalled one driver. 'It wasn't used much then for anything else' (Nagle, 63). In effect Bentleys were offering the thrill of owning a racing car to the enthusiastic private motorist who shared their disregard for British rules and speed limits. But the car was expensive, selling at $750 initially and rising to well over $1000 at a time when most cars were becoming cheaper. 
This made it imperative for Bentleys to demonstrate that their cars could compete with vehicles built for racing. Hence the need for a professional driver, a role that was brilliantly filled by Frank Clement ['see below']. Unusually among the Bentley Boys he combined the talents of a professional driver and a first-rate mechanic. An experienced installation engineer, he had been a road-tester for Vauxhall before accepting W. O.'s invitation to join Bentley as development manager in 1920. 'There was nobody like Clement... he was always thinking something up -- experimenting all the time' (Nagle, 56). Recognizing that the company's success would depend on the skill of their mechanics he created the team that was the basis of the company's reputation. It was the mechanics who first attracted the 'Bentley Boys' tag after their hard partying at the Isle of Man TT in 1922, but the press applied it to the drivers after their performances at Le Mans from the mid-1920s onwards. A very consistent driver, Clement never got flustered and was famed for the speed of his pit-work. In 1921 he drove the first Bentley to win at Brooklands, he led the first Bentley team in the Isle of Man TT in 1922, and drove in every 24 hour Le Mans race from 1923 to 1930, being placed in all of them. 
In the early years Clement's co-driver was John Duff ['see below'], a tall, imposing figure always recognizable in his plus fours, roll-neck sweater, and tweed jacket. After service in the First World War he was in search of a new challenge and found it in fast cars, initially Fiats. But Duff wanted more power, moved to Bentleys, and emphatically demonstrated their endurance and his own stamina when he took the British double twelve record of 2082 miles at 86 m.p.h. at Brooklands in September 1922. He drove single-handed in a seat that was effectively a steel bucket; after twelve hours, with a raw back, he had to be lifted out of the car and carried off to the Hand and Spear in Weybridge, where he was helped into a bath; but he was fit to race the next day. In 1923 Duff insisted on entering the Le Mans 24 hour race for the first time. W. O. was sceptical, both because of the risk to the Bentley prestige and because of the expense. However, Duff's performance, followed by his victory in 1924 with Clement, proved that Bentleys could match the continental machines that had been designed as racing cars, thereby greatly boosting their reputation. 
Duff's 1923 race brought Bentleys to the attention of an improbable member of the group, J. D. (Benjy) Benjafield ['see below']. A thickset, balding individual, with a sunny disposition, Benjafield was a respected consultant bacteriologist, with a practice in Wimpole Street. He also possessed several of the attributes of a Bentley Boy, being a sportsman, 'bon vivant', and the husband of a rich wife who allowed him to indulge in expensive hobbies. In October 1923 he bought a Bentley and found its performance so impressive that 'I began to fancy myself' (Foulkes, 69). In this sense Dr Benjafield represented the Bentley dream made reality. On visiting the Bentley service department in 1924 he passed some jovial remarks about wanting a motor that would go faster and was promptly invited to Brooklands for a speed test. Benjafield confessed to being terrified by the run he was given, but as the experts thought he had what it took to become a Bentley Boy they offered him the services of a mechanic if he entered a small club race. By coming in fourth Benjafield passed the test and in 1925 was invited to race at Le Mans. Seen as the company's most reliable driver, he participated at Le Mans every year from 1926 to 1929; his most celebrated achievement was the 1927 24 hour race when, following a seven-car pile-up in the White House Corner crash, he and Sammy Davis, representing the third Bentley team, brought their car home to victory. 
Another customer-turned-driver was Sir Henry (Tim) Birkin ['see below'], an iconic Bentley Boy on account of his wealth, charm, eccentricity, and reputation as a ladies' man. After serving as a pilot in the war Birkin found post-war Britain too dull and took up racing in 1921 to restore some excitement to his life. He bought his first Bentley in 1925, but did not race for the team until 1927 and remained a semi-detached member. He competed regularly at Brooklands, where he won the lap record at 135 m.p.h. in 1930. A striking figure dressed in a dark blue shirt, white overall trousers, and a spotted scarf that fluttered, dangerously, in the breeze, Birkin filled his cars with oranges that he sucked steadily during races. He suffered from a stutter that, along with his wealth, made him appealing to women. 'Life was never dull with Tim around', recalled W. O., 'if only because of the abundance and wide variety of his girlfriends' (http://maisonblanche.co.uk/Bentley_boys.html). But his philandering resulted in divorce in 1928. 
Birkin's impatience to win races often led him to take undue risks with his vehicles and throw away his chances of victory: 'he really was a car-wrecker -- he'd do anything', complained Clement (Nagle, 128). As a result Bentleys used him in one of their three teams to set the pace so as to wear down and smash up the cars of rival teams. In 1928 Birkin hit on the idea of supercharging his 4.5 litre Bentley, thereby giving rise to the legendary 'Blower Bentley'. The car had terrific acceleration but was heavy, clumsy, and prone to overheating. Bentley's mechanics rightly saw it as a mistake because it undermined the company's reputation for reliability, but Birkin obtained funds from Bernard Rubin and the Hon. Dorothy Paget, a wealthy, eccentric racehorse owner, to sustain his own team. The Blower was the epitome of Bentleys: a car beloved by the fanatics that was a business failure. 
Birkin betrayed all the characteristics of a male obsessive spiced by an angry patriotism. He elevated his hobby into a great national cause capable of solving Britain's ills, using his autobiography for a long rant about the lethargy of the British motor industry, the failure to develop British racing cars and to build adequate racing tracks, the ignorance and apathy of the public, and the victimization of drivers for exceeding speed limits on the roads (Birkin, 29-31, 113-15, 201-5). The political side of the Bentley Boys emerged most blatantly in 1926 when they formed the Brooklands Squad of crack drivers to help the authorities break the general strike. 
Yet despite the publicity generated by their drivers' exploits on the racetrack, Bentleys failed to thrive as a business. Up to 1931 only 3037 motor cars were actually produced. As a result they were expensive, being virtually handmade, and in any case not suitable for the ordinary driver or chauffeur. 'What we badly wanted', admitted the chief salesman, A. F. C. Hillstead, 'was a bread-and-butter model that would appeal to the ordinary motorist of average means'. From time to time H. M. Bentley would instruct the sales staff: 'Nothing to pay the wages with next Friday. Go out and get some money' (Hillstead, 73, 111). 
Eventually in 1925 W. O. decided to rectify the company's under-capitalization by recruiting a prominent Bentley owner who was a great lover of fast cars. Already a multi-millionaire, Woolf Barnato ['see below'], who had recently inherited an extra $1.5 million, was an obsessive sportsman and outstanding athlete who excelled at boxing, cricket, and golf as well as racing. Boyish but self-assured, he was attractive to women. He routinely spent $900 each week, bred horses, loved betting, and became a leading playboy of the post-war era. In 1925 Barnato was given a test drive in the new 6.5 litre Bentley with a view to buying the company. But though he was no businessman Barnato was shrewd and hated lending money. In May 1926 his accountants imposed tough terms, devaluing the original shares to one shilling. Barnato eventually lost about $90,000 on Bentley Motors but admitted, 'I can't grumble'. He gathered the Bentley Boys to his parties in Grosvenor Square and to his huge red-brick mansion, Ardenrun, on a 347 acre country estate at Lingfield in Surrey. Though not quite respectable, he made Bentleys even more fashionable by associating the motors with a range of celebrities from the prince of Wales to Tallulah Bankhead. But Barnato was also a talented and obsessive racing driver. In September 1925 he and Duff had smashed the world speed record over twenty-four hours at Montlhery near Paris. He won at Le Mans in 1928, 1929, and 1930 and his determination to keep the company in the forefront of racing sustained the Bentley Boys legend in the later 1920s. 
In the process Barnato brought several acquaintances into the team including George Duller ['see below'], who was a regular guest at Ardenrun and nightclub companion, and had been Barnato's co-driver at Le Mans in 1925. Duller was a small, muscular man who enjoyed a brilliant career as a jockey; when driving a car he would periodically rise in his seat as though riding a horse and he claimed that driving kept him fit between horse races. Other regular drivers of Barnato's cars were Jack Dunfee ['see below'] and his brother Clive Dunfee ['see below']. Jack, who enjoyed acting as court jester to the group, won the Brooklands six hour race in 1929 as co-driver to Barnato. 
Another rich Bentley Boy who drove with Barnato in the 1920s was Glen Kidston ['see below']. Quiet by Bentley Boy standards, Kidston was a born adventurer, completely fearless and notorious for refusing to obey orders when he came into the pits. From 1920 he took up motorcycle competitions, representing Britain as an amateur. In 1929 he came second in the international grand prix at Le Mans and second in the Irish grand prix; in 1930 he and Barnato won the 24 hours at Le Mans covering 1831 miles at an average speed of 76 m.p.h. In 1928 Barnato also persuaded Bentleys to include another friend, Bernard Rubin ['see below'], a wealthy Australian who lived in a Grosvenor Square house next door to Barnato. He first raced at Brooklands in 1928, and the same year, co-driving with Barnato, he won the 24 hour race at Le Mans. 
By 1929 Bentleys had achieved fame on the racetrack and produced a 3 litre, 4.5 litre, 6 litre, and finally an 8 litre model capable of accelerating to 100 m.p.h. in fifty seconds. Yet they were still not selling enough and the onset of the depression undermined the market for luxury goods. As the annual cost of racing stood at anything between $2412 in 1925-6 and $3369 in 1927-8, substantial sums for a cash-strapped company, it was decided, after the sweeping success at Le Mans in 1930, to cut costs by withdrawing from racing to concentrate on production. Yet even this was insufficient and in June 1931 Barnato decided not to risk any more money. The company went into liquidation and was bought by Rolls-Royce. 
The Bentley name lived on, but by 1932 all but Birkin had given up racing. The Bentley Boys numbers dwindled, often through untimely and violent deaths: Kidston in a flying accident in 1931, Dunfee in a crash at Brooklands in 1932, Birkin from an infection from burns sustained in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933, and Rubin following surgery in 1936. Frank Clement retired from racing after his marriage in 1930. 
As Rolls-Royce had acquired the assets of Bentley Motors all the cups and trophies won by the drivers were carried off to Derby. Barnato, however, took his trophies and after a protracted argument Clement was allowed to keep one of his. It later transpired that the rest had simply been sold off for their value as silver. This mean-spirited act on the part of Rolls-Royce somehow encapsulated the story of the Bentley Boys, who had blazed brilliantly across the 1920s scene only to peter out amid the gathering gloom of the 1930s. 
The Bentley team also included, at various times, Herbert (Bertie) Kensington Moir (1899-1961) and the French drivers Jean Chassagne and Baron Andre d'Erlanger, while those associated with them included their chronicler Arthur Finch Clitheroe Hillstead (1894-1975). The principal figures are listed below. 

(Reginald) Clive Gallop (1892-1960), engineer, was born at Mena House, the Pyramids, Cairo, Egypt, on 4 February 1892, the son of Reginald George Gallop (died 1911), of Wimbledon, a barrister, and his wife, Helen Marion, 'nee' Duffield (died 1939). The diplomat and authority on Iberian folk culture Rodney Alexander Gallop (1901-1948) was his younger brother. After education at Harrow School (1905-10), he became a consulting engineer and pre-war racing driver. In the First World War he was commissioned in the Scottish rifles, gained a Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate at Hendon in October 1915, and went on to serve in the Royal Flying Corps. As well as designing cars for Bentley he built cars for Count Zborowski. He married on 29 September 1923 Barbara, daughter of Robert Dobb, with whom he had a daughter. Having divorced his first wife he married second, on 22 October 1932, Thora, daughter of Walter Waterhouse; they had two daughters and a son. In the Second World War he held the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the auxiliary military pioneer corps. Latterly resident in Leatherhead, Surrey, he was dead on arrival at Dorking General Hospital, on 7 September 1960, after sustaining a fractured cervical spine as a result of being thrown from a skidding motor car. 

Sydney Charles Houghton Davis (1887-1981), journalist and racing driver, was born at 68 Philbeach Gardens, Brompton, London, on 7 January 1887, the son of Edwin Charles Davis, tea merchant, and his wife, Georgina Maud Fielding, 'nee' Houghton. After Westminster School he attended the Slade School of Art, and then served an apprenticeship at the Daimler Motor Works (1903-7). He became a journalist and illustrator on motoring journals, starting the periodical 'Automobile Engineer' with A. Ludlow Clayden. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, where he served in the armoured car section. On 6 June 1917 he married Rosamund Sylvia Evelyn, daughter of Joseph Pollard, surgeon. After the war he became sports editor of 'Autocar', and went on to write a string of books on motor sport, notably 'Motor Racing' (1932). He was also a significant driver in his own right, competing at Brooklands in a variety of marques in the 1920s, and participating in rallies, hill climbs, and veteran car events in the 1930s. In the Second World War he served in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in north-west Europe, with the rank of major. His first marriage was dissolved and he married, second, on 5 January 1957, Susanna Aubrey-Hall ('b'. 1937/8), engineering tracer, daughter of John Leo Aubrey-Hall, foundry engineer. He died in a fire at his home, Sutton Lodge, Clandon Road, Guildford, Surrey, on 9 January 1981, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 

Frank Charles Clement (1886-1970), engineer and racing driver, was born at 33 High Street, Tring, Hertfordshire, on 15 June 1886, the second son in the family of at least two sons and five daughters of John Tripp Clement (died 1909), a jeweller and watchmaker, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Elliott (died 1890). He trained as a mechanical engineer and served with the Royal Engineers during the First World War. As well as his successes at Le Mans, he competed at Brooklands where, in October 1929, he and Jack Barclay won the 500 mile race, and in May 1930 with Barnato he won the double twelve, covering 2080 miles in twenty-four hours at an average speed of 85.68 m.p.h. On 3 August 1930 he married Kathleen Irene, daughter of William Smith, contractor. Latterly resident at Linnell Dene, Hexham, Northumberland, he died at St Mary's Hospital, Stannington, on 15 February 1970. 

John Francis Duff (1895-1958), racing driver, was born in Kiukiang, China, in January 1895, the son of John Lindlay Duff. His parents were missionaries, originally from Canada, where he was educated at Hamilton, Ontario. In March 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Berkshires, where he became known for leading from the front. He married, on 14 March 1917, Clarissa, daughter of John Henry Lindsey, brewer. After the war he became a car dealer in London, with an agency for Bentley. He moved to Los Angeles in 1926, where he ran a fencing school, but returned to Britain, where he was a horse breeder. He died at Whipps Cross Hospital, Essex, on 9 January 1958, from a fracture of the spine and crushed spinal cord after falling from a horse which he was training for a showjumping event. 

Joseph Dudley Benjafield (1887-1957), bacteriologist and racing driver, was born at Bletchenden, Church Street, Edmonton, on 6 August 1887, the son of William Barnett Benjafield (1856-1921), a general practitioner, and his wife, Miriam Alice, 'nee' Wilkinson. Educated at Marlborough College and London University, he qualified in medicine in 1909 and obtained the MD in 1912. Specializing in bacteriology and clinical pathology, he held appointments at the Western Skin Hospital, the Kensington General Hospital, and All Saints' Hospital for Genito-Urinary Diseases. He married on 28 July 1914 Elvera Helen (1886-1983), daughter of Gustave Caesar Edward Gelardi, director of companies. They had one son. In 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Army Medical Corps. By the 1920s he had become a respected consultant bacteriologist at St George's Hospital in London with a practice in Wimpole Street. He died at 78 Harley Street, London, on 21 January 1957 and was cremated at Enfield crematorium. 

Sir Henry Ralph Stanley Birkin, third baronet (1896-1933), racing driver, was born at Magdala Road, Basford, Nottingham, on 26 July 1896, the second son of Sir Thomas Stanley Birkin (1857-1931), second baronet, a lace manufacturer, and his wife, the Hon. Margaret Diana Hopetoun, 'nee' Chetwynd (died 1927). He had been known as Tim since a perceptive sister dubbed him 'Tiger Tim'. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Warwickshire regiment and later served in the Royal Air Force. He married on 12 July 1921 Audrey Clara Lilian, daughter of Sir Thomas Paul Latham, first baronet, textile manufacturer; they had two daughters. His wife divorced him in 1928. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in 1931. He wrote 'Full Throttle' (1932). He was injured in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933 when he burned his forearms when refuelling; this resulted in septicaemia which led to blood poisoning, from which he died in a London nursing home, at 7 Portland Place, on 22 June 1933. He was buried at Blakeney churchyard, Norfolk. His uncle succeeded him as fourth baronet. 

(Joel) Woolf Barnato (1895-1948), racing driver, was born at 27 St James's Place, Westminster, on 27 September 1895, the son of the wealthy South African diamond merchant Barnett Isaacs (Barney) Barnato (1852-1897) and his wife, Fannie Christiana, 'nee' Bees. Educated at Charterhouse School, he was admitted to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1913 to study for an ordinary BA degree, specializing in law. His university career was ended by the First World War, when he held the rank of acting captain in the Royal Field Artillery. He married at Marylebone register office on 7 December 1915 Dorothy Maitland (1892/3-1961), daughter of H. V. Falk of New York, with whom he had two surviving daughters, the younger of whom, Diana Barnato Walker, became a noted aviator. In May 1918, by deed poll, he renounced the Christian name Joel. He left his wife in 1921 and they subsequently divorced; she married Richard Butler Wainwright and, as Dorothy Maitland Wainwright, became a noted breeder of Guernsey cattle. As well as racing Bentley cars, he took part in motor boat racing, in 1925 winning the Duke of York's trophy on the Thames in his boat 'Ardenrun Manor'. He married second, in 1932, Jacqueline, 'nee' Quealy, of San Francisco, with whom he had two sons. He was commissioned pilot officer in the RAF in September 1940 and held the rank of wing commander. In December 1947 he married Joan Isachsen. He died from a coronary thrombosis at 90 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, on 27 July 1948, following an operation for bowel cancer. After a funeral service at St Jude's, Englefield Green, Surrey, he was buried in the churchyard there. 

George Edward Duller (1891-1962), racing driver and jockey, was born at 63 Edward Street, Plaistow, West Ham, on 26 January 1891, the son of George Henry Duller (1865-1930), a cab proprietor and later a trainer of racehorses at Epsom, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Green. He became a steeplechase jockey. During the First World War he was an air mechanic. On 17 September 1918 he married, at Epsom, Bessie Grace, the daughter of a racehorse trainer, George Godfrey Hyams. They had a daughter. Regarded as an 'outstanding hurdle race jockey' ('The Times', 8 Aug 1962), he rode Trespasser to three consecutive imperial cup wins at Sandown Park between 1920 and 1922. After retiring from riding he became a trainer. He died at his home, 78 Hookfield, Epsom, on 6 August 1962. 

Jack Lawson Dunfee (1901-1975), racing driver, was born at Albury, Putney Hill, London, on 19 October 1901, the second of four sons of Vickers Dunfee (1861-1927), a wine merchant and prominent figure in the corporation of the City of London, and his wife, Caroline Elizabeth, 'nee' Froy (1870-1922). He gave up racing after his brother's death in 1932. On 15 November 1939 he married the film actress Sandra Storme (1914-1979), born Eileen Violet Needham, daughter of Percy Needham, company director, and former wife of Arthur Griffiths. Jack Dunfee and his first wife divorced and she married Richard Francis Yarde-Buller, fourth Baron Churston. Dunfee married, second, on 19 July 1953, Margaret Audrey, daughter of John Francis White, company director, and third, in 1975, Jennifer Helen Oliver. He died at his home, Wychwood Manor, Ascott-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire, on 14 September 1975. His younger brother (Beresford) Clive Dunfee (1904-1932), racing driver, was born at 24 Gwendolen Avenue, Putney, on 18 June 1904. He became a member of the London stock exchange and married, on 11 December 1930, the actress Jane Baxter (1909-1996), who was born Feodora Kathleen Alice Forde, daughter of Henry Bligh Forde, civil engineer. During the 500 mile race at Brooklands on 26 September 1932, Clive Dunfee took over from his brother Jack driving Barnato's 8 litre Bentley. While overtaking another vehicle at a speed of 126 m.p.h. he went over the top of the high banking for which Brooklands was notorious, was thrown from the car, and was killed immediately. He was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 

(George Pearson) Glen Kidston (1899-1931), racing driver and aviator, was born at 54 Cromwell Road, Brompton, London, on 23 June 1899, the elder son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Archibald Glen Kidston (died 1913), a captain in the 3rd Royal Highlanders, and his wife, Helene Adeline Blanche, 'nee' Chapman. His family had established a firm of metal merchants in Glasgow. After his father's death, his mother married the naval officer and pioneer motorist and aviator Sir Walter Windham. Educated at Ludgrove School, Kidston passed through the Royal Naval College at Osborne (1912) and Dartmouth (1914). His life became a succession of dramatic escapes starting in September 1914 when, as a sixteen-year-old naval cadet, he survived two and a half hours in the sea when his cruiser, 'Hogue', sank after being torpedoed. Interned in Holland, he was repatriated and returned to naval service in the 'Orion' until transferring to submarines late in 1917. He was promoted to lieutenant in 1920, serving in submarines, and in December 1926 was given command of submarine H48 at Portsmouth. He retired from the navy with the rank of lieutenant-commander in 1928. He married on 25 November 1925 Nancy Miriel Denise (1906-1997), daughter of Edward Rowland Soames. They had a son. Debts incurred by her, while still a minor, were the subject of a high court action brought in 1927 by the firm of court dressmakers who had supplied her wedding trousseau. 
Kidston competed in motorcycle racing events from 1921, including the Ulster tourist trophy in 1928, when he crashed into a hedge at 95 m.p.h. In May 1927 he had survived an accident in the Solent when the motor boat he was racing split in two at 50 knots. He took up flying in 1928, gained his licence in April 1928, and became joint owner of a Fokker plane. Flying it on a big game expedition in east Africa he survived a landing in a swamp. In November 1929 he was the only survivor when a Junker airliner, on which he was a passenger from Croydon aerodrome to Amsterdam, crashed in dense fog near Caterham, Surrey. He was a keen promoter of commercial aviation and in April 1931 flew from Netheravon, Wiltshire, to Cape Town in six days to demonstrate the viability of a fast air postal service within the British empire. Kidston's luck finally ran out on a flight from Johannesburg to Durban, in connection with the affairs of Union Airways in South Africa, of which he was a financial backer. Crossing the Drakensberg mountains on 5 May 1931, the aeroplane disintegrated in a violent storm near Van Reenan, Natal, and Kidston and his co-pilot T. A. Gladstone were killed. It was later stated that Kidston had overloaded the plane with a heavy tea chest. Their bodies were returned to Britain, where Kidston was buried at Glasbury church, Breconshire. 

Bernard Rubin (1896-1936), motorist and aviator, was born at Carlton, Melbourne, Australia, on 6 December 1896, the eldest son of Mark Rubin (1867?-1919), a pearl merchant, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Davis. Educated at University College School, Hampstead, he served in the Royal Garrison Artillery in France where he was so severely wounded that he could not walk for three years. Subsequently he took up big game hunting, motor racing, and flying. On 22 March 1934 he set out from Lympne in a de Havilland Leopard Moth to fly to Australia, and starting the homeward flight from Darwin on 23 April 1934 reached Pevensey on 1 May. On 28 March 1935 he married, at the British consulate in Paris, Audrey Mary, eldest daughter of C. R. Simpson. He died at his home, the Old Cloth Hall, Cranbrook, Kent, on 27 June 1936, having contracted pulmonary tuberculosis following an operation for the collapse of a lung cavity. 


@@@@@


doc= 97975


Railton, Reid Antony (1895-1977), motor engineer, was born on 24 June 1895 at Cherry Tree House, Alderley Edge, in the Cheshire stockbroker belt, the son of Charles Withington Railton (1856-1937), stock and share broker, whose family had followed that profession for several generations, and his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth, 'nee' Sharman (1867-1937), an attorney's daughter from Wellingborough, Northamptonshire. He attended Rugby School but, while his elder brother took up the family profession, followed his own path by entering Manchester University about 1913 to study for a BSc. 
On graduating in 1915, Railton was offered a job at Leyland Motors in Lancashire where he became assistant to the experimental engineer John Parry Thomas of whom Railton later said, 'he taught me how to think and such ability as I have as an engineer I owe entirely to his teaching' (Ludvigsen, 6). Though Leyland made buses and lorries, in 1917 Thomas and his assistant were asked to design a luxury car. The Leyland Eight was exhibited at the Olympia motor show in 1920 and was much admired with an impressive top speed of 130 m.p.h. Economic conditions were tough, however, so Leyland decided to concentrate on their core market and cancelled the project in 1922. Only fourteen chassis are believed to have been built, two of which were sold to the maharajah of Patiala. Railton was sent, in lieu of a workshop manual, to explain the car's workings to his highness's garage staff. 
In 1923 Thomas left Leyland Motors to set up his own company at Brooklands motor racing circuit in Surrey. Also part of the enterprise was his financial backer Kenneth Thomson and engineer Kenneth Taylor. Railton decided to move on too. He set himself up in Letchworth, Hertfordshire, where he designed a vehicle with an innovative engine called the Arab. As he prepared to go into production tragic events intervened. In March 1927 Railton drove to Pendine Sands in Wales to watch Thomas attempt to regain the land speed record from Malcolm Campbell in his racing special, Babs. He arrived to find that his friend had just been killed in a high-speed crash. Railton was so upset that he closed his company down though only a few cars had been completed. Thomas's partners set up a new firm called Thomson and Taylor (Brooklands) Ltd (T&T) and Railton accepted an invitation to join them as their chief engineer. 
Railton's first commission was to complete a sports version of the Riley Nine started by Thomas. After the car went into production T&T were retained to service the Riley racing team, with Railton and Taylor as the 'works mechanics'. This provided excellent experience in problem-solving and maximizing performance. On 11 February 1928 he married Margaret Audrey ('b'. 1900), daughter of James Hensman, tea merchant. They went to live near Brooklands where they had a son and daughter between 1934 and 1936. 
In 1929 Malcolm Campbell was looking to recover the land speed record from Henry Segrave who had achieved 231 m.p.h. at Daytona in his Golden Arrow. Campbell's car, Blue Bird, dated from 1923 and could not challenge this speed. He went to T&T for assistance. There was no time to build a new car and funds were limited so Railton began an extensive rebuild of the existing car which lasted throughout 1930. The modified Blue Bird went on to break a number of records at Daytona Beach, finally reaching 253 m.p.h. Campbell was not satisfied so an upgraded engine was fitted along with further chassis modifications. Campbell achieved 301 m.p.h. on the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah in 1935 after which Blue Bird was retired. Campbell and Railton continued to work together on boats which also carried the Blue Bird name, making repeated attempts on the water speed record. 
Meanwhile Railton had become involved in the English Racing Automobiles (ERA) project to build a single-seater racing car with Raymond Mays and Peter Berthon. Throughout 1934 Railton worked on a chassis to be manufactured by T&T and fitted with a Riley Six engine modified by Mays. The ERA went on to gain a reputation as one of the quickest single-seaters of the 1930s. 
At the same time Railton was working with another record-breaker, John Cobb. He created the Napier Railton using a Napier Lion aircraft engine on a deep underslung frame with innovative suspension to absorb the shocks of the racing track. Throughout 1933-5 Cobb used the Napier Railton to break numerous records at Brooklands and on the Bonneville Salt Flats. In 1937 Cobb asked Railton to design a land-speed record car from scratch. Railton drew on all of his experience to date to create a car known simply as The Railton. It did its job and in August 1939 Cobb set a record of 369 m.p.h. He was also involved with the EX135 -- a project started in 1937 by the MG Company. The distinctive aerodynamic shape created by Railton meant that the driving position into which the driver, Goldie Gardner, had to fit was almost horizontal. MG EX135 averaged 203 m.p.h. on the Dessau Autobahn in June 1939, the first of many successful record attempts. 
Railton's personal appearance was at odds with his reputation. Slim with prescription sunglasses, he was a modest man who dressed without ostentation and smoked continuously. Louise Barlow, who saw him at Bonneville, described him as 'for all the world like a professor of dead languages at a quiet university rather than a designer of ultra-fast cars' (Ludvigsen, 20). The intense problem-solving associated with creating high-speed cars had the side-effect of causing migraine headaches and he often visited the Alps to recuperate in the mountain air. 
In 1939 Railton accepted an invitation to join the Hall-Scott Motor Company in San Francisco and the family settled in Berkeley nearby. After a few years he decided to become an independent consultant. One of his first commissions was from his old friend John Cobb who, in September 1947, averaged 394 m.p.h. over a measured mile with the Railton Mobil Special. He too moved on to water-speed records and in 1952 Railton designed a special hull for his Crusader boat and installed a de Havilland Ghost jet engine. The boat disintegrated after reaching 200 m.p.h. and Cobb was killed. For a number of years Railton also undertook consultancy for the Hudson company of Detroit as an adviser. He died in Berkeley, California, on 1 September 1977. 
A maverick from a non-technical family, Railton became one of the foremost engineers in his specialism. His reputation was such that the name Railton became a by-word for speed and record-breaking. 


@@@@@


doc= 97976


Gardner, (Alfred Thomas) Goldie (1890-1958), racing motorist and speed record breaker, was born at East Dene, Charteris Road, Woodford, Essex, on 30 May 1890, the son of Alfred Gardner (1852/3-1922), an East India broker, and his wife, Isabella McIntosh, 'nee' Goldie (1866/7-1951). After preparatory school at Pelham House, Folkestone, he was educated at Uppingham School, where he acquired a motorcycle, and then in 1910 entered a broker's office in Colombo, Ceylon. This was followed in 1913 by a business position in northern Burma but typhoid and malaria forced his return to Britain early in 1914. On the outbreak of the First World War he was commissioned in the Royal Field Artillery and was posted to the western front in 1915, gaining the Military Cross in 1916. Badly wounded in his right leg in August 1917, he underwent twenty operations. He relinquished his commission on account of ill health in April 1919, and was discharged from the army in 1921 with the rank of major. 
Gardner had become a car owner in 1915 and in 1924 began racing an Austin Seven at Brooklands, but then switched to French cars, a two-seater Salmson in 1926 and in 1929 an Amilcar, which he raced in the Irish international grand prix at Phoenix Park, Dublin, in 1929 and 1930. In 1930 he met Cecil Kimber, managing director of MG cars of Abingdon, with which he began an association that lasted over twenty years. He purchased one of the firm's new MG 750 cc C-type Montlhery Midget cars and took delivery for the Brooklands double twelve hour race in May 1931. In a bad accident at the Ulster tourist trophy race in 1932 his MG came off the road and somersaulted three times, throwing him out and fracturing his already disabled right leg. This was saved from amputation during the four months he spent in Newtonards hospital. He gave up road racing but returned to the track in September 1934 to take part in the 500 mile race at Brooklands, coming third in a 1100 cc MG K3 co-driven by J. D. Benjafield. He took part in the 1935 500 mile race, then went to the USA to compete in a stockcar event at Daytona early in 1936 in a Lincoln Zephyr saloon. While in Daytona he married, in March 1936, Mariel King, 'nee' Boalt, who returned with him to Britain but went back to the USA soon afterwards and divorced him in Florida in 1937. 
In 1935 Lord Nuffield had instructed the MG works to give up direct involvement in racing, but Gardner persisted with record-breaking attempts. He purchased a 1100 cc single-seater MG K3 Magnette in which, at Brooklands on 28 August 1936, he established a new outer circuit class G (750 cc up to 1100 cc) record of 124.4 m.p.h., and went on to cover fifty miles at 119 m.p.h. With renewed support from MG, he set a class G record of 148.5 m.p.h. for the flying start mile on the autobahn at Frankfurt in June 1937. He followed this, later that month, with a series of records at Montlhery, though he failed to break the 150 m.p.h. barrier, which was his target. To push the speeds further Gardner bought the MG 'Magic Magnette' EX 135 from its owner, the record breaker George Eyston, and this was adapted with an enclosed streamlined body designed by Reid Railton, and with an MG K3 engine, constructed at Abingdon with Nuffield's support and approval. 
Gardner's modified MG Magnette was ready in June 1938 and achieved a 186.5 m.p.h. record for the flying mile on the Frankfurt autobahn in November 1938. At the end of that year he was awarded the RAC Segrave trophy. On his birthday, 30 May 1939, at the new Dessau autobahn in Germany which was closed to traffic for his attempt, Gardner broke the 200 m.p.h. barrier for a 1100 cc car, achieving a mean speed of 203.16 m.p.h. in two runs over the flying mile. On his return to Britain his car was displayed in MG showrooms. 
During the Second World War, Gardner rejoined the Royal Artillery and was posted to a mechanical transport training battery in Yorkshire, with the rank of major. He married at Bridlington register office, on 7 September 1940, Una (1914-2008), daughter of Francis Eagle-Clarke, solicitor, of Saxton House, Willerby, Yorkshire. They had a daughter. Promoted to lieutenant-colonel in 1942, he was an instructor at a mechanical training school in Rhyl, and then in 1944 joined 21 Army group organizing transport for the allied civilian administration in the liberated countries of north-west Europe. 
Before the war Gardner had planned attempts on the 750 cc record (class H). The chassis and body of his record-breaking car were removed from storage at the end of the war and fitted with a new 750 cc MG engine. A first attempt on the Milan autostrada in July 1946 was unsuccessful but a second attempt, on a straight stretch of motorway at Jabbeke, Belgium, in October 1946 pushed the 750 cc record (which had stood for ten years) to 159.2 m.p.h. for the flying mile. Frustrated by the lack of support from MG, he drove Jaguar cars in 1948, but returned to MG in 1949 when the firm resumed its support for motorsport. In the birthday honours list in May 1949 he was appointed OBE. At Jabbeke in September 1949 he recovered the 500 cc (class I) record with 154.2 m.p.h., and in July 1950 he broke the 120 m.p.h. barrier for class J engines (up to 350 cc) with a 121 m.p.h. flying mile. By 1950 Gardner, then in his sixtieth year, had achieved for MG five of the ten internationally recognized capacity class records. In that year MG production at Abingdon for the first time exceeded 10,000 cars. He published an autobiography in 1951. 
North America was an important market for MG, and Gardner's final record attempts were at Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah, in August 1951 and 1952 with a supercharged MG TD engine. The first was thwarted by rain, and in the second his car spun and struck a marker pole, which in turn smashed into his helmet. Although his head injury was not considered severe at the time, its longer-term effects forced his retirement from further record attempts. He settled at Eastbourne, Sussex, and died there, from a cerebrovascular accident, at St Mary's Hospital, on 25 August 1958. 
Gardner was known for his courage. As those who knew him well recognized, his appearance of calm before attempting a record masked an apprehension of the danger connected with each attempt. Rather than seeking small, incremental improvements in speeds, he went all out in each drive. His record breaking was undertaken as a private owner, though with backing from the companies which supplied his cars and their components. He justified his pursuit of light car speed records for their technical and advertising value, as indicated by the international publicity they received. His 1938 MG, which achieved the 200 m.p.h. record on the eve of the Second World War, is preserved at the Heritage Motor Centre, Gaydon. 


@@@@@


doc= 97977


Lambert, Percy Edgar (1880-1913), motor racing driver and car dealer, was born at 9 Pimlico Road, Pimlico, London, on 5 October 1880, the third son in the family of at least three sons and three daughters of Charles Lambert (1841/2-1888), a master builder and later house furnisher and picture frame maker, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Chappell (1837/8-1923), who continued to run the house furnishing business after her husband's death. After schooling he followed his older brother Harold Charles Lambert (1877-1937) into the motor trade, selling Austin and Singer marques from premises in Westminster. 
Lambert became an enthusiast for motor racing and drove a range of vehicles which included Austin, Singer, Talbot, and Vauxhall models. He first raced at Brooklands in 1910, the purpose-built racing circuit near Weybridge, Surrey, which had been opened three years earlier. High speed testing and racing of cars could be undertaken there without falling foul of the law of 1903 which restricted cars to a speed of 20 m.p.h. on public roads. 
Known in racing circles by his nickname of Pearley, Lambert drove Austins of that name. During the 1911 Brooklands season, while driving his Austin Pearley III, he continually raised the speed limit, starting with a best lap of 77 m.p.h., raising that to 82 m.p.h. in July. By the end of 1911 he had achieved a top lap speed of 91 m.p.h. During 1911 he also secured twenty-one prizes for his efforts and achieved recognition for being a driver who combined daring with fine judgement and skill. 
During 1912 Lambert rose to further prominence by winning the class E and 21 hp records for ten laps from a standing start at a speed of 92.3 m.p.h. At the end of June he drove a works Vauxhall C12 in the grand prix de l'automobile de France in Dieppe, but he was forced to retire after completing eighteen laps. Later in November 1912, driving Lord Shrewsbury's single-seater Talbot in the single-seater half mile, kilometre, and mile, he achieved speeds of up to 113 m.p.h. 
By the end of 1912 the Talbot company reckoned that it would be possible to establish the record of covering 100 miles in one hour. On 8 February 1913, in a 25 hp Talbot, Lambert made a first attempt to do so but failed when a tyre burst as he was within three miles of his target. At Brooklands a week later, on 15 February 1913, in a 4.5 litre side-valve Talbot, he covered 103 miles and 1470 yards in sixty minutes, and became the first driver to achieve the feat of driving 100 miles in an hour. Carefully organized by the Talbot company, and recorded on cinematograph film, Lambert's drive proved that power was not the only factor in high speed, and that a car of moderate weight with a medium-sized engine, capable of high crank-shaft speed, was best suited to the purpose. He also demonstrated the importance of vehicle reliability, and especially the durability of tyres at speeds over 90 m.p.h. 
In April 1913 Lambert's record was broken by another driver, Jules Goux, whose Peugeot covered 106.22 miles in an hour at Brooklands, and this in turn was bettered by Jean Chassange in a Sunbeam in mid-October 1913. On 31 October 1913 Lambert tried to regain his position, using the same car as previously with minor modifications in design. He began driving in poor weather with a mist hanging over the Brooklands track, leading to poor visibility as water formed on his goggles. When he had been driving for about twenty-eight minutes at an average speed calculated at 114 m.p.h. and just after he had passed the members' enclosure at 110 m.p.h., the rear off-tyre burst. The car overturned on an embankment, throwing Lambert out. He was found to be unconscious, suffering from a fractured skull, and died before reaching Weybridge Cottage Hospital. It was widely reported that he had promised his fiancee that it would be his last attempt at a world record. A coroner's jury returned a verdict of accidental death and after a funeral at St Peter's, Eaton Square, he was buried at Brompton cemetery, London. 
Lambert was a popular figure in racing circles, known for his personal modesty. He emphasized the importance of physical fitness for fast driving and trained for his record attempts. He was a total abstainer from alcohol, and rarely smoked. Although he was not an amateur, as he drove for the Talbot firm, it was said that he possessed sufficient private means from his business interests not to need to attempt records for a living, but instead did so for the pleasure of handling fast cars. Nor was he seeking to produce a spectacle for crowds, and only small numbers of spectators were present to witness his attempts on the one hour record. Shortly before his death he and his brother entered vehicle manufacturing and jointly formed the Lambert Light Car Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 97978


Bentley Boys (act. 1919-1931), racing drivers, were a team of motoring enthusiasts who achieved remarkable fame as drivers on the racetrack and as playboys off the track during the 1920s. They attained the climax of their collective career between 1927 and 1930 when they won four consecutive victories in the 24 hour race at Le Mans; in 1929 they took the first, second, third, and fourth places in the race. While their success as drivers endowed Bentley motor cars with a high reputation for speed, performance, and reliability, their lives away from racing bestowed glamour and excitement on the struggling young company. Mostly wealthy men, the Bentley Boys epitomized the old-school amateurism of British sport. Obsessive motorists, they competed out of bravado and patriotism rather than for money or careers. As W. O. Bentley admitted: 'The public liked to imagine them living in expensive Mayfair flats with several mistresses and, of course, several very fast Bentleys, drinking champagne in nightclubs, playing the horses and the Stock Exchange, and beating furiously around racing tracks at the weekend... this was not such an inaccurate picture' (Bentley, 109). 
Even at the racetrack the Bentley Boys maintained their hedonistic lifestyle. According to one of their mechanics 'the pit they used [at Le Mans] was just like a small hotel... they'd have all the wine, champagne, eats, chickens, and everything that went with it. They'd have the head chauffeurs, butlers, secretaries... hangers-on too, plenty of them, and the womenfolk -- some beautiful women too' (Nagle, 134). One of the more sober drivers complained that the women 'were great fun but some of them could be a nuisance at times. Their girl-friends got in the way' (ibid., 128). However, for the British public this heady mixture of glamour, success, and recklessness proved immensely appealing. In the anti-climax of the post-war years they brought a vicarious element of excitement into thousands of ordinary lives. 
The founding father was W. O. Bentley, who enjoyed extensive pre-war experience in improving the speed and performance of engines. After the war, during which he had developed faster and more powerful aero-engines in the technical department of the Royal Naval Air Service, W. O. decided to produce his own motor car. From the outset everything was personalized and eccentric. He launched the enterprise by means of a party at a restaurant in Regent Street where a handful of investors agreed to guarantee a mere $4000, taking shares at ten shillings each. W. O. drew on the skills of three acquaintances to get the project off the ground in 1919. 

Clive Gallop ['see below'] was an old friend from wartime. After demobilization from the Royal Flying Corps in the summer of 1919 he accepted W. O.'s invitation to help design the new car and became works manager. Later that year, when the 3 litre Bentley had been assembled, Gallop could not resist taking it out for a test run with the mechanics. All went well until the tail of his dust-coat became wrapped around the cardan shaft and he began to disappear into the chassis; fortunately he stopped the car and was unwound. 
A different but equally important role was played by Sammy Davis ['see below']. Like Gallop, Davis was one of the Edwardian motoring enthusiasts, but was unusual in being a talented author and artist as well as a good driver. Davis came into contact with W. O. when the latter and his brother, H. M. Bentley, were making motorcycles. By the end of the war, when he had worked as an inspector of aero-engines, Davis had lost most of his friends and family; he suffered a breakdown but found a welcome escape in the world of motoring. As he and W. O. had kept in touch Davis was in on the original idea of the Bentley car and, as a journalist for 'Autocar' in 1919, he was perfectly placed to publicize it. In January 1920 he gave the 3 litre model a test drive. The car, he wrote, 'had the air of a lithe, active, and speedy animal straining a little on the leash'. He loved its powers of acceleration: 'instantly the exhaust changed its note from a purr to a most menacing roar, the white ribbon of road streamed towards the car, while the back seats pressed hard on one's shoulder blades' (Foulkes, 31; Hillstead, 40). 
As Davis saw immediately, the Bentley was designed for the big, straight continental roads where its speed and endurance were assets, but it was far from clear that it had a market in Britain, where few roads were suitable. 'We used a special bit of the Edgware Road for speed tests', recalled one driver. 'It wasn't used much then for anything else' (Nagle, 63). In effect Bentleys were offering the thrill of owning a racing car to the enthusiastic private motorist who shared their disregard for British rules and speed limits. But the car was expensive, selling at $750 initially and rising to well over $1000 at a time when most cars were becoming cheaper. 
This made it imperative for Bentleys to demonstrate that their cars could compete with vehicles built for racing. Hence the need for a professional driver, a role that was brilliantly filled by Frank Clement ['see below']. Unusually among the Bentley Boys he combined the talents of a professional driver and a first-rate mechanic. An experienced installation engineer, he had been a road-tester for Vauxhall before accepting W. O.'s invitation to join Bentley as development manager in 1920. 'There was nobody like Clement... he was always thinking something up -- experimenting all the time' (Nagle, 56). Recognizing that the company's success would depend on the skill of their mechanics he created the team that was the basis of the company's reputation. It was the mechanics who first attracted the 'Bentley Boys' tag after their hard partying at the Isle of Man TT in 1922, but the press applied it to the drivers after their performances at Le Mans from the mid-1920s onwards. A very consistent driver, Clement never got flustered and was famed for the speed of his pit-work. In 1921 he drove the first Bentley to win at Brooklands, he led the first Bentley team in the Isle of Man TT in 1922, and drove in every 24 hour Le Mans race from 1923 to 1930, being placed in all of them. 
In the early years Clement's co-driver was John Duff ['see below'], a tall, imposing figure always recognizable in his plus fours, roll-neck sweater, and tweed jacket. After service in the First World War he was in search of a new challenge and found it in fast cars, initially Fiats. But Duff wanted more power, moved to Bentleys, and emphatically demonstrated their endurance and his own stamina when he took the British double twelve record of 2082 miles at 86 m.p.h. at Brooklands in September 1922. He drove single-handed in a seat that was effectively a steel bucket; after twelve hours, with a raw back, he had to be lifted out of the car and carried off to the Hand and Spear in Weybridge, where he was helped into a bath; but he was fit to race the next day. In 1923 Duff insisted on entering the Le Mans 24 hour race for the first time. W. O. was sceptical, both because of the risk to the Bentley prestige and because of the expense. However, Duff's performance, followed by his victory in 1924 with Clement, proved that Bentleys could match the continental machines that had been designed as racing cars, thereby greatly boosting their reputation. 
Duff's 1923 race brought Bentleys to the attention of an improbable member of the group, J. D. (Benjy) Benjafield ['see below']. A thickset, balding individual, with a sunny disposition, Benjafield was a respected consultant bacteriologist, with a practice in Wimpole Street. He also possessed several of the attributes of a Bentley Boy, being a sportsman, 'bon vivant', and the husband of a rich wife who allowed him to indulge in expensive hobbies. In October 1923 he bought a Bentley and found its performance so impressive that 'I began to fancy myself' (Foulkes, 69). In this sense Dr Benjafield represented the Bentley dream made reality. On visiting the Bentley service department in 1924 he passed some jovial remarks about wanting a motor that would go faster and was promptly invited to Brooklands for a speed test. Benjafield confessed to being terrified by the run he was given, but as the experts thought he had what it took to become a Bentley Boy they offered him the services of a mechanic if he entered a small club race. By coming in fourth Benjafield passed the test and in 1925 was invited to race at Le Mans. Seen as the company's most reliable driver, he participated at Le Mans every year from 1926 to 1929; his most celebrated achievement was the 1927 24 hour race when, following a seven-car pile-up in the White House Corner crash, he and Sammy Davis, representing the third Bentley team, brought their car home to victory. 
Another customer-turned-driver was Sir Henry (Tim) Birkin ['see below'], an iconic Bentley Boy on account of his wealth, charm, eccentricity, and reputation as a ladies' man. After serving as a pilot in the war Birkin found post-war Britain too dull and took up racing in 1921 to restore some excitement to his life. He bought his first Bentley in 1925, but did not race for the team until 1927 and remained a semi-detached member. He competed regularly at Brooklands, where he won the lap record at 135 m.p.h. in 1930. A striking figure dressed in a dark blue shirt, white overall trousers, and a spotted scarf that fluttered, dangerously, in the breeze, Birkin filled his cars with oranges that he sucked steadily during races. He suffered from a stutter that, along with his wealth, made him appealing to women. 'Life was never dull with Tim around', recalled W. O., 'if only because of the abundance and wide variety of his girlfriends' (http://maisonblanche.co.uk/Bentley_boys.html). But his philandering resulted in divorce in 1928. 
Birkin's impatience to win races often led him to take undue risks with his vehicles and throw away his chances of victory: 'he really was a car-wrecker -- he'd do anything', complained Clement (Nagle, 128). As a result Bentleys used him in one of their three teams to set the pace so as to wear down and smash up the cars of rival teams. In 1928 Birkin hit on the idea of supercharging his 4.5 litre Bentley, thereby giving rise to the legendary 'Blower Bentley'. The car had terrific acceleration but was heavy, clumsy, and prone to overheating. Bentley's mechanics rightly saw it as a mistake because it undermined the company's reputation for reliability, but Birkin obtained funds from Bernard Rubin and the Hon. Dorothy Paget, a wealthy, eccentric racehorse owner, to sustain his own team. The Blower was the epitome of Bentleys: a car beloved by the fanatics that was a business failure. 
Birkin betrayed all the characteristics of a male obsessive spiced by an angry patriotism. He elevated his hobby into a great national cause capable of solving Britain's ills, using his autobiography for a long rant about the lethargy of the British motor industry, the failure to develop British racing cars and to build adequate racing tracks, the ignorance and apathy of the public, and the victimization of drivers for exceeding speed limits on the roads (Birkin, 29-31, 113-15, 201-5). The political side of the Bentley Boys emerged most blatantly in 1926 when they formed the Brooklands Squad of crack drivers to help the authorities break the general strike. 
Yet despite the publicity generated by their drivers' exploits on the racetrack, Bentleys failed to thrive as a business. Up to 1931 only 3037 motor cars were actually produced. As a result they were expensive, being virtually handmade, and in any case not suitable for the ordinary driver or chauffeur. 'What we badly wanted', admitted the chief salesman, A. F. C. Hillstead, 'was a bread-and-butter model that would appeal to the ordinary motorist of average means'. From time to time H. M. Bentley would instruct the sales staff: 'Nothing to pay the wages with next Friday. Go out and get some money' (Hillstead, 73, 111). 
Eventually in 1925 W. O. decided to rectify the company's under-capitalization by recruiting a prominent Bentley owner who was a great lover of fast cars. Already a multi-millionaire, Woolf Barnato ['see below'], who had recently inherited an extra $1.5 million, was an obsessive sportsman and outstanding athlete who excelled at boxing, cricket, and golf as well as racing. Boyish but self-assured, he was attractive to women. He routinely spent $900 each week, bred horses, loved betting, and became a leading playboy of the post-war era. In 1925 Barnato was given a test drive in the new 6.5 litre Bentley with a view to buying the company. But though he was no businessman Barnato was shrewd and hated lending money. In May 1926 his accountants imposed tough terms, devaluing the original shares to one shilling. Barnato eventually lost about $90,000 on Bentley Motors but admitted, 'I can't grumble'. He gathered the Bentley Boys to his parties in Grosvenor Square and to his huge red-brick mansion, Ardenrun, on a 347 acre country estate at Lingfield in Surrey. Though not quite respectable, he made Bentleys even more fashionable by associating the motors with a range of celebrities from the prince of Wales to Tallulah Bankhead. But Barnato was also a talented and obsessive racing driver. In September 1925 he and Duff had smashed the world speed record over twenty-four hours at Montlhery near Paris. He won at Le Mans in 1928, 1929, and 1930 and his determination to keep the company in the forefront of racing sustained the Bentley Boys legend in the later 1920s. 
In the process Barnato brought several acquaintances into the team including George Duller ['see below'], who was a regular guest at Ardenrun and nightclub companion, and had been Barnato's co-driver at Le Mans in 1925. Duller was a small, muscular man who enjoyed a brilliant career as a jockey; when driving a car he would periodically rise in his seat as though riding a horse and he claimed that driving kept him fit between horse races. Other regular drivers of Barnato's cars were Jack Dunfee ['see below'] and his brother Clive Dunfee ['see below']. Jack, who enjoyed acting as court jester to the group, won the Brooklands six hour race in 1929 as co-driver to Barnato. 
Another rich Bentley Boy who drove with Barnato in the 1920s was Glen Kidston ['see below']. Quiet by Bentley Boy standards, Kidston was a born adventurer, completely fearless and notorious for refusing to obey orders when he came into the pits. From 1920 he took up motorcycle competitions, representing Britain as an amateur. In 1929 he came second in the international grand prix at Le Mans and second in the Irish grand prix; in 1930 he and Barnato won the 24 hours at Le Mans covering 1831 miles at an average speed of 76 m.p.h. In 1928 Barnato also persuaded Bentleys to include another friend, Bernard Rubin ['see below'], a wealthy Australian who lived in a Grosvenor Square house next door to Barnato. He first raced at Brooklands in 1928, and the same year, co-driving with Barnato, he won the 24 hour race at Le Mans. 
By 1929 Bentleys had achieved fame on the racetrack and produced a 3 litre, 4.5 litre, 6 litre, and finally an 8 litre model capable of accelerating to 100 m.p.h. in fifty seconds. Yet they were still not selling enough and the onset of the depression undermined the market for luxury goods. As the annual cost of racing stood at anything between $2412 in 1925-6 and $3369 in 1927-8, substantial sums for a cash-strapped company, it was decided, after the sweeping success at Le Mans in 1930, to cut costs by withdrawing from racing to concentrate on production. Yet even this was insufficient and in June 1931 Barnato decided not to risk any more money. The company went into liquidation and was bought by Rolls-Royce. 
The Bentley name lived on, but by 1932 all but Birkin had given up racing. The Bentley Boys numbers dwindled, often through untimely and violent deaths: Kidston in a flying accident in 1931, Dunfee in a crash at Brooklands in 1932, Birkin from an infection from burns sustained in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933, and Rubin following surgery in 1936. Frank Clement retired from racing after his marriage in 1930. 
As Rolls-Royce had acquired the assets of Bentley Motors all the cups and trophies won by the drivers were carried off to Derby. Barnato, however, took his trophies and after a protracted argument Clement was allowed to keep one of his. It later transpired that the rest had simply been sold off for their value as silver. This mean-spirited act on the part of Rolls-Royce somehow encapsulated the story of the Bentley Boys, who had blazed brilliantly across the 1920s scene only to peter out amid the gathering gloom of the 1930s. 
The Bentley team also included, at various times, Herbert (Bertie) Kensington Moir (1899-1961) and the French drivers Jean Chassagne and Baron Andre d'Erlanger, while those associated with them included their chronicler Arthur Finch Clitheroe Hillstead (1894-1975). The principal figures are listed below. 

(Reginald) Clive Gallop (1892-1960), engineer, was born at Mena House, the Pyramids, Cairo, Egypt, on 4 February 1892, the son of Reginald George Gallop (died 1911), of Wimbledon, a barrister, and his wife, Helen Marion, 'nee' Duffield (died 1939). The diplomat and authority on Iberian folk culture Rodney Alexander Gallop (1901-1948) was his younger brother. After education at Harrow School (1905-10), he became a consulting engineer and pre-war racing driver. In the First World War he was commissioned in the Scottish rifles, gained a Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate at Hendon in October 1915, and went on to serve in the Royal Flying Corps. As well as designing cars for Bentley he built cars for Count Zborowski. He married on 29 September 1923 Barbara, daughter of Robert Dobb, with whom he had a daughter. Having divorced his first wife he married second, on 22 October 1932, Thora, daughter of Walter Waterhouse; they had two daughters and a son. In the Second World War he held the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the auxiliary military pioneer corps. Latterly resident in Leatherhead, Surrey, he was dead on arrival at Dorking General Hospital, on 7 September 1960, after sustaining a fractured cervical spine as a result of being thrown from a skidding motor car. 

Sydney Charles Houghton Davis (1887-1981), journalist and racing driver, was born at 68 Philbeach Gardens, Brompton, London, on 7 January 1887, the son of Edwin Charles Davis, tea merchant, and his wife, Georgina Maud Fielding, 'nee' Houghton. After Westminster School he attended the Slade School of Art, and then served an apprenticeship at the Daimler Motor Works (1903-7). He became a journalist and illustrator on motoring journals, starting the periodical 'Automobile Engineer' with A. Ludlow Clayden. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, where he served in the armoured car section. On 6 June 1917 he married Rosamund Sylvia Evelyn, daughter of Joseph Pollard, surgeon. After the war he became sports editor of 'Autocar', and went on to write a string of books on motor sport, notably 'Motor Racing' (1932). He was also a significant driver in his own right, competing at Brooklands in a variety of marques in the 1920s, and participating in rallies, hill climbs, and veteran car events in the 1930s. In the Second World War he served in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in north-west Europe, with the rank of major. His first marriage was dissolved and he married, second, on 5 January 1957, Susanna Aubrey-Hall ('b'. 1937/8), engineering tracer, daughter of John Leo Aubrey-Hall, foundry engineer. He died in a fire at his home, Sutton Lodge, Clandon Road, Guildford, Surrey, on 9 January 1981, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 

Frank Charles Clement (1886-1970), engineer and racing driver, was born at 33 High Street, Tring, Hertfordshire, on 15 June 1886, the second son in the family of at least two sons and five daughters of John Tripp Clement (died 1909), a jeweller and watchmaker, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Elliott (died 1890). He trained as a mechanical engineer and served with the Royal Engineers during the First World War. As well as his successes at Le Mans, he competed at Brooklands where, in October 1929, he and Jack Barclay won the 500 mile race, and in May 1930 with Barnato he won the double twelve, covering 2080 miles in twenty-four hours at an average speed of 85.68 m.p.h. On 3 August 1930 he married Kathleen Irene, daughter of William Smith, contractor. Latterly resident at Linnell Dene, Hexham, Northumberland, he died at St Mary's Hospital, Stannington, on 15 February 1970. 

John Francis Duff (1895-1958), racing driver, was born in Kiukiang, China, in January 1895, the son of John Lindlay Duff. His parents were missionaries, originally from Canada, where he was educated at Hamilton, Ontario. In March 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Berkshires, where he became known for leading from the front. He married, on 14 March 1917, Clarissa, daughter of John Henry Lindsey, brewer. After the war he became a car dealer in London, with an agency for Bentley. He moved to Los Angeles in 1926, where he ran a fencing school, but returned to Britain, where he was a horse breeder. He died at Whipps Cross Hospital, Essex, on 9 January 1958, from a fracture of the spine and crushed spinal cord after falling from a horse which he was training for a showjumping event. 

Joseph Dudley Benjafield (1887-1957), bacteriologist and racing driver, was born at Bletchenden, Church Street, Edmonton, on 6 August 1887, the son of William Barnett Benjafield (1856-1921), a general practitioner, and his wife, Miriam Alice, 'nee' Wilkinson. Educated at Marlborough College and London University, he qualified in medicine in 1909 and obtained the MD in 1912. Specializing in bacteriology and clinical pathology, he held appointments at the Western Skin Hospital, the Kensington General Hospital, and All Saints' Hospital for Genito-Urinary Diseases. He married on 28 July 1914 Elvera Helen (1886-1983), daughter of Gustave Caesar Edward Gelardi, director of companies. They had one son. In 1915 he was commissioned in the Royal Army Medical Corps. By the 1920s he had become a respected consultant bacteriologist at St George's Hospital in London with a practice in Wimpole Street. He died at 78 Harley Street, London, on 21 January 1957 and was cremated at Enfield crematorium. 

Sir Henry Ralph Stanley Birkin, third baronet (1896-1933), racing driver, was born at Magdala Road, Basford, Nottingham, on 26 July 1896, the second son of Sir Thomas Stanley Birkin (1857-1931), second baronet, a lace manufacturer, and his wife, the Hon. Margaret Diana Hopetoun, 'nee' Chetwynd (died 1927). He had been known as Tim since a perceptive sister dubbed him 'Tiger Tim'. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Warwickshire regiment and later served in the Royal Air Force. He married on 12 July 1921 Audrey Clara Lilian, daughter of Sir Thomas Paul Latham, first baronet, textile manufacturer; they had two daughters. His wife divorced him in 1928. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in 1931. He wrote 'Full Throttle' (1932). He was injured in the Tripoli grand prix in 1933 when he burned his forearms when refuelling; this resulted in septicaemia which led to blood poisoning, from which he died in a London nursing home, at 7 Portland Place, on 22 June 1933. He was buried at Blakeney churchyard, Norfolk. His uncle succeeded him as fourth baronet. 

(Joel) Woolf Barnato (1895-1948), racing driver, was born at 27 St James's Place, Westminster, on 27 September 1895, the son of the wealthy South African diamond merchant Barnett Isaacs (Barney) Barnato (1852-1897) and his wife, Fannie Christiana, 'nee' Bees. Educated at Charterhouse School, he was admitted to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1913 to study for an ordinary BA degree, specializing in law. His university career was ended by the First World War, when he held the rank of acting captain in the Royal Field Artillery. He married at Marylebone register office on 7 December 1915 Dorothy Maitland (1892/3-1961), daughter of H. V. Falk of New York, with whom he had two surviving daughters, the younger of whom, Diana Barnato Walker, became a noted aviator. In May 1918, by deed poll, he renounced the Christian name Joel. He left his wife in 1921 and they subsequently divorced; she married Richard Butler Wainwright and, as Dorothy Maitland Wainwright, became a noted breeder of Guernsey cattle. As well as racing Bentley cars, he took part in motor boat racing, in 1925 winning the Duke of York's trophy on the Thames in his boat 'Ardenrun Manor'. He married second, in 1932, Jacqueline, 'nee' Quealy, of San Francisco, with whom he had two sons. He was commissioned pilot officer in the RAF in September 1940 and held the rank of wing commander. In December 1947 he married Joan Isachsen. He died from a coronary thrombosis at 90 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, on 27 July 1948, following an operation for bowel cancer. After a funeral service at St Jude's, Englefield Green, Surrey, he was buried in the churchyard there. 

George Edward Duller (1891-1962), racing driver and jockey, was born at 63 Edward Street, Plaistow, West Ham, on 26 January 1891, the son of George Henry Duller (1865-1930), a cab proprietor and later a trainer of racehorses at Epsom, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Green. He became a steeplechase jockey. During the First World War he was an air mechanic. On 17 September 1918 he married, at Epsom, Bessie Grace, the daughter of a racehorse trainer, George Godfrey Hyams. They had a daughter. Regarded as an 'outstanding hurdle race jockey' ('The Times', 8 Aug 1962), he rode Trespasser to three consecutive imperial cup wins at Sandown Park between 1920 and 1922. After retiring from riding he became a trainer. He died at his home, 78 Hookfield, Epsom, on 6 August 1962. 

Jack Lawson Dunfee (1901-1975), racing driver, was born at Albury, Putney Hill, London, on 19 October 1901, the second of four sons of Vickers Dunfee (1861-1927), a wine merchant and prominent figure in the corporation of the City of London, and his wife, Caroline Elizabeth, 'nee' Froy (1870-1922). He gave up racing after his brother's death in 1932. On 15 November 1939 he married the film actress Sandra Storme (1914-1979), born Eileen Violet Needham, daughter of Percy Needham, company director, and former wife of Arthur Griffiths. Jack Dunfee and his first wife divorced and she married Richard Francis Yarde-Buller, fourth Baron Churston. Dunfee married, second, on 19 July 1953, Margaret Audrey, daughter of John Francis White, company director, and third, in 1975, Jennifer Helen Oliver. He died at his home, Wychwood Manor, Ascott-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire, on 14 September 1975. His younger brother (Beresford) Clive Dunfee (1904-1932), racing driver, was born at 24 Gwendolen Avenue, Putney, on 18 June 1904. He became a member of the London stock exchange and married, on 11 December 1930, the actress Jane Baxter (1909-1996), who was born Feodora Kathleen Alice Forde, daughter of Henry Bligh Forde, civil engineer. During the 500 mile race at Brooklands on 26 September 1932, Clive Dunfee took over from his brother Jack driving Barnato's 8 litre Bentley. While overtaking another vehicle at a speed of 126 m.p.h. he went over the top of the high banking for which Brooklands was notorious, was thrown from the car, and was killed immediately. He was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 

(George Pearson) Glen Kidston (1899-1931), racing driver and aviator, was born at 54 Cromwell Road, Brompton, London, on 23 June 1899, the elder son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Archibald Glen Kidston (died 1913), a captain in the 3rd Royal Highlanders, and his wife, Helene Adeline Blanche, 'nee' Chapman. His family had established a firm of metal merchants in Glasgow. After his father's death, his mother married the naval officer and pioneer motorist and aviator Sir Walter Windham. Educated at Ludgrove School, Kidston passed through the Royal Naval College at Osborne (1912) and Dartmouth (1914). His life became a succession of dramatic escapes starting in September 1914 when, as a sixteen-year-old naval cadet, he survived two and a half hours in the sea when his cruiser, 'Hogue', sank after being torpedoed. Interned in Holland, he was repatriated and returned to naval service in the 'Orion' until transferring to submarines late in 1917. He was promoted to lieutenant in 1920, serving in submarines, and in December 1926 was given command of submarine H48 at Portsmouth. He retired from the navy with the rank of lieutenant-commander in 1928. He married on 25 November 1925 Nancy Miriel Denise (1906-1997), daughter of Edward Rowland Soames. They had a son. Debts incurred by her, while still a minor, were the subject of a high court action brought in 1927 by the firm of court dressmakers who had supplied her wedding trousseau. 
Kidston competed in motorcycle racing events from 1921, including the Ulster tourist trophy in 1928, when he crashed into a hedge at 95 m.p.h. In May 1927 he had survived an accident in the Solent when the motor boat he was racing split in two at 50 knots. He took up flying in 1928, gained his licence in April 1928, and became joint owner of a Fokker plane. Flying it on a big game expedition in east Africa he survived a landing in a swamp. In November 1929 he was the only survivor when a Junker airliner, on which he was a passenger from Croydon aerodrome to Amsterdam, crashed in dense fog near Caterham, Surrey. He was a keen promoter of commercial aviation and in April 1931 flew from Netheravon, Wiltshire, to Cape Town in six days to demonstrate the viability of a fast air postal service within the British empire. Kidston's luck finally ran out on a flight from Johannesburg to Durban, in connection with the affairs of Union Airways in South Africa, of which he was a financial backer. Crossing the Drakensberg mountains on 5 May 1931, the aeroplane disintegrated in a violent storm near Van Reenan, Natal, and Kidston and his co-pilot T. A. Gladstone were killed. It was later stated that Kidston had overloaded the plane with a heavy tea chest. Their bodies were returned to Britain, where Kidston was buried at Glasbury church, Breconshire. 

Bernard Rubin (1896-1936), motorist and aviator, was born at Carlton, Melbourne, Australia, on 6 December 1896, the eldest son of Mark Rubin (1867?-1919), a pearl merchant, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Davis. Educated at University College School, Hampstead, he served in the Royal Garrison Artillery in France where he was so severely wounded that he could not walk for three years. Subsequently he took up big game hunting, motor racing, and flying. On 22 March 1934 he set out from Lympne in a de Havilland Leopard Moth to fly to Australia, and starting the homeward flight from Darwin on 23 April 1934 reached Pevensey on 1 May. On 28 March 1935 he married, at the British consulate in Paris, Audrey Mary, eldest daughter of C. R. Simpson. He died at his home, the Old Cloth Hall, Cranbrook, Kent, on 27 June 1936, having contracted pulmonary tuberculosis following an operation for the collapse of a lung cavity. 


@@@@@


doc= 97980


Eldridge, Ernest Arthur Douglas (1897-1935), motor racer and world land speed record-holder, was born at 13 Burton Road, Kilburn, London, on 18 July 1897, the son of Arthur Eldridge (1871-1945), financier's clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Appleby. He was educated at Harrow School (1909-13), where it was said he owned and ran a motor car in defiance of a school ban. During the First World War he was a volunteer ambulance driver in the French Red Cross. He spoke perfect French, and later lived in Paris. Aged eighteen, though describing himself as twenty-one, he married at Brentford register office on 20 November 1915 Marjorie May, daughter of Ashley Tooth, of independent means. 
Eldridge made his name driving and modifying aero-engined 'monster racers' which owed their existence to the sale of surplus military aircraft components by the Aircraft Disposal Board in the years after the First World War. He made his first appearance at the famous Brooklands racetrack in Weybridge at the midsummer meeting of 1921, driving an Isotta-Fraschini. The car, originally manufactured in 1907, had last been driven at the circuit in 1913. After extensive modification at his garage in London the vehicle was transformed via the incorporation of a 240 hp Maybach engine. In 1922 Eldridge claimed his first Brooklands victory in spectacular fashion, driving his Isotta-Fraschini at over 100 m.p.h. for each of his flying laps in an eleven mile contest. 
Eldridge's next project was the gargantuan Fiat 'Mephistopheles'. It was originally a chain-driven sprint model; Eldridge had purchased the car for a rumoured $25, and extended its chassis by eighteen inches with sections of a London bus in order to incorporate a 260 hp Fiat aero engine. In June 1923 the two-ton 'Mephistopheles' claimed a new Brooklands lap record of 124.33 m.p.h. In August 1923 he gained the Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate, flying a Sopwith Gnu. 
In July 1924 Eldridge competed in the Arpajon speed trials, alongside the Frenchman Rene Thomas. The contest, which took place about twenty miles from Paris, was held on a public road four and a quarter miles in length. Thomas in his Delage set a new land speed record of 143.31 m.p.h. over two runs, with Eldridge in 'Mephistopheles' attaining a higher average approaching 147 m.p.h. Eldridge was subsequently disqualified following a complaint from Thomas that the Fiat did not conform with regulations as it had no reverse gear. Undeterred, Eldridge persuaded the officials and gendarmerie to prepare the road course once more a week later, and following an adjustment to 'Mephistopheles''s gearbox he set an official land speed record of 146.01 m.p.h., the last to be set on a public road. 
Eldridge's feat garnered little of the press interest in Britain that was accorded to other land speed records of the 1920s, probably because it was achieved in a Fiat. When Malcolm Campbell claimed the record just two months after Eldridge by a margin of 0.015 seconds, it was reported that 'England [had] snatched a world's record from Italy' ('Daily Telegraph', 26 Sept 1924). At Brooklands, Eldridge remained a popular figure. His head-to-head contest with John Godfrey Parry Thomas in August 1925 over ten laps was considered one of the most thrilling in the history of British motorsport. Both 'Mephistopheles' and Thomas's Leyland-Thomas lost tyre treads during the encounter, which ended in a narrow victory for Thomas. 
Later in 1925 Eldridge returned to Paris to focus on building his new cars, the Eldridge-Specials. These vehicles claimed numerous records at the Montlhery autodrome, whose potential as a venue for record-breaking attempts was recognized by Eldridge. In November 1925 he took the world's 50 km record there, at a speed of 116.43 m.p.h. In 1926 Eldridge and his compatriot Douglas Hawkes drove the cars in the Indianapolis 500, finishing nineteenth and fourteenth respectively. Soon afterwards Eldridge purchased the Indianapolis Miller in which Harry Hartz had claimed second place in the same race, with a view to modifying it for record breaking. At Montlhery, on 31 December 1926, he drove the Miller to the one hour record with a speed of 126.51 m.p.h. He suffered a near-fatal crash in the Miller racer on the French course in 1927, which practically ended his racing career. Travelling at over 130 m.p.h., the car somersaulted off the Montlhery banking and crashed in the infield. Thrown out of the car and left unconscious in hospital for ten days, he recovered, though lost the sight of his right eye. 
Following his accident Eldridge collaborated with George Eyston, assisting with the record-breaking achievements of the supercharged MG vehicles 'Magic Midget' and 'Magic Magnette' at Montlhery. Later he designed and developed Eyston's 'Speed of the Wind', in which Eyston claimed a new twenty-four hour record of 140.52 m.p.h. at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah in September 1935. The stage was set for Eldridge to collaborate with Eyston again on a land speed record attempt. Shortly after returning to England from America, however, Eldridge contracted pneumonia, dying in a nursing home, 38 Courtfield Gardens, Kensington, London, on 27 October 1935. 
Along with Parry Thomas, Ernest Eldridge embodied the designer-driver ethos that led to the creation of remarkable vehicles for the pursuit of the land speed record. Like that of his great racing rival Eldridge's low-key personal style contrasted greatly with the visible public profiles of other record breakers such as Malcolm Campbell or Eyston. However, Eldridge's advice to the latter to pursue record breaking as it was a potentially lucrative activity revealed him to be a canny observer of contemporary developments in publicity, and as such, an influential figure within motorsport in the 1920s and 1930s. 


@@@@@


doc= 97984


Caminada, Jerome (1844-1914), police officer, was born at 33 Peter Street, Manchester, on 15 March 1844, the third son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Francis Caminada (died 1847), a cabinet maker originally from Lombardy, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Boyle, who was of Irish descent. Other members of the Caminada family were makers of barometers and scientific instruments. The family worshipped at St Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Mulberry Street, Manchester; later, as a detective, Caminada would meet his informants on the back pews of the church. After attending St Mary's Catholic School, he worked in local iron foundries. 
Aged twenty-three, Caminada joined the Manchester city police force on 20 February 1868, when he was described as five feet eight inches in height, with a fresh complexion, grey eyes and brown hair. He started as a beat constable in the town centre or A division. In 1871 he was promoted sergeant, and transferred to the detective department, which was then part of the non-territorial E division. Based at headquarters in the basement of Manchester town hall, members of E division often rubbed shoulders with senior officers and promotion was held to be more rapid once one 'went indoors'. He married, on 19 December 1881, at the church of the Holy Name, Chorlton upon Medlock, Amelia (1855-1928), daughter of Joseph Wainhouse, weaver. For some years after their marriage he and his wife lived with his mother-in-law, Mary Wainhouse, at 22 Eastnor Street, Stretford. They had five children, three of whom died in infancy. 
In 1882 Caminada was promoted detective inspector, and in 1884 he was made chief detective inspector. He was appointed superintendent of E division on 2 December 1897. Leading the Manchester city police detective department, he became the city's most celebrated detective, and gained a national reputation for his police work. He learned to move effectively through all levels of the highly stratified society of Victorian Manchester, from interviewing a company director about alleged embezzlement to getting information at an illegal bare-knuckle boxing match. He developed an extraordinary memory for faces and became adept at disguises. On one occasion, his foot swathed in bandages, he pretended to have gout so he could obtain some patent medicine from a quack doctor practising fraudulently in Manchester. He also possessed physical courage and could tackle the toughest of criminals. On the trail of a violent burglar whom he had locked up on many previous occasions, Caminada, disguised as a workman, leapt on his prey, one Bob Horridge, as the latter emerged from a public house. Greeting the burglar with a cheery 'Hello Bob!' Caminada grasped him in a desperate bear hug in order to prevent him from drawing the loaded gun that he habitually carried in his coat pocket. Caminada himself was authorized to carry a pistol when he deemed it necessary. During his career he received awards from the Manchester watch committee as well as from banks after he had solved cases of fraud and forgery. He was reckoned to have brought about the imprisonment of over 1100 criminals, testimony in part to his care in preparing his cases meticulously when they came to trial. Much of his achievement was associated with his work in 'cleaning up' Deansgate in central Manchester. He regarded beer houses as centres of vice and claimed to have been responsible for suppressing 400 of them, and was also involved in campaigns against betting dens and brothels. 
Caminada was unusual as an outsider, from an Irish Catholic background, who rose through the ranks of the Manchester police. His origins heightened his awareness of the problems of poverty, and concern with the rehabilitation of criminals. While still a serving officer he published details of his police work in 'Twenty-Five Years of Detective Life' (1895), describing over fifty cases in which he had been involved. A second volume appeared in 1901, and highlighted the international scope of his counter-terrorist investigations. On one occasion he shadowed Fenian nationalist suspects from Manchester to Paris and in another case followed a man from England to the United States, back to England and then to Ireland, where he kept him under observation for a further two months, noting whom he met, until the suspect returned to the United States. 
Caminada retired on 31 March 1899 and received a pension of $210 a year. He and his wife lived in Whitworth Park, Moss Side, Manchester, where he owned houses and was an estate agent and active member of the ratepayers' association. Standing as an independent candidate for Openshaw, with an anti-socialist manifesto, he was elected to Manchester city council in 1907, but lost the seat in 1910 on the returning officer's casting vote. Seriously injured in a charabanc accident in north Wales in 1912, he never fully recovered and died from influenza, but with underlying diabetes and heart disease, at his home, 2 Mount St Bernard, Denmark Road, Whitworth Park, Manchester, on 10 March 1914. His wife, a son, and a daughter survived him. His funeral took place at the southern cemetery, Manchester, and a requiem mass was held at the church of the Holy Name. In tribute Judge Edward Parry feted Caminada as 'The Garibaldi of Detectives' (Hewitt, 90). An enduring tale told by the Manchester police themselves was of a well-known prostitute seen on the fringes of Caminada's funeral, wearing a red dress, perhaps a silent triumphant comment that the man who had done so much to change the criminal haunts of old Manchester had finally been laid to rest. 


@@@@@


doc= 97986


Vitre, Barbara Mary Denis de (1905-1960), police officer, was born at Eling Farm, Hampstead Norris, Berkshire, on 6 November 1905, the youngest daughter of George Theodosius Denis de Vitre (1861/2-1932), estate manager, and his wife, Harriet Isabel, 'nee' Beeching (1866-1955). After a boarding-school education at St Felix, Southwold, she studied social welfare work at the University of Manchester before undertaking a six-week course in police work under the auspices of the Women's Auxiliary Service led by Mary S. Allen. 
In October 1928 Denis de Vitre, or de Vitre, as she was usually known, joined Sheffield city police force, serving under Captain Percy Sillitoe, one of a small number of chief constables who were then enthusiastic about the appointment of women as attested officers. In 1931 she was appointed head constable for women in Cairo city police; her duties included the regulation of the city's brothels as well as the registration of prostitutes, undercover work for the narcotics bureau, and training Egyptian policewomen. In 1933 she returned to England to succeed Eileen Claire Sloane as Leicester's second policewoman. She was promoted sergeant in 1936. In 1937 she organized the first Provincial Policewomen's Conference, held in Leicester and attended by 36 women delegates from 26 different police forces. This was approximately half of all 'provincial' policewomen, who were mainly employed in twos or threes in urban forces (the conference did not include women from the Metropolitan Police, who already formed an establishment of 97). At the conference dinner a toast was made to 'the wartime women police', responded to by Mary Allen. De Vitre was called upon to respond to a further toast to 'the women police of today', demonstrating her increasingly significant profile nationally. In 1944 she transferred to Kent constabulary. Sir Percy Sillitoe, her former boss, had recently been appointed as the chief and wanted to create a new policewomen's department, which he chose her to head. Within ten months the women's establishment had increased from 2 to 179, including wartime auxiliaries as well as regulars (Sillitoe, 172). 
On 1 April 1945 de Vitre moved to the Home Office to assist the inspectors of constabularies with the inspection of all provincial policewomen and the monitoring of their duties and conditions of service, as well as advising chief constables and civil servants on the training and deployment of women. Since the 1920s women's organizations had joined with women MPs to campaign for the employment of women in all police forces and for the appointment of a woman to work with inspectors of constabularies. This demand was finally accepted by the home secretary, Herbert Morrison; de Vitre was appointed first as staff officer and, from 1948, as assistant inspector of constabularies (with responsibility for the inspection of all policewomen's departments), the highest rank available to women in the police service. The work undertaken by women during wartime had clearly been recognized; yet it was perceived by many to be for 'the duration' only and it was not assured when war ended. De Vitre used her position at the Home Office not only to promote women's employment but also to expand the range of duties and responsibilities in which they were involved. She did so with indefatigable enthusiasm. Contemporaries commented on the importance of her charm, tact, and strength of character in persuading chief constables and police authorities to expand their use of women officers. Sir William Johnson, inspector of constabularies, wrote: 'fine and sincere without any pretence, she won people by sheer force of her personality' ('Police Review', 19 Aug 1960). Between 1945 and 1960 the number of women employed in English, Welsh, and Scottish police forces increased from 445 to 2500. De Vitre was appointed OBE in 1951. 
Known affectionately as Miss de V among policewomen, de Vitre's significance also lies in the support she provided for her colleagues. She has been described as 'probably the most popular senior woman police officer the service has produced' (Lock, 187). De Vitre's recognition of the need for policewomen to come together as a professional community, sharing good practice as well as sociability, was demonstrated in her revival of policewomen's conferences (organized by the Home Office from 1947 onwards) for each of the districts within England, Scotland, and Wales. 
De Vitre's approach to policing is best characterized as a vocation, based on commitment to public duty and service. Although she had been trained by the controversial Mary Allen, who was associated with militant suffrage (and later the British Union of Fascists), de Vitre preferred not to draw attention to this link. Like many of her contemporaries, she argued that policewomen had a special role to play in dealing with women and child victims and offenders; but she also encouraged chief constables to deploy women across a broad range of uniformed and plain-clothes duties, criticizing those who restricted their role to office work. While the marriage bar (which required women to leave the service on marriage) had been lifted in England and Wales in 1946, it continued to operate in Scotland; de Vitre vociferously opposed its retention. In 1954 she wrote to Sir Charles Cunningham, permanent under-secretary at the Scottish Office, of her concerns that Scottish policewomen were 'the only women so discriminated against and I feel so strongly that we should establish the principle of their individual freedom' (NA Scot., HH55/776). The argument was only won beyond her lifetime; the Scottish marriage bar was finally removed in 1968. While she avoided the rhetoric of feminism publicly, her aim was to enable all women officers to realize their full potential for the benefit of the service as a whole. 
De Vitre died of cancer at her home, 7 Palace Street, Westminster, London, on 8 August 1960. In her role as assistant inspector of constabularies she was succeeded by Kathleen M. Hill who had worked with her closely at the Home Office since 1945. She did not marry and had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 97987


Cherrill, Frederick Rupert (1892-1964), police officer and fingerprint expert, was born in a cottage in Malt House Row, Dorchester-on-Thames, Berkshire, on 18 September 1892, the sixth of the nine children of George Edward Cherrill (1855-1923), carpenter, and his wife, Emma Ann, 'nee' Crook (1858-1923), who had been in domestic service. He was educated at the village school in Dorchester and at an art college in Oxford. His mother wanted him to train as a woodcarver and for a time he worked as a carpenter but from childhood, inspired by the fictional detective Sexton Blake, Cherrill wished to become a detective policeman. His fascination with fingerprints also began as a child, when he noticed the marks he imprinted in flour dust while assisting at the local watermill. His decision to apply to the police force was cemented by a chance meeting with a former policeman who occupied an adjoining hospital bed when Cherrill was recovering from an operation to remove a cervical rib. His new acquaintance mentioned Sir Edward Henry's 'The Classification and Uses of Finger Prints' (1900). Cherrill obtained a library copy and learned it 'pretty well off by heart' with the result that he was 'well versed in the history and theory of fingerprints' long before he joined the police ('Cherrill of the Yard', 10). 
Cherrill entered the Metropolitan Police in November 1914 as a constable attached to Wandsworth Common station. On 28 January 1915 he married Mabel Kate (1894-1973), daughter of Henry Room, tailor, of Cowley St John, Oxford; Joan, their only child, was born in 1916 (in 1938 she married John Godsell, later chief superintendent of New Scotland Yard's fingerprint bureau). In November 1915 Cherrill rescued a woman from a house fire, for which act of bravery he received a medal and the sum of 2 guineas from the Society for the Protection of Life from Fire. 
From the start of his police career Cherrill aspired to join the fingerprint bureau, which had been established in 1901. He realized his ambition by way of competitive entry in July 1920 and was trained by the bureau's second head, Superintendent Charles Stockley Collins (1866-1932). Cherrill gained successive promotions and attained the rank of chief superintendent in July 1949. In May 1938 he succeeded Harry Battley (1883-1960) as chief of the fingerprint bureau. He held the position until his retirement in January 1953. 
During his years as a detective Cherrill may 'have solved more murder cases than any other detective at the Yard' ('New York Times', 24 Dec 1964). Among his most renowned investigations were the Blackout Ripper murders, in which a Royal Air Force cadet, Gordon Frederick Cummins, killed and mutilated four women in London in the space of a few days in February 1942; the theft of the duchess of Windsor's jewels from Ednam Lodge, Surrey, in October 1946; and the Maidenhead 'trunk murder' of June 1948 in which a fragment of a fingerprint led to a conviction. 
Cherrill, who was also a handwriting expert, testified frequently for the prosecution. Many murderers were convicted and hanged after his calm and authoritative court testimony. He considered the most dramatic trial in which he was involved to be that of the career criminal Harold Dorian Trevor, who was convicted of the murder in October 1941 of an elderly widow and executed in March 1942. In retirement Cherrill claimed that he knew no instance of an innocent person being executed but in December 1949 he played a minor role in investigating the notorious murders at 10 Rillington Place, Notting Hill, for which Timothy Evans was wrongfully hanged before the guilt of John Christie was established. A month before Evans's trial Cherrill shared a convivial cup of tea with Mr and Mrs Christie in their flat ('Cherrill of the Yard', 168, 232). 
Cherrill gained the coronation medal, police long service medal, MBE (1943), king's police medal (1953), and many commendations. In the course of his police service he is known to have lived in Upper Tooting and Mitcham, Surrey. His autobiography, 'Cherrill of the Yard' (1954), is mainly an account of some of his most famous cases. It was a popular success in Britain and the USA, where it was issued under the title 'Fingerprints Never Lie'; the 'New York Times' reviewed it enthusiastically. Within a year the British edition was reprinted for a second time. The book, also published in paperback and book club formats, provided the basis for television programmes. Although Cherrill hinted at a further volume of memoirs, no such book ever appeared. In the course of his career and in early retirement, however, he published several works on his area of expertise. These included 'Notes on Fingerprints and Palmprints' (1940), 'Fingerprints' in the 'Journal of Criminal Science' (1950); 'Fingerprints and Disease' in 'Nature' (7 October 1950); and 'The Fingerprint System at Scotland Yard: a Practical Treatise on Fingerprint Identification' (1954), which updated books by Henry and Battley. Cherrill had a minor speaking role, as a fingerprint officer, in the classic Ealing Studios film 'The Blue Lamp' (1950). 
Cherrill's importance in the history of fingerprint science derives partly from his length of service, throughout the whole of which he remained active at the scenes of crimes, and the cases he investigated. He was a 'supreme clinical' analyst of fingerprints ('The Guardian', 24 Dec 1964) and 'an unusually able professional police technician' ('New York Times', 28 Nov 1954). His knowledge of his subject was 'encyclopaedic' and his experience 'immense' (Nott-Bower). Such was his fame that he became widely known as the Fingerprint Man. Cherrill contributed much to the technical advance of fingerprint science, technology, and classification. He collaborated with Battley in developing the single fingerprint system of identification, pioneered the use of palm prints as evidence, and oversaw the introduction of fingerprint data transmission by radio. Under his leadership the scope, scale, and efficiency of the Fingerprint Bureau were improved. 
Though widely acknowledged as 'the greatest fingerprint expert in the country' ('The Times', 9 Oct 1935), Cherrill was repeatedly attacked in print, sometimes ferociously, by George Wilton Wilton (1862-1964). Wilton, who championed Henry Faulds as a fingerprint pioneer, accused Cherrill of variously ignoring, understating, or denying Faulds's historical significance and, in doing so, undermining efforts to secure civil list pensions for Faulds's daughters. Cherrill thought Wilton 'not a reasonable person' (Cherrill to G. Carmichael, secretary, New Scotland Yard, 29 Dec 1954, TNA: PRO, MEPO 3/2546). 
Cherrill was portly, pink-faced, and jowly. When conducting his police duties outdoors he was seldom without a bowler hat. Though his demeanour could seem forbidding, he possessed benevolence, a sharp sense of humour, and a fund of anecdotes. His hobbies were fishing, for which he had a passion from boyhood, shooting, gardening, reading, woodworking, painting, and drawing. He was a skilled caricaturist of his police colleagues, lawyers, and others. He loved nature and routinely carried a magnifying glass to enable him to inspect flowers. In 1959 he returned to Dorchester, and lived with his wife in a bungalow on Abingdon Road. In retirement he continued to be consulted by barristers in need of his expert help. He died of congestive heart failure at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 23 December 1964 and was buried in Dorchester cemetery on 31 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 97988


Dew, Walter (1863-1947), police officer, was born at Far Cotton, Northampton, on 7 April 1863, the third son among the ten children of Walter Dew ('c'.1822-1884), railway guard, and his Irish-born wife, Eliza, 'nee' Fisher ('c'.1832-1914). The Dew family moved to London when Walter was ten years old. He left school aged thirteen, taking work in a solicitor's office and as a seed-merchant's clerk before fulfilling his ambition to work on the railways when he became a porter. 
Dew had an 'instinctive dread' of London policemen (Dew, 2), but when it was suggested that he became one, he successfully applied to join the Metropolitan Police in 1882, despite his slim frame and boyish looks. After drill training at Wellington Barracks he was posted to Paddington Green in June 1882. On 15 November 1886 he married Kate (1866-1927), daughter of John Morris, coachman. They had six children (one died in infancy). 
In June 1887 Dew joined the criminal investigation department (CID), where he acquired the nickname Blue Serge on account of the suit he habitually wore. He was transferred to the dangerous Whitechapel division, and as a detective constable he was involved in the Whitechapel murders investigation. Dew suffered from insomnia and loss of appetite, the result of long working hours, the sight of the victims' remains and lack of success in catching the killer. He was only too pleased to leave the district in December 1888, never to return, and frankly admitted that he had no idea of Jack the Ripper's identity, but believed there were seven victims. 
Dew proved to be a dependable, clever, and successful detective, steadily rising through the ranks, eventually becoming a detective chief inspector at Scotland Yard in 1906. It was suggested that his appearance and quiet, unassuming manner had contributed to his success. Soft-spoken, with a lisp and kindly eyes, he did not look like a typical policeman. He was one of the five chief inspectors at the Yard who were always available to investigate serious provincial cases. When he arrested Flora Fanny Haskell for the murder of her son in Salisbury in 1908 he was convinced of her guilt but she was acquitted after a retrial in 1909. He was more successful when Mary Robinson was imprisoned for perjury, in 1908, for her involvement in the Druce-Portland inheritance case of 1907. 
Already considering retirement in 1910, Dew took on his final and most famous case. Cora Crippen, an unsuccessful music-hall artiste, was reported missing. Her husband, Hawley Harvey Crippen, an American doctor who worked as a dentist in London, had told her family and friends that she had returned to America where she died. Cora's friends were dissatisfied with the story and Dew took up the case. He interviewed Crippen, who stated that his wife had left him for another man and the story about her dying was a lie to avoid any embarrassment. Furthermore, he admitted to having an affair with his much younger secretary, Ethel Le Neve, who was now living with him at 39 Hilldrop Crescent, Camden Town. 
Dew searched the house but found nothing suspicious. On returning three days later, he found Crippen and Le Neve had gone. A more thorough search of the property on 13 July led to the discovery of human remains in the cellar. The missing person case was now a murder investigation. Crippen and Le Neve had fled to Belgium where they boarded the steamer 'Montrose' to Canada, masquerading as father and son, with Le Neve dressed as a boy. The ship's captain, Henry George Kendall, suspected that the couple were the wanted pair and sent a wireless telegram message back to Liverpool conveying his suspicions. When Dew was informed he instinctively sensed that they were the fugitives. Taking a huge gamble he decided to pursue the 'Montrose' in a faster ship, the 'Laurentic', which he boarded at Liverpool under the pseudonym Mr Dewhurst. 
The 'Laurentic' reached Canada first and on 31 July 1910 Dew boarded the 'Montrose' in disguise with two Canadian police inspectors who arrested Crippen and Le Neve. Crippen was taken to the captain's cabin, where Dew met him with the salutation (subsequently quoted in many slightly varied forms of words), 'Good morning, Dr Crippen; I am chief inspector Dew' (Young, 42). Dew spent much time with Crippen on the return voyage, recalling 'there was something almost likeable about the mild little fellow' (Dew, 8). The detective was sometimes accused of being too sympathetic towards Crippen but, as he told the home secretary, Winston Churchill, 'I have always made it a practice to treat prisoners with courtesy & consideration no matter what their position in life' (TNA: PRO, MEPO 3/198). Despite the superficially amicable relationship with the well-mannered Crippen, Dew always believed him to be guilty and 'a callously calculating murderer' (Dew, 8). Le Neve described Dew as 'a very nice man' ('Thomson's Weekly News', 16 Oct 1920): he thought she was innocent of any involvement in the murder of Cora Crippen. 
Having captured the couple and safely delivered them for trial at the Old Bailey under the scrutiny of the world's media, Dew was accused by the crown prosecutors, Richard Muir and Travers Humphreys, of not working hard enough in helping them prepare the case against Crippen. Dew was not surprised when Crippen was found guilty of killing his wife and executed. Le Neve was acquitted of being an accessory. 
The worldwide press coverage of the Crippen case had made Dew possibly the most famous detective in the world and he embraced the celebrity status that remained with him for the rest of his life. He retired from the Metropolitan Police in December 1910, having been awarded an exemplary conduct certificate and around 130 commendations during his career. 
Always sensitive to criticism, Dew successfully sued nine newspapers for libel over false claims that he had made statements to the press about the Crippen case when in Canada, and with regard to attacks on his character and conduct during the investigation. For the next seventeen years Dew worked as a confidential enquiries agent but retired soon after his wife's death in 1927. He moved to Worthing, Sussex, to a small bungalow called the Wee Hoose. On 10 December 1928 Dew married a widow, Florence Idle (1876-1966), daughter of Charles Beedle, and became stepfather to her daughter Iris. 
Dew spent his retirement years gardening and writing. Still remembered as the man who caught Crippen, Dew was sometimes asked by national newspapers to comment on high-profile crimes. Between 1934 and 1936 his memoirs were serialized in the tabloid 'Thomson's Weekly News'. They were divided into three parts: the Crippen case, Jack the Ripper, and a selection of his other cases, including the arrests of international jewel thief Harry the Valet and the fraudster and bigamist Conrad Harms. In 1938 the memoirs were published in book form as 'I Caught Crippen'. 
Old age did not mellow Dew, who still sent angry letters to those who found fault with his conduct in the Crippen investigation. He died at the Wee Hoose, 10 Beaumont Road, Worthing, on 16 December 1947 from heart failure. He was buried three days later at Durrington cemetery, Worthing. His eldest son, Walter, became a special branch inspector, while another son, Stanley, was killed in the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 97990


McLevy, James (1793/4?-1873), police officer and author, was born near Markethill in the parish (whether Roman Catholic or civil is not clear) of Ballymacnab, co. Armagh, the son of John McLevy, weaver, and his wife, Catherine Dourie. McLevy remained true to his Catholic faith, which helped to define his approach to crime and detection throughout his police career in Edinburgh. A memoir of McLevy published in 1861 claimed that his father had been a farmer, but in Armagh smallholding and linen weaving were commonly joint occupations. After an elementary education McLevy's first job (at the age of thirteen) was as an apprentice fine-linen weaver. Still in his teens, about 1811, he married Rosa O'Neill and the couple migrated to Scotland. After living for two years in the textile town of Gatehouse-of-Fleet, Kirkcudbrightshire, they moved to Edinburgh, where Rosa died shortly afterwards. 
At the time of McLevy's arrival Edinburgh was going through a construction boom, due to its prestigious New Town development, and like many Irish incomers he found work as a builder's labourer. His reliability and strong work ethic were recognized by one employer, Robert Paterson, who in 1830 recommended McLevy as a suitable recruit to the city's police. He duly entered the force as a night watchman, the equivalent of a constable, and in 1833 was promoted to the rank of criminal officer. Captain James Stewart, superintendent of the Edinburgh police, was anxious to nurture a corps of specialists dedicated to detecting and prosecuting offenders, although his officers had more in common with the 'thief-takers' of London's Bow Street runners than the crack detective department of Scotland Yard, inaugurated in 1842. It was only during the 1850s that the term 'detective' began to be widely used in Edinburgh, and even when McLevy effectively retired in 1860 there was still ambiguity about whether his formal designation was as principal criminal officer or detective. 
From the names of McLevy's fellow officers -- such as Fallon, Reilly, and Mulholland -- it is evident that men of Irish extraction constituted a significant presence in Edinburgh's police during the mid-nineteenth century. The work was physically demanding, yet Edinburgh wage rates remained low and produced a high turnover of recruits. McLevy's longevity in service was unusual, and from the outset he demonstrated a determination to succeed. An incentive may have been the additional money that could be earned from rewards, as was indicated when an Edinburgh magistrate congratulated the team of McLevy and William Mulholland for apprehending a record number of offenders over a six-week period ('Caledonian Mercury', 11 Aug 1834). McLevy's exploits soon became a regular feature of city newspapers, and although his cases occasionally involved capital crimes like homicide, the overwhelming focus of his investigations was on the everyday offences of house-breaking, shop-breaking, thieving, resetting (receiving stolen goods), and fraud. 
McLevy developed a gift for connecting with the inhabitants of the Old Town 'conglomerates', which included the overcrowded wynds and closes of the Cowgate, Grassmarket, and West Port. There he built up an intricate network of informers, acquiring especial knowledge of the common lodging houses regarded by contemporaries as hotbeds of criminality. Pawnbrokers and second-hand goods dealers, known in Edinburgh as brokers, constituted another crucial source of information. McLevy's Irish Catholic identity may have eased the cultivation of his contacts, often themselves Irish, but he was also skilled at cajoling witnesses into saying more than they intended. By the 1840s his extraordinary vigilance and energy were repeatedly acknowledged by the press. One newspaper called him 'the lynx-eyed McLevy' ('The Scotsman', 16 Feb 1842), while the 'Caledonian Mercury' went so far as to call him 'the Scottish Vidocq' (28 June 1849), drawing parallels with Eugene-Francois Vidocq, the legendary (if controversial) French detective who had founded the 'brigade de surete' in 1812. 
McLevy's talents and commitment were highly valued by Edinburgh's police authorities. This was shown in 1852 when his robust use of language towards an English tourist, arrested in the mistaken belief that he was part of the pocket-picking Swell Mob, resulted in a formal complaint to the lord provost. McLevy was exonerated on the grounds that his finer feelings had become 'blunted' after so many years of pressure in the police service ('The Scotsman', 11 Sept 1852). Conversely, in 1856 he was considered sufficiently presentable to provide evidence to a House of Commons select committee on the merits of the ticket-of-leave system for returned transportees from Britain's penal colonies. McLevy emphatically was not in favour of Edinburgh criminals, many of whom he had helped convict, being encouraged back to their old haunts ('Second report', 59-61). In 1860, when the by now elderly detective sought leave to be released from active duty due to ill health, Lord Provost Francis Douglas Brown was effusive in his praise for McLevy's 'zeal' and 'remarkable faculty for identifying thieves' ('The Scotsman', 30 May 1860). Although still nominally attached to the police force, he was granted a pension of 1 guinea per week. 
With more spare time McLevy concentrated on completing a volume of reminiscences. 'Curiosities of Crime in Edinburgh' appeared at the beginning of 1861, an accomplishment that was innovative for a detective officer in the British Isles. Priced at 2 shillings -- complete with portrait of an affable looking, balding man with side-whiskers -- the book quickly sold out and was immediately reprinted. McLevy selected twenty-eight investigations he had actively pursued since the 1830s and presented them in the form of dramatic set pieces. As many of the dates, locations, and protagonists can be verified, it seems likely that over the years he kept a scrapbook of the hundreds of newspaper reports about himself. However, McLevy embellished his sleuthing skills in order to enliven the narrative. A mystery remains about whether the writing was ghosted, perhaps by an obliging journalist; contemporaries certainly had their suspicions. Nevertheless, the down-to-earth essence of his personality shines through the fifty stories that were eventually published. They contain quirky humour, salty dialogue, feisty characters, and a relative absence of the moralizing often associated with mid-Victorian explorations of the criminal underclass. 
Although a popular success, McLevy's first book was by no means universally acclaimed. Presbyterian and other Edinburgh evangelicals disliked his slyly irreverent allusions to their home missionary endeavours, and there was a sectarian edge to some of the criticism. In his second volume, 'The Sliding Scale of Life' (1861), McLevy took a more sanguine approach to the efforts of religious reformers, while at the same time introducing Jean Brash, one of his most incorrigible and colourful adversaries from the 1840s. In the ingenuity of her thieving activities and entrapment of gullible men Jean was deemed to be beyond 'training in a ragged school' ('Sliding Scale', 14). Yet despite a keen public appetite for such anecdotes, no further volume was forthcoming. During the 1860s McLevy's health deteriorated and chronic bronchitis and a heart condition eventually left him housebound. He died aged seventy-nine at his home, 5 South Richmond Street, Edinburgh, on 6 December 1873. He had longstanding ties with the city's Canongate district, and was buried at the cemetery there on 9 December. 
After his death McLevy's memory was kept alive through the continuing popularity of his stories. These in turn inspired the exploits of James McGovan, a fictional Edinburgh detective created in the 1870s by William Crawford Honeyman. In 1975 the writer George Scott-Moncrieff was one of the first to suggest that McLevy and his 'alter ego' McGovan had influenced the young Arthur Conan Doyle. Whatever the reality, in 1999 McLevy made the full transition to fictional sleuth, when the BBC broadcast the first in a series of radio dramas. The cat-loving, coffee connoisseur created by David Ashton quite deliberately bore scant resemblance to the real man, although elements from the original stories were woven into the plot lines. Following on from this success, the first of Ashton's McLevy novels appeared in 2006. Inevitably, literary celebrity has blurred the identity of the historical detective, but McLevy's career remains significant in its own right. He demonstrated shrewd awareness of his self-image and came to embody the vigilance of Edinburgh's police within the community. Latterly he was seen as an indispensable agent of law enforcement, confounding contemporary stereotypes about Irish migrants and criminality. In 2000 his legacy was recognized by Lothian and Borders police, when the annual McLevy trophy was first presented for the best detection work in the force. 


@@@@@


doc= 97993


Howe, Francis Richard Henry Penn Curzon, fifth Earl Howe (1884-1964), politician and motorist, was born at Penn, Buckinghamshire, on 1 May 1884, the only son of Richard George Penn Curzon Howe, fourth Earl Howe (1861-1929), MP for the High Wycombe division of Buckinghamshire from 1885 until 1900 when he succeeded to the earldom, and his wife, Lady Georgiana Elizabeth Spencer-Churchill (died 1906), fifth daughter of the seventh duke of Marlborough. He was styled Viscount Curzon from 1900 until he succeeded his father as fifth Earl Howe in January 1929. His earliest ambitions pointed to a career in the navy, but on the grounds of poor health he was sent instead to Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford. However, in 1904 he joined the Sussex division of the RNVR. He married on 28 October 1907 his cousin Mary (1887-1962), only daughter of Colonel Montagu Curzon, younger son of the first Earl Howe. They had one son and one daughter. 
In the First World War Howe fought at Antwerp in 1914 as commander in the Howe battalion of the Royal Naval Division and subsequently served as a gunnery officer on the 'Queen Elizabeth'. In 1918, finding the peacetime navy an unappealing prospect, Howe turned to politics. Backed by the 'Coupon' issued by Lloyd George's coalition, he stood as Conservative candidate in South Battersea. As Viscount Curzon, he was returned with 68 per cent of the vote, though successive elections rapidly whittled his majority down to 1100 in a straight fight with Labour in 1923. Initially he saw himself as a spokesman for his former shipmates who urged him on leaving ship to 'Tell the Financial Secretary to the Admiralty what we think of him -- tell him off' ('Hansard 5C', 126, 18 March 1920, col. 2536). He also became prominent as a defender of the motorist whom he saw as persecuted by the police, harassed by legislation and unfairly taxed. He accused the petrol companies of profiteering and regularly attacked the Anglo-Persian Oil Company as a state-owned business with an interest in keeping prices high. ('Hansard 5C', 142, 26 May 1921, col. 300; 143, 13 June, col. 2). 
In common with many inter-war MPs and peers Howe was reluctant to accept that the laws on motoring applied to him. Fortified by personal experience he protested that the driver often committed offences unknowingly, only to be charged before 'a court of so-called justice' and convicted because 'The word of anybody is taken against him. A policeman might say anything he likes' ('Hansard 5C', 135, 10 Dec 1920, col. 2673-4). He demanded the removal of the 20 mph speed limit, complained that too many police were employed to detect infringements of the 'Motor Car Act' of 1903, and frequently asked how many convictions against MPs and their drivers had been secured under the act, thereby exposing himself to the challenge: 'How many convictions have been recorded against the hon. and gallant member who put the question?' ('Hansard 5C', 132, 27 July 1920, col. 1200). 
Howe's contributions to debate were severely limited by his appointment as a junior whip in 1924, though on his elevation to the House of Lords in 1929 as Earl Howe, he resumed his defence of the motorist. His favourite targets were taxi drivers, whom he accused of causing congestion in London, and local authorities for selling building land along the new arterial roads which were themselves financed via the Road Fund and thus 'from the pockets of the motoring community' ('The Times', 16 Oct 1934, 2 Oct 1936). As late as 1945 he responded to reports that 44,307 people had been killed on the roads during wartime by insisting that the main cause of the casualties was 'the recklessness of pedestrians' ('The Times', 22 Nov 1945). 
Howe's passion for motoring dated from 1898 when visiting France aged fourteen. However, between 1908 and 1924 alone he acquired twenty-one convictions for driving offences. When charged with driving at 32 mph in a 20 mph zone in 1924 he was unapologetic, explaining that 'the car had four wheel brakes and could pull up very quickly'. The magistrate fined him $20 and suspended his licence for six months ('Daily Mail', 3 April 1924). Yet this proved no deterrent and Howe was fined so often for excessive speed that in 1928 an exasperated magistrate advised him to take up motor racing, which he did at the age of forty-four. 
As an amateur racing driver Howe participated in the new Mountain Circuit at Brooklands which was 'so designed that exciting incidents were plentiful', driving a type 43 Bugatti of which he was very fond. In 1931 he and Tim Birkin won the Le Mans 24 hour race in an Alfa Romeo Mouza. He suffered seven accidents including one at Vickers Bridge Corner at Brooklands in 1937 when he was thrown from the car, breaking his wrist, several ribs, and his shoulder. 'I have been wondering whether this will be the end of my husband's racing career', Lady Howe told the 'Daily Mirror'. 'These terrific speeds terrify me, but I would never dream of asking him to give up. His heart is too much in it' ('Daily Mirror', 19 May 1937). Two months later he was back on the track as an observer. 
Howe had taken up motor sport in the last days of amateur drivers and was obliged to give way to the professional racing teams. However, his experience and enthusiasm enabled him to devote himself to the development of what was now established as a leading sport. He served as chairman of the British Road Federation, chairman of the Royal Automobile Club's competition committee, and president of the British Racing Drivers' Club from 1928 until his death. His ambition was to make Britain the centre of the motor racing world by promoting the construction of new superior speedway tracks. 
In an era when divorce was still comparatively uncommon and court appearances in marital cases were disapproved of in upper-class circles, Lord Howe was unusual. His first marriage was dissolved in January 1937, and he married second, on 8 February 1937, Joyce Mary McLean Jack, daughter of Charles McLean Jack of Johannesburg, South Africa, with whom he had a daughter. He divorced her in July 1943 and married third, on 8 February 1944, Sybil Boyter Shafto (1905-1999), former wife of Major Ernest Duncombe Shafto and daughter of Captain Francis Johnson, with whom also he had a daughter. He died at his home, Hatchits, at Penn in Buckinghamshire on 26 July 1964. A robust personality, Howe was a vocal parliamentarian and became an immensely popular figure in Britain's motor racing fraternity. 


@@@@@


doc= 97995


Bond, Lawrence (1907-1974), engineer and motor vehicle designer, was born at 5 Penwortham Hill, Penwortham, Preston, Lancashire, on 2 August 1907, the son of Frederick Charles Bond (1873-1963), a clothing maker who became a well-known local historian and artist, and his wife, Margaret Ellen, 'nee' Morphy ('c'.1876-1957), from Ballinamallard, Fermanagh, Ireland. He had one sibling, a younger brother, Frederick Bond (1910-1997). The family lived in the Broadgate area of Preston, close to the centre of the town and Lawrie (as he was known) was educated at Preston grammar school and afterwards served an apprenticeship. 
In the early 1930s Bond worked in the drawing offices of Henry Meadows Ltd, engine and gearbox manufacturers, in Wolverhampton. He went on to work as a draughtsman with the Blackburn Aircraft Company at Brough, Yorkshire. At Beverley register office he married, on 22 December 1934, Mary Marjorie, daughter of Albert Lambert, house decorator. They had one daughter. 
Bond's time at Brough was an important influence on his later design work, which frequently featured weight-saving aircraft construction techniques and materials. By 1944 he had set up his own small engineering workshop just outside Blackpool, Lancashire. Employing some 20-30 workers, the Bond Aircraft and Engineering Company (Blackpool) Ltd manufactured aircraft and vehicle components under Ministry of Supply contract and had its office on Queen Street in the centre of the town. The end of the war saw the closure of his Blackpool premises and he moved to a small workshop with attached living accommodation, known as Towneley Works off Berry Lane, Longridge, Lancashire. His first marriage ended in divorce and he married, second, at Blackpool register office, on 18 January 1947, Pauline Freeman, the divorced wife of George Stanley Percival Freeman; she was the daughter of Jeffrey Mackenzie, regular soldier. 
At Longridge, with now only a handful of staff and the work varied and often unreliable, Bond began to turn his own designs into reality, initially concentrating on his passion for motor racing. His first machine, intended to compete in the new post-war 500 cc class, was nicknamed the Doodlebug and made its public debut in 1947 at the Shelsley Walsh hill climb. This was followed by a more sophisticated Type C machine built to conform to the new national 500 cc formula of 1948. He soon became a well-known, if less than successful, figure at such events and his machines, featuring front wheel drive, aluminium semi-monocoque construction and elektron alloy castings, were extremely lightweight and attracted a lot of attention. 
Although they established Bond's reputation as a designer, these racing cars were far from a commercial success and he turned his attention to more practical applications of his ideas. His prototype 1/8 litre shopping car was announced in May 1948. Economic conditions in the UK, including continuing wartime petrol rationing and restrictions on materials for manufacturing, made such a vehicle an attractive commercial proposition. Realizing the sales potential of his ultra-lightweight, three-wheel microcar, with fuel consumption of 100 miles per gallon, but not having the facilities to put it into production, he sold the design to the Preston firm of Sharp's Commercials (renamed Bond Cars Ltd from 1964). Sharp's turned Bond's concept into the successful Bond Minicar which gave post-war Britain a basic, but affordable, means of personal transport. A range of these diminutive vehicles was marketed under the Bond name and developed through consecutive designations Mk A to Mk G from 1949 up to 1966 with a total of approximately 26,500 vehicles being produced. 
Bond next turned his attention to the design and manufacture of a series of small lightweight motorcycles and scooters. The first of these, the Bond Minibyke, an unconventional machine, again utilizing mainly aluminium construction, appeared in 1949. After producing some 150 machines at Longridge, he sold the rights to Ellis Ltd of Leeds, which built a further 600. Next came the Lilliput in 1951 under his new company name of BAC (Bond Aircraft and Engineering Company). This was a more conventional looking machine, but was not a commercial success with only some 200 being built. The Gazelle, a scooter-type machine, was introduced in the same year, but the design was soon sold after only a handful had been produced. 
In 1953 Bond sold his Longridge workshop and began to concentrate on freelance design work rather than manufacturing, moving south to Wormley in Surrey. He worked on a number of ultimately unsuccessful projects, including his final two-wheel design, the Bond Sherpa Scooter announced in 1955. Despite these setbacks he was busier than ever. In 1956 he moved to Loxwood in Sussex to set up a new workshop, Lawrence Bond Cars Ltd, and later that year two new vehicles which he had designed were launched. The first was the Berkeley Sports, an attractive four-wheel, two-seater open tourer built by Berkeley Coachwork Ltd, using an innovative semi-monocoque shell, this time in glass-fibre. It received excellent press reviews and achieved limited competition success, continuing in production until 1961, with over 4000 being built. The second design was the Opperman Unicar, built by S. E. Opperman Ltd, a very basic four-wheel, four-seat microcar utilizing glass-fibre semi-monocoque construction. Production ceased in 1959, with only some 200 having been sold, most as 'build-it-yourself' kits to avoid purchase tax. 
These commercial successes enabled Bond to turn his attention once again to designing racing cars, resulting in 1960 in the Bond formula junior. This was a breakaway design featuring a forward mounted engine with front wheel drive and was the first stressed skin monocoque formula junior racing car. In the early 1960s he renewed links with Sharp's Commercials, designing a completely new three-wheeler for them, the Bond 875, a much more conventional vehicle than the previous Minicars and considered a worthy competitor to Reliant, who were dominating the three-wheeler market by this time. He also styled the company's first four-wheel model, the Bond Equipe GT, a pretty glass-fibre bodied specialist sports car based on the Triumph chassis and drive train. 
In 1965 Bond moved north again, to Bowes in Yorkshire, intending to combine the roles of freelance designer and publican. He continued working on a number of projects and became interested in boat design, but his health deteriorated and resulted in a return to Lancashire, to live with his daughter, his only child. He died at her home, 56 Woodlands Road, Lytham, Lancashire, on 2 September 1974. 
Bond was a talented and prolific designer who was never afraid to try out new ideas, though his obsession with weight saving, often to the point of structural weakness, proved to be the flaw of a number of his designs. This and his apparent lack of business sense, or the patience to develop his designs into commercially viable products, led to several of his ideas falling by the wayside. He was an enigmatic character, always smartly dressed, but often in the background, uncomfortable with personal publicity. His second wife, Pauline, was responsible for much of the press coverage that helped promote his projects. Best remembered for the Bond Minicar, an affordable product for the period of post-war austerity, he was not sentimental about his work and saw his designs simply as solutions to specific problems or circumstances. When, in later life, he was confronted by a group of enthusiastic Bond Minicar owners, he was puzzled that they were still driving such vehicles, when more comfortable and practical alternatives had become available. 


@@@@@


doc= 97997


Shanks, John (1825-1895), sanitary engineer, was born in Stonefield, Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 22 December 1825, the eldest son of William Shanks, a handloom weaver and later a church officer, and his wife, Helen Gowans. He served an apprenticeship as a plumber with Wallace and Connell, Glasgow, and on completing his apprenticeship continued in their employment as a skilled tradesman or journeyman. But he was ambitious and keen to be his own master and in 1851, aged twenty-five, he started his own business at 32 High Street, Paisley, as a plumber and gas fitter. Two years later he opened a branch in Lowndes Street, Barrhead, before moving to larger premises in Main Street, opposite the Free Church, later the same year. In 1853 he married Isabella Mills (1827/8-1869), with whom he had at least two sons and three daughters. 
Shanks continued to operate the two premises until 1855, when he closed those in Paisley and thereafter concentrated his operations in the expanding town of Barrhead. The same year he was joined by his younger brother Andrew Ferrier Shanks, who had also served an apprenticeship as a plumber with Wallace and Connell. In 1860 Shanks established a brass foundry and finishing shop in the upper floor of the premises so he could manufacture water closets, many of which at that time incorporated working parts of iron and brass. He still had to buy the necessary cast-iron components and these were supplied by George Smith & Co., of Glasgow -- well known for their cast-iron urinals -- while the earthenware closet basins came from J. M. P. Bell of Glasgow. 
Shanks's first patent, taken out in 1863, specified a water closet (WC) with a plunger valve to release the waste and a ball cock to refill the basin. The plunger valve consisted of an india-rubber ball that was contained in a cylinder at the rear and connected to the basin by a short inclined pipe. It was known as the 'patent flexible valve closet', although within the works it was simply called the number 4. When the prince of Wales was taken ill with typhoid in 1871 an inspection of the drainage and sanitary condition of Buckingham Palace found that every water closet in the palace was defective except one solitary specimen of Shanks's patent number 4 found in the servants' quarters. 
In 1866, encouraged by the success of this closet, Shanks built an entirely new brass foundry at Barrhead, named the Tubal Foundry after Tubal Cain, the first worker in brass and iron in the 'Old Testament'. Following the death of his first wife he married second, on 2 January 1871, a widow, Jessie Turnbull Smith ('b'. 1833/4), housekeeper, daughter of Walter Turnbull, block printer. They had a daughter. 
In 1871, at precisely the time when a mass market for fitted baths was first emerging, Shanks took out his first patent for a combined supply, waste, and overflow fitting for a bath. Before 1870 fixed baths with connections to hot and cold water and a waste outlet had been something of a luxury but from the 1870s most new middle-class houses were built with bathrooms fitted with a bath, lavatory, washbasin, and water closet. The same year Shanks took out his first patent for another sanitary appliance with which the firm was to become closely associated: this was the overhead water closet cistern or 'water waste preventer', which was developed by many sanitary engineers from the 1850s in an effort to stop the flow of mains water into the tank while the closet was being flushed. 
Although Shanks had his own brass foundry, he remained heavily dependent on George Smith & Co. to provide his iron castings and also to distribute his goods, and he entered a ten-year agreement to pay them 171/2 per cent commission on the total output of the Tubal Foundry while paying a fixed high price for the cast iron they supplied. Struggling under these terms and to lessen his dependence on Smith & Co. Shanks started his own iron foundry around 1873. In 1875 he was declared bankrupt and his brother Andrew took over the firm, but by 1878 Shanks was once more able to resume active business. A new partnership was arranged of Shanks & Co. with the two brothers having equal shares. By 1878 the firm had appointed an agent in London and gradually business in the capital grew and showrooms were established at 46 Cannon Street. 
In 1877, after a break of four years probably attributable to the financial difficulties of the mid-1870s, Shanks resumed patenting sanitary ware with a substantial patent that specified improvements to water closets and cisterns, and for a cast-iron bath made with a shelf incorporating the waste and overflow. This was marketed as the Imperial bath and it enjoyed considerable success. Before the 1870s most domestic baths were made of sheet iron or copper and required the support of a wooden enclosure. From the early 1880s the use of wooden cabinet work in bathrooms was widely condemned as unhygienic as it harboured dirt and germs. Cast-iron baths won the approval of health reformers as they were free standing and therefore easier to clean around; they were also cheap and affordable. They had appeared as early as the 1850s -- so Shanks cannot be credited with their introduction -- but when they rose to popularity in the 1880s he was closely involved in their development and production, manufacturing well-designed, free-standing, enamelled cast-iron baths with a comfortable rolled edge. 
The same patent of 1877 also covered improvements to lavatory washbasins. Shanks introduced a washbasin that replaced the projecting nozzles of ordinary taps with side inlets or slits near the rim. He soon introduced a similar arrangement which was used on his Citizen washbasin and Imperial baths. Only the spindle and knobs of the tap were visible and the water entered the basin through small perforations in the earthenware, securing, the firm claimed in 1886, the 'maximum of cleanliness'. In 1881 he patented a bath tap with a flexible tube and perforated rose for providing a shower or spray bath and then the following year he patented a mixer tap for baths and washbasins: this had a mixing chamber that received the water from the hot and cold inlet valves, which was then discharged through a single outlet. He also catered for the luxury end of the market with such products as the Independent combined shower, spray, and full-length bath, which he exhibited at the Edinburgh International Exhibition in 1886. By then he had also introduced another luxury article, a pedestal bidet with hot and cold water and an ascending spray. 
Shanks also extended his range of water closets, again taking out patent protection. In 1880 he took out his first patent for a wash-out closet -- an all ceramic water closet basin and trap containing water in the basin separate from the trap -- and in 1881 his first for a syphonic water closet cistern. By the early 1880s support was growing for the free-standing pedestal water closet, free of any wooden enclosure, and Shanks responded with an 'encased washing-out closet' in which the earthenware basin and trap were enclosed in an iron shell filled with concrete. In January 1884 Shanks claimed to have sold 'many hundreds' to hospitals and private customers but this device did not remain in production for long. In 1885 he patented a valve closet with two discharge valves for use on ships. Shanks were subsequently to supply many of the great liners built in the first half of the twentieth century, including the 'Titanic'. Shanks also took out three patents for urinals between 1884 and 1892. In 1888 he patented his first syphonic water closet cistern, which employed an inverted cast-iron bell to raise the water over the syphon pipe. Shanks were to manufacture huge quantities of this type of cistern -- many for export -- including the well-known model the Levern. 
In 1892 Shanks took out a patent for a water closet cistern close coupled to the closet basin. This was arguably his most important and original contribution to the development of the water closet. Some thirty years earlier Shanks had gone some way towards developing a low level reserve of flush water with his number 4 plunger closet, but the 1892 patent described a closet that appeared in full coloured glory in an illustrated catalogue published about a year later as the 'patent combination closet'. The cistern was made of cast iron and coupled to a wash-down closet, which was the first of a long line of close coupled water closets used worldwide in the twentieth century. In March 1894 Shanks patented a jet syphon closet that flushed the closet using a jet to charge a syphon that drew the waste from the basin instead of relying on the sheer force of the flush. The syphonic closet had originated in the United States in the 1870s but Shanks was just ahead of two chief main rivals with his patent: Thomas W. Twyford and George Jennings patented their versions a few months later. 
Shanks's inventiveness was matched by the rapid expansion of the Tubal works. It grew to become one of the most conspicuous features of Barrhead, covering nearly 7 acres of land on the slope from the High Street to the waterside. By the 1890s the firm employed 600 workers in twenty different trades, from iron and brass founding to enamelling, connected with the production of baths, cisterns, and other sanitary appliances. In 1893 the firm had agencies in Manchester, Aberdeen, and Dublin as well as London and Glasgow. Its richly illustrated catalogue of that year confirmed the firm's place as one of the leading sanitary manufacturers in Britain. 
Shanks was active in local affairs as a member of Neilston parish council, was manager of Barrhead United Presbyterian Church, and was prominent in the temperance cause. Following the Irish 'Home Rule Bill' he became a Liberal Unionist in national politics. His younger brother having predeceased him in 1893, he left the day-to-day running of the company to his son John and his nephew William. Left a 'helpless invalid' by a stroke, he died at his home, Tubal Lodge, Barrhead, on 18 December 1895. 
The business passed to his nephew William Shanks and his son John, who continued the expansion of the company, operating with three departments, home, export, and marine. In 1902 the firm established its own fireclay works -- the Victoria Pottery -- and in 1918 acquired the old-established earthenware manufacturers J. and M. Craig of Kilmarnock. Shanks remained a household name for bathroom fittings through the twentieth century, merging in 1969 with Armitage, an old-established Staffordshire firm of sanitary potters, to create the famous brand name Armitage Shanks. 


@@@@@


doc= 97998


Sir Henry Meux, first baronet (bap. 1770, d. 1841), baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 8 May 1770, was at constant loggerheads with his younger brother Thomas Meux (1772-1842), who was in charge of the brewing operations. Henry, overseeing the firm's sales and tied houses, began to conceal things from his partners. Andrew Reid became increasingly suspicious of his transactions and in 1808 instigated a much publicized case in chancery accusing Henry Meux of misappropriating $163,000 of the partnership's capital. Meux defended himself as best he could, claiming that the large loans he had made to publicans had been in the best interests of the firm and with the tacit agreement of Sir Robert Wigram. In truth he had been running a distilling business hidden from his partners and in competition with that owned by Andrew Reid. Chancery ordered the sale of the brewery, and in 1809 the immensely profitable concern was sold. Its purchasers were members of the Reid and Wigram families and, for seven uneasy years in the new partnership, Thomas Meux, Henry Meux, and his father, had two strategies. Realizing the likely outcome of the chancery case, Richard Meux had attempted to find a partnership for Henry with Whitbreads, claiming he would bring all his old customers with him. In view of Meux's reputation for trouble, the Whitbreads wisely turned his offer down. Next, again unsuccessfully, they had attempted to buy the Griffin brewery, but their resources, although they had a fifth share in the sale's proceeds, did not match those of the Reid and Wigram families. 
Undeterred, Henry Meux soon acquired the Horseshoe brewery in Tottenham Court Road. He quickly transformed its fortunes. Then in 1814 disaster struck. On 17 October one of his great vats burst under the pressure of 7664 barrels of porter. Walls were swept away, basements flooded, nearby tenements collapsed. Eight people lost their lives, either by 'drowning, injury, poisoning by the porter fumes or drunkenness' (Mathias, 62). Despite losses of $15,000 the brewery survived. Indeed it flourished. One historian maintains, from evidence given in 1817 to the select committee of the House of Commons on the police of the metropolis, that it did so by 'using methods on the borders of legality and beyond to secure trade' (Corran, 343). Certainly Henry Meux had drive and an ability to surmount setback. On his death his brewery ranked fifth in terms of output among London breweries. As he had acquired the Horseshoe brewery only thirty years earlier this was an impressive achievement against the intense competition throughout from half a dozen established breweries each turning out over 100,000 barrels annually. His marriage in November 1814 to Elizabeth Mary (died 1851), daughter of Thomas Smith of Castlebar House, Middlesex, took place shortly after the Tottenham Court Road catastrophe. 
In September 1831 Henry Meux was granted a baronetcy on the patronage of his relative the lord chancellor, Lord Brougham. To match his title he bought in the late 1830s the historic Theobalds Park estate in Hertfordshire, near Cheshunt and Waltham Cross. Its glory days as a royal residence were long past. The original house, built by William Cecil, Lord Burghley, became a favourite house of James I, who exchanged it for Hatfield House, but it had been almost entirely dismantled during the Commonwealth. Sir Henry Meux's purchase was a modestly sized structure of the late 1760s with a surrounding estate of some 2700 acres. Enjoying country life for little more than a couple of years, he died at Theobalds Park on 7 April 1841, leaving a family of four children, the 23-year-old second baronet and three daughters. 
The purchase of Theobalds underlined the first baronet's vision of his family's social advancement. The dynasties of big London breweries were famously wealthy. Some, like the Whitbreads, possessed large landed estates, but in general they stuck to the task of running their immensely profitable enterprises. The Meuxs did not. Two of Sir Henry's daughters, with portions of $20,000 each, married into the aristocracy, one to the heir of the earl of Essex of nearby Cassiobury Park, while the son and successor to the baronetcy, 


@@@@@


doc= 97999


Trent, William (1653x66-1724), merchant and founder of Trenton, New Jersey, was born into a merchant family in Inverness about which few further details are known. In the early 1680s William followed his brother James and cousin Maurice to Pennsylvania. There he quickly became one of the leading figures in Philadelphia, where about thirty-five merchants formed a nascent upper class. He was a committed member of the Church of England and served as a vestryman at Christ Church, Philadelphia, between 1717 and 1720. Although an Anglican in a society established and dominated by Quakers, and despite some difficult times, he achieved both financial and political success. 
As a merchant Trent built and invested in a large number of ships, sharing expenses and risks with leading merchants in the area, as well as with the colony's proprietor, William Penn. In 1703 Penn's secretary, James Logan, wrote to his employer about an investment in a venture to collect rice from South Carolina and to trade it overseas, noting that it was 'with the Most Industrious thriving and Intilligent Traders here' of whom Trent was one (Dunn and Dunn, 4.248). Trent's exports and imports included tobacco, corn, bread, flour, furs, liquor, rice, and slaves. In 1704 he purchased with his fellow Philadelphian merchant Isaac Norris 7500 acres on the Schuylkill River, north-east of Philadelphia, part of which formed the site of modern-day Norristown. Certain ventures, like that of 1703 -- undertaken during Queen Anne's War -- were risky and Trent's wealth fluctuated with the successes and failures of shipping during wartime. According to one early list for Philadelphia he was identified as the town's fourteenth wealthiest person while another document placed him third. He was sufficiently successful to invest in ships, goods, and property including Philadelphia's famous Slate Roof House, previously occupied by William Penn, which he owned between 1703 and 1708. 
In 1703 Trent was appointed to Pennsylvania's provincial council; then, beginning in 1710, he was elected on five occasions to the assembly and selected as speaker in 1717 and 1719. In addition, and while not trained as a lawyer, he served as a provincial and then a supreme court judge. In politics Trent sided with the conservative proprietary faction, not surprising for an Anglican. At the same time, he did not believe that Quakers should be prevented from testifying in court or from holding office because of their refusal to swear oaths. 
About 1693 Trent married Mary Burge (died 1708), with whom he had three surviving sons -- James, John, and Morris -- and one daughter, Mary. After his wife's death in April 1708 he married, on 20 July 1710, the nineteen-year-old Mary Coddington, with whom he had two sons; one, Thomas ('b'. 1711), died young while the second, later known as Major William Trent (1715- 'c'.1787), became a pioneer and commander of Fort Pitt during the Pontiac War (1763-6). A few years after the marriage Mary Coddington was one of three women in Philadelphia caught up in a scandal involving a possible affair with Francis Philips, rector of Christ Church, yet she subsequently moved with her husband to New Jersey in 1721. 
In August 1714 Trent purchased 800 acres of land at The Falls, on both sides of the Assunpink Creek on the northern shore of the Delaware River. This was an area originally settled by a Yorkshire Quaker, Mahlon Stacy (died 1704), from whose son Trent purchased the land and on which he now built lumber and fulling mills and started an iron forge. Here between 1716 and 1719 he also built a Georgian-style brick house that was originally used as a summer residence. The house -- which now stands in 2 acres of grounds between Market and South Warren streets, Trenton -- had two storeys, as well as a full basement that originally contained the kitchen and an attic (once used for storage and slave quarters). There were two parlours on the ground floor and four bedrooms on the first; the house has a large central hall, and two entrances, which originally faced onto the nearby Delaware River and a local road. Large by the standards of the times, the house was meant to impress visitors with its owner's wealth and status. On 4 January 1719 Trent also submitted a plan for 'Trent town' to the Hunterdon county authorities; Trenton was first used as the settlement's name later that year though variations (including Trent's-town, Trent-town, and The Falls) were still used during the eighteenth century. 
In 1721, in the wake of the economic crisis that followed the South Sea Bubble, Trent was forced to liquidate his Pennsylvania assets and moved to his summer residence. As in Pennsylvania he achieved political and judicial office in New Jersey. At the request of the governor, William Burnet, Trent was commissioned as a colonel in the Hunterdon county militia and in 1719 became a judge of the court of common pleas for Hunterdon. He also represented Burlington county in the colony's legislature and held the office of speaker of the assembly in 1723 and 1724. Shortly before his death he was appointed as New Jersey's chief justice. 
William Trent died suddenly from a 'fit of apoplexy' on 25 December 1724 at Trenton; he was survived by his children and his second wife. His place of burial is unknown, though it has been suggested that he was buried in a Quaker ground in what is now Riverview cemetery, Trenton. Trent died intestate and the allocation of his estate was contested by his wife and eldest son. The dispute was settled two years later when the executors valued Trent's listed property at $1100 18's'. 01/2died In March 1737 it was claimed that Trent had not died from a stroke but had been murdered by three slaves, who were arrested and subsequently executed on charges of poisoning. 
Since his death Trent's New Jersey residence has had more than twenty owners, and was used by both the Hessians and patriots during the American War of Independence. It later served as a residence for three of New Jersey's governors and is now the oldest building in the state's capital city. In 1929 the house -- known variously as Kingsbury Hall and Bloomsbury Court and now as Trent House -- was donated to the city of Trenton by its last private owner, Edward A. Stokes, who stipulated that it be maintained as a public cultural institution. It was restored during the 1930s, furnished with period pieces, and opened to the public in 1939. Today the 1719 William Trent House Museum is operated by the city and the Trent House Association, and has been designated a national landmark by the United States congress. 


@@@@@


doc= 98001


Simonds family (per. c.1768-1960), brewers, traced its origins in that trade to William Simonds ('bap'. 1733, died 1782), who was the second son of a yeoman of Arborfield, Berkshire, Thomas Simonds (1700-1765), the owner of extensive estates. On his father's death William Simonds, who was married to Mary Blackall (1730-1797), resolved to forsake the land and become an industrialist. He moved to nearby Reading, which the excise department records show to have become the most important malting area in Britain. There Berkshire barley was converted into malt and shipped down the River Thames to the large-scale breweries in London, such as Barclay Perkins. Having established a malting business at Reading, about 1768 he began brewing as well. 
Simonds's town centre premises were, however, too cramped to permit much expansion, and it was his only son, William Blackall Simonds (bap. 1761, d. 1834), baptized at Broad Street Independent Chapel, Reading, on 13 August 1761, who created the more considerable brewery that brought his family both celebrity and wealth. In 1789 W. B. Simonds acquired a greenfield site on what were then the outskirts of Reading, because it adjoined a tributary of the Thames, the River Kennet, convenient for transporting in bulk such ingredients as hops and malt by barge and for dispatching the brewed beer. To design the brewhouse and a family residence he employed his friend the architect John Soane. He met the set-up cost of $6400 partly from inherited wealth, including $1000 from his maternal grandfather, William Blackall ('b'. 1690), and a $2000 dowry for his wife Elizabeth (1734-1842), daughter of Daniel May (1734-1773), miller of Pangbourne, Berkshire. They married at Pangbourne in 1783 and had five sons and two daughters. Elizabeth's uncle, Thomas May (1737-1800), founded May's brewery of Basingstoke, eventually bought by H. and G. Simonds in the late 1940s. 
Simonds's taste for luxury was evident in the coloured silhouette he had made of himself as a young man, with fashionable powdered hair, fancy cravat, and sky-blue coat decorated with silver buttons. In 1799 he replaced the horse-driven rotary mill for grinding barley with a Boulton and Watt steam engine, only the second to be installed in a Berkshire brewery, and a very confident gesture that provided significantly greater capacity than was needed at that time. 
As early as 1791, newly appointed receiver-general of taxes for west Berkshire, Simonds was co-founder of Micklem, Stephens, Simonds, and Harris's bank in Reading. However, the refusal by local magistrates to issue licences for new public houses frustrated his ambition to offer Simonds' high-quality beer to a wider clientele. The consequent lack of competition in the town allowed rivals to sell a poorly made product at inflated prices. By 1814, seeing no future in brewing there, he was anxious to give it up and concentrate on his banking activities. Having withdrawn from the original bank he established a new wholly family-run bank; in addition to himself and his second son, Henry, the partners were John and Charles, sons of William Simonds's elder brother, Thomas; it was later entitled John Simonds, Charles Simonds & Co., Reading Bank. Having served as mayor of Reading in 1816, as four of his descendants did by 1882, W. B. Simonds retired to London and then to Pangbourne, where he died on 13 January 1834. Instead of taking capital out of the brewery, he accepted an annuity and left $1000. 
The Simonds bank survived the financial crisis of 1825. When news arrived at Reading that its correspondent bank in London, Williams & Co., had failed, Charles Simonds travelled overnight to the capital and next morning opened an office opposite Williams' bank, displaying a notice 'Reading Notes paid here'. By the late 1860s Simonds' had five banking branches in neighbouring towns from Basingstoke to High Wycombe. In 1871 John Simonds was joined by his sons John and William and by his nephew James; the latter trio ran the bank until 1905. Although it held the brewery account, relations were not particularly close, the brewery partners declining to subject themselves to what they termed the clutches of their bankers. Despite obtaining the account in 1889 of the newly established Berkshire county council, the bank never earned more than moderate profits, which rose from $4800 in 1844 to $25,000 in 1912. During the following year the fourth generation of Simonds banking partners sold out to Barclays Bank, which continues to operate from the original Simonds premises in King Street after nearly 200 years. 
Meanwhile, W. B. Simonds had handed over the brewery assets to his eldest son, Blackall Simonds (bap. 1784, d. 1875), who was baptized at St Lawrence's, Reading on 20 July 1784. A boisterous regency character, he energetically involved himself in the rough-and-tumble of unreformed national and local politics and in arduous fox-hunting. A member of the south Berkshire hunt, he and his groom used hunt outings to track down potential sites for public houses around the county. His foresight was rewarded when in 1830 the 'Beer Act' permitted the opening of beer shops without a magistrate's licence, and he was able to move speedily, ahead of his competitors, to acquire new public houses. 
During the 1830s the brewery's reputation grew so that annual production rose from 11,000 to 15,000 barrels. Steadily overtaking rivals who failed to improve their inferior brands of beer, it was already the largest brewery in Reading when in 1834 it introduced the earliest of its novelties, a less strong pale ale, at first solely for export, shipped even as far as Australia. Burdened by having to run the brewery single-handed, Blackall Simonds saw a decline in demand over the next decade. Then in 1845, having no children, he handed over to his brothers Henry Simonds (1785-1874) and George Simonds (1794-1852), who since 1814 had been building up a nearby wine and spirits business. Retiring to the Isle of Wight, Blackall followed his father's practice in receiving annuities for himself and his wife, Emma Jane (1796-1885), daughter of Thomas Usborne of Reading. He died at Ryde on 18 February 1875. 
The new partners inaugurated an era of rapid expansion, during which brewery output increased from 12,000 barrels in 1850 to 40,000 barrels in 1868. When George Simonds died in 1852 members of the third generation, grandsons of William Blackall Simonds and nephews and executors of Blackall Simonds, entered the firm: Henry Adolphus Simonds (1823-1910) and his cousin Henry John Simonds (1829-1896), a scholar at Eton College and later a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, who became a barrister. Early in the same decade they began to market pale ale in Britain. Now that much manual labour was being eased by machinery, consumers were demanding beer of lower strength. Within three decades that brand -- sold in bottles from 1858 onwards -- accounted for half the brewery's output. 
A plentiful supply of male Simonds descendants of the founder gave the partners scope to select the most able to join their ranks. They expected junior members to devote their entire time to the business, and to be supervised at a distance by the senior partners, who permitted them considerable discretion. That combination of energy and experience allowed growth to take place through tangible innovations as well as through imaginative expansion of the market for beer. On the technical side the firm's laboratory, one of the earliest in the brewery industry, employed scientists who tested both the ingredients and the standard of each brew. Moreover, George Simonds's eldest son, Blackall Simonds junior (1839-1905), who joined in 1868 when Henry Simonds retired, was a trained engineer. In the mid-1870s he designed the first ever concrete industrial store on four levels to hold stocks of the firm's beer and wine. A decade later the firm introduced a new system of fermentation, the Burton Union method. While being labour-intensive, it led to marked improvements in the palatability of the pale ale. 
The younger partners were in the meantime planning to open fresh outlets, to supplement their many tied houses. Now that Aldershot, twenty miles from Reading, had been designated as the headquarters of the British army, in 1872 they arranged to set up the first canteen for the troops stationed there. The popularity of that initiative encouraged the firm to establish branches in Gibraltar and Malta so as to make beer available to overseas garrisons in those colonies. Between 1877 and 1883 they followed up that move by securing contracts for supplying railway refreshment rooms. By 1885 the partners' technical and market strategies had caused output to rise from 40,000 barrels in 1868 to 114,000 barrels, while net profit was up from $10,000 to over $25,000. 
That year the firm was registered as a limited company, under the name of H. and G. Simonds Ltd, with capital of $500,000. The directors and senior Simonds managers held all the issued preference and ordinary shares. The family thus retained full control over the business, and avoided the kind of scramble by private investors for their shares that other brewery companies were experiencing. The latter had sought outside capital in order to buy up further outlets for their beers; to achieve the same goal without extending its capital, in 1896-9 the Simonds company created no less than $275,000 worth of 4 per cent debentures. As a result it doubled the number of its tied houses. 
Meanwhile Blackall Simonds junior's younger brother, George Blackall Simonds (1843-1929), sculptor, was achieving fame in an altogether different field. Born in Reading on 6 October 1843, the second of the three sons of George Simonds and his wife, Mary Anne Boulger, he had been educated at Bradfield College, which his family had helped to found. Having decided on an artistic career in preference to joining the brewery, he studied sculpture under Johannes Schilling in Dresden, and later with Louis Jehotte in Brussels. During a twelve-year stay in Rome, in 1877 he married (Emily) Gertrude Prescott (1859-1940), an American citizen whom he had met there. George Prescott Simonds (1881-1914), their only child, was killed very early in the First World War. 
In Italy Simonds displayed the family's scientific aptitude by pioneering the Victorian effort to reintroduce the Renaissance technology of casting bronzes from wax moulds. The 'lost wax' ('cire perdue') method involved fashioning a wax model, forming a mould, and then melting away the wax before pouring in metal between the core and the mould. Simonds used that technique to make what is widely hailed as his finest work in that genre, 'The Falconer' (1868). That represents a life-sized youth in steel breastplate, jerkin, tights, and cap slipping, or unleashing, a peregrine falcon of impressive wing span, at least half the young man's height. 
Following its display at the Vienna International Exhibition of 1873 a massive bronze replica, over 11 feet high and cast at Florence in a single piece, was commissioned for New York's Central Park, where it was dedicated in 1875; after weathering and constant vandalism, it was repaired and repatinated in 1982. The trouble Simonds took over its creation reflected his abiding recreational interest in falconry, a sport he worked hard to revive in the UK, becoming founder president of the British Falconry Society. 
Simonds made a number of statues for his native town of Reading, most notably one of the largest bronzes hitherto cast, which took him two years to design and execute, the 31 foot long Maiwand lion (1886) in the Forbury Gardens. It commemorates the 328 officers and men of the Royal Berkshire regiment who died at Maiwand during the campaign of 1879-80 in Afghanistan. His bust of the engineer Sir Joseph Bazalgette was erected on the Victoria Embankment in London, one of more than 200 works in an unusually wide range of materials, including marble, bronze, plaster, terracotta, silver, brass, wood, and cast iron. 
Having returned to Britain, an imposing figure with the widest of moustaches, George Blackall Simonds achieved celebrity in London's art world. There he became in 1884 a founder and the first master of the Art-Workers' Guild, which provided a forum where artists, architects, and craftsmen could share their views: an organization familiar to the studio life of Rome, but not found hitherto in northern countries. In 1879 he and a relative by marriage patented their invention of an iconograph, which allowed the dimensions of sculptures and other solid objects to be magnified or reduced. 
In 1903, aged sixty, Simonds retired from sculpting, and became a director of the brewery company. Two years later, on the death of his brother Blackall, he took the name of Blackall-Simonds. In 1910 he succeeded Henry Adolphus Simonds as chairman of the brewery, and remained in that office until his own death, at his home, Bradfield House, Bradfield, Berkshire, on 16 December 1929. He was buried at Bradfield. Shortly before his death the company received for the first time the royal warrant for supplying its products to the royal households. His family remembered him as not having much of a head for the intricacies of business, but he related well to the brewery staff and was a ready mediator at company meetings. He led the company through the five-month general strike and other industrial disputes of 1926. Despite crippling shortages of raw materials and transport, he refused to lay off any of the 1200 employees. After its close the grateful workforce subscribed to buy the directors a long-case clock for the boardroom. 
A succession of elderly chairmen did not seriously hold back the brewery's more recent progress, thanks to the activities of some very dynamic younger directors. The most noteworthy during George Blackall-Simonds's reign was Frederick Adolphus Simonds (1881-1953), brewer. Born in Reading on 2 January 1881, he was the eldest son of Louis de Luze Simonds (1852-1916) and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (1857-1930), daughter of Gavin Turnbull, an army surgeon. Eric had three younger brothers and a sister. His brother Gavin Turnbull Simonds (1881-1971), a lawyer of distinction, served as lord chancellor in Winston Churchill's second government from 1951 to 1954. 
Frederick William Simonds (1819-1896), a younger grandson of William Blackall Simonds, had emigrated to New York in 1845 and in the following year married Sophie de Luze, the Swiss consul's daughter. Their son, Louis de Luze Simonds, was recalled by his childless great-uncle, Henry Adolphus, to Reading, where he became the first company secretary when H. and G. Simonds Ltd was registered in 1885 and then managing director, and later still Henry's heir. 
Educated at Eton and at Magdalen College, Oxford, Eric Simonds served with the Royal Berkshire regiment in the South African War of 1899-1902 before becoming a trainee with the company. He was made a director in 1905. He initially focused on building up business in Gibraltar, Malta, Cairo, Belgium, and other overseas branches, with considerable success, although the joint venture with East African Breweries Ltd in Kenya did not turn out to be profitable. In 1909 he married Amy FitzGerald (1883-1969), daughter of John Sheriff Hill, a banker. They had a daughter who died in infancy, and three sons, Louis, Duncan, and Kenneth, all of whom became directors of Simonds companies. He succeeded his father as managing director in 1916. The company had hitherto relied entirely on internal growth, all its 350 outlets being in or close to Reading. He took advantage of developments in motor transport, and the ever increasing network of trunk roads, to plan the company's expansion by means of outside acquisitions. 
Eric Simonds began that strategy by purchasing breweries mainly in south-west England, including the Tamar Brewery in Devonport, W. J. Rogers in Bristol, and R. H. Stiles at Bridgend in Glamorgan. In the home counties around London he bought Ashby's in Staines and Wheeler's in High Wycombe. By the beginning of the Second World War in 1939 H. and G. Simonds was recognized as one of the most rapidly expanding breweries in the whole of southern England, at a time when regional brewery companies were becoming common throughout the British industry. In 1938 Eric Simonds took over the chairmanship from Stephen Shea-Simonds. 
After 1945 he resumed his ambitious programme of acquisitions; those included Phillips' brewery in Newport, Monmouthshire, May's brewery in Basingstoke, and Pool & Sons in Penzance. With the four acquired breweries that were maintained in production, H. and G. Simonds' output in 1953 reached almost 500,000 barrels, up from 175,000 barrels in 1900. Retaining the company's capital structure intact, he paid for these acquisitions by a series of debenture issues. After a final acquisition in 1955 of the Octagon Brewery in Plymouth, by the time of its merger the company had 1132 public houses and 63 off-licences. Eric was high sheriff of Berkshire in 1928-9 and president of the Royal Warrant Holders' Association in 1937 and 1945. A full-bodied man with a florid complexion, he would have made a 'good model for John Bull' ('The Times', 25 Aug 1953), revelling in his many sporting activities and friendships. He died in a London nursing home, 30 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, on 17 August 1953 and was buried at Cliddesden, Hampshire. 
His successor was the first non-family chairman, General Sir Miles Dempsey, who had commanded the British 2nd Army from Normandy to the Rhine in the Second World War, and was colonel of the Royal Berkshire Regiment. Dempsey had joined the Simonds board in 1947 as vice-chairman on retirement from the army. His fellow directors included members of the sixth Simonds generation, including Eric's son Duncan Simonds (1916-2002) and Richard Quarry (1912-2003) as joint managing directors. In 1960 the company's board agreed to a merger on equal terms with the two great and recently merged London breweries, Courage and Barclay Perkins, which together had net operating assets of $21 million, compared with H. and G. Simonds' $9.8 million. 
Initially registered as Courage Barclay and Simonds Ltd, the new company later adopted the first of those names, one of the three main subsidiaries, Courage (Central) Ltd having its head office in Reading. Then in 1980 all the latter's operations were moved from William Blackall Simonds's original site on Bridge Street to a new brewery on the southern outskirts of the town, close to the M4 motorway at Worton Grange. 
The brewery the Simonds family had founded and managed in Reading remained under its control throughout a period of almost two hundred years. Thanks to a large supply of able family members, financial prudence in husbanding their corporate capital, a drive to innovate, and marketing skills, the Simondses achieved the very rare feat among large-scale British manufacturing industry of continuous profitability and growth into the sixth family generation. 


