@@@@@


doc= 98007


James, Evan (1809-1878), poet, and 
Evan James was born at 11 Castle Street, Caerphilly, Glamorgan, on 11 February 1809, the son of Evan James (1773-1856) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Stradling (died 1824). He was the tenth of fourteen children, three of whom did not survive infancy. By 1813 his parents were living at the Ancient Druid inn, Argoed, Bedwellte, Monmouthshire. 
The family had been involved in the business of cloth-weaving since the mid-eighteenth century, and it was this trade that the young Evan entered, as did several of his brothers. In 1832 he married Elizabeth Jones ('b'. 1810/11) of Eglwysilan, with whom he had seven children. By 1836 the family had moved to Evan's parental home, the Ancient Druid inn, which was at once a private residence, an inn, and a cloth factory. In 1847 he moved the family to Mill Street, Pontypridd, to take over a larger weaving and manufacturing concern previously operated by a Thomas Austin. Evan James lived in Pontypridd for the remainder of his life, and it is with this town that he and his son are most closely associated. He died in Pontypridd on 30 September 1878, and was buried with his wife in the cemetery of Carmel chapel, Pontypridd. Some of his library survives, and it reveals him as a widely read man. His poems were held in high regard and some were published in 'Gardd Aberdar' in 1854. 
His eldest son, James James, was born on 4 November 1832, either at the Ancient Druid inn, or at the Old Inn in Pontaberbargoed, where his parents briefly lived. James James moved with the family to Pontypridd in 1847 and in the early 1850s married Cecilia (1830/31-1892), the daughter of Morgan and Joan Miles of Pontypridd, with whom he had one son and two daughters. The son, Taliesin (1856-1938), became a harpist and is described in the 1881 census returns as a 'professor of music'. 
James James worked for his father from the age of fifteen and is described as a 'traveller' in the 1861 census, by which time, as a married man, he occupied a different house in the same street as his parents; but for most of his life he was an innkeeper, first at The Anchor at Walnut Tree Bridge, near Pontypridd, then the Colliers Arms, Mountain Ash, and finally The Swan, Aberaman. He was a harpist but had no reputation as a player. Indeed, his celebrity rests entirely on his contribution to 'Hen wlad fy nhadau'. He composed other works but none was published, and surviving manuscript writings of his show him to be a musician of no particular talent. He died at 6 Hawthorn Terrace, Aberdar, on 11 January 1902. 
The status of 'Hen wlad fy nhadau' was enhanced by several romanticized accounts of the inspirational process that led to father and son writing it. A letter from James James published in the 'South Wales Daily News' on 17 March 1884 gives the composer's own account, which is disarmingly straightforward. The tune was written by James in January 1856, to words already composed by his father; it was given the title 'Glan Rhondda'. In 1858 the harpist Thomas Llewelyn (Llewelyn Alaw) submitted it, with James's permission, to an eisteddfod competition at Llangollen for the best collection of unpublished Welsh airs. The adjudicator of that competition, the Chester organist John Owen (Owain Alaw), published it in the influential 'Gems of Welsh Melody' in 1860 with a prefatory note that confirms James James's account of its composition: 'Composed in January 1856 by James James, Colliers Arms, Mountain Ash; Words by Mr Evan James, Pontypridd. English words with Symphonies, Accompaniment and Chorus by Owain Alaw.' James James had given permission for the publication but did not approve minor changes made by Owen, who also, it appears, was entirely responsible for the harmonies. Performances of the song at various eisteddfodau and by touring Welsh soloists and choirs quickly popularized it, and by the 1880s it was being used as a national song. 
James's letter to the 'South Wales Daily News' was stimulated by an extended correspondence in that paper and its rival publication the 'Western Mail' concerning charges that the song was plagiarized. The allegation was made in the 'South Wales Daily News' on 6 March 1884 by Frederick Atkins, an English-born Oxford graduate working in Cardiff as a schoolteacher, who claimed that it was taken 'note for note' from a song called (with numerous variants) 'Tiptin o rosin'. The 'Western Mail' immediately launched an attack on its rival's Anglicized, establishment, 'anti-Welsh' attitudes, and for two weeks numerous authorities were asked to pass judgement on the authenticity of James's creation. In fact the two songs have only a passing similarity over a couple of bars. The issue was absurdly inflated and seems to have been worked up by the 'Western Mail' to promote its self-appointed pro-Welsh posture. It did, however, serve to raise the status of the piece even further. Engravings of James and his father are reproduced in Percy Scholes's article on the composition of 'Hen wlad fy nhadau' which was published in the 'National Library of Wales Journal' in 1943. The article also contains a facsimile of the autograph manuscript of the song. 
James James was buried at Aberdar cemetery. His death passed without comment in either of the newspapers that had focused so much attention on him in 1884. He was, however, included in the dictionaries of Welsh biographies compiled by T. Mardy Rees and T. R. Roberts, both published in 1908, and in 1912 in the supplement to the 'DNB' covering those who died between 1901 and 1911, where Daniel Lleufer Thomas described how the song he had written with his father became 'recognised by Welshmen in all parts of the world' as 'the national anthem of Wales' ('DNB'). By 1909 a committee in Pontypridd had begun raising contributions for a memorial to the song's joint authors. Public subscriptions paid for the statues of them by Sir William Goscombe John, unveiled at Ynysangharad Park, Pontypridd, on 23 July 1930. James's son, Taliesin, played the harp at the unveiling. 


@@@@@


doc= 98010


Dunn, James Churchill (1871-1955), medical doctor and army officer, was born at Churchill, near Auckland, New Zealand, on 24 February 1871, the only known child of Richard Dunn (1839-1871), from a family of coal-masters in Rutherglen, Lanarkshire, and his young Irish wife. Within three or four months of Dunn's birth, his parents were killed in a conflict between settlers and Maoris, Te Kooti's War (1868-72), but he survived and was discovered by a neighbouring sheep farmer. Sent back to Scotland, Dunn was brought up by two spinster aunts: he later wrote, 'what I am is largely (how largely?) the finished whole of 'Aunt'' (Simpson, introduction, xxii). He was educated at Hamilton Academy, Glasgow Academy, and Clifton Bank School, St Andrews. In 1888 he began medical studies at Edinburgh University and, after further study in 1892 at Leipzig and Vienna, in 1893 was awarded MB, CM. He was a research assistant Glasgow, and in 1897 gained an Edinburgh MD. He moved to London and worked in several hospitals, including as a house physician and later as a resident medical officer at the St Pancras and Northern Dispensary, Euston Road. 
During 'Black Week', December 1899, Dunn was among the many middle-class men who volunteered for the Second South African War. He enlisted as a trooper in a Montgomeryshire yeomanry company of the imperial yeomanry. He served for over a year and was awarded the DCM for bravery. He later served for a few months at the end of the war as a civil surgeon with the army in South Africa. By 1903 he had returned to London and was a physician in the Lying-In Hospital, Lambeth. In 1908 he was awarded a Cambridge University diploma in public health. In 1913 he was in practice at 29 George Street, Portman Square, London. 
Following the outbreak of war in August 1914 Dunn, then aged forty-three, again volunteered. In January 1915 he was commissioned temporary lieutenant in the RAMC, and in July was posted to the 19th field ambulance (not a vehicle but a mobile medical unit) in the 19th brigade in France. The brigade was with the 27th division from May 1915, the 2nd division from August 1915, and the 33rd division from November 1915. Also in the brigade was the 2nd battalion, Royal Welch Fusiliers (RWF), to which in November 1915 Dunn was appointed regimental medical officer. He continued as such, promoted to temporary captain, enduring depression and influenza, until temporarily invalided by gas in May 1918, his only wounding during the war: an officer saw 'pitiful rows of gas-blinded men lying in the shade... and Dr. Dunn, with tinted glasses and a parasol, striving to convince himself that it was nothing and would soon pass!' (Dudley Ward, 467). In June 1918 he requested a transfer as he disliked working with the new acting commanding officer. He served less happily in a service battalion of the East Yorkshire regiment in the 31st division until the end of the war. 
The Royal Welch Fusiliers was an old and distinguished regiment with twenty-nine battle honours, and idiosyncrasies including the goat, the 'flash' (black ribbons at the back of the collar), and the spelling Welch. Ostensibly Welsh, the regiment before the war recruited largely from Birmingham and was nicknamed the 'Birmingham Fusiliers', but during the war the Welsh intake increased. Although very aware he was an 'attached' officer, Dunn became devoted to the regiment and especially its 2nd battalion. His contemporaries there included Siegfried Sassoon, Robert Graves, and Frank Richards (later author of 'Old Soldiers Never Die'), who all praised him in their memoirs. 
Described as 'hard-bitten', reserved, reticent, difficult to know, and averse to publicity, Dunn was a brave and active medical officer, often in the front trenches and always present during raids, bombardments, and attacks. He went out with the orderlies and stretcher-bearers, tending the wounded under fire. During his thirty months with 2nd RWF he was mentioned in dispatches in 1916 and 1917, and awarded the MC and clasp and the DSO. The citations were for outstanding bravery in tending the wounded under fire. The DSO, cynically known as 'Dukes' Sons Only' from its award to aristocratic staff officers, was well deserved by Dunn in 1917. His citation stated that he 'set a magnificent example to all of courage and devotion to duty under continuous heavy fire' (Creagh and Humphris, pt 2, 84), and Graves wrote that Dunn 'earned his D.S.O. many times over' (Graves, 173). Though officially non-combatant, in an emergency he took temporary command and fired a machine gun. Respected by all ranks, he was influential within the battalion. Sassoon described him 'sauntering up the trench with the detached demeanour of a gentle botanist' (Sassoon, 168) and Richards wrote that he was 'the bravest and coolest man under fire I ever saw in France' (Richards, 154). 
After the war Dunn returned to civilian practice, living in Glasgow with his aunts; for the rest of his life his address was 62 Sardinia Terrace, Cecil Street, Hillhead, Glasgow. He described himself as 'a solitary by nature' (Simpson, introduction, xxii) and never married. He was a member of the Glasgow pensions appeal tribunal on claims for war disability. In 1922 he was one of fifty-nine witnesses -- officers, doctors, neurologists and psychologists -- who gave evidence to the War Office committee of inquiry into 'shell-shock', initiated and chaired by Lord Southborough. 'Shell-shock', a term both invented and officially rejected in the First World War, was a contentious and emotive issue. Dunn, well aware of ''wind-up' cases' and malingerers, showed ambivalence towards war neuroses, and emphasized the importance of training, discipline, the death penalty, and morale. He also claimed of Sassoon's 1917 protest that 'he said in public at home what 'everyone' in the infantry said in France' (quoted in Simpson, 'Dr James Dunn and shell-shock', 512). 
First World War commemoration took many forms, including unit histories. In 1925 a regimental committee started preparing a history of the RWF in the war. Dunn wrote to former members and gathered material on the 2nd battalion. He advocated the acquisition of recollections from all ranks, to show 'ordinary trench life'. He wanted to ensure his battalion's record was not overshadowed by that of the 1st battalion. He compiled a 70,000-word manuscript and sent it to the regimental history editor. Although it incorporated material he had written, Dunn was bitterly disappointed by the regimental history, published in 1928, which he believed inaccurate and omitting the best contributions. Urged by Sassoon and Edmund Blunden, and wanting to correct what he considered the distortions of Graves's 'Goodbye to All That' (1929) and other 'catchpenny' publications on the war, Dunn decided to publish his manuscript. After rejection by several publishers, in 1938 his 'The War the Infantry Knew' was published by P. S. King, a small London firm, in an edition of only 500 copies. 
Dunn did not name himself as author: the title-page stated the book was 'edited and partly written by one of their Medical Officers'. The book was based on Dunn's diaries and letters, regimental records, and contributions from sixty-three veterans, mostly RWF officers, but also other ranks. They included Sassoon and Richards, but not Graves, whose offered material Dunn declined. The book was a chronicle of the 2nd battalion from July 1914 to June 1919, including not only combat and suffering, but also other aspects of wartime experience (though not venereal disease). It expressed Dunn's views: favouring the old regular army and critical of Territorials and New Army troops, and also of generals and their staffs. It was favourably reviewed and became considered a classic, though scarce because of its limited print run. An invalid in his later years, he died in Glasgow on 30 March 1955, and was cremated. He had apparently destroyed his diaries and letters. The 'elusive' Dunn was researched by Keith Simpson, who initiated the republication in 1987 of 'The War the Infantry Knew'. It remains an outstanding record of the western front. 


@@@@@


doc= 98011


Cammaerts, Francis Charles Albert (1916-2006), special operations officer and teacher, was born on 19 June 1916 at 17 Launceston Place, South Kensington, London, the elder son and third of the six children of Emile Leon Cammaerts (1878-1953) and his wife, Helen Geralda Louise, 'nee' Braun (1879-1964), an actress with the stage name Tita Brand. His Belgian father was a journalist, a respected poet, and professor of Belgian studies at the University of London from 1933 to 1947. His wife, Cammaerts's mother, was the daughter of the Wagnerian diva Marie Brema. Cammaerts was brought up at Radlett, Hertfordshire, going to preparatory school in Harpenden followed by Mill Hill School and then St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he got a poor degree in English and history. He became a schoolteacher, first in Belfast and then in Penge in Kent. A pacifist from childhood, he resigned in 1940 and went to work as a farm labourer in Lincolnshire. On 15 March 1941, at the register office in Caistor, Lincolnshire, he married Nancy (Nan) Findlay (1916-2001), daughter of James Smith Findlay, architect. They had a son and three daughters (one of whom died young). 
Cammaerts's brother Pieter's death in the RAF cured him of pacifism. A chance meeting with Harry Ree, a friend and colleague from Penge, led him into the Special Operations Executive (SOE), where his perfect fluency in French commended him to the independent French section. He had one great disadvantage as a secret agent -- he stood six feet four inches tall, and thus caught policemen's eyes. Moreover, the training staff did not notice his qualities of leadership, and pronounced him no more than a competent instructor in sabotage. As such, ranked as a lieutenant in the intelligence corps but wearing plain clothes, he went to France by Lysander aircraft on the night of 23-4 March 1943 to join the circuit of Peter Churchill, who returned by the same aircraft to England for rebriefing. Churchill's circuit had just moved from the riviera to Annecy, near the Swiss frontier. Cammaerts found it dangerously insecure, separated himself from it at once, and settled down in Nice to discover what life in Nazi-occupied France was like, pretending that he was recovering from tuberculosis. 
With the help of some retired policemen Cammaerts gradually assembled a powerful circuit of his own, codenamed Jockey, in some of the departements to the east of the Rhone, mainly in the Drome. His own codename was Roger. With the help of Auguste Floiras, his radio operator, he was able to secure parachuted drops of supplies, and so to arm the saboteurs he trained. In parallel with his sabotage circuits he had a private circuit of safe houses round which he rotated, never staying more than two nights in any one place; nobody else, not even Floiras, knew where he would be -- an invaluable safety precaution. He carried the papers of an electricity inspector, which enabled him to travel widely. In the spring of 1944 -- by now a lieutenant-colonel -- he effected some useful sabotage, both of railways and of electric power supplies. He redoubled his efforts after the allied landings in Normandy in June 1944. He visited the Vercors during its rising, but escaped from it when the Germans attacked, with his courier, the Polish countess Krystyna Gizycka. The 'etat-major des forces francaises de l'interieur' gave him command of all resistance forces east of the Rhone, but no orders. The Germans offered two million francs for his capture; no one turned him in. 
By bad luck Cammaerts fell into enemy hands at a road block on 13 August, was identified, and condemned to death. The night before he was to have been shot his courier appeared with a vast sum in francs and bought his release. His teams offered invaluable help to the American troops who landed on the riviera on 15 August and inflicted heavy casualties on the retreating Germans. He was awarded a DSO by the British, the Croix de Guerre and the Legion d'honneur by the French, and the medal of freedom by the Americans. He and Floiras rescued the latter's wife and daughter from Ravensbruck concentration camp. 
After the war Cammaerts served briefly in the allied military government in Berlin, before being posted to Brussels -- where his family could join him -- as deputy director of the Inter-Allied Reparations Agency (1946-8). He then spent four years running an international bureau for educational visits and exchanges, before he went back to teaching. He became headmaster of Alleyne's Grammar School at the new town of Stevenage, which in nine years (1952-61) he built up into a flourishing eight-hundred-strong comprehensive school. He then spent five years (1961-6) as principal of Scraptoft teacher training college, Leicester, treating trainees as his equal, and instilling his theories of how children should be taught. He always stressed the importance of bringing out each child's individuality, rather than cramming them with data. Staff and pupils alike warmed to his outgoing personality. In 1966 he became professor of education in Nairobi, Kenya, as that former colony recovered from the ravages of Mau Mau, and assured Kenyan predominance over former missionary schools of several faiths. From 1972 to 1981 he was principal of Rolle College, Exmouth, again sustaining teacher training. His last official post was in Botswana, where from 1982 to 1988 he set up a teacher training system at Molepolole from scratch. 
Cammaerts and his wife, Nan, retired to Combemaure in the Drome, and then moved on to Le Pouget in the Herault, where she died in 2001. He lived another five years, dying in his house at Le Pouget on 3 July 2006. He was survived by his son and two daughters. He often said he would rather be remembered as a teacher than as a secret agent. 


@@@@@


doc= 98018


Lowndes, Ashley Gordon (1885-1956), biologist and schoolteacher, was born at Cainscross Villa, Cainscross, Stonehouse, Gloucestershire, on 9 October 1885, the third son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Robert Baxter Lowndes, solicitor, and his wife, Marian, 'nee' Whitaker. Privately educated, he moved to Southampton, serving in the merchant navy from the age of thirteen until his early twenties. While a ship's apprentice he was befriended by the vicar of South Shields, Henry Edwin Savage. Later, as a Sunday school teacher, his brilliance was recognized by a curate in Portsmouth, who successfully recommended him for a teaching post at Ardingly College in Sussex. In 1910 he entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1913, having taken a third in part 1 of the natural sciences tripos and won a half-blue for swimming. During the First World War he became a research chemist working on explosives research at Nobel Industries, where his ideas were credited with leading to successful new processes, including patents for detonators. 
In 1921 Lowndes was recruited by Cyril Norwood, master of Marlborough College, to teach sixth-form biology. He remained at Marlborough for seventeen years, turning biology -- which had previously been taught for those intending to study medicine -- into a subject in its own right. His single-mindedness and rigorous methods led him to drive his pupils hard, while his 'passion for investigation' (Young, 826), also led him to involve them in advanced study. 
Lowndes was remarkable for pursuing scientific researches alongside his teaching: 'He passionately believed that those who taught science should also contribute to it by research' ('The Times', 29 March 1956). He contributed to several fields, but his best work was regarded as being on the biology of crustaceans, where he concentrated on the taxonomy of entomostraca. He also made significant contributions to the knowledge of freshwater copepods and ostracods. A typically ingenious experiment led him to criticize established explanations of the feeding of 'Chirocephalus'. His investigations into the rapid movements of small organisms using home-made equipment bettered that of well-established biologists. He had made a stroboscope from a cocoa tin with two cuts opposite parallel slits. Fitted over the eyepiece of a microscope, the tin could be revolved by squeezing the bulb of a scent-spray and, by altering the speed of the tin, he could see in slow motion the action of cilia, the beating of a flagellum, or the limbs of arthropods. The Leverhulme Trust awarded him three grants, in 1933, 1934, and 1955, for 'polygraphic process in ultra-rapid cinema photo-microscopy'. His observations on the action of flagella using this equipment were subsequently verified, in 1945, by electron microscopy. He also perfected a technique for weighing living aquatic organisms and tissues by a displacement method, which was upheld by the National Physical Laboratory as accurate up to four decimal places. 
Lowndes's independence of mind enabled him to criticize the findings of distinguished scholars in the field, and an aggressive tendency involved him in heated scholarly disputes. In 1929 and 1930 he criticized Charles Elton's 'Animal Ecology' and in 1944 he revised two concepts of Sir D'Arcy Thompson, while dismissing some textbook accounts of flagellar movements as 'a travesty of elementary mechanics', pointing out also that recent interpretations by Sir James Gray FRS, among others, were incorrect. 
Lowndes, who was unmarried, retired from Marlborough College in 1938 to undertake research in the leper colony at Oji River, Onitsha, Nigeria, run by the Church Missionary Society, with the intention of becoming an honorary research worker for the society. At the outbreak of the Second World War he returned to Britain to teach at various public schools. At Wells Cathedral School he particularly enjoyed the moat in the bishop's palace for its aquatic life. In 1947, after two unsuccessful applications (in 1932 and 1935), he was awarded the Cambridge degree of ScD. His ambition to be elected a fellow of the Royal Society was never fulfilled, perhaps as a result of his tendency to make enemies of eminent biologists. He continued to work at the Marine Biological Laboratory, Plymouth, until his death, from pneumonia, at Falmouth Hospital, Falmouth, Cornwall, on 15 March 1956. 
'Tubby' Lowndes was a barrel-shaped man who would address his pupils in west country style. His early years spent at sea were reflected in his rolling gait, and a directness of manner that could make him appear rough and coarsely spoken in the public-school world in which he later moved. He was fond of choral music and sang the hymns every evensong and attended saints' and high days, parading down the aisle in his scarlet robes. A gifted experimenter, he published at least a hundred papers, many of them short, but to the point. Most of all, he was remembered as 'one of the most brilliant and least orthodox science teachers of his day' ('The Times', 29 March 1956), who had a major influence on the style of biological teaching in Britain. Several of his pupils became academic biologists and three of them, famous experimental zoologists, became fellows of the Royal Society: J. Z. Young, R. J. Pumphrey, and P. B. Medawar (later a Nobel laureate). 


@@@@@


doc= 98022


Harrison, Edward Frank (1869-1918), analytical chemist and army officer, was born at 264 Albany Road, Camberwell, London, on 18 July 1869, the third child of William Harrison (1822/3-1878), a Home Office clerk, and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Lawson. His father died when he was nine and his mother opened a small school, which enabled her sons to be educated at the United Westminster Schools. At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to a pharmaceutical chemist in north London, after which he was an assistant pharmacist in Croydon. In 1890 he gained a Pharmaceutical Society Bell scholarship and entered the School of Pharmacy in 1891. He spent long hours in the research laboratories of the Pharmaceutical Society and made ends meet by working at a pharmacy each evening and as an assistant lecturer at the school. His parents were Particular Baptists but his scientific education and a rigorous critical outlook caused him to replace religious conviction with a belief in research for its own sake. Hard work, seriousness, and a strong moral purpose were evident from an early age. 
In 1894 Harrison was made a fellow of the Royal Chemical Society. With the aim of earning enough to marry he took a position with Brady and Martin, pharmaceutical chemists, of Newcastle upon Tyne. On 4 November 1895 he married Edith Helen (1872-1937), a schoolteacher, the daughter of John James Wilson, timber merchant. They had two sons. About 1899 he was appointed head of the analytical department of Burroughs, Wellcome & Co. at Dartford. During this time he prepared for his BSc examination at the University of London. Graduating in 1905, he formed a partnership with Charles Edward Sage as an analytical and consulting chemist, and also taught at Sage's Central School of Pharmacy. The partnership was dissolved in 1906 and Harrison took up independent practice in Chancery Lane, London. He was assisted by Percy Arthur William Self and by 1914 traded as Harrison and Self. His reputation for careful and thorough research led the British Medical Association to commission him to analyse a variety of proprietary medicines to prevent deception of the public. The results were published in 1909 as 'Secret Remedies: what they Cost and what they Contain', followed in 1912 by 'More Secret Remedies'. That year, as chief witness for the British Medical Association, he gave effective evidence to the select committee of the House of Commons on patent medicines. 
Following the outbreak of the First World War Harrison made repeated attempts to enlist in the forces. He succeeded in May 1915 in joining the 23rd (1st Sportsman's) battalion, Royal Fusiliers, as a private, reducing his stated age by two years to meet the limit of forty-five. In April 1915 the Germans carried out an attack in Belgium using chlorine gas. This led to the formation of a chemists' corps of the Royal Engineers, in which he was commissioned temporary second lieutenant, in July 1915, to work on anti-gas research. Like most of his profession he regarded the German use of poison gas as a perversion of chemical science; he also had no doubt that the allies should reply in kind. 
Harrison joined the staff of the anti-gas department, initially at the Royal Army Medical College at Millbank, London, which had the task of devising protection for British forces. The situation was one of the utmost urgency, as the allies had no form of respirator. The design and production of masks to protect against chlorine was comparatively simple but by July 1915 the problem was to devise a single mask which could keep out potentially over seventy gases. Hydrogen cyanide and phosgene emerged as the most likely to be used. Harrison's experience and intuition enabled him to make rapid decisions when scientists with a purely academic background tended to be overly cautious and deliberate in their investigations. There was a high degree of self-experimentation and scientists working on the project during this most critical phase were at times incapacitated, often to the point of unconsciousness. 
The War Office wanted improved protection to be achieved through modification of the existing chemically impregnated flannelette hood. Although these hoods had some success against phosgene they were penetrated by high concentrations and were not suitable for adaptation to meet new threats. Almost immediately, in July 1915, Harrison and a small team began developing a respirator in which the protective chemicals were layered in a filter box, initially an adapted army water bottle. Soda lime permanganate granules, developed by Bertram Lambert at Oxford University, were capable of providing protection against a very wide range of substances but broke down into a dust that choked the wearer. Hardening the granules rendered them ineffective until, after forty-nine attempts, Harrison discovered a successful formula. Initially known as Harrison's tower, the respirator developed by the end of 1915 comprised a filter box connected to a facepiece with inlet and exhalation valves. Adopted by the army as the large box respirator, 200,000 were issued to artillerymen and machine-gunners between February and June 1916. A compact version, the small box respirator, was made a universal issue from August 1916. The design meant that the filter box could be modified to protect against new agents; regarded as the most effective gas mask of the war it was adopted by American forces in a modified form. 
Harrison emerged as the most able researcher in solving the complex problems of both design and production and made frequent visits to France to meet chemists working at the front. In January 1917 he became head of the anti-gas department and in June was appointed CMG. On 1 November 1917 the anti-gas department became part of the chemical warfare department of the Ministry of Munitions and Harrison was appointed an assistant controller of the department, responsible for anti-gas apparatus. In July 1918 he was appointed deputy controller and in October controller, and in the same month he was appointed officer of the French Legion d'honneur. He held the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Engineers. 
By October 1918 Harrison was weakened by two and a half years of constant work and the gas inhaled during the early stages. He succumbed to influenza and, after suffering from pneumonia, died at the premises of Harrison and Self at 57 Chancery Lane, London, on 4 November 1918. His wife and younger son survived him (his eldest son had been killed in action, aged nineteen, on 30 July 1916 during the battle of the Somme). Buried with full military honours at Brompton cemetery on 8 November, Harrison was the subject of lengthy tributes emphasizing his abilities, personality, and organizational genius, which led to the saving of many lives. Memorials to him were unveiled by the Pharmaceutical Society in Bloomsbury Square, and the Chemical Society at Burlington House, and both organizations continue to award prize medals in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 98024


Tripp, Sir (Herbert) Alker (1883-1954), police officer and town planner, was born at 38 Ashley Road, Islington, London, on 23 August 1883, the son of George Henry Tripp (1860-1922), a civil servant in the Home Office who became receiver for the Metropolitan Police district, and his wife, Sophia Caroline, 'nee' Freeman (1855/6-1932). From childhood to late teens Tripp was determined to become an artist, and was a student at the Slade School of Fine Art, but his parents insisted that art would be an unwise and insecure career choice. In 1902, bowing to parental persuasion, he followed his father and was nominated by the home secretary to a civil service clerkship in the office of the commandant of the Metropolitan Police, at New Scotland Yard. On 6 June 1910 he married Abigail (1880/81-1951), daughter of John Clarke Powell of the Bank of Ireland. They had one son and one daughter. 
In 1920 Tripp became chairman of the police recruiting board. This was a 'suited' position: even following promotion to assistant commissioner of the Metropolitan Police in 1932 he only wore uniform on official occasions. His main achievement at the recruiting board was to make the case for an enhanced supply of officer material, something long denied by Peelite tradition. In 1934 Lord Trenchard agreed to the establishment of the Metropolitan Police Staff College at Hendon. Between the mid-1920s and early 1930s Tripp served as a prominent member of the standing committee on aliens and nationality and the advisory committee on the homeless poor of London. Only in 1932, however, following promotion to assistant commissioner with responsibility for traffic, a post he held until his retirement, did he reveal the full range and depth of his talents. 
A passionate motorist and cyclist, Tripp had long pondered methods of reducing the death toll on Britain's roads. Since the end of the First World War the traffic problem had become critical. Motor cars had appeared on the roads in ever larger numbers, a development stridently resisted by those who promoted the interests of pedestrians. A convinced citizen of the new automotive world, Tripp travelled widely in search of viable control systems. By the mid-1930s he had decided that, although the great majority of British drivers could be trusted to respond to what was then a remarkably undemanding body of traffic law, pedestrians and cyclists were intrinsically incapable of adjusting to radically changed conditions. He dabbled with plans for the legal regulation of non-drivers but, meeting tough opposition, switched to environmental and planning-based solutions. 
Throughout the 1930s Tripp invariably supported conservative Home Office and senior constabulary policies. A clear majority of chief constables were convinced that in the near future motor vehicles would present an insoluble problem. Tripp agreed and also seconded the view that 'over-regulation' of motorists might harm relationships between drivers and the police, thereby reducing rather than increasing prosecutions of the very small number of road-hogs conventionally believed to pose a threat to other road-users. Tripp opposed scientifically based innovation, including the introduction of radical 'Scandinavian' measures to reduce the incidence of drink driving. Giving evidence in 1938 to the House of Lords select committee on the prevention of road accidents, chaired by Lord Alness, he argued that blood tests would be alien to 'British conditions' and insisted that no more than approximately ninety private car owners whose driving was impaired by alcohol could be shown to be causally responsible for fatal accidents in any calendar year. 
By the late 1930s Tripp had decided that the road traffic crisis would never be solved by safety education and caution on the part of the overwhelming majority of private motorists, who were assumed to behave in a responsible manner. American solutions might be needed. These included 'separation', although Tripp preferred the term 'segregation'. He wrote two seminal studies, one the product of monitoring traffic problems, particularly in London, over the preceding twenty years: the other, an analysis of road conditions in what he correctly predicted would be a massively more heavily motorized post-war environment. 
In 'Road Traffic and its Control' (1938) Tripp proposed the construction of a central network of what would later be called inter-city arterial routes. Each would be 'supplied' with traffic from feeder roads, but have only minimal contact with small towns and villages. To save lives, he argued, pedestrians must be prevented from encountering dangerous streams of fast-moving vehicles. As far as possible long-distance drivers would be confined to the central arterial spine. Over the next decade Tripp strongly advocated the adoption of these ideas as a member from 1944 of the committee on road safety and from 1946 of the Ministry of Transport Road Research Board. 
In his second study, 'Town Planning and Road Traffic' (1942), Tripp refined the idea of segregation, championed the introduction of urban precincts, and proposed a scheme based on restricted movement of pedestrians -- via bridges and underpasses -- in town centres. Both books proved influential in the USA, Europe, and Scandinavia. In time each fed into Colin Buchanan's internationally influential post-war analysis, 'Towns and Cars' (1963). They also infuriated the rump of the pro-pedestrian movement: anti-motoring activists accused him of forcing non-drivers underground or dangerously up into the heavens. Tripp refused to compromise, insisting that the era of mixed traffic had passed. Segregation must be preferable to spiralling slaughter. 
Tripp retired in 1947. Throughout his civil service career he continued to paint and established a reputation as an artist. He painted watercolour portrayals of gently domesticated inter-war seascapes and landscapes, and exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy. Many of his paintings were reproduced as posters for railway companies. From 1942 to 1949 he served on the Royal Academy's planning committee, which concerned itself with the architectural reconstruction of post-war London. 
Tripp was also a prolific author on sailing, the other guiding passion of his life, illustrating his books in pen and ink. 'Shoalwater and Fairway' (1924), 'Suffolk Sea Borders' (1926), 'Solent and Southern Waters' (1928), and 'Under the Cabin Lamp' (1950) are studded with credible dialogue and reveal a microscopically detailed knowledge of the eastern and southern seaways. That he was able to lead what amounted to a triple life -- dominated, inevitably, by his lifelong engagement with metropolitan and national traffic problems -- says much about early twentieth-century workloads in the Metropolitan Police and at the Home Office. 
Tripp was made a CBE in 1935 and knighted in 1945. He died at St Andrews Hospital, Northampton, on 12 December 1954. His home had been at Lee Cottage, Weston Green, Thames Ditton, Surrey, and his funeral was held at All Saints', Weston Green. An unassuming, persuasive, conservative but nevertheless creative man, Tripp made a major though controversial contribution to the consolidation of mass motoring in twentieth-century Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 98025


Haden, George (1788-1856), engineer, was born in Handsworth, Birmingham, on 23 July 1788, the second son and third of five children of George Haden (1756-1822), foreman of the copying machine shop at Boulton Watt & Co., and his wife, Sarah Ann Shakespeare (1754-1792). He was apprenticed at the age of fifteen for a period of five years to Boulton Watt & Co. at their Soho, Birmingham, manufactory, working on the construction of steam engines and boilers. When he was about twenty-one he was sent out on the road by the firm as a travelling agent and engineer assembling, erecting, and commissioning Boulton and Watt steam engines manufactured at the Soho works. 
Haden's first job, in December 1809, took him to the north of England erecting an engine for Birley and Hornby in Manchester. He then worked on the construction of the Leeds gasworks before moving to Scotland, where he spent five years in the construction of the Cranston Hill waterworks in Glasgow. He also erected numerous steam engines elsewhere in Scotland. After living in lodging houses away from his home for so long, and missing the close family ties with his father and siblings, he became disenchanted and wrote of his disgruntlement with his way of life and his earnings. In 1814 he was sent by Boulton and Watt as their agent to the west of England, where there was an increasing demand for steam engines to power the machinery in the woollen mills being built in Somerset, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire. Among the clients for whom Haden erected steam engines was the woollen firm, at Trowbridge, Wiltshire, of J. and T. Clark. Haden was much taken with the town of Trowbridge, reporting in a letter to his father dated March 1815 that it was a thriving place for business. Several mill owners offered to subscribe to pay him to look after their engines, which he reckoned would take less than half his time, leaving the remainder free to undertake other business. He set up home in Trowbridge with his wife, Ann Nelson (1790-1819), whom he had married at Harborne, Staffordshire, on 1 May 1816. Their first child, George Nelson Haden, was born in the following year; his wife died shortly after the birth of their second child, Benjamin. 
Haden was joined in Trowbridge by his brother James Haden (1790-1871), who had also served an apprenticeship at the Soho works, and they rapidly expanded their activities to include millwrighting work, repairing and maintaining the machinery of the woollen mills. In 1816 they set up the firm of G. and J. Haden, which as well as erecting steam engines and undertaking millwright work entered the newly emerging industry of heating and ventilating, by the manufacture of warm air stoves. Being a bachelor James was able to become the partner in the firm who travelled the country erecting, supervising, and taking orders for the installation of warm air stoves and expanding the firm's business. Their early clients included landed gentry, and in 1826 they installed warm air stoves at Windsor Castle for George IV. During the 1830s and 1840s the firm undertook increasing amounts of business for public buildings, notably lunatic asylums and prisons (including Parkhurst and Pentonville); in the following decades, much of their work involved installing warm air ventilation systems in churches, using air ducts covered by gratings in the aisles. Their stoves were also installed at Lambeth Palace, Bowood House, Hillsborough Castle, Gosford House, Penrhyn Castle, and many other places. The four patents taken out between 1829 and 1842 by George Haden included improvements to the effectiveness of warm air stoves (patent no. 5773 of 1829, 6561 of 1834, 7927 of 1842, 9259 of 1842). James retired from the firm in 1855, and the partnership was renamed George Haden & Son. 
George Haden was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1834, and was often selected as an umpire in professional arbitrations. He was an active member of the Tabernacle Congregational church in Trowbridge, was for thirty years superintendent of the Sunday school, and was also a supporter of the Mechanics' Institute in the town, where his firm employed large numbers of local people. He married, second, on 12 December 1844, a widow, Christiana Hicks (1785/6-1854) of Trowbridge, daughter of John Wilson, grocer. After a short illness he died at his home in Polebarn Lane, Trowbridge, from kidney failure, on 29 October 1856, and was buried in the family grave in Trowbridge. 
The firm continued to be managed by George Haden's surviving son, George Nelson Haden (1817-1892), whose warm air installations included the British Museum and the hotel at St Pancras station; he also designed a hard labour crank that was widely used in prisons. His two sons William Nelson Haden (1859-1946) and Charles Ingham Haden (1863-1947) became chairman and managing director and ran the company until the late 1930s. William Nelson Haden's son, George Nelson Haden (1900-1960), chairman from 1938 to 1958 and the last link between the firm and the Haden family, installed the hypocaust system of heating in Liverpool's Anglican cathedral, and in 1933 the air conditioning system for the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank. 


@@@@@


doc= 98026


Crosby, (Thomas) Frederick Gordon (1885-1943), motoring artist, was born at 7 Park Place East, Sunderland, co. Durham, on 25 July 1885, the second child and only son of Thomas Crosby (1837-1911), shipbroker, and his wife, Annie Louisa, 'nee' Jeboult (1855-1927). His parents married in Exeter in 1882, and had a daughter who was born there in 1884 before they moved to Sunderland. In 1886 his mother obtained a judicial separation and returned with the children to Exeter where her family ran a glass, china, and art pottery business. His father remained in Sunderland where his financial position deteriorated, and he died in a workhouse. His mother ran boarding houses in Babbacombe and in Torwood, Torquay, and later lived with her unmarried sister, Mabel, an art teacher, who had advertised herself as giving sketching classes and preparing pupils for the South Kensington examinations. 
Crosby attended Christ's Hospital preparatory school, Hertford, from 1896 to 1898, when he entered Christ's Hospital senior school in London. He left school in 1900 and was for a while an apprentice marine engineer, before working as a draughtsman in the drawing offices at the Vauxhall and Daimler companies in Coventry while living with Arthur Ludlow Clayden, the son of the principal of the Albert Memorial College in Exeter. In 1907 he joined the periodical 'Autocar', which was then based in Coventry, and with which he began an association as a salaried staff member which lasted over thirty years. He married in Coventry, on 23 July 1910, Gertrude Marjorie Dickinson ('b'. 1890), whose actual name was Florence Gertrude Dickinson, the daughter of John Dickinson, watch finisher, of Coventry. They had two sons, Peter and Michael, born in 1914 and 1921. 
Although Crosby had no formal art training he contributed line drawings of mechanical parts of cars on show at Olympia to 'Autocar' in November 1907 and illustrated a short story for its Christmas issue. Through 1908 he produced a steady stream of sketches of races and drivers that from the outset showed his capacity to capture movement and expressions. His full-page illustration (4 July 1908) of a hill climb on the Kirkstone Pass was the first of many that demonstrated his love and use of the landscape, either illustrating the dangers of the mountain road or the pleasures of driving along the open road. 
Although Crosby's work was used in advertising campaigns he was not a commercial artist. His illustrations of races and cars on the open road proved popular, the first being his 1911 impression of the Coupe des Voiturettes Legeres, which was used in the 1912 Rudge-Whitworth detachable wire wheels campaign. Illustrating topical subjects on design and safety, he made humour a common feature. His intention was to make the technology accessible to the layman, for example through his drawings of workshops in a series on 'How Cars are Produced' and most significantly, in 1912, a full-page three-dimensional perspective drawing of a Lanchester chassis. His annotated technical perspective sketch of a Fergus chassis, in 1915, applied an aesthetic interpretation to motor engineering. 
During the First World War Crosby provided patriotic illustrations of aircraft, convoys, and battle incidents for 'Autocar' and for government departments. These produced one of only three exhibits by him at the Royal Academy, and his only critical success, 'The Glorious Achievement of Lieut. Warneford VC, 7 July 1915' (exh. RA 1916), depicting the first destruction of a Zeppelin airship in air-to-air combat. 
Crosby's drawings and paintings of the 3 litre Bentley for its 1919 catalogue illustrate the high quality of his design work not just as a graphic artist but as a concept artist. The car was not yet in production and it was left to Crosby's visual interpretation to authenticate the speed and power of the new machine. In July 1921 he wrote three illustrated articles for 'Autocar', 'The harmony of outline', followed in 1922 with 'All-weather cars' and 'The design of sporting cars', and in 1925 'Comfort and convenience in bodywork'. 
In April 1926 'Autocar' announced a series of graphic impressions of famous racing cars, prepared from paintings by Gordon Crosby. These colour prints secured his reputation as a motoring artist. They began with 'Speed' (7 May 1926), depicting an 'ultra-modern' racing car in British colours in the Le Mans. The series 'Meteors of the Road and Track' began (25 June 1926) with a representation of Henri Fournier in a 60 hp Mors winning the 1901 Paris-Berlin race. History paintings that made use of his knowledge of locations, informed by photographs and sketches, were published monthly through to September 1927, and then spasmodically between February 1928 and April 1929 when a colour print was included as part of an account of the 1922 grand prix along with his sketch of the original race. A new series of 'Meteors of the Road' was launched in May 1938. 
The only discussion of Crosby's work from an art criticism point of view was an evaluation in the context of advertising published in 1926 in the journal 'Commercial Art'. He was applauded for capturing cars as living things, which was seen as an outcome of his intimate knowledge of motor engineering combined with a rare artistic skill, though it was his commercial value as an automobile artist, rather than his qualities as an illustrator, that was flagged up. 
Crosby's annual excursions with the 'Autocar' technical editor Montague Tombs to the London motor show from 1928 provided an invaluable discourse on the car aesthetic in the 'Autocar' articles 'Keeping up appearances'. His work was much used in advertising MG sports cars. Crosby's works were exhibited at the Rootes Showrooms, Devonshire House, London, in January 1929; the Olympia motor show, in 1930; the 'Autocar' Picture Gallery, Olympia, in 1931; Ackermann's Gallery, New Bond Street, in 1934; and as part of the Selfridge's Safety Week Exhibition that toured between Liverpool, Manchester, and Birmingham in 1935. He worked at speed, to press deadlines, working in pen, pencil, charcoal, pastel, watercolour, and oil. He failed, however, to achieve the artistic recognition for which he yearned. His small scale bronzes fall into the decorative art category as trophies and mascots, as does his 1934 bronze plaque commissioned by the British Racing Drivers' Club to the memory of Sir Henry Birkin for the Brooklands Paddock. 
A reproduction of a coloured painting by Crosby of a Hurricane fighter plane in aerial combat, produced for 'Flight' magazine and titled 'In a World of Space', was chosen by King George VI for his Christmas cards to the RAF in December 1939, and was sold in aid of RAF charities. Generally known as F. Gordon Crosby, he latterly hyphenated his name. Having suffered for some time from pernicious anaemia, he committed suicide at his home, Heatherlands, South Drive, Wentworth, Virginia Water, Surrey, on 21 August 1943, dying from a gunshot wound to the head. A revival of interest in his work was triggered by an exhibition in 1978 and sales in 1990 and 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 98027


Ward, (James) Rowland (1847-1912), taxidermist, was born at 21 Edward Street, St Pancras, London, on 12 May 1847, the second son of (Edwin) Henry Ward (1812-1878) and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Hunt. His family had a long association with natural history. His grandfather was a naturalist and dealer in animal skins and his father, who had accompanied J. J. Audubon in America, was chief taxidermist in the Oxford Street business of Thomas Mutlow Williams, himself a leading taxidermist who had exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851. 
Henry Ward set up in 1857 as an independent taxidermist and it was here that Rowland Ward served his apprenticeship, along with his elder brother, Edwin, who later also became a leading taxidermist. Despite the existence of an autobiography little is known of Rowland Ward's early life. He had artistic talent and his early ambition was to become a sculptor; later he sold bronzes as a sideline to his taxidermy work, though these were unremarkable, and even a little crude. His observational talents applied to three-dimensional objects, and a facility with modelling compounds, nevertheless lay at the heart of his innovations in taxidermy, allowing him to obtain greater accuracy and lifelike appearance in his specimens. He claimed to have pioneered the application of a malleable modelling compound under the skin of large mammals, enabling the creation of folds and wrinkles in the skin, a much needed advance on traditional stuffing methods. Although this method was not new Ward demonstrated its value most effectively, adding quality and realism to the facial details of the many lions, tigers, and primates that he and his firm produced, setting a high standard for others to follow. He is credited with introducing the use of woodwool into taxidermy, and also carbolic (phenol). 
About 1870 he set up in business independently, trading briefly as James Ward, then as Ward & Co. From about 1879 he advertised increasingly as Rowland Ward & Co and was incorporated as a limited company in 1890 to trade as 'taxidermists, naturalists, furrier, silversmith, bookseller and publisher' from his showroom in Piccadilly. 
Ward claimed to have originated the idea of setting up animals in natural groups. He put on dramatic displays at major national and international exhibitions, attracting valuable publicity, and also won many awards for quality and ingenuity. At the London International Exhibition of 1871 he displayed 'Combat of Red Deer'. At a later exhibition he created a display of a tiger attacking an elephant, now in the natural history museum in Paris. He made a speciality of preserving and displaying famous animals, including the heads of a prize Smithfield shorthorn, a charger from the battle of Waterloo, the Grand National winner Cloister, as well as celebrated railway collecting dogs for orphans such as London Jack (1901) at Waterloo station and the Irish terrier Tim at Paddington. He was not afraid to work with pets and domestic animals, jobs that taxidermists undertake reluctantly. His examples of famous domestic dogs, submitted to the breed judges for approval before being added to the collection, were later displayed at the Rothschild Zoological Museum at Tring. 
Although fundamentally an entrepreneur, Rowland Ward had a deep knowledge of natural history. He insisted on the importance of accurate measurements in taxidermy, and made careful studies of animal behaviour and habitats. He became a fellow of the Zoological Society of London in 1879, signing himself FZS thereafter on letters and trade labels. He also wrote frequently to 'The Times' about aspects of natural history. 
Rowland Ward travelled extensively in his bachelor days, having as his base an apartment above the Piccadilly showroom. During a period of ill health from 1882 he stayed for a number of years as a house guest at the Hertfordshire home of his friend the businessman and racehorse owner Sir John Blundell Maple. Ward married on 9 February 1893 Lina (1867-1951), the daughter of John Mann Taylor; she was connected with the Maple family. They had no children. Evidently considerably wealthy, he and his wife briefly leased Stradsett Hall in Norfolk and then Necton Hall near Swaffham, where they entertained for the shooting season many well-known guests with sporting and artistic interests, including the big-game hunters Abel Chapman, F. C. Selous, and John Guille Millais, and such artists as Edwin Landseer. He was also a keen motorist and as early as 1902 he owned a 22 hp Daimler. 
Ward's showroom was a meeting place for well-heeled and widely travelled men, and 'the Jungle' in Piccadilly became a focus for zoological and sporting ventures. Among his customers was Philippe, duc d'Orleans, who is reckoned to have purchased more than 2500 items from Ward, amassing a large private museum that formed a major showcase of Wardian taxidermy from about 1889. Ward's advice was sought by those organizing hunting trips, including Theodore Roosevelt. The firm received a royal warrant in 1904. Mounting hunting trophies for sportsmen was the most lucrative part of his business: he received sixty rhinos from a single expedition and was commissioned to mount thirty lions shot by Lord Delamere. He developed a sideline in publishing high-quality books written by his hunting friends and customers and also published 'The Sportsman's Handbook' (1881), a guide to hunting areas of the world and the proper treatment of trophies in the field. This ran to ten editions in his lifetime. His 'Horn Measurements and Weights of the Great Game of the World' (1892) went through numerous subsequent editions as 'Records of Big Game' (1896) and arose from his own interest in careful measurements of animals for taxidermy. He acted as an agent for many museums, and supplied them with specimens: in 1906 his firm prepared the British Museum of Natural History's first full-size wild African elephant and the first ever full-mount of an okapi. His products also included 'Wardian furniture' in which animal parts were contorted to form chairs, umbrella stands, lamps, and inkwells. 
Having suffered from heart disease for nine years, Ward died at his home, Restmore, Sea Road, Boscombe, Hampshire, on 28 December 1912, and was buried at Bournemouth cemetery. Among the bequests from his considerable estate was a legacy of $5000 to be expended by his trustees for the purchase of specimens from his company which were to be presented to the British Museum (now the Natural History Museum, London), provided that the museum undertook to keep them on view in the public galleries. Many specimens were supplied in this way and the museum's own magazine described at least eighteen full-mount mammals that were donated between 1927 and 1936. After his widow's death in 1951 the remainder of the fund was expended to create the Rowland Ward pavilion in the Natural History Museum, comprising three dioramas of African mammals, the largest depicting an African waterhole. All three were dismantled in 2004. The taxidermy business continued after Ward's death until the 1970s, the company being formally wound up in 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 98028


Spicer, Peter (1839-1935), taxidermist, was born in Jury Street, Warwick, on 28 October 1839, the son of John Spicer (1811-1866) and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Heynes. His father, a saddler by trade, established a taxidermy shop in Warwick; his trade label, featuring fox, hare, pheasant, and heron, also indicates that he supplied artificial birds' eyes to the trade and dealt in British and foreign bird skins. His cases of taxidermy often have a painted scene in the background, a style that was not widely adopted by British taxidermists until much later. When John Spicer died, his wife, Emma, continued taxidermy briefly, using her own trade label. 
Peter Spicer entered the family business, and was described as a 'bird & animal preserver' at Leamington Spa, when he was married there, on 23 January 1865, to Ann, daughter of George Ward, shoemaker. He subsequently took on the business in his own name and, based in Leamington Spa, built it up to become one of Britain's most respected taxidermy operations, especially renowned for the quality of its hunting trophies and for its excellent cases of mounted birds. Typical features of the latter included a watercolour scene painted at the back, probably by Spicer, who was an accomplished watercolourist. Cases were unusually large for their subject, with depth and glass side panels adding to the air of spaciousness. Groundwork was of peat in early cases, crumpled paper in later ones. The front glass was secured by paper tape (helping to keep out dust), covered by a gilded quadrant. Spicer bird cases often featured birds of prey and grouse. Arsenic was the preferred form of preservative (despite which, several employees lived well into their eighties, and Spicer himself died at the age of ninety-five). 
The Spicer firm was particularly known for its hunting trophies, especially fox and otter masks, but also deer heads and African species. Until about 1913 heads were prepared in the traditional way by cleaning up the skull, padding it out with fibrous stuffing, and replacing the preserved skin over it. Later the firm developed a system of iron moulds in which plaster manikins could be cast in indefinite numbers, giving consistently high quality. The skin was then fitted over the plaster shape. This 'tapiderm' process seems to have been Peter Spicer's innovation: the use of hollow plaster manikins reduced the weight of trophies (traditional stag heads, padded with tow, clay, and plaster, were heavy), lowering freight costs and making the trophies easier for servants to handle when lifting them off the wall to clean. 
Following the death of his first wife Spicer married, second, on 20 September 1877, Lavinia ('b'. 1849/50), daughter of Joseph Sims Williams, baker. After 1904 the business was called Peter Spicer & Sons and operated as a partnership between Peter and his two sons (William and his half-brother, Gilbert). In its heyday, in the early twentieth century, the Spicer business had several divisions, employing at least thirty-six people, and had an outpost at Inverness to serve the Scottish deer stalking and grouse shooting industries. 'Spicer's Stalking Records', a review of past seasons with advertisements for the preparation of trophies, was issued between about 1909 and 1923. With a reputation for quality second only to Rowland Ward Ltd of London, the firm set great store by its patrons, who included King Edward VII, the Spanish royal family, the shah of Persia, and the sultan of Johore. 
The First World War was a difficult period for the business, which by the time of Peter Spicer's retirement in 1921 had begun to diversify into other ventures, such as wax doll making. A stout, bearded man, he died at his home, 82 Leam Terrace, Leamington, Warwickshire, on 20 January 1935. His son William ran the taxidermy business until its closure in 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 98029


Gunn, Thomas Edward (1844-1923), taxidermist, was born at Trafalgar Street, Lakenham, Norwich, Norfolk, on 5 November 1844, the son of Robert Gunn, coachbuilder, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Hipper. After attending the Norwich Blue Coat School he was apprenticed aged fourteen to John Sayer, the long-established taxidermist at 47 St Giles Street, Norwich. He subsequently rose to become Sayer's manager and chief taxidermist, taking over the business when Sayer died in 1866. This was a time of increasing interest in wildlife and taxidermy. Gunn had the good fortune to be practising in the heyday of collection-based natural history and was based in an area rich in birdlife, including a regular influx of rare migrant birds, much in demand from museums and gentleman collectors. The business grew, and in the mid-1870s moved to larger premises at 84-6 St Giles Street, Norwich, where it remained for sixty-five years, one of Britain's largest and most respected taxidermy operations. 
Gunn developed a distinctive style of high-quality taxidermy and was widely known beyond East Anglia. His glass cases were almost invariably of the wooden box type (with only a single glass pane to the front). Typically the inside was washed with a bluish grey, and decorated with dried reeds and sedges painted pale yellowish green. The simulated mud or sand groundwork was made from absorbent grey paper, glued into mounds and slopes, then covered with sand and painted, usually ochre or dark brown. His mounted bird specimens were typically bound tightly with threads while the feathers dried, creating a tight and sleek appearance when the threads were removed. He used a peculiar system for the wire support within his birds, evidently learned from his mentor John Sayer, and not illustrated in the contemporary taxidermy manuals. 
Most of Gunn's work consisted of British birds, trapped or shot around the coasts and wetlands of Norfolk by gamekeepers and professional wildfowlers. Working in Norwich, he had access to many key sites, especially for rare migrants, such as bluethroats and the occasional egret, spoonbill, or ibis, and he supplied many of the major bird collectors of his day. After severe winters kingfishers and bitterns would be brought to the shop, having been found starving as a result of being unable to feed in frozen streams and lakes. Fishermen, sport shooters, and the general public anxious to preserve some natural beauty were also among his customers. Specimens of fish were sometimes preserved by him, as well as cases of otters (usually depicted with a fish as prey, but snarling unnaturally). 
Gunn married, on 13 August 1865, Maria (1845/6-1889), daughter of William Frankling, builder. They had at least three sons and five daughters. An awkward-looking man, with a large beard, high forehead, thin hair, and a tendency to wear eccentric floppy-brimmed hats when out in the field, Gunn was sometimes irreverently referred to as 'Robinson Crusoe'. He was a keen wildfowler and shot many of the birds that he set up, some of them illegally, for which he was prosecuted in 1881. Nevertheless he was a widely respected member of the local community, a freemason, and a lifelong member of the Norwich and Norfolk Conservative Club. His personal interests included angling and bowls. He enjoyed a high reputation as a field naturalist and published many of his own observations in appropriate journals, including 'The Field' and 'The Zoologist'. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1883 and was a founder member of the Norfolk and Norwich Naturalists' Society. Natural history was thus both his hobby and his job. 
Gunn had his own personal egg collection, and an extensive collection of taxidermy, each with its own meticulous catalogue. The taxidermy comprised carefully designed cases, set up with the birds in typical habitat scenes, and stacked to the ceiling in his Norwich home. The collection mostly comprised Norfolk birds, but included red grouse, shot on a visit to Staffordshire. He created similar cases for many of the famous collectors of the day, including Edward Thomas Booth (1842-1890) of Brighton, who had pioneered the idea of 'habitat groups' for the display of birds, and for the ophthalmologist and sportsman-naturalist Fergus Menteith Ogilvie (1861-1918), whose fine collection (now in Ipswich Museum) includes some of the best surviving examples of Gunn's work. Gunn would accompany these valued customers on shooting trips and often stayed at Calke Abbey in Derbyshire, where he taught Sir Vauncey Harpur Crewe, tenth baronet, the art of taxidermy and assisted in building up a considerable natural history collection there. 
Ill health having forced his retirement from business in 1919, Gunn died at the Bethel Hospital, Bethel Street, Norwich, on 13 July 1923, and was buried in Norwich. He bequeathed his business and associated equipment to his son Frederick Ernest Gunn (1869-1950), who continued working until the Second World War. After the war he disposed of the taxidermy shop and donated the remains of his father's collection to the Natural History Museum in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 98031


Gerrard, Edward (1810-1910), taxidermist, was born in Oxford on 20 October 1810, the son of Edward Gerrard, greengrocer. After moving to London with his parents he was employed by the Zoological Society of London from 1836 as assistant to George Robert Waterhouse, curator of the society's museum. His work with the museum's collections of vertebrata was the basis of his zoological knowledge. He married, on 28 September 1837, Mary Ann (1814/15-1846), daughter of James Maltby, tailor; they had a son and two daughters. 
In April 1841, encouraged by John Edward Gray, keeper of the zoological department of the British Museum, Gerrard joined that department as an attendant, working closely with Gray thereafter. One of his first jobs was to help move the collections from Montague House to the new museum buildings at Bloomsbury. Most of the existing exhibits of mammals consisted of mounted skins; Gerrard assisted Gray in building up collections of skeletons. Working in a damp cellar, and using a tray on his knees as a table, he compiled a manuscript catalogue of the osteological specimens, on which Gray's published catalogue (1847) was based. 'The Catalogue of the Bones of Mammalia in the British Museum' (1862) was compiled by Gerrard under his own system of arrangement, and Gray put Gerrard's name on the title page, but was overruled by Richard Owen and the museum's trustees, who ordered that the name be erased (Gray to Darwin, 21 Feb 1862, 'Correspondence', 10.91). In 1862 Gerrard was elected an associate of the Linnean Society. He was employed by the British Museum as an attendant for fifty-five years, until his retirement in 1896. 
About 1850, while still employed by the British Museum, Gerrard set up the family taxidermy and osteology business for which he became best known. Initially the business was based at the family home, 54 Queen's Street, Camden Town, in north London, but later moved to the yard behind 61 College Place, also in Camden Town. This was conveniently close to London Zoo, a focus for so many of the zoological luminaries of the day, and the Gerrard workshops soon became famous as a place where hunters, travellers, and naturalists met and exchanged or sold specimens. The juxtaposition of zoo and taxidermist was also advantageous as it ensured a regular supply of dead animals nearby, and during the heyday of British taxidermy, from about 1880 until 1914, Gerrard's business thrived in competition with dozens of other firms. The firm's speciality was preparing and articulating skeletons, used for teaching comparative anatomy. 
A widower for over sixty years, Gerrard lived with his unmarried daughter, a schoolteacher. He had a strong constitution, and throughout his career walked daily, in all weathers, from Camden Town to the museum at Bloomsbury. He died at his home, 61 College Place, Camden Town, London, on 19 June 1910. His son, Edward ('b'. 1841), carried on the taxidermy business, which was passed down to two more generations of the family until it was wound up in 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 98034


Duck, Ann (bap. 1717, d. 1744), criminal, was baptized on 22 July 1717 in Cheam, Surrey. Her father, John Duck, was a black man and her mother, Ann Brough, was white; they married on 12 August 1717 in St Clement Danes, Westminster. John Duck was also the father of an illegitimate daughter, conceived early in 1716 when he was visiting London with his master, Edward Green, of Nonsuch Park, near Cheam. He appears to have left service about the time of his marriage, to become a teacher of sword fighting to the gentlemen of the inns of court. The family lived in Little White's Alley off Chancery Lane, where they had at least two other children, Elizabeth and Mary. 
Until the death of her father, around 1740, Ann's behaviour was unexceptionable; she learned to read, write, and do accounts. She may have worked for a while as a shop assistant but then became a servant in a bawdy house and joined the Black Boy Alley Crew, a notorious gang of criminals in Clerkenwell, north of the City of London. In June 1742 she was committed to Newgate prison for assaulting and robbing a man, although no proceedings resulted from the incident. By her own account, she had already spent time in various gaols, including Wood Street, the Poultry Compter, the New prison, and the Clerkenwell Bridewell, all minor prisons used for those sentenced in the lower courts for such lesser crimes as soliciting. 
Ann Duck's first appearance at the Old Bailey was on 14 January 1743 for assault and theft from a waggoner; she was acquitted. On 29 June 1743 she made her second appearance in the same place for theft and was again acquitted. In these and further alleged crimes she worked with one or more other women, sometimes enticing a man into a house, plying him with drink and then, when he was befuddled, robbing him. At least two of these subsequent victims did not bring charges and a third did not turn up at the Old Bailey, probably for fear of reprisals, so Duck was yet again acquitted. The crimes she and her associates committed increased in violence, however, and at least one man died in the course of a robbery, although Duck and her two friends were not apprehended and she never confessed to this. The last of her thefts occurred on 21 September 1744. Three days later Duck was one of a mob who viciously attacked and left for dead the headborough of Clerkenwell, sent to the gang's headquarters to arrest a number of them. Duck was charged with both these crimes. On 17 October 1744 she was tried at the Old Bailey, first for the assault on the headborough, for which she was acquitted, and then for the theft. Including appearances in the lower courts, it was, according to the 'Daily Gazetteer', the nineteenth time she had been brought to trial. She was sentenced to death. In Newgate she made a confession to the ordinary and, despite a petition to the king from a cousin, was hanged at Tyburn on 7 November 1744. 
Ann Duck's life shows that black people were an unremarkable part of the population of London during the eighteenth century and that there was no apparent prejudice against them in the courts. Her colour was mentioned by witnesses only incidentally as a way of identifying her. One witness thought Duck was the proprietor of a drinking house, for which an official licence was needed. A gentlewoman who saw a victim struggling with Duck assumed they were married and that what she was witnessing was a domestic dispute. She was neither surprised nor shocked to see such a relationship, which, as Duck's parents' marriage also suggests, was relatively commonplace. 


@@@@@


doc= 98035


Tagore, Satyendranath (1842-1923), Indian civil servant and author, was born in Calcutta, India, on 1 June 1842, the second son of Debendranath Tagore (1817-1905) ['see under 'Tagore family] and his wife, Sarada Devi (1826?-1875). The author Swarnakumari was his younger sister. He was born into an illustrious family referred to by one modern historian as 'the Medici of Calcutta' (Kling, 10). His family could boast of the first independent Indian merchant under East India Company rule, 'Prince' Dwarkanath Tagore (1794-1846), who was Satyendranath's grandfather. In this family sons and daughters alike were gifted writers, dramatists, painters, and musicians. Satyendranath's elder brother, Dwijendranath Tagore (1840-1926), was a philosopher admired by Mahatma Gandhi. The fifth brother, Jyotirindranath Tagore (1849-1925), was described as the 'finest living Indian artist' by the British painter William Rothenstein (Rothenstein). The eighth and youngest brother, Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), was a Nobel prize-winning poet. His younger sister was the author Swarnakumari Devi. 
Satyendranath Tagore learnt English and Sanskrit at home before proceeding to the Hindu School and the Presidency College, Calcutta. In 1859 he married Jnanadanandini Devi. In 1862 he travelled to England to prepare for the Indian Civil Service examinations, which had been opened to Indians the previous year. He took the examination in June 1863 and was successful, and after completing his probationary training returned to India in November 1864. It was to be seven more years before another Indian joined the ranks of the covenanted Indian Civil Service. The epic poet Michael Madhusudan Dutt composed a poem to celebrate his achievement, and the social and intellectual leaders of all communities in Calcutta, Hindu, Muslim, and Christian, Bengali and non-Bengali, met and rejoiced over him on his return from England. He served the government from 1864 to 1897, beginning as assistant collector and magistrate in Ahmedabad and finishing as a sessions judge in Satara; all of his postings were in the Bombay Presidency. 
Satyendranath Tagore was a renaissance man in the way he combined social action, piety, a sense of national identity, and a passion for writing, with his professional work as a civil servant of an alien government. His family home was also the home of Hindu protestantism. His father followed modern India's first reformer, Rammohun Roy, in leading a reformist Hindu movement known as the Brahmo Samaj. Debendranath Tagore was devoted to the philosophy of the 'Upanishads' and lived like an ascetic despite being the scion of a wealthy family. Satyendranath Tagore grew up in the shadow of the reform movement and lent his youthful energy to it. 'I also was swept by the tide of the new enthusiasm', he wrote ('Amar Balya Katha', 57). He composed many devotional songs, with a patriotic flavour to some of them. One of his songs, composed for the national fair in 1867, expressed the idea of a common Indian nationality and came to be sung like a national anthem. About it Rabindranath Tagore later wrote, 'Our family was at the centre of plans for establishing the patriotic Hindu Mela, a National Fair... My second brother [Satyendranath] wrote the hymn 'Jai Bharater Jai' ('Victory to India, Victory')' (Das Gupta, 4). The fair became an annual event for the display of national talent and the indigenous arts. The Brahmos were in this and many other ways pioneers of Indian nationalism. 
In his memoirs, 'Amar Balya Katha o Amar Bombai Prabas' (1915), written in Bengali, Satyendranath Tagore called himself a 'Radical', using the latter word in English ('Amar Balya Katha', 3). He also wrote that his father was regarded as a 'Conservative', again using the word in English, but that his father did not interfere in his son's independence. This was tested when Satyendranath made radical moves for women's freedom from a young age. Writing in 1863 from London to his wife in Calcutta, he told her that the most fortunate and beautiful thing in Western life was in the way their women lived (Chaudhurani, 46). On his first visit to Calcutta from Bombay he broke all social rules by taking his wife to a 'majlis' in the Government House. She was the only Bengali woman among so many British women. Satyendranath's influential uncle Prasanna Kumar Tagore left the assembly at this sight. But Satyendranath successfully saw to it that the women of his family came out of their 'andar mahal', or women's quarters, and enjoyed independent movement. 
Satyendranath Tagore wrote profusely, mainly philosophical commentary and autobiography, almost always in Bengali. Of his writings those on the 'Bhagavad Gita' and on Buddhism, 'Bouddhyadharma', were the most prominent. These continued to be revised and reprinted in his lifetime, underlining his strong and unflinching interest in those subjects. From his introductions to the revised editions it is evident he was keen on receiving readers' views and incorporating them. Some of his commentaries were later collected in the Tagore Archives as manuscripts or typescripts. These included his essays on 'Indian Wisdom' and 'Kalidas' by Monier Monier-Williams, on 'Kalidas' by Friedrich Max Muller and 'Bhavabhuti' by H. H. Wilson, on vedic literature and religion, on Robert Watson Frazer's 'Literary History of India', Friedrich Max Muller's 'History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature' and 'Natural Religion', Edwin Arnold's 'The Light of Asia', and on T. W. Rhys Davids's 'Buddhism'. He was an early activist for the modernization of the Bengali language and was elected head of the Bengali Literary Academy for the year 1900-01. 
Satyendranath Tagore died in Calcutta on 9 January 1923. His children continued in the family tradition: his son Surendranath Tagore (1872-1940) was a literary scholar, translator of his uncle Rabindranath's writings into English and of the 'Mahabharata' into Bengali, while his daughter Indira Devi Choudhurani (1873-1960) was a scholar of Western literature and Indian music, and became vice-chancellor of Viswa-Bharati University. 


@@@@@


doc= 98036


Tagore, Jyotirindranath (1849-1925), playwright and musician, was born in Calcutta on 4 May 1849, the fifth son of Debendranath Tagore (1817-1905) of the Jorasanko branch of the Tagore family of Bengal, and his wife, Sarada Devi (1826?-1875). The family occupied leading positions as entrepreneurs and religious reformers, within the civil service, and as part of the literary and artistic elite. Jyotirindranath's second brother was the first Indian member of the covenanted Indian Civil Service, Satyendranath Tagore (1842-1923). Their youngest brother, Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), was the first Asian Nobel laureate in literature. 
The Tagore brothers grew up in an atmosphere where the British-Indian cultural encounter was generating profound controversy over new concepts and social mores at various levels of Indian life. Inevitably, the representatives of the colonial British culture dominated the interaction. Cultural leadership therefore became as important as political leadership in helping Indians to negotiate the encounter. The Tagore family contributed to that leadership by making culture the basis of their service to humanity outside the political movement. One of their contributions was to restore the Upanishadic ideal of becoming one with the world and to make that a dominant element in modern India's cultural ideology. They did this by nurturing an integrated Indian personality capable of appreciating the many currents of the Indian cultural tradition and also the liberal values of the West. They grew in their position as cultural nationalists while being at ease in high British culture. Rammohun Roy, modern India's first social reformer, and Dwarkanath Tagore (1794-1846), the leading entrepreneur, who was Jyotirindranath's grandfather, worked for an equal racial partnership between India and Britain in all the spheres of political, economic, and cultural activity. Although this could not be achieved, its lesson was not lost on the succeeding generation. They grew up to embrace the world with a confidence that came from their education in the mother tongue, Bengali, their grounding in the Indian cultural tradition, their love of world literature, and the influence of western thought, all of which were family gifts. 
Jyotirindranath Tagore (who was educated in Calcutta at St Paul's School, the Parental Academic Institution, and Presidency College) characterized these gifts seamlessly in his activities. He was a patriot who floated a 'swadeshi' (or Indian-run) steamer company in 1884 in East Bengal to compete with the English company, Flotilla. In 1876 he founded a secret society named 'Sanjivani' ('Awakening') on the model of Mazzini's Carbonari. He was a keen hunter. He was a playwright, an editor, and a translator. His feelings for nationalism and internationalism were expressed in the number of languages he cultivated and from which he translated. He learned Marathi and French and knew Sanskrit well. He introduced Sanskrit, Marathi, and French works to Bengali readers through his translations. Between 1899 and 1904 he translated seventeen Sanskrit plays into Bengali. He translated the Marathi nationalist leader B. G. Tilak's treatises 'Geetarahasya' and 'Karmayoga' into Bengali. He translated not only the works of Pierre Loti and Theophile Gautier but other works of French history and fiction into Bengali. He also translated Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar' and Marcus Aurelius's 'Meditations' from English into Bengali. 
Jyotirindranath Tagore was a skilled musician. He presided over a homely soiree every afternoon on the mansion's third-floor terrace with his wife, Kadambari Devi (1859-1884), whom he married on 5 July 1868, who also loved cultural activities. Other participants in the soirees included Rabindranath Tagore and the poet Akshay Chaudhuri. Jyotirindranath played the piano and violin and composed melodies to words by Rabindranath which he and Akshay then performed. Some of these early compositions became part of Rabindranath's great repertoire of songs. Jyotirindranath spoke lovingly of his home to his biographer, describing the trees and the creepers that he bought and planted on his terrace to give the surroundings the feel of woodland. He could name the many hummingbirds that flitted and sang all round his house. Jyotirindranath was also involved nationally as an organizer for the advancement of Hindustani classical music. He founded the Bharatiya Sangit Samaj ('Indian Music Society') in 1897 and produced two magazines on music, 'Binabadini' and 'Sangeet Prakashika'. He also composed a body of hymns for the assemblies of the Brahmo Samaj, a reformist Hindu movement led by his father, following in the footsteps of Rammohan Roy. 
Jyotirindranath Tagore also loved to draw. He sketched many portraits, mainly of his family members, of which about 2000 form part of the collection in Calcutta's Rabindra-Bharati University Museum. Seeing some of the sketches, the English painter William Rothenstein wrote to him on 14 September 1912: 'I know of few drawings which show at the same time so much sensitiveness of line and sincerity in characterisation, and there is a beauty and nobility in the expression you give to your sitters which it would be difficult to match. (Rothenstein to Tagore, 14 Sept 1912, Rabindra-Bhavana Library and Archives, Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan)' Rothenstein arranged to publish a collection of these as 'Twenty-five Collotypes from the Original Drawings of Jyotirindranath Tagore' (1914) and wrote an introduction for the volume in which he described Jyotirindranath as the 'finest living Indian artist'. 
Jyotirindranath Tagore was perhaps best known for his plays and satires. Among those staged during the 1870s and 1880s were 'Puruvikram', about the Punjab King Porus, or Puru in Bengali, who had stood up to Alexander the Great; 'Ashrumati', which was about the marriage of a Hindu girl and a Muslim boy; and the tragedy 'Sarojini', depicting patriotic martyrdom. His satires included 'Kinchit Jalajog', 'Alik Babu', and 'Hatath Nabob'. The last was based on Moliere's 'Le bourgeois gentilhomme'. His plays were sought after by the commercial theatres of the time but he himself staged them mainly at the family mansion. Family members were keen actors and it helped that the women members had come out of the confines of the 'andar mahal', or the women's quarters, to be educated, to act on the stage, to go out socially with their husbands, to dress fashionably, and even to ride. 
Despite such a range of artistic talents, Jyotirindranath Tagore remained somewhat unrecognized in his own lifetime. This was partly because he was overshadowed by his brother Rabindranath, but partly also because he became a recluse following the tragic death by suicide of his remarkable wife in 1884. He gave up the theatre and built a house on the picturesque Morabadi Hill in Ranchi which he named Shantidham, 'house of peace'. He lived there alone until his death, in Ranchi, on 4 March 1925. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 98037


Tagore, Dwijendranath (1840-1926), poet and philosopher, was born in Calcutta, India, on 11 March 1840, the eldest son of Debendranath Tagore (1817-1905) ['see under 'Tagore family] and his wife, Sarada Devi (1826?-1875). His grandfather 'Prince' Dwarkanath Tagore was one of the most successful independent Indian merchants of the early nineteenth century. The Tagore family was remarkable for its gifted and influential men and women. Dwijendranath's younger brother Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941) was a world-famous poet who became the first Indian and first Asian Nobel laureate in 1913. 
Dwijendranath Tagore was educated in Calcutta at St Paul's School and Presidency College. He was a man of many talents: philosopher, poet, songster, mathematician, innovator, and hobbyist. His hobby was making boxes with paper and experimenting with trigonometry. His publications include 'Ontology' (1871) and 'Boxometry' (1913). He developed shorthand in Bengali and wrote a book on it, 'Rekhaksar varnamala' (1912). He composed songs and wrote their musical notations in Bengali, 'swaralipi', introducing the 'kasimatrik' notation system in 1880. His patriotic song 'Malin mukhachandrama bharat tomari' ('pale is your face oh India') became popular. He wrote witty verses on the English-educated Bengali youth who had taken to imitating the English. He coined a term for them, 'Ingo-Bango', or the 'English-Bengali' type ('Visva Bharati Quarterly', 1945, 145). Yet, as his close companion Charles (C. F.) Andrews, commented, Tagore had ''wholly' annexed' Shakespeare, Scott, and Dickens. To him these were not 'foreign at all' (Andrews, 336). Andrews gave the better part of his life to serve the Santiniketan school that Rabindranath Tagore founded in rural Bengal, where Dwijendranath Tagore lived. Like any family member, Andrews called Dwijendranath 'barodada' (elder brother). 
Dwijendranath Tagore and Mahatma Gandhi met several times and, according to Andrews, revered one another. A keen observer of the Gandhian way, Tagore once wrote to Gandhi doubting if 'penance and fasting' were 'quite the things' that were 'necessary'. But, 'on second thought', he continued: 'I find that we are not competent to judge the matter from our standpoint. You are deriving your inspiration from such a high source that, instead of calling in question the appropriateness of your sayings and doings, we ought to thankfully recognize in them the fatherly call of providence full of divine wisdom and power. (D. Tagore to M. Gandhi, n.d., Rabindra-Bhavana archives, D. Tagore file)' Referring to Gandhi, he used to tell his brother Rabindranath, 'Rabi, you do not understand. This man will deliver India' (Kripalani, 257). 
In his philosophical convictions Tagore was a follower of Kant. He wrote a philosophical work in four volumes, 'Tattwavidya' (1866-9), comparing Kantian and Indian philosophy. He also wrote a spiritual treatise, 'Brahmajnan o Brahmasadhana' (1900). He held sessions on the 'Bhagavad Gita' with the Santiniketan teachers and published 'Gitapatha' ('Readings from the 'Gita'') in 1915. Andrews described how 'humble and truthful' Tagore was about his own spiritual experience. He spoke of having found comfort from the scriptures, which included not only the 'Gita' but also the Christian gospels. His two favourite sayings from the latter were 'The kingdom of heaven is within you', and 'Except ye become as little children, ye cannot enter the kingdom of heaven' (Andrews, 340). 
As a poet Dwijendranath Tagore was best known for his allegorical verses 'Swapnaprayana' ('Dream journey') of (1875). He translated the Sanskrit epic 'Meghdut' into Bengali (1860), which Michael Madhusudan Dutt, the greatest contemporary writer of epic verses, acclaimed. Tagore converted the difficult Sanskrit texts from the 'Upanishads' into simple Bengali verse for all to read. He did that also for the prayer book, 'Brahmo dharma grantha', of the Brahmo Samaj (a Hindu reformist movement influential in Bengal from the mid-nineteenth century). He wrote his second book of original verses, 'Kavyamala' (1921), in old age. He enjoyed rhyming in English and wrote letters to Andrews beginning 'Oh, Charlie dear, I wish you were here' (Andrews, 339). 
Dwijendranath Tagore was unusual in the way he lived. He was eccentric and other-worldly. Even his own creations had no use for him after he had read them out to an intimate circle of listeners. His brother, Rabindranath, wrote how 'barodada' would alternately write and read from his 'Swapnaprayana' with his 'boisterous laughter at his own conceits making the verandah tremble' (Tagore, 94). Other contemporaries also wrote about his 'hearty and child-like laugh' (Chowdhury, 27). He could also be impatient. It was a familiar sight to see his old faithful servant Muniswar running to fetch whoever had been called for. But he was very troubled if he felt he had lost control or been harsh. Then it was a mad rush until he had made amends. 
In Santiniketan, where he moved after his father's death in 1905, Tagore's day began early with a walk round the garden followed by a cold bath at the same time every day, followed by feeding the mynahs from his own plate and continuing to revise his Bengali shorthand even when his fingers were bent with rheumatism. Some of his letters revealed his inner anxiety when his father entrusted him with charge of the family's estate. He was married and had five sons and two daughters, but his wife died relatively young. He died at Santiniketan on 19 January 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 98045


Cunningham, Sir Charles Banks (1884-1967), colonial police officer, was born in Argyll Street, Campbeltown, Argyll, on 8 May 1884, the seventh son of John Cunningham, physician, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Patrick. Educated at Cambeltown grammar school, he was initially trained in banking, and in 1902 became a member of the Institute of Bankers in Scotland. A career change followed when he joined the Indian police service as probationary assistant superintendent of police, Madras, in December 1904. He apparently had doubts about this decision, and in 1906 unsuccessfully requested permission to transfer to the imperial customs service. Settling down to police work, he rose rapidly through the ranks, becoming a district superintendent of police in 1909. A year later he was promoted to deputy commissioner of police, Madras. He was also appointed a commissioner of the corporation of Madras. He showed exceptional ability in passing the police and law examinations, as well as learning the local Dravidian languages. On 1 November 1912 he married Grace, daughter of Hugh Macnish of Campbeltown; they had two sons and one daughter. 
In 1915 Cunningham became commissioner of police in Travancore, a rare extra-provincial appointment which he held until 1921. From 1917 he served as a member of the legislative council of Travancore state and was appointed director of civil supplies and controller of munitions. In 1924 he was asked to review the distribution of the mufassil police, a task that enabled him to display his skills in administration and business, as well as gaining more knowledge about the police throughout the whole of the Madras presidency. After this assignment he was made district superintendent of police in Coimbatore, where he dealt with industrial unrest and displayed 'a toughness and vigour... which greatly commended itself to a government which saw the growing restiveness of the industrial proletariat as a major law and order problem' (Arnold, 77). 
Cunningham was made a deputy inspector-general in January 1928, and in May 1928 he returned to Madras as acting commissioner of police, the previous incumbent having been removed after failing to prevent a nationalist riot. It fell to Cunningham to restore confidence within the police and to reorganize the force into a more effective tool in public order situations. With his characteristic energy and attention to detail he wrote a thorough report that proposed a number of reforms, including better pay and conditions, strengthening and retraining the armed reserve, and the creation of a deputy commissioner's post with responsibility for unrest and disorder. He also proposed that the police should be given their own switchboard in the main exchange, since previously police calls had no priority over civilian traffic. His proposals were almost all accepted by the city authorities and provided a model for reorganizing other police forces in the state. He was awarded the king's police medal the same year. 
Cunningham's firm handling of the salt 'satyagraha' in April 1930 was appreciated by the government of Madras and he was appointed inspector-general with responsibility for the suppression of civil disobedience throughout the province. His actions in April were said to have 'fortified the Madras Government at a time when any weakening in the capital would have led to widespread breakdown in law and order up country' ('The Times', 31 Oct 1967). His 'authoritarianism' in dispersing meetings was criticized. He was made a companion of the Star of India and awarded the Indian police medal in 1931. In 1933 he was knighted, such an award being rarely conferred on an Indian police officer at the time. 
Cunningham's term as inspector-general 'represented a high-point in police influence in Madras and brought the IPS [Indian police service] to a position of unprecedented authority within the colonial administration' (Arnold, 78). In circumstances of growing industrial unrest and rioting his forceful approach reduced the level of violence and enabled the reassertion of authority, but he was much criticized by Congress for incidents where there was undoubted use of excessive force by the police. Cunningham's aim was to protect the life and property of those threatened by the disorder and to demonstrate that disorder was not an effective means of securing concessions; even Congress noted the police's efficiency in quelling unrest. One of his first acts as commissioner was to introduce a new short 'lathi' (stick), which was to prove highly effective because it was easier to wield in large crowds. He was generally quick to defend his officers against accusations of excessive violence, although one officer was later prosecuted for using unnecessary force against a Congress leader in January 1932. Both Cunningham and the government were keen that excessive force should not be used, while recognizing that 'once you apply force you cannot always regulate its precise use' (ibid., 198). 
Cunningham also faced the problem of monitoring the more extreme Congress activities, and the small but growing threat from communists, which was soon identified as the main danger. The 'Government of India Act' of 1935, which conceded self-government to the provinces, was expected to reduce the demands placed on special branch; Cunningham thought, however, that this was unlikely. He wrote in 1935 that: 'far from censoring and press scrutiny work becoming less important under the new constitution, my expectation is that it will become greater in volume and more important than it is now' (Arnold, 191). After this date he was forced into a delicate political balancing act between upholding the law and ensuring the police's effectiveness, by preventing undue interference by the newly elected provincial authorities, and not allowing special treatment for the police to go so far as to undermine the whole principle of provincial autonomy. 
These were difficult years and Cunningham retired relatively early, ending his police career in January 1938. There were some rumours that C. Rajagopalachari, the premier of the first Congress-led ministry of the province, which took office in July 1937, forced Cunningham into early retirement. One version of an early encounter between the two men recounts that on entering the premier's office there was no chair for his use and Cunningham was forced to sit cross-legged on the floor (Arnold, 219). Rajagopalachari also declined Cunningham's plans for the rapid expansion of special branch, which had been approved by the interim ministry and which were resubmitted by Cunningham in September 1937. It was later proposed that the rumours that he had been dismissed should be countered through the release of a statement thanking him for his outstanding service. This was rejected by Rajagopalachari as an 'extraordinary and unnecessary step' (ibid., 220). Despite his departure and the seeming hostility of the premier little changed in the way in which the police operated; Cunningham's reforms had left a tried and tested force in place. He was disappointed at leaving India 'just at a time when the police are going to have an opportunity of demonstrating that they are the servants of the public and the Government of the day' (ibid.). He maintained his association with India, continuing as deputy and later chairman of the Madras and South Mahratta Railway, serving in these capacities until partition. 
On his return to Britain Cunningham became deputy controller of civil defence in Buckinghamshire. In 1940 he was recalled to police work by the Home Office as inspector of constabulary for the southern region, to advise the civil defence regional commissioner on police matters during the war emergency. He also served as vice-chairman of the Committee for the Industrial and Scientific Provision of Housing from 1943 to 1944 and as chairman of the Animal Feeding Stuffs Committee (southern region) from 1945 to 1949. After the war he maintained business interests in the City of London; he became a fellow of the Institute of General Managers in 1958. He was active in pressure groups concerned with fiscal policy and was president of the Taxpayers' Union and a vice-president of both the Free Trade Union and the Cobden Club. He published two volumes of verse inspired by his time in India, 'When Sword Met Steel' (1961) and 'The Shining Sword' (1962). He died in London on 30 October 1967; his funeral took place at Golders Green crematorium. His elder son, John Charles Cunningham, died on active service with the RAF in 1941; his younger son, Lieutenant-General Sir Hugh Cunningham ('b'. 1921), was deputy chief of defence staff (operational research) from 1976 to 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 98050


Dowbiggin, Sir Herbert Layard (1880-1966), colonial police officer, was born in Cotta, Ceylon, on 26 December 1880, the eldest surviving son among the four sons and four daughters of the Revd Richard Thomas Dowbiggin (1838-1901), who was in charge of the Church Missionary Society Singhalese mission in Cotta, and his wife, Laetitia Anna, 'nee' Layard (1845-1930). Educated at Merchant Taylors' School (1895-1900), where he played for the rugby fifteen, he joined the Ceylon police as an inspector in 1902, rising rapidly through the ranks to become inspector-general in 1913. He was the first officer to have risen up through the Ceylon police ranks rather than being brought in from the Indian police. 
In Ceylon Dowbiggin developed his own policing ethos, which was based on civil rather than semi-military practices. His policing concept stemmed in part from the inherited traditions of the Ceylon police, influenced in its own development by two police forces: the Royal Irish Constabulary and the Metropolitan Police. While the Royal Irish Constabulary was theoretically a colonial, semi-military police force, the Metropolitan Police was unarmed and practised the civil concept of 'policing by consent'. Yet in practice each type of police force borrowed from the other, which resulted in an overlapping of policing styles. The Ceylon police displayed characteristics of both, though in essence it remained a colonial police force. Cyril Longden, inspector-general in Ceylon from 1905, had introduced civil-style reform, steering Ceylon police officers towards training with the City of London Police rather than the Royal Irish Constabulary. When Dowbiggin succeeded Longden he continued his predecessor's work; by 1926 the Metropolitan Police was providing refresher courses not only for the Ceylon police but for all overseas police officers when specifically requested. 
Throughout his tenure of office Dowbiggin put into practice his belief that policemen should be 'civilians in uniform'. Police officers patrolled with only a truncheon or a stick, though firearms were available in police stations for use when 'the only method of preserving law and order [was] by means of an armed force'. Despite the extent of public disorder and a high proportion of murders in Ceylon at that time Dowbiggin believed that the mere presence of armed police officers when public disorder threatened was sufficient to act as a deterrent ('Police Journal', 1928, 205). He was also keen to deter serious youth crime and supported the establishment of boys' clubs in Colombo in 1922 for orphan boys. Known as street boys' clubs, they encouraged boys to attend school and helped in securing employment. Throughout his police career Dowbiggin was interested in the creation of youth associations throughout the world. 
In line with Dowbiggin's vision of modernization the Ceylon police establishment was strengthened and a new police headquarters was set up. In 1913 the police department purchased the Bambalapitiya grounds in Colombo, which later housed the central police depot. By 1916 the number of police stations on the island had increased to 138. Greater emphasis was placed on the prevention and detection of crime; a CID department was established in 1915 and the analysis and collation of crime reports was standardized. Dowbiggin also promoted new investigative techniques, including finger printing and foot printing ('so useful in an Eastern country where the majority of the inhabitants go about barefooted' and introduced into Ceylon by Superintendent G. Manwaring in 1926; 'Police Journal', 1928, 211) and photography (a photographic branch was introduced in 1924). He ensured that police stations could communicate effectively with each other. In 1925 a new training school was set up and run according to the British public school system with separate houses and senior recruits given the title of prefects in charge. From this time roughly 300 recruits passed through the school on a yearly basis. Dowbiggin was also responsible for the creation in 1924 of a police saving association to which police officers (with the exception of Muslim officers) were required to contribute 4 per cent of their salaries. On retirement the association provided an officer with sufficient funds to buy property or set up in business. Dowbiggin always remained sympathetic towards the plight of the rank and file and understood that the reform of police policies and procedures should be undertaken before blaming officers for ineffective policing. From the late 1920s effective police work was sometimes referred to as a 'darbegum'. 
'Remarkable' and indeed 'eccentric' as Dowbiggin has been described (O'Regan, 15), and despite his vision of transforming the Ceylon police in an English mould, the force remained essentially colonial in character, and used punitive methods to contain colonial uprisings. During the 1915 riots he authorized the use of draconian policing measures that led to the arrest of one of the leaders, Anagarika Dharmapala, whose legs were broken while he was in police custody. His brother, who was also arrested subsequently, died as a result of his injuries. E. W. Perera, a Cotta lawyer, made a direct and emotional appeal to the colonial secretary for the repeal of martial law and for the investigation of police brutality. The episode haunted Dowbiggin during his years in Ceylon though he maintained his belief in civil-style policing, which he attempted to promote among other colonial constabularies. 
In 1926 the colonial office asked Dowbiggin to inspect the Cyprus military police, a semi-military force solely responsible for the defence of the island, and to recommend 'police-style' reforms. His detailed report placed an emphasis on the police undertaking civil rather than semi-military duties encapsulated in his famous dictum: 'The notebook is to the Policeman what his rifle is to the soldier' (Dowbiggin, 'Inspection of Cyprus military police', TNA: PRO, CO 67/218/3/59). In Cyprus Dowbiggin encouraged the recruitment of colonial police rather than military officers into the police force, and developed the notion of policing the local population by consent rather than through force. 
Dowbiggin had the idea of setting up the first professional police journal for the 'police forces of empire', the 'Police Journal', first published in 1928. In it he asserted that, despite the different regulations and conditions of service, 'the police forces of the Empire have a common bond... they are the representatives of law and order, pledged to protect the welfare of their fellow citizens whose servants they are'. 
In January 1930 Dowbiggin was sent to Palestine, then governed under the British mandate, to report on the Palestine police, a semi-military force comprising British and Palestinian officers (both Arabs and Jews, although the latter were under-represented). As a result of serious rioting in 1929, which the police failed to contain, a commission chaired by Sir Walter Shaw recommended police reform. Dowbiggin's detailed instructions for its complete overhaul emphasized the need for a civil and impartial police force. He perceived that the different sections of the police had operated in a segregated manner, with the British section carrying out essentially paramilitary rather than civil 'police' duties. Recommending that the British, Arab, and Jewish sections of the police work more closely together, he looked to a stable and lasting civic order facilitated by the recruitment into the police of 'intelligent men of good character drawn from all nationalities resident in Palestine' (Dowbiggin, 'Report on the Palestine police force', 8 May 1930, TNA: PRO, CO 935/4/2). 
Many of Dowbiggin's recommendations inspired his own protege from the Ceylon police, Roy Spicer, who became inspector-general of the Palestine police in July 1931 as part of the continuing reform programme. Spicer described Dowbiggin's report as the 'Police Bible'. In practice, however, Dowbiggin's concept of civil policing was undermined by the reality that the only means by which the British could control Palestine was a semi-military police force. While the reformed Palestine police quelled the 1933 riots it proved unable to contain the Arab revolt in 1936, and Sir Charles Tegart was brought in to advise on further reform. Tegart strongly criticized Dowbiggin's ideal of a civil police force and argued that attempts to change its ethos, policies, and procedures had been the principal cause of the Palestine police's inability to confront 'Arab terrorism'. Tegart advocated what he termed 'flexible security policing' and brought about the reinforcement of the Palestine police's semi-military nature and practices. 
Dowbiggin's greatest achievement was to become the first unofficial police adviser to the Colonial Office, acting as a roving police ambassador. On returning home from leave in 1935 he embarked on a grand tour, visiting the police forces of south-east Asia as well as the forces of twelve cities in the United States, two in Canada, and two in Japan, and ending with a visit to the Metropolitan Police. His lengthy report left few in doubt that he was the Colonial Office's 'father of the colonial police service'. Officers who had served with him in the Ceylon police took his particular ethos with them when they transferred to other constabularies, and he kept up a stream of correspondence with the heads of many forces, advising on police matters. With the creation of the colonial police service on 1 October 1936 provisional plans had been put in place for the post of a colonial police adviser, who would report directly to the Colonial Office on colonial police appointments, promotions, police policy, and procedures, and would undertake annual inspections and oversee colonial police conferences. Dowbiggin had been one of the first possible candidates suggested, the Colonial Office describing him as 'young for his years and exceptionally energetic' (Furse, CO minute, 15 Feb 1933). In the event, the official post of inspector-general of the colonial police service did not come into effect until 1948 with the appointment of Sir William Johnson. In 1937 Dowbiggin made a final overseas tour, visiting the police forces of Zanzibar, Kenya, Sudan, Mozambique, Northern and Southern Rhodesia, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and Honolulu, offering advice on policing matters. 
Dowbiggin retired as inspector-general of the Ceylon police in 1937. Awarded the king's police medal in 1920, he was knighted in 1931, and in 1939 received the colonial police medal. He was described as being 'a stern disciplinarian, especially of his young officers from the United Kingdom, fearlessly outspoken and direct in all his enterprises' with 'a formidable presence' ('Police Journal', 39, July 1966, 328). In retirement he lived at the Old Rectory, Milden, near Bildeston, Suffolk, where he was a prominent member of the church congregation. He died at St Mary's Hospital, Bury St Edmunds, on 24 May 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 98052


Jeffreys, William Rees (1871-1954), promoter of roads and road transport, was born at 7 Warwick Place, Paddington, London, on 1 December 1871, the eldest of the four children of William George Jeffreys (1839/40-1890), upholsterer, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Garratt (1843/4-1919), sometime servant, toy dealer, and boarding-house keeper. Though included in 'Who's Who in Wales' (1921) and sometimes identified as Welsh, Jeffreys never lived in Wales and his family links with it were tenuous, for his father was born in Bristol and his mother in Lincolnshire. 
As a child Jeffreys was privately educated; in his late twenties he studied statistics under A. L. Bowley at the London School of Economics. In 1891 he joined the Board of Trade's commercial, labour, and statistical department. In twelve years as a civil servant he never rose above the rank of second division clerk. In 1893 he became the first chairman of the newly formed Association of Clerks of the Second Division, a forerunner of the Society of Civil Servants. In his youth he was a keen cyclist, and in 1902 acquired his first motor vehicle, a Werner motorcycle. 
In 1901, while still at the Board of Trade, Jeffreys was appointed honorary secretary of the Roads Improvement Association (RIA), a body relaunched in 1898 to promote the formation of a highway network suitable for the motor car age, though in its early days he and it were closely associated with cycling organizations. Jeffreys had 'full authority... to organize political propaganda in favour of a central highway authority and a state grant for highways' (Jeffreys, 2). He later became a member of the RIA's council and, eventually, its chairman, a position he retained in the 1950s. He was associated with many other public and commercial bodies. These included the Cyclists' Touring Club, Commercial Motor Users' Association, Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, Town Planning Institute, British Motor Trading Corporation, Surrey Motors, Institution of Automobile Engineers, of which he was honorary treasurer from 1910 to 1933, and several insurance companies. For many years he was prominent in the International Road Congress movement, serving as honorary secretary of the London Congress of 1913. 
Through the RIA Jeffreys met many of the pioneer figures of motoring, including John Scott Montagu and Claude Johnson, secretary of the Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland (ACGBI, Royal Automobile Club or RAC from 1907). He joined the club in May 1902 and, following Johnson's resignation in 1903, he became its administrative secretary and, along with Basil Joy and Julian Orde, one of the trio in day-to-day control of club affairs. Among Jeffreys' first tasks were to assist in organizing the Gordon Bennett race in Ireland and to lobby MPs over the 'Motor Car Bill' then before parliament. He also edited the club 'Journal' and, most importantly, served as secretary of the recently established Motor Union of Great Britain and Ireland (MU), an organization set up within the ACGBI to advance the interests of all motorists, not just the social elite who comprised the club. 
In 1904, following criticism in 'Autocar' about lack of leadership at the club, Orde was made its sole secretary. Jeffreys lost his ACGBI post but continued to run the MU. He was 'a born organizer' and in some ways his time at the helm was successful ('The Times', 20 July 1910). The union acquired a large branch network, substantial capital reserves, and a membership of more than 14,000, which for a time made it far bigger than either the RAC or Automobile Association. Furthermore, on the union's behalf Jeffreys successfully opposed many attempts to establish local speed limits. 
In other respects, Jeffreys left a trail of havoc. Although the union was 'a child' of the ACGBI, he had little respect for the 'bumbling amateurs' who ran the club. He thought they should stick to social and sporting matters while he led the MU in a direction of his choosing, even if it meant challenging the parent body (Brendon, 88, 124, 126). His actions soon created difficulties. Under the terms of the 'Motor Car Act', 1903, car owners were obliged to pay $1 to register their vehicles with a local authority of their choice. Jeffreys wrote to councils to ascertain their attitudes towards road improvements, speed limits, speed traps, and signposts. He planned to advise ACGBI and MU members to pay their fees only to authorities sympathetic to the motoring interest. But at least one county council officer judged that Jeffreys was, in effect, offering a bribe. When Jeffreys' letter became public knowledge he incurred public criticism and the wrath of senior club members. Montagu thought his attempt to dictate to local authorities 'worthy of the Tsar of all the Russias' (Brendon, 100; Tritton, 101). Friction increased as Jeffreys, who has been termed the RAC's 'over-mighty subject', endeavoured to make the union's 'influence and authority greater than that of the R.A.C.' (Brendon, 124; 'The Times', 20 Oct 1908). 
In 1907 Jeffreys 'took on the Automobile Association' by pirating its road programme, establishing a network of agents in direct competition with the AA's scouts, and plagiarizing its badge (Brendon, 124). The AA's secretary, Stenson Cooke, was incensed and retaliated by inviting MU members to defect. Disinterested observers considered the association's grievances justified ('The Observer', 18 Aug 1907; 'The Times', 29 Aug 1907). The 'Automotor Journal' accused Jeffreys of 'Tammany Hall' methods and of 'an overweening policy of militant self-aggrandisement'. Montagu deplored his 'Napoleon tactics' and capacity to generate ill feeling (Brendon, 126). Publicly the RAC defended Jeffreys but he was reined in and required to negotiate a settlement with the AA which, for the union, amounted to capitulation. Soon after, the RAC broke with it and a large proportion of MU members opted to join the club's new associate section rather than stay with the union. Jeffreys remained secretary of a much depleted MU until 1910 when, soon after recovering from typhoid, he was appointed secretary of the newly established Road Board at a salary of $1000 per annum. 'The Observer''s motoring correspondent judged him 'the best qualified' person for the post 'for he is really an authority on roads' (26 June 1910). 
The MU marked Jeffreys' departure with a dinner, an inscribed gold watch, and a cheque for $500. Later that year the AA and MU amalgamated. For all his clashes with the RAC and the AA, Jeffreys maintained close links with both. From 1919 he served for many years on the motor legislation committee, a body he played a key part in establishing, which represented them both. He was briefly its deputy chairman. In the 1930s he was a member of the RAC committee. 
Jeffreys observed that the Road Board was the first central roads authority in the British Isles since the Romans. It was set up under the terms of Lloyd George's 1909 budget to distribute earmarked moneys derived from motoring taxes (the Road Fund) for the construction and improvement of roads. It lasted from May 1910 to September 1919, when it was incorporated into the newly created Ministry of Transport. Jeffreys served as its secretary for all but its last nine months and soon won praise for his competence ('The Times', 5 Dec 1911). However, in 1914 the royal commission on the civil service found 'the formal records of the Board's proceedings', for which Jeffreys was responsible, 'most imperfect' ('Fourth Report', 82; Plowden, 101). In later life Jeffreys himself noted that while the board got some things done, its achievements were limited. He attributed its shortcomings mainly to the wide-ranging opposition it encountered and the unsuitability of many of the otherwise distinguished individuals who served on it (Jeffreys, chap. 4). 
At the end of the First World War Jeffreys was 'someone whose authority in the world of motoring still counted for more than anyone else's' (Barty-King, 133). After leaving the Road Board he had more freedom to work as a propagandist for improved roads and highways administration and he did so with a vengeance for over thirty years. He travelled widely in Britain, Europe, Africa, Asia, Australasia, and North America to study his subject and disseminate his ideas. In the process, he became a great admirer of the road networks established in the United States and Germany. 
At home Jeffreys was an indefatigable writer, broadcaster, lobbyist, and lecturer in the roads cause. His first letter to 'The Times' appeared in 1902. Half a century and dozens of contributions later they were still appearing. He also wrote many journal articles and pamphlets. His only book, 'The King's Highway' (1949), gave an account of the development of Britain's roads since the late nineteenth century, paying special attention to the author's role in the process. It recounted the mistakes and missed opportunities that Jeffreys believed had dogged roads policy and administration for decades. 
Jeffreys was involved, as member or witness, in many government inquiries including: the departmental committee on highways administration (1903); royal commission on motor cars (1905); royal commission on London traffic (1905); departmental committee on the taxation and regulation of vehicles (1922); royal commission on cross river traffic (1926); royal commission on transport (1929-30); and House of Lords committee on the prevention of road accidents (1939). 
Decades into the age of the motor car Jeffreys believed Britain's unplanned and congested road network was inferior to that of 'any other civilised country' ('The Times', 31 May 1929). He came up with many practical ideas for its improvement. He was the first to propose the construction of a great west road, the initial section of which George V opened in 1925, nearly a quarter of a century after Jeffreys' initial suggestion. He also advocated a road bridge over the River Severn near Chepstow, an orbital London by-pass, and 'special roads' restricted to motor traffic alone with no stopping permitted and no pipes or cables laid beneath them. In addition, he favoured using the unemployed on road-building projects, opposed the introduction of driving tests, supported the construction of rest areas for motorists, deplored Churchill's 1926 'raid' on the Road Fund, and lacked enthusiasm for elevated roads as a means of relieving traffic congestion. Overseas he championed construction of an all-weather Cape to Cairo highway and a road linking India, Burma, and China. He believed his greatest professional achievement was to organize tar trials between 1902 and 1907 that led to the introduction of dustless 'blacktops' in place of the dusty macadam roads of the past. 
From the 1920s Jeffreys' passion was collecting modern art. For comparatively modest sums he acquired, sometimes direct from the artist, a collection that included works by Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, Augustus John, Pierre Bonnard, Maurice Utrillo, Raoul Dufy, Jacob Epstein, and Walter Sickert. A contemporary recalled that his collecting principles were first to confine his purchases to the works of living artists (since purchases of the work of dead artists could not encourage further creation), and second to avoid acquiring more than one work from the same artist unless it was an example of a different period or style ('The Times', 30 Nov 1954). 
As a young man the diminutive Jeffreys cut a striking figure with his shock of tousled hair and flamboyant moustache (Barty-King, 44-5, 73, 89). He was ambitious, self-confident, energetic, single-minded, and thick-skinned. Some have seen him as a mischievous, abrasive, and domineering troublemaker with an enthusiasm for road building that verged on the fanatical (Brendon, 88, 100, 124; Plowden, 19). He believed motorists were a beleaguered rather than a privileged minority. He achieved much, though many of his ideas were ignored or implemented only after his death. In his lifetime his knowledge and expertise about roads and their administration were widely recognized, not least by Lloyd George who in 1937 called him 'the greatest authority on roads in the United Kingdom and one of the greatest in the whole world' (Jeffreys, xvi). 
Jeffreys never married. In the early twentieth century he, along with two adult siblings, lived in his widowed mother's boarding-house in Paddington. For much of his adult working life he lived at Brecon, Christchurch Park, Sutton, Surrey. He spent his last nineteen years at Wivelsfield Hall, Wivelsfield Green, Sussex, where he died of heart failure, bronchopneumonia, and auricular fibrillation on 18 August 1954. He was buried alongside his sister, Ethel, his lifelong companion, at Wivelsfield parish church on 21 August. 
In his lifetime Jeffreys funded a studentship at the London School of Economics and a triennial lecture at the Town Planning Institute. After his death his art collection was auctioned at Christies in November 1954, when it was regarded as the most important collection of nineteenth- and twentieth-century art collected by a single owner to have appeared in the London auction rooms since 1945. The sale of the collection realized $56,344, having been acquired at a cost of only $3332. The sum raised supplied the basis for the Rees Jeffreys Trust; establishment of the trust allowed the funding of many university posts, bursaries, road improvement schemes, and other projects associated with roads and motor transport. 


@@@@@


doc= 98053


Russell, George Neville (1899-1971), army officer and director of nationalized road transport, was born at 57 Tufnell Park Road, Islington, London, on 19 October 1899, the eldest of the three illegitimate sons of Emily Mary Russell (1870-1959) and Sir Edward George Jenkinson (1835-1919), civil servant and businessman. His father had served in the Indian Civil Service before, in 1882, being posted to Dublin Castle where he organized the police operations against secret societies in Ireland. He continued his anti-Fenian work in London, after which he engaged in mining speculations in Mexico, and then became chairman of Daimler and a prime mover in both the Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland and the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. By 1911 Sir Edward, though still married to Annabella Jenkinson ('nee' Monck-Mason), was styling himself George Russell, living with Emily, and purporting to be her husband. George Neville Russell had several half siblings, the children of Sir Edward and Annabella. 
Russell spent his first years in Islington, Luton, and Linslade, Buckinghamshire. He was educated in Linslade and at Arnold House preparatory school, Llanddulas, North Wales before entering Rugby School, Warwickshire, where he was a pupil between 1913 and 1917. After attending the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned as second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 20 September 1918, and had his first experience of a war zone during the Arab uprising of 1919-20, gaining the Iraq medal with two clasps. Other medals and honours followed during and after the Second World War; most notably he became CBE in 1943 and CB in 1946. 
Promoted to the rank of lieutenant in 1920, Russell served as an adjutant in 1921. In 1925-6 the army sent him to Cambridge University, though he never took a degree. On 18 June 1927 he married Iris Margaret, daughter of Charles Mills, wine shipper, of Wimbledon. They had two daughters. Between 1934 and 1936 he was seconded to the Institute of Engineering at the Royal Military College, Canada, in Kingston, Ontario. For much of his military career Russell's rate of promotion was unexceptional: he became a captain in 1929 and major in 1938. Thereafter his progression was rapid; when his military career ended in 1947 he held the rank of major-general. 
During the Second World War and afterwards Russell occupied a variety of roles in the army's transport sector. In France, serving with the British expeditionary force, he was responsible for all road and rail movements. Subsequently he was, successively, director of movements, GHQ, Middle East, 1942-3; deputy quartermaster-general (movements and transportation), GHQ, New Delhi, 1944-5; and transportation adviser to the special commissioner in south-east Asia, 1946-7. He was director of movements during the battle of El Alamein and the invasion of Sicily. Early in his military career Russell was nicknamed Charles. Thereafter, he was universally known by this sobriquet. Divorced from his first wife in 1946, he married, second, in Singapore on 28 August 1946, Jocelyn Delia Harvey ('b'. 1914), only daughter of Frank Bennett, a general practitioner. They first met in Cairo in 1941 and their marriage produced two daughters and a son. 
In 1948, after leaving the army, Russell was appointed chairman of the Road Transport Executive (RTE, later the Road Haulage Executive or RHE), one of five bodies responsible for running Britain's newly nationalized transport systems under the terms of the 'Transport Act', 1947. His salary was $5000 per annum and his management style bore the stamp of his military background ('The Times', 28 June 1949; Bonavia, 74). At first the industry journal was 'slightly dubious' about having a former soldier in charge of road haulage, even one as experienced and successful in the field of military transport as Russell ('Commercial Motor', 19 March 1948, 21). It feared that he would falter in the face of opposition from those within the haulage industry who abhorred nationalization. However, his genial manner and measured, business-like approach to his duties quickly won over doubters, and he was soon referred to in favourable terms, as 'the man at the wheel of Britain's nationalised road transport' ('Commercial Motor', 8 April 1949, 4). 
At the RTE Russell had the 'mammoth' task of creating British Road Services (BRS), which he chaired and managed between 1948 and 1959, out of the thousands of long-distance haulage businesses taken into public ownership in 1949. At its peak in 1951 BRS had around 80,000 staff and 40,000 vehicles. Following the election of a Conservative government in 1951, enactment of the 'Transport Act', 1953, and abolition of the RHE, Russell was effectively required to denationalize road haulage and transfer the BRS fleet back to private ownership. 
Three years later, following another reversal of government policy, Russell was called upon to reorganize the remaining, still substantial, BRS business. Some 16,000 vehicles and 40,000 employees were divided between five limited liability companies that all traded under the BRS 'umbrella' with Russell in overall control. During Russell's time at the helm BRS was in an almost constant state of upheaval and its return on capital was not always impressive. But drivers enjoyed working for it because, unlike many private operators, it maintained its vehicles to the highest standards. Furthermore, because its credit was good, fuel retailers never refused service. 
Russell was elected to the council of the Institute of Transport in 1953 and was its president in 1958-9. Over the years he delivered many papers to the institute. Among these were his 1957 Henry Spurrier lecture, 'Transport and the Commonweal', and a much praised presidential address (October 1958), 'Management in Transport'. 
In 1959 Russell relinquished his post at BRS when appointed a full-time member of the British transport commission, having previously served successively on its London midland and eastern area boards. He chaired it in 1961-2, immediately before its break up. At the commission, where Russell faced the 'baffling problems of transport as a whole' ('The Times', 30 Aug 1971), he was disinclined to view road haulage as an inferior adjunct to railways. Between 1962 and 1964 he served on the newly established British Railway board during preparation and publication of the highly controversial Beeching report which recommended extensive cuts to the rail network. As chairman of Railway Sites Ltd Russell's main responsibility on the board was British Railways' property portfolio but he believed that the railways had to 'pay their way' ('The Times', 1 Nov 1962). 
On reaching pensionable age in 1964, Russell retired from the British Railways board. However, he maintained a long standing interest in subsidized or social housing; until 1970 he was chairman of the Sutton Dwelling Trust, a post he assumed in 1962. He was also, for two years, chairman of the publicly owned manufacturers Bristol Commercial Vehicles Ltd and Eastern Coach Works Ltd. 
Throughout his military and civilian transport career Russell loved nothing more than to escape his desk by undertaking personal tours of inspection to gain hands-on experience and see conditions for himself. Until dissuaded by colleagues at BRS concerned that he was 'telegraphing' his impending arrival, he was in the habit of travelling to inspections in a chauffeur-driven Humber bearing the registration number BRS 1. Typically, when booked to give a speech at a Road Hauliers' Association dinner in Birmingham in 1948, he travelled to the venue in a 14 ton 8 wheeler in order to 'find out for himself what conditions were like on the road' ('Commercial Motor', 23 April 1948, 49). In the company of his driver he ate a 1's'. 9died meal at a roadhouse on the way. 
Russell was tall and rangy with sandy hair and a small military moustache. He possessed great energy and enthusiasm, to the extent that he was sometimes dubbed Cyclone Charlie. His many leisure pursuits included walking, gardening, the theatre, music, cards, sailing and other sports, and mess dinners with soldier friends. In character he was extrovert, sociable, humorous, determined and outspoken, sometimes irascible. Having been resident for some months at Stourpaine, Blandford Forum, Dorset, he died on 24 August 1971 at the General Infirmary, Salisbury, of uraemia melaena and a gastric ulcer. After a funeral service at Stourpaine on 27 August 1971, he was cremated in Salisbury. A memorial service took place in London two months later. 


@@@@@


doc= 98054


Smith, George William Quick (1905-1986), road transport administrator, was born at 21 Waverley Terrace, Albert Road, Wood Green, London, on 23 August 1905, the eldest son of George Windsor Smith ('b'. 1879/80), commercial clerk in a firm of provision importers, and his wife, Maud Edith, 'nee' Quick ('b'. 1879/80). For much of his life he was known as Quick Smith. As a child he lived in Palmer's Green, London, but nothing further is known about his early life. 
Between 1922 and 1935 Quick Smith held posts in the shipping industry where he gained accountancy and secretarial experience. He was an accountant at the time of his marriage, on 2 June 1934, to Ida Muriel (1902-1990), daughter of Ernest Frederick Tinkler, sculptor. They had no children. 
Quick Smith entered the road transport business in 1935, working for the Road Haulage Association. He also was connected with other haulage bodies in the late 1930s, sometimes on a part-time basis. These included the National Conference of Express Carriers, of which he was general secretary. He played an important part in persuading road and rail carriers to agree rates for transporting small parcels. Later he helped to establish the Meat Transport Organization, an agency of the Ministry of Food in the era of rationing. On behalf of the National Road Transport Employers' Federation and then as secretary of the National Road Transport Federation (NRTF), he was a member of delegations to the International Labour Office in Geneva between 1935 and 1948 that helped establish the Bureau International de Transport par Autocar et Camion (International Road Transport Union, as it was known in Britain, from 1948). 
By 1939 Quick Smith was a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries. Following part-time study while in employment, he obtained an LLB degree from London University and in 1942 was admitted as a pupil to the Inner Temple. When he passed the bar final in 1944, he was secretary to the NRTF, an employers' organization established in 1943, and the standing joint committee of the Road Hauliers national organizations, which dealt with such matters as black-out accidents and fuel rationing. Quick Smith was called to the bar in June 1945 but never practised as a barrister. 
For much of his career Quick Smith represented the interests of road haulage operators. Nevertheless, he acquired a reputation of being rather more than an employers' man. On the occasion of his retirement as chief executive of the Transport Holding Company in 1971, the left-wing trades union leader Frank Cousins recalled that some thirty years earlier 'QS was the first person I ever met who shot down a proposal from a colleague on the employer's panel with the words: 'Oh no, that won't do, it wouldn't be fair'' ('Commercial Motor', 20 Aug 1971). 
Quick Smith's career took off in the post-war era of nationalized transport. In 1948 he became secretary and legal adviser to the British Transport Executive (BTE), later renamed the British Haulage Executive (BHE) and British Road Services (BRS). In January 1954 he was elevated to the BRS board of management. In co-operation with his chairman, Major-General George Russell, he oversaw the transfer of thousands of private haulage companies and tens of thousands of their vehicles and employees into the public sector. Then, following the return of a Conservative government in 1951, enactment of the 'Transport Act', 1953, and abolition of the RHE, he was required to denationalize road haulage by transferring the BRS fleet back to private ownership. 
Notwithstanding his professional background in employers' organizations, Quick Smith was unenthusiastic about wholesale denationalization. In his December 1954 Spurrier lecture to the Institute of Transport he stated that sufficient vehicles had been sold back into private ownership already, that the rest should be left in the hands of BRS to preserve the advantages of large-scale organization, and that road haulage should not be a political football ('Journal of International Transport', 26 (1954-6), 65-76; 'Manchester Guardian', 14 Dec 1954). The 'Transport (Disposal of Road Haulage Property) Act', 1956, which created five limited companies whose shares were held by BRS, provided for a public-private mix consistent with Quick Smith's ideas. 
Between 1957 and 1960 Quick Smith was a member of the Anglo-French Channel Tunnel studies group that reported in favour of a tunnel. He left BRS and the Road Haulage executive in 1959 to become adviser (special projects) to the British transport commission, which exercised overall control of nationalized transport. When the commission was abolished by the 'Transport Act', 1962, he was appointed secretary of the Transport Holding Company (THC), a government-owned body that administered a range of state-owned transport, travel, and engineering companies previously managed by the BTC. In 1969 he was made chief executive. The 'Transport Act', 1968, abolished the THC and replaced it with the National Freight Corporation (NFC) which consolidated all remaining parts of nationalized road haulage, including BRS, Pickfords, Freightliners, and National Carriers. Quoted on the London stock exchange it was a public enterprise that competed with private hauliers. Quick Smith was its chief executive and deputy chairman with a salary, by 1971, of $13,000 per annum -- a sum sufficient to sustain him at his exclusive address on Hyde Park Gate, Knightsbridge, where he had moved, from Hove, in the 1950s. At the request of John Peyton, minister of transport industries, he delayed his retirement by six months to assist the transition to a new NFC chairman. Though formally retired from mid-1971 Quick Smith sat on the transport tribunal from 1973 until 1977 and retained directorships with haulage and bus companies. 
Quick Smith published much on transport and transport law. Late in life he wrote a history of nationalized road haulage but it was never published. At the Institute of Transport he was a member of council, 1954-7, and vice-president, 1960-62. He was a practising Anglican, and during the 1960s and 1970s was churchwarden at All Saints, Margaret Street, London. He also was a governor and, latterly, vice-president of SPCK, and a trustee of several transport benevolent funds. He was made CBE in 1959 and granted freedom of the City of London. He was master of the Carmen's Company in 1967-8. Quick Smith's hobbies were reading, writing, and the arts. Towards the end of his life, when he moved to Poole, Dorset, he belonged to the Royal Motor Yacht Club. He died of pneumonia at Poole General Hospital on 15 July 1986. Following a requiem mass at St Stephen's Church, Bournemouth, on 22 July, his body was cremated. 
Though he professed to hate bureaucracy and committee work, Quick Smith was 'the consummate bureaucrat' who spent much of his professional life in committee rooms ('Companion to British Road Haulage History'). He was a quiet and private man but a persuasive negotiator who rose from a modest background to become 'one of the most influential figures' in Britain's post-war nationalized transport industry ('The Times', 23 July 1986). In the process, he acquired vast experience of administration and transport law and intimate knowledge of the attitudes and aspirations of transport operators, civil servants, trade union officials, and politicians. He has been accused of inconsistency of principle in switching from champion of private enterprise to defender of nationalization and back again in less than a decade ('Companion to British Road Haulage History'). This is to oversimplify; whoever employed him and whatever ideology prevailed in Westminster, Quick Smith's priority was to advance the interests of road haulage. 


@@@@@


doc= 98055


Smith, Edward Shrapnell Shrapnell- (1875-1952), promoter of commercial road transport, was born at 2 Cambridge Street, Liverpool, on 10 February 1875, the only son and second of the six children of Edward Charles Smith ('b'. 1840/41), wine merchant, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Shrapnell ('b'. 1842/3). Though Shrapnell was originally his middle name, from an early age he styled himself Shrapnell Smith. In 1913 he changed his name by deed poll and was called thereafter Edward Shrapnell Shrapnell-Smith ('The Times', 13 Aug 1913). 
Shrapnell-Smith was educated at Liverpool College (Modern School), Liverpool Royal Institution School and University College, Liverpool, where he studied chemistry. He served an apprenticeship at a chemical works in Widnes and for two years worked in the town as a chemist with Gaskell-Deacon & Co., gaining a reputation as an able researcher. In 1899, while employed by the United Alkali Company in Liverpool, he and a colleague were the first investigators to obtain crystalline sodium hypochlorite ('WWW'; Applebey, 1919). 
As a youth Shrapnell-Smith developed a keen interest in the emergent technology of motoring. In December 1895 he attended a meeting organized by Sir David Salomons at the Cannon Street Hotel in London which resulted in the formation of the Self-Propelled Traffic Association (SPTA) to promote motoring and a motor transport industry in Great Britain. Shrapnell-Smith, who was the sole representative of Liverpool interests at the meeting, became honorary secretary of the association's Liverpool and district branch (LSPTA), founded in October 1896. From 1897 the branch doubled as the local centre of the newly established Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland (later RAC). Shrapnell-Smith was a founder and life member of the club; he served for a while as its vice-chairman and sat on its committee for forty-six years. 
With the earl of Derby as its president, the LSPTA became a regional hub for the promotion of mechanized transport, particularly heavy vehicles. Between 1898 and 1901 Shrapnell-Smith was honorary organizing secretary for the LSPTA's three trials of heavy motor vehicles. The object of the trials was to test the ability of such vehicles to haul goods between local docks and warehouses and also between the port of Liverpool and inland towns. The first trials took place in a climate of scepticism (outside SPTA) about the ability of motorized vehicles to compete with horse-drawn transport and railways. The Liverpool trials, which were the first of their kind in England, demonstrated the ability of motor lorries to carry materials over long and short distances quickly, efficiently, and economically. 
Shrapnell-Smith edited the judges' reports for all three trials; in 1899 and 1901 he sat on the trials sub-committee. The trials 'were instrumental in getting the pioneers to develop the lorry' ('Companion to British Road Haulage History', 232). Shrapnell-Smith's reputation grew to the extent that in 1901 he was one of four motorists invited to accompany British army troops on cavalry manoeuvres. 
Shrapnell-Smith's early successes with heavy motor vehicles provided the platform for his long and varied career in the commercial transport industry, business world, and public life more generally. In 1903 he helped found the Motor Van and Wagon Users' Association (Commercial Motors Users' Association from 1907). He was its honorary treasurer until 1918 before going on to serve as its chairman (1918) and president (1920-29). In 1905 Edmund Dangerfield, a pioneer in the field of technical publications, appointed Shrapnell-Smith founding editor of the 'Commercial Motor'. It was an 'inspired choice' (Seth-Smith, 47). With Shrapnell-Smith at the helm between 1905 and 1917, the magazine became the 'pre-eminent... most powerful and virile champion' of Britain's commercial transport industry ('Commercial Motor', 18 April 1952). Because of his eccentric ways and insistence on correct grammar, printing staff referred to the editor as the 'comma king' (Seth-Smith, 47). During his editorship he became honorary vice-president of the Society of Motor Omnibus Engineers and honorary treasurer of the Roads Improvement Association. Before the First World War he conducted research on road resistance and foresaw the value of electric vehicles, especially in urban settings ('Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers'). He contributed the heavy commercial vehicles section within the motor vehicles entry in the 1911 edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. 
In September 1912 Shrapnell-Smith married Sarah ('b'. 1879), younger daughter of Major-General Richard Temple Godman of Highden, Pulborough, Sussex. His best man was Arthur Stanley, Conservative MP and fellow motoring enthusiast. Shrapnell-Smith and his wife had a daughter and two sons. Their elder son, Thomas, a flight lieutenant in the RAF, was killed when flying on active service in Singapore in 1939. 
During the First World War Shrapnell-Smith served as commandant in the Motor Transport Column of the City of London National Guard (1915-19), retiring with the rank of honorary major. He also undertook charitable work as honorary secretary and treasurer of the Commercial Motor Campaign Comforts Fund for the Overseas Mechanical Transport Columns of the Army Service Corps (1914-17). His wife served on the ladies' committee of the fund. He left 'Commercial Motor' in 1917 and joined the Petroleum Executive as deputy director and chief economy officer (1917-19). He accepted no remuneration but was rewarded by being made a CBE in 1918. 
After the war Shrapnell-Smith served on numerous governmental, commercial, and philanthropic bodies concerned with matters of motor transport, sometimes, again, without payment. In addition, he gave evidence to several government committees of inquiry. His official positions included membership of the roads advisory committee, Ministry of Transport (1923-33), and, from its inception in 1934 until its abolition in 1951, the 'Road and Rail Traffic Act', 1933, appeal tribunal. Between 1934 and 1944 he was chairman of the petroleum industry committee of the British Standards Institution. He was also honorary representative of the British government at international road congresses held in Milan (1926), Washington (1930), and Munich (1934). Among many other appointments he served as director-general of both the London Housing Bonds Campaign (1920) and Hospitals of London Combined Appeal (1922). He was a fellow of the Chemical Society and member of both the Institute of Transport and Institution of Chemical Engineers. 
After the corporations of Liverpool and Birkenhead consulted him about the proposed Mersey tunnel in 1925 Shrapnell-Smith became an enthusiast for similar projects elsewhere, especially under the English Channel. He thought developments in aeronautics and gunnery rendered obsolete old concerns about defence risks. On behalf of the Commercial Motor Users' Association and in a personal capacity Shrapnell-Smith championed a tunnel link between Britain and France, favouring the use of electric vehicles rather than exhaust-emitting trucks ('Daily Mirror', 3 Dec 1928; Channel Tunnel Association Archives). 
In contrast to his progressive views on tunnels, Shrapnell-Smith opposed proposals for building out-of-town motorways, arguing that commercial vehicle routes needed to pass through urban centres. He was a member of many deputations that sought to influence government transport policy and fiercely opposed Churchill's 1926 'raid' on the Road Fund. He thought also that pedestrians should assume greater responsibility for their own safety ('The Times', 29 Oct 1926). 
Shrapnell-Smith twice stood for parliament as Conservative candidate for the East Woolwich constituency. He lost to the Labour candidate by over 8500 votes in the 1929 general election. In April 1931 he contested a by-election and increased substantially his share of the vote but still lost to his Labour opponent by 3843 votes ('The Times', 16 April 1931). Soon afterwards he experienced a nervous breakdown owing to pressure of work (Shrapnell-Smith, 'What is the Prana of Yoga? A Thesis', 21). 
In youth Shrapnell-Smith was dark-haired and moustachioed. In later life he retained the moustache but became bald. He had a good sense of humour and was always well dressed. For much of his adult life he lived at Hound House, Shere, Surrey. In his final years he became interested in yoga. He claimed to have achieved great health benefits through a combination of deep breathing and 'prana' (vital force) which he identified as incoming cosmic radiation. In 1951 he outlined his ideas in a booklet: 'What is the Prana of Yoga? A Thesis'. On 8 April 1952, he collapsed and died while delivering an after dinner speech to senior members of the East Kent Road Company at the County Hotel in Canterbury. Cause of death was 'coronary occlusion' (d. cert.). 
With his 'unrivalled knowledge of the youthful commercial vehicle industry' Shrapnell-Smith's 'influence on the formative period of the [road haulage] industry was considerable' ('Companion to British Road Haulage History', 360). Although his range of professional activities became extensive, he continued to play a 'vital part' in its development throughout the interwar period, if not beyond (Seth-Smith, 48). 


@@@@@


doc= 98056


Sinclair, Donald McIntyre (1901-1971), passenger transport engineer and manager, was born at 10 Carlton Terrace, Maryhill, Glasgow, on 18 December 1901, the third son in the family of at least four sons and two daughters of John Sinclair, mercantile cashier, and his wife, Nicholas, 'nee' Wylie. After schooling at Milngavie and at Bearsden Academy, he was a student at the Royal Technical College, Glasgow (a forerunner of the University of Strathclyde), from where his parents hoped that he would enter the shipbuilding industry. Instead, he became an apprentice automobile engineer with Albion Motor Car Company of Scotstoun, Glasgow, after which he drove and maintained buses in Perthshire. He married, at Killin, Perthshire, on 8 January 1924, Catherine Ann Thomson, daughter of James McGregor, ground officer. They had three daughters. 
In 1924 Sinclair moved south as a branch engineer with British Petroleum at Bedford, Croydon, and then Bristol. He joined the passenger transport industry in 1931 as assistant to the chief engineer of the Northern General Transport Company at Gateshead, where he was involved in development work and the design and manufacture of side-engine single-decker buses. 
In April 1940 Sinclair moved to Birmingham as chief engineer to the Birmingham and Midland Motor Omnibus Company (BMMO), known universally as Midland Red on account of the fleet's livery. In October 1943, on the death of the company's traffic manager, he became acting general manager, which combined the engineering and traffic roles, and was formally appointed to that position in the summer of 1944. At Midland Red he made his mark as an engineering innovator and passenger transport manager. 
From its early days the BMMO was led by engineers who saw the future in designing and building their own buses. Between the wars the company employed talented engineers and established factories in Birmingham where under the banner of BMMO they manufactured many of the buses which operated under the Midland Red name. Although a chief engineer, S. C. Vince, was appointed in 1947, Sinclair retained an active role in the manufacture and design of the company's vehicles. 
During the Second World War Sinclair began developing improvements in bus design, and after the war he led the expansion of the company's engineering division at its three main sites (Digbeth, Bearwood, and Carlyle Road, Edgbaston), where some 3000 employees built, modified, and serviced the fleet of buses. His ambition was to see the majority of the company's transport needs fulfilled by vehicles constructed in its own works. Many component parts, including engines, gearboxes, chassis, and bodies, were made and assembled there. 
Sinclair and his small management team created buses which were in the forefront of engineering innovation. Underfloor engines which lowered the centre of gravity and freed up more space for passengers were introduced on Midland Red vehicles before other operators adopted them. Novel bodywork features included streamlining and wraparound windscreens to reduce drag and improve fuel consumption, while radiators were sited behind slotted covers. Fibreglass body panels were used to reduce weight and maintenance, and rubber suspension units (and later air suspension) improved passenger comfort and achieved weight saving. Disc brakes and fluorescent lighting were introduced. Thirty-foot long buses were brought into service on the first day that they were permitted on Britain's roads, following a relaxation in the official regulations in 1950. 
During Sinclair's period of office Midland Red became the largest bus company in the country outside London, both in the size of its fleet, peaking at around 2000 buses, and in the area of its operations, some 12,000 square miles stretching from Nottingham down to Oxfordshire, and from the Welsh borders to Rutland. Passenger numbers rose from 327 million in 1944 to a peak of 484 million in 1956. Despite the later employment of a traffic manager, Sinclair had ultimate responsibility for keeping the vast network of routes on the road. He coined the slogan 'The Friendly Midland Red'. 
In November 1959, when the M1 motorway opened, Midland Red launched Britain's first motorway coach service, from Digbeth coach station to London. While the motorway was being built, Sinclair and his team of engineers had designed and built upgraded coaches (complete with toilets) with supercharged engines capable of speeds of up to 100 m.p.h. He personally tested one at the Motor Industry Research Association's proving ground at Lindley, at speeds of up to 85 m.p.h. In the event those engines were governed to a speed of 80 m.p.h., which was well in excess of the top speed of most cars. Motorists on the M1 became accustomed to being overtaken by Midland Red coaches, which reduced the scheduled coach journey time from Birmingham to London from 5 hours 20 minutes to 3 hours 25 minutes and subsequently 2 hours 55 minutes. To cope with demand, thirty new fast coaches were built and motorway services from Coventry to London (1960) and Birmingham to Worcester (1962) were introduced. 
Sinclair oversaw the construction of a central bus station which opened under the new Bull Ring development in Birmingham in November 1963, but it suffered a series of problems and failed to arrest a decline in bus usage. By the early 1960s most of Midland Red's routes were losing money. Car ownership reduced passenger numbers, which fell to 276 million in 1966. Staff shortages, as workers were attracted to better paying jobs in car manufacturing, affected reliability, while in-house bus making was proving uneconomic. By the time of Sinclair's retirement, in 1966, the BMMO was facing nationalization. 
Sinclair was a hands-on engineer, never happier than when he could don a heavy overcoat and drive around Birmingham city centre with his chief engineer to test an experimental chassis. His innovations were widely copied, and his advice on fibreglass body panels was even sought by a British motor racing manufacturer. For Sinclair, the construction of fibreglass body panels had a labour management dimension, as he had not enjoyed good relations with the sheet metal workers in the company's works, and was able to dispense with many of them when 'plastic' body panels became the norm. As a manager he was a disciplinarian and aloof. A mechanic could be summarily dismissed for leaning a wheel against the bodywork of the bus while changing a wheel (and at least one was). Bus conductors were admonished for calling passengers 'ma' or 'mum'. During the national bus strike of 1957, he caused offence to many Midland Red personnel by statements he made to the press. 
Sinclair was a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and of the Institute of Transport. He was made CBE in January 1950. In 1953 he was president of the Omnibus Society. He held directorships in several midlands coach firms and was a member of the Institute of Directors. He lived to see Midland Red taken over by the National Bus Company (1968), the ending of new vehicle construction, the fragmentation of the network, and even some of the buses painted white. 
Sinclair's physical appearance was dapper, with short 'brylcreemed' hair with a clear parting, and a trim moustache. He sported a grand roman nose. Despite his long period in England, he never lost his Glaswegian accent. In retirement he was resident in Viceroy Close, Edgbaston. He died at Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Edgbaston, following a heart attack, on 17 June 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 98088


Thomas Spensley Simey, Baron Simey (1906-1969), social scientist, was born on 25 November 1906 at South Hill, Greenway Lane, Lyncombe, Somerset, the third son of George Iliff Simey (1866-1927), solicitor, and clerk of the peace and of Somerset county council from 1905 to 1927, and his wife, Alice Robson, 'nee' Spensley (died 1941), daughter of the Revd William Spensley, of Belle Vue House, Sunderland. He was educated privately, and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he took a first-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1928. He then worked in local government, and qualified as a solicitor in 1931. In the latter year he was appointed a lecturer in public administration at the University of Liverpool. His 'Principles of Social Administration' was published in 1937. In 1939 he succeeded Alexander Carr-Sounders as Charles Booth professor of social science at Liverpool, a post he held until his death. During the early part of the Second World War he worked for the Ministry of Labour on manpower issues. His Caribbean experience led to 'Welfare and Planning in the West Indies' (1946). After the war he built up Liverpool's department of social sciences, which combined a national reputation for training social workers with an international reputation for its research, particularly in the fields of industrial relations and community development. Among Simey's own later works was 'Social Science and Social Purpose' (1968). He was chairman of the Joint University Council for Social Studies (1948-51), the British Sociological Association (1949-50), and the central advisory committee of the Ministry of Education (1956-60), and president of the National Federation of Community Associations (1961-4). He was also a governor of William Temple College (1948-67) and a director of Liverpool Repertory Theatre (1947-69). He was created a life peer, as Baron Simey, of Toxteth, in 1965. He died of apoplexy and hypertension at Lourdes Hospital, Sefton Park, Liverpool, on 27 December 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 98096


Sant, Mowbray Lees (1863-1943), police officer, was born in London on 18 December 1863, the second but only surviving son (there were five daughters) of James Sant (1820-1916), portrait and genre painter, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Thomson (1833-1907). Educated at Charterhouse, he was commissioned in the 5th battalion of the Northumberland Fusiliers in 1885, and married in 1889 Annie Marguerite Alicia (1866-1953), third daughter of Chesborough Macdonald of Queensland, Australia, with whom he had twin daughters. He was promoted captain in 1892 and was adjutant of the 3rd battalion of the Northumberland Fusiliers until his retirement in 1898, when he joined the reserve, and gained some police experience through working in the office of the chief constable of Northumberland. 
In September 1899 Sant became chief constable of Surrey, having been selected from fifty-one applicants. He was only the second head of the force of about 230 men, his predecessor Captain Henry Cadogan Hastings having held the position since the establishment of the county constabulary in 1851. At the time of Sant's appointment the Surrey local authorities were receiving complaints about the 'undue speed' and recklessness ('scorching') with which motor cars were being driven through the towns and villages of a still predominantly rural county. Traversed by major routes out of London to the south coast, Surrey was particularly exposed to incursions of the capital's wealthy 'automobilists', exploiting the capacities of their expensive new machines. Sant's response to this novel policing problem earned him a reputation as 'motoring's arch-persecutor' (Barty-King, 42). In October 1899 his consultations with chief constables and police superintendents in neighbouring counties and boroughs produced a practically unanimous response in favour of additional regulation. In June 1900 he issued an order to his superintendents to tackle the problem of reckless drivers, recommending that pairs of constables monitor sections of roads where speeding would be dangerous, and to stop offenders. He urged that motor vehicles should be made identifiable by a number attached to every car (a requirement that was made law in 1903), since the worst offenders often evaded prosecution by failing to stop, or giving false names and addresses to his officers. 
In 1901 Sant was quoted as saying that he would stop speeding motorists 'at any cost' ('Daily Mail', 11 July 1901), and elsewhere stated the intention of his force to 'check' those motor drivers 'who are making the highways of the county unsafe for the general body of the public' ('Surrey county council reports', 1902, 725). Between 1904 and 1905 prosecutions in Surrey for reckless or dangerous driving, or breaking speed limits, substantially exceeded those in any other county in the United Kingdom. In November 1905 he told the royal commission on motor cars that owners of cars should be made responsible for the transgressions of their chauffeurs, and that photographs should be attached to driving licences. He defended the existing 20 m.p.h. speed limit, even though he acknowledged that on certain stretches of road 50 m.p.h. might be safe. His own experiences of inconsiderate motorists in the Guildford area -- whom he reckoned at a quarter of the drivers on a typical Sunday -- were that they failed to slow down when passing, or allow room for other road-users (he was reduced to shaking his fist at a driver who nearly forced him and a cycling companion into a ditch), and tooted persistently at anything that hindered their claim to monopolize the middle of the road. The road dust thrown up by motor vehicles obliged cottagers to keep their front windows shut, and prevented children playing outside; he also feared class antagonism, having witnessed the resentment of a group of working men pedestrians at being enveloped in a 'peasoup fog' by a passing motorist. Critics attacked his 'crusade against motorists' ('Surrey Times', 8 July 1905), and national newspapers condemned his 'motorphobia', but the chief constable was generally supported by the Surrey press (Durrant, 30-31). 
Sant gained convictions by use of speed controls (or 'traps', as they were stigmatized) along measured quarter-mile stretches of road, with a constable at one end signalling the passing of a car, while another at the other end recorded the time on a stopwatch. Since magistrates were reluctant to convict other than on evidence from long stretches of relatively open road, this dictated the position of the speed traps, which were then criticized by motoring organizations for penalizing drivers in places where speeding presented no immediate danger. Some alleged that the heavy fines raised were a form of taxation. In correspondence with Stenson Cooke, secretary of the Automobile Association (AA), Sant justified the traps as instilling 'into the minds of drivers of motor-cars the feeling that at any moment they exceed the limit of speed allowed by law they may be detected and called upon to answer for it' ('The Times', 5 March 1908). The practice of AA patrolmen warning their members about the location of speed controls led to a succession of roadside skirmishes between the Surrey police and the scouts. Sant regarded the AA tactics as a deliberate interference with the duties of the police. After some legal setbacks he gained his point in October 1909 when the appeal court upheld ('Betts v. Stevens') the conviction for obstruction of an AA patrolman who had signalled to drivers of motor cars bearing the association's badge that they were approaching a police control at the top of Rodborough Hill, on the Portsmouth road near Godalming. 
After 1910 Sant's conflict with the automobile subsided, partly because tarred roads reduced the problem of dust. He became concerned, instead, at the demands made by motor traffic on police resources. As early as 1909 he suggested the recruitment of a special staff to regulate and control cars, so that the police could concentrate on their prime duties of keeping the peace, and the prevention and detection of crime. Complaining in the 1920s that over a third of his officers might be on traffic duty at any one time, he advocated a force of road wardens under the Ministry of Transport, and won over a conference of chief constables in 1928. He acknowledged that motoring offences brought the normally law-abiding public into conflict with the police, and made them less likely to help the police in their crime detection work. This consideration may explain why his earlier battles with motorists were not mentioned in his retirement tributes or obituary; the constabulary's historian in the mid-twentieth century set them out in detail, but depicted Sant's outlook as 'Victorian' (Durrant, 52). 
Sant himself regarded the First World War, when large numbers of troops were billeted in Surrey and Canadians awaiting demobilization rioted at Witley in 1919, as the most challenging period of his service. Initially slow to tackle the low pay of his men, he caused resentment by his advice to them not to use the weekly rest day introduced in 1914 improperly. After the war he encouraged sport within the force, establishing competitions for cricket and marksmanship. A stickler for smartness and drill, he nevertheless trusted his subordinates, bringing in Scotland Yard during a murder case only once, in 1906, to no effect, after which he relied on his own superintendents to investigate serious crimes. He was awarded the king's police medal in 1925, and retired in December 1930. Required as chief constable to live within two miles of the constabulary headquarters at Guildford, Sant settled at Shalford, where he died at his home, the Red House, on 14 June 1943. He was buried in Shalford cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 98097


Nigel Seymour Gosling (1909-1982), a 'small twinkling dapper figure' ('The Times', 22 May 1982) whom she married on 31 July 1939. They had one son, Nicholas. Nigel Gosling was born on 29 January 1909 at 43 Hyde Park Square, London, the third of four sons of William Sullivan Gosling (1869-1952), a captain, later major, in the Scots Guards, and landowner, and his wife, Lady Victoria Alexandrina Alberta Kerr (1876-1956), fifth daughter of Schomberg Henry Kerr, ninth marquess of Lothian. Educated at Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, he entered the Foreign Office but after about a year in Berlin decided he was not cut out for that life. Instead he began painting and writing about art, with dance originally as a second interest, although he did occasionally make up the numbers on stage. During the Second World War, as a conscientious objector he served in the Red Cross, rising to become its senior representative with General Eisenhower's armies. He was not against the war but knew that he could not himself kill. After the war, already aged forty, he became a full-time journalist, joining the staff of 'The Observer' newspaper to edit and review. As an art critic Gosling wrote books on Leningrad, Paris, Gustav Dore, and Nadar (Gaspard-Felix Tournachon). 


@@@@@


doc= 98098


West, (Arthur) Graeme (1891-1917), army officer and poet, the eldest of four children, was born at Christchurch Road, Eaton, Norwich, Norfolk, on 23 September 1891. His father, Arthur Birt West (1859-1948), son of a nonconformist minister and sternly evangelical, had been an engineer and a missionary before deciding to live off private means and work for a charity; he married Mary Wingate, 'nee' McLaren (1858-1899), who died while the children were still young. The family moved to London, first to 21 Talbot Road, Highgate, and then, after the father's second marriage in 1905, to 4 Holly Terrace, Highgate, in a handsome row of houses overlooking Hampstead Heath. 
In the same year Graeme West became a boarder at Blundell's School, Tiverton, where he met C. E. M. Joad, later well known as a philosopher and broadcaster. Joad, good at games and brilliant in the classroom, won the school's closed scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1909. West, according to Joad's later account of him, was a very different type, shy, awkward, and not at all athletic, so there was some astonishment when he in his turn won the scholarship in 1910. Oxford opened up the world of ideas to the two young men. While Joad talked about socialism and the irrelevance of religion, West listened but quietly developed values of his own: literature, love, the beauty of nature and art. He worked hard, took a second-class in 'literae humaniores' in 1914 and, after graduating, decided to stay up for a fifth year. 
West is remembered for one posthumous work, 'The Diary of a Dead Officer' (1919), introduced and edited by Joad, who organized the book as pacifist propaganda: West as an individual takes second place. In the Christmas vacation of 1914, according to Joad, West applied 'in a rush of enthusiasm' to become an army officer, 'was turned down for his eyes, and enlisted as a private in the Public Schools Battalion' ('Diary', xii). West's army papers merely record that he became a private in the 16th battalion, Middlesex regiment, in February 1915. They also note other details not mentioned in the 'Diary': his physical development was 'good', he had belonged to the Officers' Training Corps throughout his time at Oxford, was promoted lance-corporal in May 1915 and a year later applied for a temporary commission in the regular army. Joad's portrait of him as unathletic and completely unsuited to soldiering cannot be entirely true. The extracts from West's diary begin in March 1915, but Joad chooses only four for that year. By December West was in the trenches, enduring severe fighting during the next four months. In March 1916 he wrote one of his two most anthologized poems, 'The Night Patrol', an early description of front-line realities but not a poem of protest. 
In April 1916 West was sent to a cadet battalion at Gailes in Scotland for four months of officer training. Joad selects twenty-six entries for this period, recording West's disgust at the stupidity, heartlessness, and incompetence of the camp staff, many of whom were older regulars who had never seen the trenches and felt they had to assert their authority. The trainee officer expressed no pity for himself, but by the time he became a second lieutenant in the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry in early August he had lost all belief not only in the war but also in Christianity. He stayed with the Joads, met conscientious objectors, read Bertrand Russell's 'Justice in War Time', and resolved to inform his new battalion that he would not serve in the army any longer -- but he could not quite bring himself to post the letter. In September 1916 he joined the 6th 'Ox and Bucks' in France, full of regret that he had not taken a stand against the war from the beginning. He did make one public protest: in October 'The New Age' published a version of his poem 'God! How I hate you, you young cheerful men', a furious condemnation of patriotic soldier-poets who considered themselves lucky to be alive in such 'epic days'. 
West kept his courage steady during weeks of horrors on the Somme. The final diary entries, dated 3 November 1916 and 10 February 1917, are happy -- and perhaps less untypical than they seem. On 16 February he became acting captain while commanding a company. On 13 March he wrote to his sister that he was 'magnificently and triumphantly' in love with a girl in England, Dorothy Mackenzie, a fact not mentioned at all in the 'Diary'. On 3 April 1917 he was killed by a sniper's bullet somewhere near Bapaume. He was buried at the Honourable Artillery Company cemetery, Ecoust-St Mein, Pas de Calais, France. 
Like a number of other anti-war books of the period, the 'Diary' was printed by Wilfred Meynell's Pelican Press and published jointly by Allen and Unwin and the socialist newspaper 'The Herald', which advertised it on 18 January 1919 as 'a grim, truthful and unvarnished account' of army life. It contains a memoir by the editor (identified only as C. J.), extracts from West's 1915-17 diary, a few letters and essays, and ten poems. Remarkable for its content, its editing, and its very early date, the book is one of the first examples of the way in which memories of the First World War were reshaped by literary means. The original diary seems to be lost and its author's full personality has disappeared behind Joad's editing, probably for ever. Nevertheless West might well have approved of the book and its message: there can be no doubt that he had learned to hate war with passionate intensity. 


@@@@@


doc= 98100


Stackhouse, Emily (1811-1870), botanical artist, was born at Modbury vicarage, Devon, on 15 July 1811, the fifth of six children (five girls, one boy) of William Stackhouse (1772-1861), vicar of Modbury, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Smith (1774-1845). The Stackhouse daughters were educated at home (the only son died of cholera at Eton in 1824) within a well-travelled, artistic, and scholarly family circle. Their family was linked by marriage to the Rashleigh family of Menabilly, and were part of a group of distinguished friends and relatives, many of whom were naturalists and parsons. William Stackhouse's uncle was the botanist and classical scholar John Stackhouse. The naturalists John Hawkins and his wife, Mary Sibthorpe Hawkins, of Trewithen, Probus, were neighbours and close friends. 
In 1834 the family moved from Modbury to Trehane, Probus, in Cornwall, a 4000 acre estate with a Queen Anne mansion, which William Stackhouse had inherited in 1830. Emily Stackhouse was twenty-three at the time of the move. Her eldest sister, Sarah, had married the Revd William James Pinwill. In future years the Pinwill children also lived at Trehane, alongside their three spinster aunts, Charlotte, Louisa, and Emily. Emily's primary focus was Trehane and its administration, with virtually all the entries in farm ledgers from 1834 to 1861 appearing in her hand. 
Emily Stackhouse developed her botanical and artistic interests in the countryside near her home. From about 1830 she produced over 600 watercolours of plants, painted from nature and based on meticulous pencilled sketches. On the reverse of each she inscribed a Linnaean taxonomy in her careful script. Several of her earliest known works as a watercolourist (1834-6) were completed in and around Norwich, where she was staying with Dawson Turner and his family. She painted from nature and travelled widely throughout Britain and Ireland to gather material for her botanical collections and to make drawings. Four albums of her 'beautiful botanical drawings' ('Royal Cornwall Gazette') were displayed at the fourteenth annual Royal Cornwall Polytechnic exhibition at Falmouth in 1846, where they received a bronze medal in the natural history section. The judges stated doubts about their placement, thinking they belonged for judgment in the amateur artist category. In her mind, however, her work in its true light was identification and classification with scientific description and her 1853 exhibition at the polytechnic was entered similarly, with the same results and glowing reviews. 
Within Cornish botanical circles Stackhouse made significant friendships with the algologist Elizabeth Andrew Warren (1786-1864), the phycologist Isabella Gifford ('c'.1823-1891), and the popular author Charles Alexander Johns. They all contributed to the county's 'hortus siccus', and many herbariums throughout the county. In Johns and his 'little books' she found the most important vehicle for her art: she provided several hundred illustrations for his works, including 'A Week at the Lizard' (1848) and 'Forest Trees of Britain' (1847). Most notably she has been identified as the artist responsible for most of the illustrations that appeared (anonymously) in Johns's hugely popular compendium for amateur botanists, 'Flowers of the Field', first published in 1851 and going through numerous editions thereafter. All were published by the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, which reproduced the woodcuts used in these books in further countryside and botanical books by later authors. Stackhouse's illustrations appear in at least fifteen and perhaps over thirty publications from 1870 to 1890, after the deaths of both of the original partners in the work. 
Stackhouse's own writings were largely unattributed (from 'a lady') contributions to the newsletters and journals of the Royal Institution of Cornwall, but in two articles, 'List of the musci natives of Cornwall' ('Journal of the Royal Institution of Cornwall', April 1865) and 'Rare plants in the neighbourhood of Truro' (ibid. 1866-7), she established her credentials as a recognized writer and scientific investigator. She also assembled a herbarium containing her collections of grasses and mosses. 
Emily Stackhouse and her sister Louisa moved to Truro after their father's death in 1861, when the Trehane estate passed to William Stackhouse Church Pinwill (1831-1926) of the Indian army, himself a distinguished horticulturist who won the Royal Horticultural Society's Victoria medal of honour in 1914. She died at her Truro home, in Strangways Terrace, on 1 March 1870, having been incapacitated by a stroke in the previous year, and was buried in the churchyard at Probus. She left bequests to the Royal Institution of Cornwall, the Royal Infirmary of Cornwall, and the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge, and a legacy of unknown proportion to the world of botanical illustration. 


@@@@@


doc= 98104


Hamilton, Gerald Francis Bernard (1890-1970), literary prototype, author, and rogue, was born Gerald Francis Hamilton Souter on 1 November 1890 in Shanghai, China, the son of Frank Thomas Edward Souter (1863-1941), a businessman of Scottish descent with commercial interests in China, and his wife, Edith Minnie, 'nee' Holliday (1860-1890). Hamilton claimed to be of 'faintly ducal' ancestry, with connections to the Stuarts and Bourbons (Hamilton, 'Mr Norris', 13), but in the words of Anthony Powell, 'all that had to be done to disprove that claim was to look it up... when the father and grandfather named by him would not be found' ('Daily Telegraph', 24 Oct 1974). Hamilton's mother died weeks after his birth and he was raised by an unmarried aunt, May Holliday, at 12 St George's Square, Westminster, London. He was sent to Lambrook preparatory school, Berkshire, where he was bullied, and in January 1905 to Rugby School. He left in April 1908, apparently in disgrace. Hamilton had a strong antipathy to his father, a staunch protestant ('an Orangeman, a true blue, to hell with the Pope of Rome and that sort of thing'; (Symonds, 121)), and this may have influenced his leaning towards high church ritual -- an interest at Rugby -- and Irish republicanism. 
Hamilton was sent by his father to China on a business venture from 1908 to 1910, where he adopted native dress and fraternized with his house boys. While in China he became seriously ill with dysentery and later claimed that the attention he received from an aristocratic Roman Catholic nurse, Sister Clare of the Denbigh family, led him to convert to Catholicism on his recovery. His father disowned him, and Gerald Souter, as he still was, changed his name to Hamilton. 
After returning to Europe, Hamilton had an entree to the royal courts -- with which he would be connected for the rest of his life -- apparently through his father's sisters. Royal acquaintances seem to have included Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany; Abbas Hilmi II, khedive of Egypt; Prince Aziz Hassan; Mulai Hafid, sultan of Morocco; Princess Maria Theresa, later the last queen of Bavaria; and Maria Christina, mother of King Alfonso XIII of Spain, who arranged for him to visit Franz Joseph, emperor of Austria. In 1912 Hamilton was in Russia, where he met members of the royal family and Rasputin. He also knew the so-called 'black society' of the Vatican, where he was received by Pope Pius X. 
At this period Hamilton's flat, in Dean Farrar Street, Westminster, was so elaborately decorated in Chinese Chippendale that strangers made appointments to see it. In 1914 he published (as Patrick Weston) 'Desert Dreamers', a homosexual romance set in north Africa. In November of the following year Hamilton's flat was raided by the police. He later presented himself as having spent the war interned owing to his pacifist and Irish sympathies, but was in fact charged with acts of indecency involving soldiers. He received two years' hard labour in February 1916, being released and re-arrested in November 1917, and was only then interned on suspicion of pro-German sympathies, being detained in Brixton gaol until 24 December 1918. Hamilton claimed to have been politically inspired by a friendship with the Irish rebel Sir Roger Casement, but in fact seems not to have known him. 
After the war Hamilton was involved with political intrigues and charitable work in Europe, attempting to restore the king of Greece and exerting influence on Pope Benedict XV on behalf of the newly established Save the Children Fund, from which he was forced to resign in 1920 over his expenses. Around the same time, he was active in gun-running for the Irish Republican Army. In 1924 he was involved in a fraud on a San Remo jeweller, obtaining a necklace on credit, and was arrested in Marseilles. He was then transported around a number of French and Italian prisons, and later said that the brutal conditions and shocking scenes he witnessed led him towards socialism. 
Freed on Christmas eve 1925, Hamilton began a more respectable career: after finding it was difficult to get 'The Times' newspaper in Germany, he offered himself as their German representative. He was amused that no checks were made on his background. The 'Times' job ended with charges of embezzlement and bad debts. 
During this period Hamilton was involved in public speaking for progressive causes, notably abortion and German reformatory conditions, in addition to pacifist, internationalist, and communist activities, which brought him to the notice of the security services in several countries; he describes himself travelling with cyanide pills under his wig (Hamilton, 'Sophocles', 208). In Berlin he shared a flat with the occultist Aleister Crowley, and Crowley received money from the special branch for reporting on him. The novelist Christopher Isherwood met him in Berlin in the winter of 1930-31 (the precise details of their first encounter remain unclear), and later immortalized him as the model for the sinisterly comic Mr Norris in his novel 'Mr Norris Changes Trains' (1935). Prior to the novel's publication Hamilton expressed hurt and alarm at the many similarities between himself and Norris, and was particularly offended by Norris's betrayal of his communist associates -- something Hamilton claimed himself incapable of doing. He was subsequently won round by Isherwood's reassurances, and later settled comfortably into his role as a literary prototype. 
Hamilton was to be enduringly associated with the character of Norris, and with Isherwood himself. He profited from an unsuccessful plan to obtain Mexican nationality for Isherwood's young partner Heinz Neddermeyer, in an attempt to keep him out of wartime service in the German army, and it was also Hamilton who leaked the contents of an Isherwood letter, written from the United States in 1939, selling Isherwood's frivolous remarks about German refugees in California to the 'Daily Express' gossip column; this helped to turn British public opinion against Isherwood and W. H. Auden for their wartime departure to the United States. Isherwood nevertheless forgave Hamilton and wrote in his journal, on receiving news of his death, 'I don't give a damn whether he swindled us [over Heinz's visa]... But I do remember all the fun we had together. He had a very cozy personality and an animal innocence, you felt he was only acting according to his nature' (Isherwood, 'Liberation', 87). 
Hamilton attended the World Congress Against War in Amsterdam in 1932 and the Anti-War Congress at Shanghai in the following year. He spent the mid-1930s in Belgium, and returned to Britain after the Munich crisis of 1938, where he campaigned against war with Germany and interested himself in the peace plan proposed by the twelfth duke of Bedford. This led to his arrest, shortly before he was able to make his planned escape to Ireland dressed as a nun, and he was interned under regulation 18b with Archibald Ramsay, MP and leader of the Right Club, and the fascist leader, Sir Oswald Mosley. In a characteristic moment Hamilton complained to the authorities that a warder had decanted his bottle of 1916 Gevrey-Chambertin into a metal container. After the war Hamilton drifted to the far right. He was active on behalf of Mosley, and went to the United States in 1948 in an attempt to procure a loan to the Franco government from the Knights of Columbus. In 1959 he accepted South African money to write a travel book, 'Jacaranda', which portrayed apartheid in a favourable light. 
It is in keeping with Hamilton's Zelig-like appearances in twentieth-century history that John Symonds has him making a speech alongside Michael Foot, Philip Toynbee, and others at Trafalgar Square before the first Aldermaston march in 1958. This seems to have been a Hamilton fantasy. He did, however, model for the statue of Sir Winston Churchill by Oscar Nemon; unveiled in London's Guildhall in 1955. When Hamilton revealed that he, an 18b detainee, had modelled the body, the irony of this was not lost on the press. Churchill is reported to have said: 'Couldn't they pick anyone else?', and Nemon told reporters, 'Give Hamilton a good kick from me' ('Daily Express', 22 June 1955). 
Hamilton made two paid marriages of convenience. On 31 August 1929, at St Jude's Church, Kensington, he married Diana Parker ('b'. 1907/8), daughter of Captain Alfred Parker. Following a divorce Hamilton married, at Chelsea register office on 29 April 1933, Suzanne (Suzy) Renou ('b'. 1907/8), daughter of Alphonse Renou, company director. Hamilton was long associated with attempts to procure passports, foreign decorations, and honours (although there is no evidence for his claim to have worked with the honours broker Maundy Gregory). Despite these activities it is not clear what Hamilton lived on for long periods, other than the charity of friends and a modest trust fund from his aunt, nor what he was 'up to', as Auden put it in 'Ode to the New Year' (1939), which celebrates Hamilton in a stanza: '
Uncle Gerald, your charm is a mystery 

I shall not attempt to define; 

It concerns your appearance, your history, 

And your knowledge of servants and wine; 

Do you think if I summoned the waiter, 

He could tell us instantly why 

The Embassy thinks you a traitor, 

And Olive thinks you a spy? 

Now it's you that I raise my cup to, 

Though I haven't the slightest idea 

What on earth it is that you're up to, 

I wish you a happy New Year. 
(quoted in C. Osborne, 'W. H. Auden: the Life of a Poet', 1979, 181-2)' Hamilton ended his life in a bedsitter at 518A Kings Road, London, above a Chinese restaurant named The Good Earth; he liked to say 'Better above the Good Earth than below it' (Symonds, 208). His rather camp wit gave rise to regular 'bon mots', including 'We live in stirring times; tea-stirring times', which Isherwood gave to Arthur Norris, along with another frequently used Hamilton excuse: 'There are some incidents in my career, as you doubtless know, which are very easily capable of misinterpretation' (Isherwood, 'Mr Norris', 22, 105; Parker, 275, 285). Hamilton died of heart failure on 9 June 1970 at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, and his body was cremated. Despite his somewhat ugly appearance, with his 'twisted mouth and blubber lips' (Maugham, 'Escape', 204), he had a fruity charisma when he talked; his character was once described as being like 'a pate unusually well-stuffed with truffles' ('London diary', 'New Statesman', 19 Dec 1959). His eccentric charm is brought out in John Symond's memoir 'Conversations with Gerald' (1974), although Robin Maugham has left a lurid picture of him as a fraudster, and some people -- Stephen Spender being one -- found him criminal and distasteful. Hamilton quotes Dante at the close of 'As Young as Sophocles', the first of three unreliable autobiographies: 'I have appeared vile in the eyes of many' (Hamilton, 'Sophocles', 264). 


@@@@@


doc= 98105


Tagore, Dwarkanath (1794-1846), businessman and philanthropist, was born in Calcutta, Bengal, India, the second son of Rammani Tagore (1759-1833), police officer, and his first wife, Menaka, daughter of Ramakanta Roy of Jessore. At the age of five he was adopted by the childless older brother of Rammani, Ramlochan, and his wife, Alakasundari, the elder sister of Menaka. Ramlochan was a man of liberal views and a patron of the arts. Rammani and Ramlochan, sons of Nilmani Tagore, were from the Jorasanko branch of the Tagore family. Dwarkanath's large extended family belonged to a subcaste of Brahmans known as Pirali, who were considered 'ritually impure' by other Bengali Brahmans, a social rejection that perhaps made them more open to European influences. After learning to read and write Bengali, Dwarkanath attended Mr Sherbourne's English school for upper-class Indian boys. At the age of seventeen he married Digambari Rai (1802-1839), a nine-year-old girl from Jessore. They had five sons, four of whom survived infancy: Debendranath (1817-1905), Girendranath (1820-1858), Bupendranath (1826-1839), and Nagendranath (1829-1858). 
Ramlochan Tagore died in 1807, and a few years later Dwarkanath Tagore assumed the management of his landed estates. Under the tutelage of Robert Cutlar Fergusson, a prominent Calcutta attorney, he mastered complex 'zamindari' law and soon became a legal adviser to other 'zamindars' of Bengal. Although he continued to practise his family's Vaishnava Hinduism, he became a protege of the religious and social reformer Rammohun Roy and joined him in his campaigns to outlaw suttee (the self-immolation of a woman on her husband's funeral pyre) and to restore and extend freedom of the press in India. From 1822 to 1828 he served as 'sheristadar' or head Indian officer of the salt agency of the twenty-four parganas (north-east of Calcutta) and, from 1828 to 1834, held the important post of 'diwan' of the board of customs, salt, and opium. During this period he began his business career, investing in overseas trading ventures, developing indigo and sugar production on his estates, and lending money at interest. In 1829 he led a group of British and Indian merchants in establishing the first joint-stock commercial bank in India, the Union Bank of Calcutta. When the major agency houses of Calcutta were devastated by a commercial crisis in 1830-33 Tagore emerged unscathed and formed his own agency house in partnership with William Carr and William Prinsep. Between 1836 and 1844 Carr, Tagore & Co. was unique among the houses in organizing and serving as managing agents for several joint stock companies based on the newly introduced steam technology -- the Bengal Coal Company, the Calcutta Steam Tug Association, the India General Steam Navigation Company, and the Steam Ferry Bridge Company -- in addition to the Bengal Salt Company and the Bengal Tea Company. 
In the 1830s and 1840s Tagore was acknowledged as the most prominent citizen of Calcutta. He financed the city's two leading English-language daily newspapers and supported the city's English-language theatre. His considerable philanthropic activities were directed towards endowing hospitals, supporting medical education, and helping the poor and blind to lead dignified lives. Although he believed that his country benefited greatly from British rule, he helped found India's two earliest political organizations, the Landholders' Society (1832) and the Bengal British Indian Society (1843). He also developed a large elegant estate at Belgachia, north of Calcutta, to which he regularly invited the city's European and Indian elites. Invitations to Belgachia were valued second only to those of the governor-general of India and earned him the nickname Prince Dwarkanath. 
On 9 January 1842 Tagore fulfilled his life's ambition and, like Rammohun Roy before him, sailed to Britain. 'En route' he met national leaders elsewhere in Europe and was the first Indian to have a papal audience. In England he mixed with political and cultural elites, was invited to Buckingham Palace more than once, and became a devotee of the London theatre. Contemporaries described him as handsome, charming, and knowledgeable. He returned home in October 1842 after a visit to Paris and the French royal family. On 18 March 1845 he again sailed to Europe, this time accompanied by four medical students, two of whom he sponsored. They were the first Indians to study medicine in Europe and returned home to successful careers. In the summer of 1846 Dwarkanath became seriously ill, probably of dengue fever. He died surrounded by friends in his room at St George's Hotel, Albemarle Street, London, on 1 August and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 5 August. At a large memorial meeting held in Calcutta he was eulogized as the greatest Indian of his time. Soon after he died the commercial crisis of 1847 wiped out many of the Calcutta agency houses along with most of his fortune, but wisely he had arranged for his extensive landed estates to be placed in trust for his sons. His remaining partners continued his firm under a new name, and four of their original joint stock companies survived for many years, three well into the twentieth century. Tagore's dream of a British-Indian imperial partnership was not to be, but he did succeed in introducing new business forms and new enterprises to India. His numerous illustrious descendants, including his grandson Rabindranath Tagore, inherited his love of the arts, his broad views, and his genius for innovation. 


@@@@@


doc= 98106


Cannan, May Wedderburn (1893-1973), writer, was born at 34 St Giles, Oxford, on 14 October 1893, the second daughter of Charles Cannan (1858-1919), Aristotelian scholar and publisher, and his wife, Mary Wedderburn (1857-1943). Her twin, Frances Keir Cannan, died in infancy. Cannan's elder sister, Dorothea, married John Johnson, printer and assistant secretary to the delegates of Oxford University Press, and her younger sister Joanna Maxwell Cannan (1896-1961), became a novelist and children's writer. She grew up at Magdalen Gate House in Oxford's High Street and, like her sisters, was educated at the Wychwood School, Banbury Road, Oxford, run by Annie Batty and Margaret Lee. 
Cannan's veneration of books began in her father's library, 'the room I loved best... At four I could read and had found my world' (Cannan, 5-6). The Cannan sisters created their own family magazine, which they wrote in penny exercise books every morning and read as it was written to their cousin. In 1907 their anthology 'The Tripled Crown' was published: 'My father started it', May asserted. 'On our complaining that there was no Anthology with all the things we wanted in it he said 'do one yourselves', so we did' (ibid., 34). Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch wrote an introductory poem. In 1908 she was sent with Dorothea to Downe House School in Kent. Although she passed the higher certificate examinations she was never happy there, and having caught pneumonia, she was allowed to return to Oxford and to Wychwood. 
In the run-up to the First World War Cannan, like many women of her class and generation, took first aid and home nursing classes. She was a member of an Oxford Voluntary Aid Detachment (VAD) that had been approached by the War Office to set up a hospital in the event of mobilization. She was able to procure Magdalen College School for the hospital, but it was eventually decided that military not VAD hospitals would be used and that military nurses not amateur volunteers would run them. Cannan and her fellow volunteers were summarily dismissed. With her sisters she undertook voluntary war work at the Clarendon Press, which produced pamphlets and books for the government's propaganda bureau. Cannan herself was responsible for putting together Oxford University Press's general catalogue. 
In 1915 Cannan spent four weeks in France running a railway canteen for soldiers, the experience providing inspiration for one of her finest poems, 'Rouen', which describes a day in the life of the busy port town. She records the incidentals of her experience from 'the coming of provisions' and 'the little piles of Woodbines' to 'the Drafts just out from England' and 'the truck train full of wounded', and thus grounds the poem in the immediacy of the war. The repetitive question 'Can you recall' combined with the insistent repletion of 'And', blend these concrete details within a lyrical memory of 'our Adventure'. Her first volume of poetry, 'In War Time', was published in 1917 by Basil Blackwell. In August 1918 Cannan went to work for the bureau of central intelligence, a branch of MI5 in Paris, and she was there when the armistice was declared in November. Her poem 'The Armistice: in an Office in Paris', which ends with the assertion 'peace could not give back her Dead', is a moving encapsulation of the conflicting emotions of women for whom the celebrations had come too late. 
In December 1918 Cannan was officially engaged to her childhood friend Major Bevil Quiller-Couch MC, RFA (1890-1919), son of Arthur Quiller-Couch (Q), professor of English literature at Cambridge and editor of the 'Oxford Book of English Verse'. Bevil Quiller-Couch survived the fighting at Mons, Ypres, the Ancre, and elsewhere, but he died in the influenza pandemic on 6 February 1919. Cannan's grief was poured into some of the most poignant poems of the war, including 'Young Adventure' and 'When the Vision Dies', which Vera Brittain quoted as the epigraph and title of chapter 6 of 'Testament of Youth' (1933). Her second poetry collection, 'The Splendid Days', dedicated to Bevil, was published in 1919. Cannan typed out every letter Bevil wrote to her and to his parents, as well as letters from his fellow officers and her own copy of the official war diaries chronicling his service (Fyfe, vii). In the aftermath of Bevil's death she was sustained by her work on the 'Oxford Magazine' and the friendship of her former schoolmate and fellow VAD volunteer Carola Oman, whose volume of poems 'The Menin Road' Cannan helped to get published. 
In the early 1920s Cannan worked as a secretary at King's College, London, and as an assistant librarian at the Athenaeum. The publication of her third volume of poetry, 'The House of Hope' (1923), inspired a letter from an admirer -- Percival James Slater (1892-1967) -- who had written to her previously about 'The Splendid Days'. Slater had been wounded in the war, joined the Royal Flying Corps, and served in captive balloons, for which he was awarded the DFC. Although they had met only five times the couple were married on 26 July 1924 at the parish church of St George, Campden Hill, London. They had one son, James Cannan Slater. 'The Lonely Generation', her fictionalized memoir, appeared in 1934. She then gave up writing for publication, partly owing to her husband's reaction to the book, and committed herself to the animals and land of the Staffordshire farm they shared for forty years. 'Long years after, he told me he was sorry he had had a 'thing about it' and about my writing -- he could not tell why -- and I said it did not matter, which had become nearly true' (Fyfe, 174). 
May Wedderburn Cannan suffered a heart attack and died in her sleep at her home, St Margaret's Cottage, 15 The Moors, Pangbourne, Berkshire, on 11 December 1973. Her funeral was held at St Mary's, Whitchurch-on-Thames. 

'Grey Ghosts and Voices', Cannan's autobiography (left at her death in manuscript), was published posthumously in 1976, and is both an evocative portrait of her Oxford childhood and a moving account of her experience of war and its aftermath. She regarded it as 'a salute to my generation' (Cannan, 152). Unlike Vera Brittain, May Cannan did not subscribe to the idea that the First World War was a futile waste of a generation: 'I had admired much of Sassoon's verse but I was not coming home with him. Someone must go on writing for those who were still convinced of the right of the cause for which they had taken up arms' (ibid., 113). 'Rouen' is one of the most anthologized First World War poems by a woman. Philip Larkin, who found it 'enchanting', chose it for his 'Oxford Book of Twentieth Century English Verse' (1973), and Jon Stallworthy likewise selected it for successive editions of the 'Norton Anthology of Poetry' and 'The Oxford Book of War Poetry'. 'The Tears of War: the Love Story of a Young Poet and a War Hero', edited by Charlotte Fyfe, Cannan's great-niece, which brings together May Cannan's poetry and her correspondence with Bevil Quiller-Couch, was published in 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 98107


Doyle, William Joseph Gabriel (1873-1917), Roman Catholic priest and military chaplain, was born at Dalkey, co. Dublin, on 3 March 1873, the youngest of seven children of Hugh Doyle, chief clerk of the high court of bankruptcy, and his wife, Christine, 'nee' Byrne. He was educated for six years at Ratcliffe College, Leicester, by the priests of the Rosminian order. He entered the Society of Jesus at Tullamore, King's county, Ireland, on 31 March 1891. After his novitiate his health did not allow him to pursue the course of Jesuit studies in its normal sequence and he worked as a teacher and prefect at Clongowes Wood College, co. Kildare, from 1894 to 1898 and from 1901 to 1904, at Clongowes and at Belvedere College, Dublin. He studied philosophy with the French Jesuits in Enghien, Belgium, and with the English Jesuits at St Mary's Hall, Stonyhurst, Lancashire, between 1898 and 1901, and theology at Milltown Park, Dublin (1904-7). His final year of Jesuit training was spent at Tronchiennes in Belgium. 
After his ordination as a priest on 28 July 1907 in Dublin, Doyle volunteered to be a missionary in the Belgian Congo but instead was sent to work as a home missioner and a director of retreats. He was in demand for this pastoral work in England, Scotland, and Wales as well as in Ireland. He saw the need for the spiritual care of working men, beyond what could be provided by the occasional missioner, and proposed a retreat house in Dublin to cater for their needs. He wrote some pamphlets which sold in very large numbers for many years and were translated into other languages: 'Retreats for Working Men: Why not in Ireland' (1909), 'Vocations' (1913), and 'Shall I be a Priest?' (1915). 
After the outbreak of the First World War Doyle volunteered and was appointed a military chaplain to the 16th division in 1915. He arrived in France early in 1916 as chaplain to the 8th battalion, Royal Irish Fusiliers, and the Royal Iniskilling Fusiliers, which together formed half of the 49th brigade. He gained a notable reputation as a chaplain for his bravery, energetic pastoral care, and kindness. He was awarded the Military Cross (January 1917) for his work with the wounded during the battle of the Somme. In December 1916 he was transferred to the 8th battalion, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, part of the 48th brigade. He was killed by a bomb on Frezenberg ridge, Belgium, during the third battle of Ypres, on 16 August 1917, while aiding the wounded. Reportedly given a hasty burial by soldiers in the field, no trace of his body has been found. He was posthumously recommended for the DSO for his earlier exploits at Wytschaete (June 1917) and for the VC for his bravery at Frezenberg. Neither award was made. 
Doyle's personal papers, including his spiritual diary, found in Dublin after his death, were published in Alfred O'Rahilly's biography of Doyle (1920), which was frequently republished and was translated into other languages. Doyle had left instructions that these notes should be destroyed, but his religious superior and his elder brother, also a Jesuit, consented to their publication. They reveal a life of deep prayer and severe penance over many years. Interest in his spirituality led to the popular devotion to Doyle evident in Ireland and the Irish diaspora in the decades after his death. The cause for his canonization was proposed in Rome in 1938 but has not progressed. 


@@@@@


doc= 98108


Foulkes, Charles Howard (1875-1969), army officer, was born in Bangalore, India, on 1 February 1875, the fifth of seven sons and one daughter of the Revd Thomas Foulkes (1826-1901), chaplain of St John's, Bangalore, and his second wife, Jessie, 'nee' Fischer (died 1912). His father, a former missionary, was a senior chaplain in the Madras government service and a distinguished Tamil and Sanskrit scholar. At the age of seven Charles left India to spend two years' schooling with the Revd Samuel Pettigrew of Puddlestone, Herefordshire, then five years at Lord Weymouth's School, Warminster, before attending Bedford modern school for two years, which had an 'army class'. He then passed into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, at the age of seventeen. 
Gazetted and commissioned into the Royal Engineers in 1894, Foulkes found outlets for his versatile skills in a wide range of imperial service. As a second lieutenant, aged only twenty-two years, he undertook a posting to Sierra Leone as the commanding royal engineer, West Africa. He built coastal defences and accommodation, drew up the first defence plan for the Gold Coast, inspected buildings in the Gambia, and served on the 'Hut Tax Expedition' (1898-9), for which he was awarded the West Africa medal with clasp. Invalided home with malaria, he sought service in the South African War (1899-1902) by devising a bicycle-mounted photo-reconnaissance unit, and convincing Sir Evelyn Wood, the adjutant-general, of its potential value. Despite the success of this pioneering initiative, Foulkes was absorbed into the 1st field troop RE and later served as a staff captain, intelligence, with a cavalry brigade. Awarded the South African medal with six clasps, he was ordered back to Sierra Leone in 1900. 
During his second tour in Sierra Leone, Foulkes undertook further service on the Gold Coast, and, when on leave in 1902, visited St Vincent and French Martinique, where volcanoes had erupted. He used his photographic skills to make a military reconnaissance of the French island, without causing embarrassment to the French authorities. Foulkes was invited subsequently to become a member of the Anglo-French commission appointed to delimit the 1000-mile boundary of northern Nigeria in hostile and largely unexplored country. While taking astronomical observations he received news that a tribal battle was about to occur, and so rode off across 175 miles of desert tracks, with five African soldiers and his personal servant, to apprehend the fugitive Emir Aliyu of Kano and bring him back to Sir Frederick Lugard, the high commissioner. Although Lugard congratulated Foulkes, the head of the boundary commission, Lieutenant-Colonel Gilbert Elliot, deplored his recklessness and, after another bout of malaria, Foulkes returned home but earned the Northern Nigeria medal in 1902. 
Later posted to Edinburgh, Foulkes took charge of the Ordnance Survey of Scotland and spent five happy years (1904-9) there. He married in London, on 14 September 1904, Dorothea Fanny Oakey (1880-1967), daughter of Herbert Oakey, emery manufacturer. A superb sportsman, he played football for Heart of Midlothian and hockey for Scotland, representing the country in the 1908 Olympic games and captaining the Scottish hockey side throughout the 1908-9 season. He spent three years commanding the 31st (Fortress) company, Ceylon, where he could indulge his passion and skill in big-game hunting. 
After a brief posting at Chatham, Foulkes was promoted to major and given command of the 11th field company, RE, at the outset of the First World War. He served in the early engagements of the war, winning the DSO for 'conspicuous gallantry' at Cuinchy in February 1915. He was mentioned in dispatches, made a chevalier of the French Legion d'honneur, and awarded the French Croix de Guerre with palm for gallantry. He became most identified, though, as the leader of Britain's gas retaliation after Germany's first major use of poison gas at Ypres on 22 April 1915. In May 1915 he was appointed to raise, train, and command four 'special companies' of scientists, chemists, and undergraduates to deliver the first British use of chlorine gas, discharged from 5500 cylinders at the battle of Loos on 25 September 1915. Although Foulkes always claimed that the gas and smoke cloud had achieved surprise, and it may have helped the advance across part of the front, the wind proved capricious and some of it blew back over British trenches. Loos did not achieve the desired breakthrough, and henceforth gas, whether dispersed from cylinders (as Foulkes preferred) or from less-weather dependent systems -- shells, 4-inch mortars, and projectors -- had a largely supportive role, harassing the enemy and inflicting casualties upon any unprotected enemies. In 1916 he was placed in command of the Special Brigade, RE, into which the special companies for gas warfare were organized, comprising 6000 of all ranks. In June 1917 he succeeded Henry Thuillier as director of gas services, in charge of the defensive and offensive gas duties, and became president of the chemical warfare committee of the Ministry of Munitions (1918). 
Foulkes emerged from the war with the 1914 and Victory medals, the order of the Crown and Croix de Guerre with palm from Belgium, the Italian order of the Crown, the American distinguished service medal, and the CMG. After serving on the Holland committee which made recommendations about the post-war organization of British chemical warfare, he was sent as a brigadier-general to GHQ India. He toured the north-west frontier, found plenty of scope for the potential use of chemical weapons, lectured the viceroy on chemical warfare, and served in the Third Afghan War, earning the India general service medal with clasp (Waziristan), 1919-20. 
Foulkes served briefly in Ireland during the Anglo-Irish War and was given charge of a propaganda department in Dublin but this never functioned for political reasons. He then held several command posts in England, including chief engineer, Aldershot (1926-30). In 1927 he was created CB and, in the following year, became ADC to George V. Promoted to major-general in 1930, he was placed on half-pay and elected to retire. He received more honours: the coronation medal in 1937, appointment as colonel commandant RE from 1937 to 1945, and, in 1962, the rare award of a gold medal from the Institution of Royal Engineers. 
In retirement Foulkes continued to lecture and write about chemical warfare, including his controversial ''Gas!' The Story of the Special Brigade' (1934), which lauded the achievements of his unit and claimed that 'gas on the battlefield... changed the whole character of warfare'. He also wrote 'Commonsense and ARP' (1934) and several articles for the 'Royal Engineers Journal'. He remained in close touch with his old comrades and regularly spoke at the annual reunion dinners. 
For most of his life Foulkes was astonishingly fit and had exemplary hand-eye co-ordination, playing cricket, tennis, rugby, billiards, and first-class hockey until he was fifty-five. Although not very tall, he was remarkably strong and was regarded as the star pupil of the Victorian body-builder Eugen Sandow. A devoted family man, he cared for his wife, who was crippled with arthritis in later life, until her death in 1967. Their one daughter had died at the age of five in a carriage accident in Ceylon, but the three sons survived. Foulkes died on 6 May 1969 in a nursing home in Branksomewood Road, Fleet, Hampshire, and was cremated at the Park crematorium, Aldershot. A memorial service was held in the chapel of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, on 10 June. His eldest son, Major-General Thomas Herbert Fischer Foulkes (1908-1986), was colonel commandant of the Royal Engineers from 1963 to 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 98109


Pope, Jessie (1868-1941), poet and writer, was born at 11 Seymour Street, Leicester, on 18 March 1868, the second daughter (she had at least two sisters and two brothers) of Richard George Pope (1832/3-1903), commercial traveller and hop merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Windover. She was educated at Craven House, Leicester, and the North London Collegiate School for Girls from 1883 to 1886. There she won the needlework prize, the scripture prize, and the English prize, and also passed the senior Cambridge certificate. The family moved to Hampstead, London, and she was living there with her parents, unmarried, at the turn of the twentieth century. By 1915 she had made her home at Lochleven House, Oak Lane, Finchley. 
Pope began writing for 'Punch', her first contribution being an article about the Bushey Heath beagles hunt. Between 1902 and 1922 she contributed 170 poems to the magazine. Boasting that she 'never refused any work that was offered to her' ('Lady's Realm'), she was a prolific writer of humorous verse, articles, and short stories, which were published in many other popular periodicals of the early twentieth century, including the 'Daily Mail', the 'Daily Express', the 'Evening Standard', 'The Queen', and the 'Westminster Gazette', before being collected in such books as 'Paper Pellets' (1906) and 'Airy Nothings' (1909). She received accolades as the 'foremost woman humourist' who had 'nimble wit and a polished facility for rhyme and scansion' for her verse on subjects that varied from 'Love in a Car' and 'With the Beagles in Herts' to 'The Ideal Home' and 'Men I Might Have Married'. 'Airy Nothings' contained the poems 'Any Woman to a Suffragette' and 'Any Suffragette to any Woman', which it could be argued show Pope taking a balanced view of the controversial fight for the franchise. While 'any woman to any suffragette' argues that '
you see, as a class, we believe, 

That brawling is vulgar, dear Madam 

' 'any suffragette to any woman' derides the 'protected shell' of non-campaigners and asserts that 'when our conflict's done', '
With equanimity you'll take 

The vote which 'we' have won. 

' Pope also wrote verse for many illustrated collections for children, including 'The Little Soldier Book' (1907), 'Babes and Birds' (1910), 'Babes and Beasts' (1912), 'The Adventures of Silversuit' (1912), 'Three Jolly Anglers' (1913), 'Tom, Dick and Harry: their Deeds and Misdeeds' (1914), and 'Frolicsome Friends' (1915). 
In 1913 Pope learned of the existence of a manuscript of a novel of working-class life and struggle entitled 'The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists' by Robert Noonan (1870-1911; 'pseud'. Robert Philippe Tressell). Noonan left the text to his daughter Kathleen, who was the nurse of one of Pope's neighbours. Pope 'thought it so strikingly good and original that I advised its being sent to a publisher' ('Lady's Realm', 75) and after touting the text unsuccessfully to a number of firms Pope convinced Grant Richards to take it on. Richards, in turn, persuaded Pope to edit it. She was paid $24 in two instalments, Kathleen Noonan having sold the manuscript to Richards for $25. Pope's Herculean task was to cut the original 250,000 word text down to 100,000 words, reputedly only excising what she called 'superfluous material and repetition' from Noonan's often longwinded or laboured descriptions. But in reality she also cut what she and Richards considered offensive or subversive passages, and transposed material as well as eliminating a key character to create what one critic has called an expurgation rather than an abridgement that 'seriously disturbed the unity and the development of the novel' (Mayne, 77). It was published in 1914 and re-published in various editions throughout the 1930s and 1940s until printed in its original form by Lawrence and Wishart in 1955. Despite Pope's 'middle-class squeamishness', which led her to make unnecessary cuts in the novel, her effort with Noonan's work 'was beyond price' (Swinnerton, 28). Without her, 'The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists' might never have seen the light of day. 
Pope is perhaps best known -- and indeed most vilified -- for her patriotic poetry of the First World War. Published from 1914 onwards in newspapers like the 'Daily Mail', her verse was later collected in the volumes 'Jessie Pope's War Poems' (1915), 'More War Poems' (1915), and 'Simple Rhymes for Stirring Times' (1916), as well as in charity gift-books such as 'The Fiery Cross' (1915). Widely disseminated and widely read, her war poetry attracted both admiration and condemnation. The opening page of 'Jessie Pope's War Poems' reproduces a facsimile of a letter sent from 'a soldier at the front' that proclaims her poems 'much admired by us all out here' and 'will be such a 'buck up'' for the soldier's wife: 'bucking up means so much to those at home as well as for us. Really, they need it most, as after all, there is the most worrying suspense.' Poems like 'No!', with the insistent line 'Are we downhearted?' and its resounding affirmation of steadfastness from Tommy and General French, Jack the sailor, and even '
the girl who is left behind 

And the wife who misses her mate 

' may have indeed 'bucked up' those on the home front, but such widespread dissemination of poems like 'Play the Game', in which war is the ultimate sport and Englishmen are urged to 'get to work with a 'gun'', sealed her reputation as a jingoistic, pro-war propagandist. 
The glorification of combat in Pope's sing-song, doggerel rhyme eschewed the horrors of the battlefield and seemingly showed little regard for the suffering of soldiers. 'The Call', with its lines, '
Who's fretting to begin, 

Who's going out to win? 

And who wants to save his skin -- 

Do you, my laddie? 

' was only one among many that compelled Wilfred Owen to dedicate 'Dulce et decorum est' in his original manuscript 'To Jessie Pope, etc', then in a subsequent version 'To a Certain Poetess' before deleting the 'dedication' altogether in favour of the more cryptic reference to 'my friend' in the final lines that precede 'the Old Lie'. 
Pope had no pretensions to literary greatness. In an interview in 1915 she made light of her talent for topical poetry saying, 'if you take a pen and sit and stare at a piece of blank paper long enough, something in the shape of a poem will come on it sooner or later', although she did list 'solitude and silence, a sense of rhythm, a fairly fluent vocabulary, and a patient determination not to be beaten by false starts' as other necessary attributes for the would-be versifier ('Lady's Realm'). Her hobbies, 'chiefly of the outdoor variety', included hunting, cycling, driving motor cars, playing golf, and swimming -- she would fearlessly dive off seaside pierheads. 
Pope's post-war books include a short novel, 'Love on Leave' (1919), which told the story of a young Englishwoman's romance with an Anzac soldier, and another volume of verse, 'Hits and Misses' (1920), only a few poems of which had the First World War as a theme. She continued to write for children, including verses for series of picture postcards 'A Day at the Fair' (1928) and 'Fairy Wings' (1928), and stories for illustrated books like 'Animal Fun and Frolic' (1930). Aged sixty-one, she married, on 11 May 1929, a widower, Edward Babington Lenton (1866-1942), a retired bank manager, the son of Edward Chapman Lenton, also a bank manager. 'I have forsaken the delights of single blessedness, and am so happily married that they no longer attract me', she wrote to her editor at the publisher Grant Richards. They settled at Ivy House, Fritton, near Great Yarmouth. Life away from London, where she lived for most of her writing career, seems to have suited her. 
Little is known of her later years, but letters in the Grant Richards archives reveal that in the 1930s she purchased back copies of her books from the publisher and asked that the rights be restored to her. She died on 14 December 1941 at Broom Hill House, Chagford, Devon, and was cremated at Plymouth. 
While many continue to condemn Pope's First World War writing -- she is represented as the worst example of the cold, female, non-combatant civilian -- some critics have argued for a more subtle consideration of her writing. In the poem 'No!', for instance, 'among the compliant cliches and facile rhythms it is possible to hear a subtle denial of chivalric platitudes' (Dowson, 189). Her wartime pen was directed not only at so-called slackers, but also at war profiteers; readers were urged not to forget the sick children at Great Ormond Street Hospital or the wounded blind at St Dunstan's when considering outlets for their wartime charity. She demonstrated ways in which women could be active and 'show their grit' in such poems as 'Socks' and 'War Girls', and cajoled women on the home front to economize. Indeed, Owen may have cancelled his original 'dedication' to Pope because he recognized 'a tongue in a cheek' (Bebbington, 92). 
Jessie Pope's verse is not 'great' literature; she was above all a writer of humour. That this humour rang hollow in light of the carnage of the western front was a fate not unique to this 'certain poetess'. It is perhaps the reason why she returned in her later years to the gentler subjects of animals and fairies in her verse and stories for children. 


@@@@@


doc= 98112


Dobell, Sir Charles MacPherson (1869-1954), army officer, was born in Quebec City, Canada, on 22 June 1869, the second of three sons (he also had two sisters) of Richard Reid Dobell (1837-1902) of Beauvoir Manor, Sillery, Quebec City, and his wife, Elizabeth Frances MacPherson. His father, born in Liverpool, had emigrated in 1857 to Canada, where he established a prosperous lumber business, moved into Canadian politics, and was elected as a Liberal member in the Canadian House of Commons. 
Charles Dobell was brought up in luxurious surroundings at Beauvoir, attending Canon Iffland's private school and Quebec high school before leaving for England, where he went to Charterhouse School. He then returned to Canada as an officer cadet at the Royal Military College, Kingston, Ontario, graduating in 1890, after which he was gazetted into the Royal Welch Fusiliers. On 3 March 1908, in London, he married Elizabeth Annie Holme (Elsye), widow of Captain Frederick L. Campbell RN and daughter of Major William Meyrick Bankes; they had a daughter. 
Dobell served his military apprenticeship in Britain's colonial wars, serving as a lieutenant in the Hazara expedition in 1891 (medal with clasp); in Crete in 1897-8 (brevet major); in South Africa from 1899 to 1900, where he commanded a battalion of the Royal Welch Fusiliers on mounted operations (DSO, dispatches, and queen's medal with clasps); in China during the Boxer rebellion in 1900 (medal); and in the northern Nigeria expedition of 1906 (dispatches twice, brevet lieutenant-colonel, medal and clasp). 
Special nomination to and graduation from the Staff College in 1904 augmented Dobell's campaigning experience and, after the Nigeria expedition, he went to the War Office as GSO (grade 3) and then GSO (grade 2) in the military operations directorate. Having been appointed aide-de-camp to the king in 1910, he left the War Office in 1911 to command the Bedfordshire regiment in May 1912 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, before becoming full colonel the following year. With this promotion he was appointed in 1913 inspector-general of the West African Frontier Force. 
When war broke out in August 1914 Dobell, by now a brigadier-general, was responsible for conquering the German colonies of Togoland and Cameroon. At home on leave at the start of the war he told the subcommittee of the committee of imperial defence that Lome (the capital) and Kamina (the base of the main wireless station) in Togoland were the only worthwhile objectives. Dobell felt that Lome, a mile over the border from the British Gold Coast, should be the initial objective -- and even this would require naval support. Events on the ground outpaced Dobell's cautious approach to operations, with the British Gold Coast regiment mobilizing ahead of schedule, and local British commanders taking matters into their own hands, pushing into Togoland and forcing its surrender by the end of August. 
On 25 September 1914 Dobell, back in Africa, arrived off Cameroon in charge of an Anglo-French force of some 13,000, largely locally recruited, soldiers, the majority of whom were French. The port city, Duala, fell without a shot fired on 27 September, German forces retreating inland. Meanwhile other British and French-led troops advanced across the borders from Nigeria and French Equatorial Africa. This was not a war of large battles, and the major enemies were disease, poor communications, and rough terrain. Short of men, in March 1915 Dobell reported that he had only two battalions fit for service, so London signalled him to sit on the defensive. Although in overall command, he had great difficulty controlling his disparate force, divided as it was between France and Britain (and Belgium), four governor-generals, six independent commanders-in-chief, and eight column commanders. The war dragged on into 1916, ending only when the last German forces retreated after a protracted and difficult campaign to neutral Spanish-run Muni. In recognition of his services in Africa in 1914-16 he was made CMG (1915) and KCB (1916) and promoted major-general. 
In June 1916 Dobell was sent to serve under General Sir Archibald Murray, in charge of Britain's advance from Egypt across the Sinai into Ottoman-held Palestine. Murray put Dobell in charge of the Egyptian expeditionary force's eastern force, which he commanded as a lieutenant-general in 1916-17, being twice mentioned in dispatches. Dobell's mission was to extend the British lines across to the border of Palestine by the town of Gaza. This was at first a war of logistics, the gradual British advance dependent on a railway and water pipeline built by Egyptian forced labour along the Mediterranean coast of the Sinai. By early 1917 his men were ready to attack into Palestine. While the campaign historian described him as 'sanguine and energetic', and 'always anxious to engage his enemy' (Wavell, 'Palestine Campaigns', 71), his first major battle, at Gaza in March-April 1917, resulted in two comprehensive defeats, in which both he and Murray, and the command structure that they created, failed. In a classic piece of official understatement the British official history of the war commented on the first battle: 'Few actions of the late war have been the subject of greater differences of opinion than the first battle of Gaza' (MacMunn and Falls, 1.315). At the first battle in March 1917 British and imperial mounted troops surrounded Gaza town -- weakly held at this time by the Ottomans -- but were then pulled out in a panic because of a communications and command breakdown that cannot be blamed on such extraneous factors as the presence of fog. If the first battle was a wasted muddle, the second battle in April 1917 was senseless slaughter as the British infantry with inadequate artillery support attacked Ottoman positions head on and were shot to pieces. It is not clear whether all of this was Dobell's or Murray's fault -- the latter was in supreme command -- but after the second battle of Gaza Murray replaced Dobell with Sir Philip Chetwode as commander of eastern force. Shortly thereafter, in June 1917, the war cabinet in London sent out Sir Edmund Allenby to replace Murray. 
In August 1917 Dobell went to India to command the 2nd (Rawalpindi) division, staying until 1920, during which time he served in the Third Anglo-Afghan War of 1919 (dispatches twice, medal). He was commander-in-chief of the northern army India in 1920, retiring with the honorary rank of lieutenant-general in 1923. 
In 1926 Dobell became colonel of his old regiment, the Royal Welch Fusiliers, an honorary position that he held until 1938. He became a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1947. He died at his home, 18 Kingston House, Prince's Gate, London, on 17 October 1954. A career marked by successes and honours, and characterized by his 'indomitable courage' ('The Times', 28 Oct 1954), was marred by defeat in the Gaza battles. While he was not alone in struggling with the challenges thrown up by modern warfare after 1914, the reverses at Gaza in the spring of 1917 were, arguably, avoidable and undoubtedly prolonged the Palestine campaign. 


@@@@@


doc= 98114


Jeudwine, Sir Hugh Sandham (1862-1942), army officer, was born at Chicheley, Buckinghamshire, on 9 June 1862, the son of William Jeudwine (1812/13-1888), vicar of Chicheley, and his wife, Grace Margaret, 'nee' Sandham (1822/3-1904), widow of George Canning Backhouse. Educated at Eton College (1876-80) and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1880-82), he was commissioned into the Royal Artillery on 22 February 1882 and was rapidly promoted lieutenant (22 May 1882). He served for ten years as a regimental officer, showing a great capacity for work and making himself proficient in the scientific side of his arm of the service. He was promoted captain on 1 September 1891, and on 10 February 1891 he married Mary Grace, daughter of Edward David Meynell, gentleman. They had one daughter. 
In January 1891 Jeudwine went through the long course at the School of Gunnery and, instead of applying for the Staff College, Camberley, a normal step on the promotion ladder, he became an instructor at the School of Gunnery, Shoeburyness, which post he held from 1894 to late 1899. Just as he left Shoeburyness war broke out in South Africa and he was posted out as a special service officer in December 1899. He was a staff officer in Cape Colony, promoted major on 3 January 1900, and was made a district commandant, fighting a number of actions south of the Orange River. He served the full two and a half years of the war, including some time as a column commander pursuing Boer rebels in Cape Colony. In carrying out this task he gained a reputation for his uncompromising methods, and acquired the nickname the Boer Crusher. Allegedly some of his colleagues began to avoid his company. He was awarded the queen's South Africa medal with two clasps, and the king's medal with two clasps. 
Jeudwine remained on the staff in South Africa until May 1904, serving as deputy assistant adjutant-general and deputy assistant quartermaster-general during the settlement of the country. He was briefly an assistant superintendent of experiments at the School of Gunnery. From October 1904 to late 1908 he worked at the War Office, in the military training branch, as the resident expert on artillery matters; in 1897, 1907, and 1908 he was a gold medal essayist for the Royal Artillery Institution. On 4 July 1908 he was made lieutenant-colonel and, as often happened, was briefly on half-pay thereafter. From April 1909 he served as deputy assistant adjutant-general at Aldershot command, and in January 1912 became an instructor and general staff officer, grade 2 (GSO2) at the Staff College, Camberley. He was a sound and serious teacher under Major-General Sir William Robertson, and was made colonel on 4 March 1912. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Jeudwine was general staff officer, grade 1 (GSO1) at the Staff College. He was posted immediately as GSO1 to Sir Douglas Haig's 1st corps and went to France and Flanders with it. He served through the retreat from Mons, and at the battles of the Marne and the Aisne. He made some vital personal interventions during the critical fighting at Ypres. On 1 November 1914 he was posted as GSO1 to the 1st division. In January 1915 he was made brigadier-general, general staff, to the newly formed 5th corps. He was an unforgiving, and apparently unpopular, chief of staff under its second and equally unforgiving commander, Edmund Allenby. The corps fought at the second battle of Ypres and in several subsidiary actions in the Ypres salient thereafter. In September 1915 he commanded the 41st infantry brigade of the 14th (light) division. 
On 3 January 1916 Jeudwine got his division -- the 55th (West Lancashire) division, Territorial Force, as it was being reconstituted in France -- and was confirmed as a major-general in June 1916. He commanded this excellent fighting division for the rest of the war. They fought at Guillemont and Delville Wood on the Somme in 1916, and at Pilckem ridge, the Menin Road ridge, and Cambrai in 1917. Perhaps their finest hour was the defence of Givenchy on 9 April 1918, when they defeated the German attacks that had already swept away the adjoining Portuguese corps. Jeudwine's calm presence of mind saw the gaping hole in the British lines sealed on its southern edge, and not one inch of ground was conceded to the enemy. In a dispatch Haig praised his role in saving the channel ports. As part of the Fifth Army Jeudwine then led his division in the final advance to victory from August to November 1918. 
After the armistice (11 November 1918) the 55th division marched to Cologne and, in March 1919, became the Lancashire division of the British army of the Rhine -- a signal honour. Jeudwine served as chief of staff at Cologne from August to October 1919, and then returned home on being specially selected to command the 5th division, then stationed at the Curragh, Kildare, Ireland. After the sharp upturn in violence in November 1920 the government planned a limited introduction of martial law. Jeudwine, who in the absence on leave of Sir Nevil Macready served as commander-in-chief, Ireland, canvassed the generals in Ireland and stated firmly that the army advised its application to the entire country. The proclamation of martial law, signed on 10 December, applied to just four counties (later eight), a limitation that undermined its objective, especially in containing the flow of arms. The soldiers' view was borne out when it was abandoned within six months. Jeudwine remained in Ireland until July 1922 and wrote the official 'Record of the Rebellion in Ireland in 1920-21 and the Part Played by the Army in Dealing with it' (1922). 
After another short spell on half-pay Jeudwine was made lieutenant-general in January 1923, and in October 1923 became director-general of the Territorial Army, a post to which he was particularly well suited after his wartime experiences with the Lancashire territorials. In October 1927 he retired from the army after forty-seven years of service. He was created CB in 1915, KCB in 1918, and KBE in 1922. Judy, as he was known in the army, took his profession seriously, and wrote for the military journals. In 1928-9 he lectured to the Staff College on the fighting at Givenchy in 1918. He died at his home, Glencairn, Camberley, Surrey, on 2 December 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 98115


Prichard, Hesketh Vernon Hesketh- (1876-1922), explorer and marksman, was born at Jhansi, India, on 17 November 1876, the son of Lieutenant Hesketh Brodrick Prichard (1851-1876) of the King's Own Scottish Borderers, and his wife, Katherine O'Brien, 'nee' Ryall (1852-1935). On the premature death of his father (six weeks before his son was born) he was brought to Britain, where he attended preparatory schools at Gorey in Jersey, Rugby, and Nuneaton, from where he won a scholarship to Fettes College. His intention was to pursue a career in the army, but he was prevented from doing so by the discovery that he had a weak heart. He was, however, outwardly fit, notably tall (6 feet 4 inches -- 2 inches less than his father) and a fine sportsman. After making a start at studying law he began the shooting and exploring expeditions, and the writing, that brought him worldwide fame. 
From 1897 Hesketh-Prichard was a regular contributor to the 'Cornhill Magazine', forming a close friendship with the magazine's editor, Reginald Smith. Much of his writing was undertaken in an unusual literary partnership with his mother, Katherine (or Kate) O'Brien Hesketh-Prichard. Together they wrote a series of swashbuckling stories, published in the 'Badminton Magazine' from 1898 and accumulated in 'The Chronicles of Don Q' (1904), a Zorro-like Spanish brigand. Mother and son, who sometimes wrote as E. and H. Heron, also contributed twelve ghost stories to 'Pearson's Monthly Magazine', published as a book in 1899. In 1913 he was chairman of the Authors' Society. 
Hesketh-Prichard's early travel writing was undertaken on behalf of Arthur Pearson, the owner of the 'Daily Express'. 'Where Black Rules White: a Journey Across and About Hayti' (1900), described his observation of vaudoux (voodoo) rites on the island, whose economic decline and political corruption he discussed in terms of the unfitness of its inhabitants for self-government. Pearson next sent him on an expedition to Patagonia (1900-01) to look for a reported giant ground sloth, the mylodon. He penetrated the Andes further than any western explorer to date, but found no sign of the creature. His experiences, which inspired parts of Arthur Conan Doyle's 'Lost World', were recounted in 'Through the Heart of Patagonia' (1902). 
An extremely accomplished rifle shot and noted big-game hunter, Hesketh-Prichard travelled widely on shooting expeditions, including Newfoundland and Labrador with John Guile Millais in 1903 and E. G. Wynyard in 1904 to hunt caribou. A subsequent expedition to the interior of Labrador with Alfred and Geoffrey Gathorne-Hardy, through regions where previous explorers had perished, was described in 'Through Trackless Labrador' (1911). He also hunted elk in Norway and moufflon in Sardinia. He married, on 1 June 1908, Lady Elizabeth Grimston (1885-1975), daughter of James Walter Grimston, third earl of Verulam, and with whom he had a daughter and two sons. Part of their honeymoon was spent in hunting a bull grey seal. He nevertheless deplored the indiscriminate clubbing of seals, for negligible commercial benefit, that had brought them to the verge of extinction in the Outer Hebrides, and was a prime mover in securing the 'Grey Seals Protection Act' of 1914, legislation that forbade the killing of seals during the breeding season. He was also a keen ornithologist, and promoted legislation to protect wild birds by forbidding the importation of feathers and bird skins for use in the fashion industry. He was made a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 
Hesketh-Prichard was also a handy amateur county cricketer, playing for Hampshire from 1900 to 1913, as a fast bowler with an average of just under twenty runs per wicket. He took 339 first-class wickets. During his best period he was selected three years running (1903-5) for the Gentlemen against the Players. 
On the outbreak of war, aged thirty-seven, Hesketh-Prichard immediately offered his services to the army but could only secure a commission on the special list as an assistant press officer on the general staff. He made his first visit to the western front in March 1915, and reported on the clear domination of German sniping over the British lines, demoralizing trench-bound forces by inflicting steady losses. He was attached to general headquarters British expeditionary force in May 1915, working in the intelligence department as an officer in charge of war correspondents. In this free-ranging capacity he was able to observe the sniping efforts of several British units in the days before there were any 'sniping officers'. Carrying with him several excellent rifles and telescopic sights of his own, he began by offering to correct the telescopic sights then widely misused by otherwise good marksmen. The improvement in sniping was so marked that he came to the attention of a series of far-sighted commanders who wanted to make use of his skill. Sir Charles Monro, general officer commanding the Third Army, was one of the first to employ him. After some time attached to the 7th corps, he went to the 10th corps, where Colonel Langford Lloyd had started a telescopic sight school. His friend John Buchan enlisted the help of such influential figures as Lord Haldane and John St Loe Strachey, editor of 'The Spectator', to raise funds for the purchase of sights and rifles for use at the front. 
Working out of several brigade headquarters, Hesketh-Prichard encouraged the forming of sniping sections, where snipers and observers were paired to work together. The rapid improvement in the sniping skills of the Third Army led Lieutenant-General Haking, general officer commanding the 11th corps, First Army, to ask for his services, to lecture his officers on the subject and to correct the telescopic sights in the corps. As a result the first proper School of Sniping, Observation, and Scouting was set up by the First Army at Linghem in France. Hesketh-Prichard had a staff of six, and trained officers as instructors to return to their units and spread the doctrine. The school was officially recognized by the War Office, with a proper establishment of instructors and craftsmen, on 24 November 1916. The staff of the school were themselves regularly sent into the front-line trenches so that their work was kept acutely relevant at all times. 
The important work done in collecting intelligence of a generally useful nature by the observers working with snipers came to be recognized. Special classes were developed to extend these skills. The smallest anomaly could reveal something important. In one famous incident the presence of a particularly contented cat helped to identify a German unit headquarters, which was duly shelled to destruction. 
By the middle of the war the whole business of sniping in the British expeditionary force had been placed on such professional lines that it is generally acknowledged that the erstwhile German superiority in that field of activity was overturned. The development of the role of observer and scout contributed to British successes in patrol work, both in dominating no man's land between the trenches and when the war of movement was restored in 1918. 
For his own sniping work Hesketh-Prichard was awarded the Military Cross in October 1916; for his work in running the First Army school he was appointed DSO; for his work in training some good sniper teams in the Portuguese corps he was awarded the military order of Avis. He was twice mentioned in dispatches. He was promoted major in November 1916. The excessive overwork damaged his health, and illness took its toll in 1917-18. He told the story of his methods in 'Sniping in France' (1920). 
Hesketh-Prichard died at Gorhambury, St Albans, Hertfordshire, on 14 June 1922, almost certainly from blood poisoning picked up during his war service. His funeral took place at St Albans; after cremation at Golders Green his ashes were placed in the Grimston family vault at St Michael's, St Albans. His widow became woman of the bedchamber to Queen Mary (1924-36), and married in 1927 Major Thomas Augustus Motion, master of foxhounds. The stories he had written with his mother (who outlived him) were made into a film, 'Don Q Son of Zorro' (1925) starring Douglas Fairbanks. His son Alfgar Cecil Giles Hesketh-Prichard (1916-1944) inherited his sense of adventure and, serving with the Special Operations Executive, died during a mission in Austria in December 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 98118


Uniacke, Sir Herbert Crofton Campbell (1866-1934), army officer, was born on 4 December 1866, the eldest son of Crofton James Uniacke (1841-1928), a member of an Irish landowning family settled in Halifax, Nova Scotia, who attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the army service corps, and his wife, Frances Elizabeth (died 1919), whose father John Campbell was lieutenant-colonel of the 60th rifles. After attending the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned in the Royal Artillery in 1885 and promoted captain in 1896. On 21 March 1899 he married Minnie Mary (1867-1947), daughter of Thomas Wild, with whom he had two sons. Further promotions followed, to major in 1901 and lieutenant-colonel in 1913. His early career was marked by a lack of campaign experience, and an enthusiasm for shooting, riding, and polo. 
In October 1913 Uniacke was appointed chief instructor of the school of gunnery, training Royal Horse Artillery and Royal Field Artillery officers. He seems to have spent August to November 1914 training territorial force and new army officers before proceeding to France in November 1914 with the 8th division as commander of the 5th brigade of the Royal Horse Artillery. Both formations were gatherings of scattered imperial garrisons. In February 1915, after a few months holding the line with minimal action, he was promoted brigadier-general to command 2nd heavy artillery reserve group. The heavy artillery had two missions, bombarding trenches and counter-battery fire at German guns. Bombardments were largely determined by the infantry, who would be in harm's way, and thus by division, corps, or even army commanders. Counter-battery fire was mainly left to artillerymen, for whom Uniacke developed new techniques. He produced a map showing what grid squares his batteries could hit; he put an aeroplane up to watch for German activity; he developed 'zone calls' that let the aeroplane signal simply what sector and what activity, speeding up communications and thus the response time. He also took part in training, chivvying the territorial force and new army units to a higher standard. 
Uniacke mainly spent 1915 in quiet sectors, although he took part in the battle of Neuve Chapelle. In mid-November 1915 he was promoted to command the artillery of the 5th corps, and in March 1916 he changed to the 3rd corps on the Somme sector, as part of a policy to move better officers to the Somme. He oversaw the bombardment, counter-battery work, and barrage planning for the 3rd corps. In such a large operation his autonomy was sharply limited; he could do little more than co-ordinate his subordinates and make sure that they would fit into army-wide plans. 
At the end of July 1916 Uniacke was promoted to major-general, Royal Artillery of Reserve (later Fifth) Army. At first he was closely watched by Sir Hubert Gough (commander) and Neill Malcolm (chief of staff). As Uniacke proved himself, they gave him more leeway. For the first month the Reserve Army was largely supporting the Fourth Army's continuing attacks with counter-battery fire. Uniacke also demanded daily reports, not from a love of paperwork but to guide his subordinates, to systematize and focus their thinking (in 1917, once he was satisfied with his subordinates, the requirement ended). Once Haig shifted the attacks to Reserve Army's sector, Uniacke had more work co-ordinating bombardments and infantry support. He accepted the Royal Artillery ethos that artillery was a supporting arm, not a combat arm, and that in a combined-arms war the artillery could not expect to dominate it. He spent much time spreading 'best practices' about tactics and techniques, relaying both successes and failures. For the winter of 1916-17 he developed and oversaw a 2,000,000-shell programme of harassing fire and local attacks. 
In March 1917 Uniacke was temporarily assigned to the Third Army. The commander, Sir Edmund Allenby, and his artillery commander, Major-General Arthur Holland, had devised an innovative and risky plan to sacrifice thorough artillery preparations to achieve surprise. The plan was regarded by some in the high command as questionable, and Haig transferred Holland as a warning to Allenby. Uniacke was brought in as a safe pair of hands and rapidly had an effective traditional plan. Gough rushed both planning and execution of Fifth Army's part of the offensive, resulting in heavy losses to gain the ruins of Bullecourt. 
The Fifth Army's next battle was at Ypres. Gough's plans were optimistic; he cited first-day success in most attacks by the British expeditionary force as a reason to plunge ahead rather than tackling smaller chunks. Uniacke first had to fight a counter-battery struggle (which would only drive the Germans back, not destroy them), bombard the German positions (including pillboxes built during the British preparations), and organize the barrage. The Fifth Army did gain ground on 31 July, but pushed too far and German counter-attacks regained any key ground lost. The next weeks were spent in a series of over-hasty attacks that did little good; improving British tactics could not overcome German geographical advantages. In September Haig switched his emphasis to the Second Army and Uniacke was again left to organize supporting fire. 
For the winter of 1917-18 the British expeditionary force assumed a defensive posture and emphasized training. Uniacke threw himself into this, switching the emphasis from technical gunnery to tactics, including practice in mobile warfare. He also wrote a 103 page report on the lessons of 1917, concluding 'the final decisive factor is the bayonet of the Infantry soldier', which drove home his belief that artillery was vitally important but still a supporting arm in combined-arms warfare. In early 1918 the Fifth Army was moved to the Somme sector, but lacked the labour to build new defence-in-depth positions. On 21 March 1918 almost 10,000 German guns and mortars blasted the British positions; spearheaded by storm troopers, the German infantry nearly broke the allied line. The Fifth Army's only option was a fighting retreat, where the training in mobile warfare was useful, but after two weeks Haig lost confidence in Gough and Fifth Army headquarters, replacing them with Sir Henry Rawlinson and the Fourth Army. Uniacke thought Gough had been badly treated and vowed 'to stick by Goughie'. Uniacke spent much of his time at the Fifth Army artillery school until, in a 'd -- d impertinence', Fourth Army seized it (diary, Uniacke papers). 
On 9 July 1918 Uniacke, who had been mentioned in dispatches ten times during his service on the western front, was made deputy inspector-general for training under Sir Ivor Maxse. He continued to emphasize combined-arms work and advocated a central artillery school, which in 1920 led to the creation of the Royal School of Artillery, Larkhill. He was recognized by his contemporaries for his tactical and technical expertise and strength of character, giving his honest opinion to superiors. Liddell Hart regarded his contribution as central to the evolution of artillery tactics on the western front. 
In 1919 Uniacke became commander of the lines of communication during the demobilization and was knighted (KCMG; KCB 1926). In 1920 he took command of 1st Indian division and Rawalpindi district for four years. He then held various largely ceremonial positions (including colonel commandant, Royal Artillery, and lieutenant of the Tower of London) until retirement in 1932. He oversaw the erection of the Royal Artillery memorial at Hyde Park Corner, edited the Royal Artillery war commemoration book to tell the human side of the war, and was active in the Old Contemptibles Association. He died in his sleep at his home, Rivermead, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, on 14 May 1934. His funeral took place at Marlow parish church. His two sons were both commissioned in the Royal Artillery and served in the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 98119


Strickland, Sir (Edward) Peter (1869-1951), army officer, was born at Snitterfield, Warwickshire, on 3 August 1869, the third son of Major Frederick William Strickland (1814/15-1885) of the Warwickshire regiment and his second wife, Frances Annie (Fannie), 'nee' Pattison. Educated at Warwick School, he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Norfolk regiment on 10 November 1888, before joining the 2nd battalion, with whom he saw active service in the Burma campaign (1887-1889). He was promoted lieutenant on 29 April 1891. 
In common with many officers of his generation Strickland served with the Egyptian army, from 1 April 1896 to 31 March 1903, participating in the Dongola expedition (1896), the Berber expedition (1897), and the Nile expedition (1898), where he took part in the battles of Atbara and Omdurman. In 1899 he also took part in operations in south Kordofan, under the command of Francis Reginald Wingate, on the White Nile against Ahmed Fedil's army, for which he was appointed DSO. He was promoted captain in 1899, and was appointed brevet major. He returned to colonial service in Africa on 3 February 1906, joining the West African Frontier Force, and saw service later that year in operations in Northern Nigeria. Promoted major on 8 September 1908, he assumed command of the Northern Nigeria regiment in 1909, returning to regimental duty in England in 1913. 
Promoted lieutenant-colonel, on 1 June 1914 Strickland was given command of the 1st battalion, the Manchester regiment, part of the Jullundur brigade in the Lahore division of the Indian army, which along with other units of the Indian corps arrived in France in September 1914. In December 1914 his battalion was involved in heavy close-quarter fighting near the village of Givenchy, and though they took several German trenches they had to retreat in the face of a co-ordinated German advance, on 21 and 22 December. He took command of the Jullundur brigade at the start of 1915, and led it through the battle of Neuve Chapelle, and at the second battle of Ypres in April 1915. He remained in France after the departure of the Lahore division and was given command of the 98th brigade, 33rd division, at the end of 1915. 
In June 1916 Strickland took command of the 1st division in succession to Major-General Sir Arthur Holland, following the latter's failure to capture Hulluch during the battle of Loos. Strickland led his division through some of the hardest fighting of the war, in the battles of the Somme, in the defence of Nieuport against a surprise attack by the Germans in July 1917, in which units of the 1st division incurred heavy losses, and in April 1918, at Lys, where it held the German advance after the almost complete destruction of two Portuguese divisions. Finally Strickland's division formed part of the Fourth Army in the allied advance of August to November 1918. 
On 17 July 1918 Strickland married Barbara Cresswell (1884-1977), widow of Captain Francis Joseph Cresswell, a friend and fellow officer in the Norfolk regiment; she was the daughter of Martin William Browne ffolkes. They had a daughter, and there were two daughters from his wife's previous marriage. 
Twice wounded during his period in France, Strickland emerged from the First World War with a reputation as a capable and competent commander. He was created KCB in 1919 and took part in the occupation of Germany as the commander of the western division of the British army of the Rhine from March to September 1919. In November 1919 he was sent to Ireland and took command of the 6th division, which was responsible for supporting the Royal Irish Constabulary in Munster and in Kilkenny and Wexford. As the Anglo-Irish conflict intensified in 1920, the British army became a key target of the Irish Republican Army (IRA), with Strickland's division bearing the brunt of the fighting on the British side. 
During 1920 and 1921 Strickland's troops in Ireland fought a counter-insurgency campaign that proved to be a model for future British twentieth-century campaigns. One of the innovations in his command was the development of British flying columns, termed active service platoons, to conduct small-unit operations against the IRA. He faced real physical danger in Ireland, survived an assassination attempt on King Street in Cork in September 1920, while at Clonbannin in March 1921 an IRA attack on a British column, with the intention of targeting Strickland, resulted in the death of the commanding officer of its Kerry brigade, Hanway Cumming. 
Unofficial reprisals and breaches of military discipline were a problem for Strickland from the beginning, with relations between the soldiers and the inhabitants of certain towns, such as Fermoy and Queenstown, being poor. He warned units in Fermoy and Queenstown over their future conduct, and reportedly even threatened the commanding officer of the Cameron Highlanders with dismissal if any further outbreak occurred. He expelled auxiliary members of the Royal Irish Constabulary from the city of Cork after they had burned a substantial part of the city centre on the night of 11 December 1920 in retaliation for an ambush. He was commissioned to investigate the Cork incident, but his report, blaming the auxiliaries, was suppressed by Lloyd George's cabinet in February 1921. His private papers record his bitterness with the British government over the conduct of the campaign, and the loss of life on all sides. 
Martial law was proclaimed in four counties of Ireland on 11 December 1920 and was extended to a further four counties on 4 January 1921, an area corresponding to that under the control of Strickland's 6th division in Munster, Kilkenny, and Wexford. As military governor in these counties, where a state of armed insurrection was declared to be in place, Strickland became responsible not just for military operations but also the administration of law and order. He was empowered to give orders for military courts to try offenders, who were liable to the death penalty for the unauthorized possession of arms. The vast majority of the executions of members of the IRA following courts martial were carried out in his command. His powers were the subject of legal challenge in July 1921 when the truce ended armed activity. As the last soldier to exercise control of a substantial area of the United Kingdom under martial law and to impose the death penalty for rebellion against the crown, Strickland occupies a notable place in constitutional history. 
Strickland remained in Ireland until May 1922, after which he assumed command of the 2nd division at Aldershot in 1923. He was created KBE in 1923, his wife also being made DBE in recognition of her public services during the previous three years of her husband's service in Ireland. He was promoted lieutenant-general in 1926. In 1927 he went to Egypt, to become general officer commanding the British forces in Egypt, a force charged with the protection of the Suez Canal. He retired from the British army in 1931, and died at his home, the Old Hall, Snettisham, Norfolk, on 24 June 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 98130


Ryan, Sarah (1724-1768), Methodist preacher, was born on 20 October 1724, though the place of her birth and the identity of her parents are unknown. She was one of six children and at the time of her birth the family lived in 'comfort... [and] plenty' ('Life', 3). However, a combination of her father's drinking and bad business decisions forced her into domestic service at the age of ten. In her twenties her life was dominated by a series of unhappy marriages, poverty, and debt. Her first husband was a bigamist, whom she met while helping her mother to run a shop. In the years that followed she simultaneously 'married' Mr Ryan, an Irish Roman Catholic trader who was frequently away at sea, and Solomon Benneken, an Italian Jew. The marriage to Ryan was abusive, and she later recalled his 'barbarous treatment' (ibid., 26) and her struggles to pay the couple's debts by taking in washing and needlework, before once more going into service. 
Sarah Ryan's introduction to Methodism took place about 1754, when she heard John Wesley preach and felt that 'all the time something said in my heart 'this is the truth I shall live & die by it'' ('Life', 36). She attended Spitalfields Chapel, London, with the influential Methodist preacher Sarah Crosby, and in the mid-1750s she lived with Crosby in lodgings in Moorfields. In 1757 Ryan was appointed by Wesley as housekeeper at the New Room in Bristol, with some responsibility for overseeing Kingswood School. She commented to Wesley, 'I have considered well your proposal, and it appears to me to be the will of God which my soul desires to do' (diary, 3). It was a controversial appointment, given Ryan's past and her lack of experience and education. But her success in the role was evident, as Wesley observed that, under Ryan's care, Kingswood was 'a blessing to all that are therein and an honour to the whole body of Methodists' ('Journal', 4.247). Wesley's readiness to overlook Ryan's past was consistent with the intimacy of their relationship, exemplified by his comment that 'I cannot think of you without thinking of God. Others often lead me to Him; but it is, as it were, going round about: you bring me straight into His presence' ('Letters', 4.4). Their correspondence is remarkable for the equality of their exchange on spiritual matters. Wesley published a number of these letters in the 'Arminian Magazine' (1781-2), implicitly establishing Ryan as a model of Christian life. Nonetheless, Ryan's past did present problems, particularly within the Wesleys' turbulent marriage. At a Methodist conference in Bristol, while Ryan was serving dinner to some seventy preachers, Mary Wesley allegedly called out 'see that whore, who is serving you! She hath three Husbands now alive' (Fletcher, 'Further account', 35). 
Ryan left Bristol in 1762 due to ill health, and began her association with Mary Bosanquet (later Fletcher), which would shape the rest of her life. In 1763 they established an orphanage at The Cedars, Leytonstone, Essex, using Bosanquet's legacy from her grandmother. Sarah (Sally) Lawrence, Ryan's four-year-old orphaned niece, came with them and continued to live with Bosanquet until her death in 1800, becoming an influential Methodist class leader in her own right. In five years the orphanage housed thirty-five children and thirty-four adults (including the preacher Sarah Crosby) and was modelled on Kingswood School, educating the children in literacy, religion, and domestic tasks. Despite hostility from the local community and growing financial pressures, the women also established regular Methodist meetings. After preaching at Leytonstone, Wesley commented 'Oh what a house of God is here! Not only for decency and order, but for the life and power of religion! I am afraid there are very few such to be found in all the King's dominions' ('Journal', 5.195). Bosanquet later recorded in her autobiography that Ryan was the 'main spring... in all the active part of this undertaking' (autobiography, pt 2, 26). By 1768 Ryan was in poor health and the community was struggling financially. The family relocated to Cross Hall, Yorkshire, but Ryan did not live to see the community re-established and died in rented lodgings in Gildersome, near Morley, on 17 August 1768. She was buried in the churchyard of Leeds Old Church. 
Following her death Ryan's spiritual life was documented in fragments in the 'Arminian Magazine', including passages from her life, a selection of correspondence, and extracts from her diary. Her unorthodox personal life was edited out of these histories, though her reputation as 'a thoughtless, flirting trigamist' (Tyerman, 2.289) has been persistent. Nonetheless, the account of her life dictated to Bosanquet in 1767 both fleshes out her history and provides rare access to the subjective spiritual experience of an eighteenth-century woman preacher. 


@@@@@


doc= 98131


Freeman, Ann (1797-1826), Methodist Bible Christian preacher, was born on 24 June 1797 in Northlew, Devon, the fourth of thirteen children of William and Grace Mason, a Devonshire farming family. At fifteen she was apprenticed as a dressmaker, before the family moved to a farm at Northcott in Sutcombe. It was here that she joined the Northcott Methodist Society with her sister Mary, which led to a rift in the family and the sisters' temporary exile from home. Within eighteen months of their return they had converted their mother, sister, and four brothers to Methodism. The radical Methodist sect of the Bible Christians (which broke away from Wesleyan Methodism in 1815 under the leadership of William O'Bryan and James Thorne) was highly influential in south-west England during the first quarter of the nineteenth century. Throughout 1816 Ann Mason heard various Bible Christian preachers, including Thorne, and attended their fifth quarterly meeting, which was held in her aunt's barn at Alsworthy on 1 January 1817. After the meeting she separated from the Wesleyan Methodists to become a class leader and preacher with the Bible Christians. She abandoned dressmaking in March 1818 and over the next year travelled as an itinerant preacher in Devon and Cornwall, speaking in the open air and walking over thirty miles a day, despite suffering from respiratory problems. She frequently experienced hostility to her preaching and in Brentor in June 1818 she recalled 'the parsons and parish-officers have searched for me, as though I was come to destroy the land' (Freeman, 12). 
Methodist women preachers, such as Mary Fletcher and Sarah Crosby, played a crucial role in the eighteenth-century evangelical revival and were acknowledged by John Wesley as having an ''extraordinary' call' ('Letters', 5.257). However, Wesley's death in 1791 and the consolidation of the Methodist movement into 'a hierarchical, church-like organization' (Valenze, 20) resulted in a decline in women's status and restrictions on their preaching. As a consequence many women broke with the Wesleyan Methodists and joined groups like the Bible Christians, Primitive Methodists, and Independent Methodists, who remained committed to revivalist techniques. By 1824 about 30 per cent of Bible Christian preachers were women, although their influence declined during the first decade of the movement. Within this permissive atmosphere Ann Mason was a determined advocate of women's preaching and lamented that 'many females are kept in bondage by those who say, 'we suffer not a woman to teach'; thus quoting Paul's words, and not rightly applying them' (Freeman, 14). 
The first conference of the Bible Christians took place at Badash, Cornwall, in August 1819. Ann Mason wrote to the conference and met their leader William O'Bryan, correcting him on the doctrine of perfectionism and telling him that 'I knew his soul was not thus saved, and begged he would expect it' (Freeman, 25). Her willingness to question male figures of authority on theological matters continued throughout her career. In 1823 she received an appointment to London, where the novelty of female preachers attracted crowds to her meetings that took place in a converted billiard room on the Strand. On 28 April 1824 she addressed about a thousand people on a hill in Brighton, leading the Brighton 'Herald' to comment that she 'delivers discourses with animation; she speaks fluently and in tolerably correct language' (Bourne, 'Bible Christians', 161). In London she re-established her acquaintance with Henry Freeman, a Devon preacher whom she had first met in 1820. The relationship seemed to accelerate Ann Mason's separation from the Bible Christians and the couple wrote to the conference in June explaining their desire to marry, their intended visit to Ireland, and their doubts over the sacraments (which in effect signalled their separation from the society). Their marriage took place on 9 August 1824. Writing to her sister a year later Ann commented 'we live and love, doing the will of God' (Freeman, 214). The couple sometimes preached together, but Ann Freeman generally travelled alone or with a female companion. 
The Freemans toured Ireland during 1824-5 and, despite frequent attacks, preached in the streets to Roman Catholics, Anglicans, and dissenters. By this time Freeman had contracted tuberculosis, but nevertheless she continued to attend several meetings each day, often miles apart. She returned to England at the beginning of 1826 to stay at her parents' house in Northcott, and died on 7 March 1826. She was buried at the parish burial ground of Sutcombe on 13 March. Freeman's journal, letters, and poems were reproduced in her 'Memoir' which was edited and published by her husband later that year. The memoir provides an insight into a lifelong struggle to accommodate Ann Freeman's personal faith within formalized religion and her commitment to independent preaching, worship, and popular evangelism. 


@@@@@


doc= 98132


Tooth, Mary (1778-1843), Methodist preacher, was born on 30 May 1778 in St Mary's Row, Moseley, Worcestershire. She was one of nine children, but only Mary and her two sisters, Rosamund and Elizabeth, survived into adulthood. Her parents, about whom little is known except her mother's maiden name (Whittaker) and date of death (1803), were not religious and the Christian influence in her early life came from her grandparents. Tooth's connection with the parish of Madeley in Shropshire and the influential Methodist preacher Mary Fletcher ('nee' Bosanquet), wife of the Revd John Fletcher, began in December 1795. She was offered a job in Madeley at a school run by Mrs Micklewright, whom she met through friends of her mother. In July 1796 she joined the local Methodist society and 'found here a people with whom I wish to live and die' (journal, B, 95). Recalling some years later the effect of Mary Fletcher's preaching, she noted 'my soul felt her words distill as dew upon the mow'd grass' (ibid., 49). Tooth remained at the school for two years, before moving to Birmingham, where she attended St Mary's Church and Cherry Street Chapel. Mrs Micklewright's son had proposed marriage and Tooth did not feel able to accept, so her sister Rosamund was sent to take her place at the school. Tooth left home once more in March 1798 to work at Miss Luton's school in Shifnal. From here she visited Madeley to worship at the weekends, establishing a close friendship with Mary Fletcher and her spiritual protegee Sarah (Sally) Lawrence, before moving to Madeley permanently about October 1799. Tooth noted in her journal, 'I was but once parted for a day & night from my beloved Mrs Fletcher for more than 15 years that I resided with her' (ibid., 11). As Mary Fletcher's health declined, Tooth took on more responsibilities in the parish, acting as a class leader and preacher. 
Following Mary Fletcher's death in 1815, Tooth protected and perpetuated the spiritual legacy of John and Mary Fletcher. As Fletcher's executrix, Tooth followed her instructions to pass her spiritual autobiography to John Wesley's biographer Henry Moore. Fletcher's autobiography was spliced together with entries from her spiritual diary and the work was published in 1817, going through twenty editions in the first fifty years (Brown, 109). Tooth also composed a 'Letter to the inhabitants of Madeley on the death of Mary Fletcher', published by Zachariah Taft in 1825. In this public letter she recalled her response to Fletcher's death: 'I clung to the casket of the saint, knelt down by the side of it, and cried to him who had just now called home the spirit of my friend, that the mantle might rest on me' (Taft, 1.35). Tooth enthusiastically took up the 'mantle', acting as a spiritual mentor to the children and grandchildren of those who first found God through the class leadership of Mary Fletcher. She left the vicarage and moved into a nearby house in May 1816, transferring the communion table from the church at Madeley and the clock from Fletcher's vicarage barn to her own upper room reserved for public meetings (journal, N, 6 Oct 1841). 
Tooth was in an unorthodox position, continuing her work into the 1840s despite the Methodist conference's prohibitions against women preachers from 1803. She also considered herself a member of the Church of England (notwithstanding Methodism's secession from the established church in 1795). She established Madeley as a site of pilgrimage and many Methodists were eager to connect themselves with a parish that had played a central role in the formation and proliferation of their faith. Tooth was the custodian who dispensed and displayed relics, such as Mary Fletcher's handkerchief and John Fletcher's 'Bible'. She presented this role as an extension of her ministry: 'none come to see me who do not profess respect for the name of 'Fletcher' they live yea they live forever & their works do follow them' (journal, M, 1 April 1839). 
Tooth remained highly active into her sixties -- attending missionary, temperance, and sewing meetings, visiting the sick, and collecting for the poor. By the end of her life poor health meant that she was no longer able to travel, but she led three weekly classes of nearly eighty members in her home up until her death on 15 November 1843. Tooth's status as an anomaly within nineteenth-century Methodism and her connection to a former era are evident in her obituary in the 'Wesleyan-Methodist Magazine' (1843): 'though Miss Tooth's habits and modes of acting were in many respects very peculiar, yet the evident piety she possessed, and the circumstance of her having stood in such a relation to Mrs. Fletcher... caused her to acquire great influence; and her loss will be extensively felt.' Her unpublished journal, which sporadically covers the period 1799 to 1842, provides a rare example of the persistence of eighteenth-century Methodist practices throughout the first half of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 98133


Holland, Margaret, duchess of Clarence (b. in or before 1388, d. 1439), wealthy widow and monastic patron, was born before 17 April 1388 ('CIPM', 22), the daughter of Thomas Holland, fifth earl of Kent (1350-1397), and Alice Fitzalan ('c'.1350-1416), daughter of Richard (II) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel. Her father's family enjoyed increasing prestige and wealth through the favour of Richard II, but suffered considerably after the usurpation of Henry Bolingbroke in 1399. Her brother Thomas Holland, who succeeded his father as earl of Kent in 1397, and her uncle John Holland, first earl of Huntingdon, were both executed in January 1400 for their involvement in a plot to seize Henry IV and his sons at Windsor. Margaret's own fortunes were at first also closely linked to those of the Ricardian regime, but ultimately turned out much better than those of her male relatives. She married John Beaufort (c.1371-1410), the eldest bastard son of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and Katherine Swynford, at some point before he became marquess of Dorset and Somerset on 28 September 1397, most likely about the time of his legitimation -- papal authorization was issued on 1 September 1396, and confirmed by royal patent on 9 February 1397. The legitimation of the Beauforts constituted part of a 'rapprochement' between Richard II and his powerful uncle, and for the latter's children facilitated a rapid rise to prominence that was underlined by John Beaufort's acquiring first the title of earl of Somerset, and then the new dignity of marquess. But although he showed his support for Richard II in September 1397 by bringing formal accusations of treason against Gloucester, Warwick, and Arundel, three of the lords appellant of 1387, Margaret's husband also prospered following the Lancastrian coup -- he had the advantage of being a half-brother of Henry IV, and was perhaps more politically astute than his wife's Holland relatives. He remained an earl and served on the royal council, anticipating the political and military power later enjoyed by the second and fourth of the sons born to Margaret and himself, John Beaufort (1404-1444) and Edmund Beaufort (c.1406-1455), who also consecutively inherited their father's title of Somerset. 
The death of John Beaufort on 16 March 1410 only served to enhance the standing of his widow. The vicissitudes of Margaret's life had already made her wealthy; the deaths of her eldest brother John in 1400 and then that of her only surviving brother, Edmund Holland, seventh earl of Kent, in 1408, left her with a fifth of the revenues of the Kent inheritance. Now the passing of Beaufort left her with almost all his estates, and even after his eldest son, Henry, attained his majority she still retained a third of them. Unsurprisingly, her wealth appears to have been an important factor in her second marriage, to Thomas of Lancaster (1387-1421), second son of Henry IV. Before this union Thomas had received no title of his own and had been relatively poor for a king's son; indeed, so obvious was the mismatch of wealth that Margaret's brother-in-law, Bishop Henry Beaufort, fearing that the inheritance of his nephews might be siphoned off by Thomas, intervened to delay the marriage by nearly two years. The first papal bull authorizing the marriage was issued on 16 August 1410 but the wedding only took place in May 1412. Thomas was made duke of Clarence on 9 July 1412, but his income remained insignificant compared with that enjoyed by Margaret -- the latter amounted to about $1500 per annum in 1418-21, compared with the $300 or so that her husband received from his own estates. When Margaret travelled to France to join Thomas in November 1419 she was accompanied by a retinue of 143 people, including nineteen knights, ten priests, eleven sumptermen to oversee her baggage train, and four choristers. It was as a great lady that Margaret attended the ratification of the treaty of Troyes on 21 May 1420, and attended Catherine of Valois, then newly married to Henry V, in Paris at the end of the year. 
Thomas died at the battle of Bauge on 22 March 1421, at which Margaret's sons John and Thomas Beaufort were captured. She had had no children from her marriage to Clarence, but remained a widow (about 1427 she undertook not to remarry) of stature and wealth for the rest of her life, with a landed income that at her death was estimated at nearly $1000 per annum. If Margaret's attitudes, interests, and influence are entirely unknown during her youth and married life, it is at least possible to discern something of her personality as a middle-aged and then elderly widow (she was reported to be at least thirty-six in 1424). A picture emerges of a woman who, in the wake of the family tragedy of Bauge, wished to avoid loneliness, and also to find new purpose in her final years. She may well have enjoyed the friendship of Clarence's hostage, the young Jean, count of Angouleme, who was most often held at Maxey Castle, Northamptonshire, where she spent a considerable amount of time. Friendship did not, however, prevent her hindering the count's attempts to secure his freedom, since she hoped to use him as a bargaining chip to obtain the release of her son John Beaufort from French captivity. 
Of greater significance, however, is Margaret's attachment to the Bridgettine monastery of Syon near Isleworth, founded in 1415 by Henry V. By 30 September 1428, when she received papal permission to receive the priests of the house in her own residence, Margaret was evidently spending much of her time living close to the house, and as its patron she bought at least seven books for the monastery, including a fine 'Bible'. This bond with her brother-in-law's prestigious foundation, very much a symbol of Lancastrian monarchy, demonstrated her commitment to the dynasty into which she had married. But in addition to these secular considerations, her relationship with the Bridgettine priests, especially Simon Wynter, suggests a desire for guidance and, beyond this, for religious friendship, as she approached death. Wynter dedicated his 'Life of St Jerome' to her and focused its content on the protection the saint provided for his devotees in the passage to the afterlife, while Margaret repaid this solicitude by obtaining a papal licence (granted on 30 November 1429) for him to leave Syon on account of his infirmity, and instead to take up residence at St Albans Abbey, with its less rigorous Benedictine observance. She was herself admitted to the fraternity of the abbey during that year. 
Margaret died in the vicinity of Syon, probably on 31 December 1439, and was buried in Canterbury Cathedral, in a chapel dedicated initially to St Anne, but subsequently to St Michael, that she had had built at the east end of the south-west transept. Its glazing, filled with heraldic glass stressing her own dynastic significance, was completed at least a year before she died. In the centre of the chapel a marble tomb chest supports three superb alabaster effigies, representing Margaret between her two husbands, Beaufort on her left and Clarence on her right. It is not known how far, if at all, the design and furnishings of the chapel reflected her personal taste, but in its visible magnificence it undeniably provided an appropriate resting place for a great lady. 


@@@@@


doc= 98134


Wilkinson, Norman (1878-1971), marine and poster artist and creator of dazzle camouflage, was born on 24 November 1878 at 2 Eastbourne Terrace, Cambridge, one of the four children of Thomas Collins Wilkinson ('b'. 1853), music teacher, who left the family in the boy's childhood, and his wife, Emma Johnson, 'nee' Lole (1851-1942). He was educated at Berkhamsted School, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, and St Paul's Cathedral choir school, London, which he left aged sixteen to study painting at the Portsmouth and Southsea School of Art. Keen to travel, and with a love of the sea, he joined a ship bound for Spain in 1897 and in the following year studied at the artists' colony of St Ives, Cornwall, where he 'learned what little I know about painting' (Wilkinson, 'Brush', 7). After a brief stay in Paris to study figure painting, he committed himself to marine painting and moved to London, taking rooms near Tottenham Court Road in late 1899. His first drawing to appear in the 'Illustrated London News' -- a study of boats guarding the royal yacht in Portsmouth harbour -- was published in 1898. This began a fourteen-year association with the paper in the heyday of black and white newspaper illustration; in this period he travelled extensively on assignments, including to North and South America. Wilkinson's first advertising posters, of which he became a leading inter-war exponent, were designs for the Liverpool Steamship Company (1903) and the London and North Western Railway (LNWR, 1905). His preference for 'simplicity and truth' (ibid., 19) broke with the existing practice of complex and detailed images, and drew criticism and praise. Among his early supporters was William Pirrie, chairman of the shipbuilders Harland and Wolff, who commissioned paintings of Plymouth and New York harbours for the RMS 'Titanic' and 'Olympic' respectively. 
In 1915 Wilkinson enlisted in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve and served in the Dardanelles, at Gallipoli, and on submarine patrol from Gibraltar. In 1917 he was assigned to Devonport and given command of a minesweeper in the channel. In April that year he wrote to the Admiralty board of invention and research with a proposal on how to camouflage and protect British merchant ships against the growing threat from German U-boats. Wilkinson's idea was not to attempt to make ships invisible to enemy submarines, which he considered 'virtually impossible', but -- by means of 'a carefully thought out pattern and colour scheme' -- to 'distort the form of the vessel [so] that the chances of successful aim by attacking Submarines will be greatly decreased' (27 April 1917, in Wilkinson, 'Brush', 79). In the following month the proposal, which the Admiralty named 'dazzle painting', was tested on a small naval vessel that was observed at sea and from the coastline. As a combination of stripes, zigzags, and curves -- in black, white, blue, and green -- dazzle painting was shown to distort perspective and to compromise the enemy's understanding of a ship's course, direction, speed, and distance. 
By June 1917 Wilkinson had secured four studios at the Royal Academy of Arts, Burlington House, London. Here he supervised three model makers and five naval officers who designed patterns that he studied by viewing painted model ships through a submarine periscope. Approved designs were finished by eleven 'lady clerks', each with art school training, with the final patterns being sent to ports around Britain for implementation. The early success of the dazzle project owed much to the support of Sir Joseph Maclay, controller of merchant shipping, who championed it in the face of early scepticism and hesitancy within the Admiralty. In October 1917 orders were given for the repainting of all merchant and armed merchant ships, together with a number of Royal Navy cruisers, destroyers, and minesweepers. By the end of the war some 5000 vessels, including the RMS 'Olympic', had been repainted with dazzle markings. Following Wilkinson's visit to Washington, DC, in early 1918, his scheme was adopted by the United States navy and also applied to ships in the French, Italian, and Japanese navies. For his invention Wilkinson received $2000 from the royal commission on awards to inventors, and was appointed OBE in 1918. On 12 January of that year, at Marylebone Presbyterian Church, London, he married Evelyn Harriet Mackenzie (1885/6-1967), daughter of Murdo Mackenzie, missionary, and one of the artists previously employed in Wilkinson's studio at the Royal Academy; the couple, who moved to Marlborough Hill, St John's Wood, London, had a daughter, Diana, and a son, Rodney (1924-2004), who himself became a landscape artist. 
In the inter-war years Wilkinson gained a reputation as one of Britain's leading poster artists, with a particularly close association with the London Midland and Scottish Railway Company (LMS). The LMS became one of four organizations formed in 1923 from the amalgamation of 123 existing railway companies -- the others being Great Western, Southern, and London and North Eastern (LNER) with which LMS was in competition for routes to the north of England and Scotland. With advertising and visual depiction an important part of this competition, Wilkinson was invited to enhance the image of the LMS. He proposed an exhibition of posters commissioned from sixteen Royal Academicians and associates of the academy to whom he wrote in October 1923, describing 'a unique opportunity of giving a lead to pictorial advertising... [and] providing a chance of educating public taste' (quoted in Hewitt, 34). Of the original sixteen artists, only two -- Augustus John and Frank Brangwyn -- were unable to accept, and were replaced by Sir William Orpen and Sir Stanhope Forbes; others who took part included Julius Olssen and Sir Algernon Talmage whom Wilkinson had first met in St Ives. The exhibition ran at the Royal Academy, London, and in New York in 1924, with Wilkinson contributing three posters depicting Galloway, 'Routes to Ireland', and Grangemouth docks -- the latter a skilful combination of landscape painting and detailed depiction of machinery that proved particularly attractive to the railway companies in this period. 
Subsequent poster commissions for the LMS included a series on sports and pastimes on the railway's route (1925) and famous public schools along the LMS network, including Mill Hill, Oundle, and Repton (1937). In contrast to the geometrical simplification and flat colouration favoured by modernist contemporaries, Wilkinson's designs were characterized by their use of a single, large image depicted in a sensitive pictorial style. It was an approach he had first used for the LNWR in 1905 and led to his claim to be the originator of the modern pictorial poster. Wilkinson's inter-war poster designs also drew on his experience of dazzle camouflage from which he gained a familiarity with the visualization of large objects, and the ability to render complex topographies in the simple forms required for poster art. An accomplished artist in watercolours and oils, Wilkinson combined his design work with a successful painting career. His canvas of the royal yacht 'Britannia' was bought by George V and exhibited at the Royal Academy (1933) and four years later he was elected president of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours. 
In 1938 Wilkinson was approached by the Air Ministry to advise on the camouflaging of aerodromes. Early in the following year he was appointed, with the rank of honorary air commodore, as the RAF's inspector of camouflage within the directorate of works. He served in this capacity until 1942 and also advised on the protection of the royal palaces from bombardment. In June 1944 he observed and sketched the D-day landings from the destroyer HMS 'Jervis'. The resulting nine canvases were among fifty-four paintings recording the activities of the Royal Navy, merchant navy, and Coastal Command that he presented to the War Artists' Advisory Committee. Collected as 'The War at Sea', fifty-three of the paintings were exhibited at the National Gallery, London, from September 1944 and were later shown in Australia and New Zealand. Despite Wilkinson's wish that the complete series be deposited in the National Maritime Museum (NMM), fourteen of the canvases initially formed part of the collection at the Imperial War Museum. Following a protracted dispute, 1947-9, the fourteen paintings were transferred to the NMM, while one canvas remains at the Royal United Services Institution. He was appointed CBE in 1948. 
After the war Wilkinson resumed his career as a marine and landscape painter, undertaking a series of works depicting Malta, Venice, and Hudson Bay. Having previously published his colour sketches of the Dardanelles (1915) and a study entitled 'Ships in Pictures' (1945), he produced a guide to watercolour sketching in 1953 and an autobiography in 1969. Following the death of his wife, Evelyn, in 1967, he married a long-time friend, Joyce Jervis, 'nee' Moss-Blundell ('b'. 1908), on 15 May of the following year, at Kensington and Chelsea register office, London. Wilkinson died on 30 May 1971, of myocardial degeneration, at his summer home, Flat 5, Seaview House, Seaview, Isle of Wight, and was survived by his wife and two children. A memorial service was held on 25 June at St James's Church, Piccadilly, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 98136


Crosby, Sarah (1729-1804), Methodist preacher, was born on 7 November 1729, probably near Leeds. Little is known of her early life other than the details revealed in the biographical account and diary extracts that were published in the 'Methodist Magazine' in 1806. She attended Church of England services at the age of fourteen, heard George Whitefield preach when she was about twenty, and dated her conversion to Methodism from 30 October 1749. A year later she joined John Wesley's Foundery Society and was established as a class leader by 1752. Details of Crosby's marriage, which began in 1750 and lasted about seven years, are vague. However, from a comment crossed out in the manuscript of Mary Bosanquet's spiritual autobiography, it appears that Mr Crosby deserted his wife and 'went abroad and returned no more' (autobiography, pt 3, 9). 
In the absence of her husband, Crosby's spiritual activities intensified. She lived in lodgings in Moorfields with fellow Methodists, including the preacher Sarah Ryan. In January 1761 she travelled to Derby, where the Dobinsons (a couple she had met at the Foundery) intended to form a Methodist society. Crosby's success exceeded her own expectations, and she was soon preaching to audiences of over 200 people. She experienced anxieties regarding this public role, writing in her diary, 'I was not sure whether it was right for me to exhort in so public a manner' (Taft, 2.42). She wrote to Wesley seeking advice, and their subsequent correspondence provides valuable evidence of his developing views on the position of women within Methodism. Women Methodists played a prominent part in the evangelical revival, and many of those appointed as class and band leaders by Wesley in the 1740s became the preachers of the 1760s. Wesley responded to this development with a mixture of anxiety and pragmatism, continuing to defend the Pauline injunction against women's preaching while still recognizing the ''extraordinary' call' of individuals ('Letters', 5.257). 
Crosby returned to London in April 1761 and continued preaching in the south of England. By the mid-1760s she had joined the Methodist community of Sarah Ryan and Mary Bosanquet (later Fletcher) at their school and orphanage in Leytonstone, Essex. In June 1768 she moved with the community on its relocation to Cross Hall near Morley, Yorkshire. Ryan did not survive the move, but Crosby and Bosanquet established weekly Methodist meetings, of which Crosby later commented: 'Jesus made me his mouth unto the people, and poured the spirit of love, zeal and wisdom upon me, for their instruction' ('Methodist Magazine', 29, 563). A letter from Wesley to Crosby from this period offered practical advice to women preachers and revealed his ambivalence over their status: 'Even in public you may properly enough intermix 'short exhortations' with prayer; but keep as far from what is called preaching as you can: therefore never take a text; never speak in a continued discourse without some break, about four or five minutes. ('Letters', 5.130)' Crosby travelled widely and was much in demand throughout the mid-1770s, preaching in chapels, private homes, and the open air to audiences of many hundreds. She also accompanied Wesley on some of his tours of the north of England. Summarizing her activities for 1777, Crosby recalled riding '960 miles, to keep 220 public meetings, at many of which some hundreds of precious souls were present, about 600 private meetings, and to write an 116 letters, many of them long ones, besides many, many conversations with souls in private' ('Methodist Magazine', 29.567). The itinerant preacher Frances Pawson was a member of the crowd who listened to Crosby on 1 December 1774. 'Her heart and words acted in concert. Every sentence was impressive, and carried conviction to the heart' ('Experience', 33). 
Life at Cross Hall was disrupted in 1781 when Mary Bosanquet married John Fletcher, vicar of Madeley, and moved to his parish in Shropshire. Crosby continued her work in Yorkshire and by 1793 she was living in Leeds with Ann Tripp (who had been employed as a governess at Leytonstone). The two women led and inspired a band of women preachers known as the 'female brethren'. Crosby died in Leeds on 29 October 1804 just prior to her seventy-fifth birthday, having attended two class meetings and a band meeting the week before. She was buried in the churchyard of Leeds Old Church, alongside her companions Sarah Ryan and Ann Tripp, and her tombstone is inscribed with the words 'A mother in Israel hath she been: her works shall praise her in the gate.' 
According to Zachariah Taft, Crosby left behind a number of notebooks that were given to Ann Tripp and Elizabeth Mortimer. Extracts were published in the 'Methodist Magazine' after Mortimer had spent two years campaigning for their inclusion by writing letters to the editor (Brown, 175-6). Crosby's life demonstrates the importance of women to the success of early Methodism and suggests the role that spiritual fellowship played in the lives of eighteenth-century women. Mortimer's struggle to establish Crosby's place in Methodist historiography also reveals the problematic position of women preachers within nineteenth-century Methodism. 


@@@@@


doc= 98138


Ashington group (act. 1934-1983) originated in October 1934 when men, mainly coalminers, from Ashington, Northumberland, began classes in art appreciation. It was a course without precedent in a mining village 16 miles, and a world away, from the nearest art gallery. The class, organized by the Workers' Education Association (WEA), first met on 29 October 1934 and was initially attended by thirteen students, rising to twenty-four in the following week. The lecturer assigned to the course was 


@@@@@


doc= 98140


Neilson, Walter Montgomerie (1819-1889), railway locomotive manufacturer, was born in Cowcaddens, Glasgow, on 28 November 1819, the eldest son of James Beaumont Neilson (1792-1865), engineer and inventor, and his first wife, Barbara Montgomerie (1796-1843). Patent royalties from his father's invention of a process to convert blackband ironstone into pig-iron by introducing a blast of hot air into a furnace enabled the purchase in 1851 of the Queenshill estate in Kirkcudbright, which became the family seat for a century. 
From the age of fourteen Walter Neilson attended the Andersonian Institution in Glasgow, where he excelled at technical topics. His father had plans for his eldest son to become, like him, a mechanical engineer and enter the family firm of Neilson and Mitchell, Hydepark Street, Glasgow. He was first apprenticed to the St Rollox foundry at seventeen, but two years later left to continue his apprenticeship at Neilson and Mitchell. In 1843 he became a partner in the family's firm, which under his direction built their first steam locomotive. His technical prowess was demonstrated in September 1849 when he obtained a patent for a 'saddle tank' engine design. 
Neilson harboured a passion to build locomotives in Scotland and to refocus his firm, from general engineering to specializing in engine manufacture for the country's burgeoning railway companies. He recorded in his memoirs: 'Seeing the number of Railways that were being made in Scotland and every thing for them got in England I determined to try to get some of the work for Scotland. I engaged William Tait as Foreman over the engine department, more particularly the Railway and Locomotive department in 1844. (Neilson, 'Dates and notes', 17)' His vision was realized in 1852 when his firm was dedicated exclusively to manufacturing railway steam engines. He recognized from the outset that competition from established locomotive manufacturers in England would require him to address the export market at the earliest opportunity. Neilson and Mitchell exported their first engine to Cuba in 1852, through the firm's existing links for supplying sugar-cane processing equipment. 
Neilson also recognized that in creating a locomotive manufacturing facility he would need to engage experienced staff, who resided in England. Gaining these proved initially to be difficult for him, and he employed James Reid (1823-1894) who had no specialized knowledge. In 1858 -- after Reid's departure and before he rejoined the firm in 1863 after gaining relevant experience -- Neilson employed Henry Dubs who had experience of locomotive construction and a knowledge of the market for engines in the south. Exports benefited from Neilson's travels to gain knowledge of overseas locomotive practice -- he visited the United States in 1856 and was deeply impressed by American engine-building techniques and performance capability -- as well as his excellent international reputation as a mechanical engineer (he became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1860). 
Business growth was sufficiently promising that Neilson purchased land in north-central Glasgow at Springburn, and he moved the firm there in 1862. At the London International Exhibition of April 1862 an 'eight-footer' locomotive designed by Benjamin Connor and built by the Neilson firm for the Caledonian Railway was purchased by Sa'id Pasha, viceroy of Egypt, leading to a succession of orders from Egyptian Railways. By 1874 the renamed Neilson & Co. had $61,500 of unfinished contracts in hand for locomotives to be delivered to railway companies in England, Scotland, Ulster, Italy, and India. By the second half of the 1870s Neilson & Co. employed 1500 men and produced 120 engines a year. It supplied markets from the Argentine to New Zealand, enjoying a reputation for building locomotives to order for demanding requirements -- especially huge articulated locomotives for export. 
Despite these achievements Walter Neilson lost the family firm in a lingering dispute with James Reid, who had succeeded Henry Dubs as manager in 1863. On reappointment Reid received a ten-year contract as a partner, with a clause to buy out Neilson at the end of this period. When a decade later he was prepared to leave the business, Neilson disputed the contract terms. He understood that old machinery and tools (which had been transferred to Springburn from the Hydepark works) would be negotiated separately from the purchase price of the works. An arbitrator named in the contract -- whom Neilson disliked and claimed was biased against him -- was brought in to value the entire firm, and the valuation led to further acrimony. Despite an impasse Neilson left the family firm in 1876. The parting was far from amicable as, in his view, he had been deserted by his family lawyer and let down by the arbiter. Consequently he felt that the enterprise he had created 'was given away to Mr. Reid for a mere nothing'. 
This blow for Neilson was compounded in the following year by the death in childbirth of his wife, Janet Ellen Henderson (1841-1877), of Leghorn, Italy, whom he had married on 14 March 1867. They had a son and a daughter. His wife's family had shipping connections in Italy, and provided him with business contacts. A devout presbyterian, who supported the Free Church of Scotland both financially and as an active elder, Neilson purchased an estate in Tuscany to ensure that members of the (protestant) Waldensian movement in Italy, on leaving their traditional home at Torre Pellice in the Cottian Alps, would find employment and pastoral care without being scattered across the country. His other activities outside business included membership of the volunteer forces, in which he achieved the rank of lieutenant-colonel in 1873, before resigning in 1874. In 1861 he became a freemason, and he served as provincial grand master of Glasgow between 1873 and 1880. He inherited the Queenshill estate on his father's death in 1865. 
Neilson recorded that he had had little time for relaxation and, indeed, he never retired. In 1884, at the age of sixty-five, he founded the Clyde locomotive works in Springburn sited, poignantly, across the railway tracks from the firm still carrying his family name that he had left eight years before. His second enterprise never thrived, largely due to fierce competition from domestic and overseas engine builders, and in 1888 he sold out to Sharp, Stewart & Co. of Manchester, who relocated to Glasgow, which was becoming the centre for locomotive manufacturing in Britain. Within months of the sale he died, at Villa Bethanie, Florence, on 8 July 1889. His body was brought to Scotland and buried in the family mausoleum in Tongland kirkyard, Kirkcudbright, near Queenshill. 
Walter Neilson was largely responsible for creating Glasgow's worldwide reputation for steam locomotive production. Through his endeavours he attracted skilled designers and works managers, some of whom went on to found locomotive enterprises themselves, thereby increasing the local manufacturing base and bringing employment and prosperity to Springburn. In 1903 three Glasgow firms, Neilson, Reid & Co. (again renamed), Dubs & Co., and Sharp, Stewart & Co., merged to form the North British Locomotive Company, which traded until 1962. Its railway engines were one of Scotland's greatest engineering and commercial achievements: 28,000 locomotives were built, 18,000 of which went for export. Neilson's enterprising vision laid the foundation for this industrial success, and his name should be revered as a giant of the Scottish industrial revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 98141


Lane, Homer Terril (1875-1925), educationist and psychoanalyst, was born on 22 September 1875 at Hudson, New Hampshire, USA, the second of five children of Samuel Augustus Lane, a labouring foreman, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Terril. He spent his strict but happy childhood in Framingham, Massachusetts. He left high school after a year to become a delivery boy. In 1898 he married Cora Barney, daughter of the local police chief at Southborough, where Lane was then living and working in a drugstore and as a delivery man. They had two children, Raymond ('b'. 1899) and Cora ('b'. 1901). After his marriage Lane enrolled at the Sloyd Training School, Boston, which taught handicrafts, with a philosophy that students should not be forced to learn and that education should be manually orientated. In 1901, when he was both studying and teaching part-time at the school, his wife died of pneumonia. He spent a summer as relief teacher of woodwork at Pennsylvania State Reformatory and then, in 1903, married Mabel, his first wife's elder sister. They had two children, Priscilla (Polly) ('b'. 1904) and Allan ('b'. 1907). 
After his second marriage Lane and his family moved to Detroit, where he taught. Later, influenced by Maria Montessori, pioneer of education for the very young, he was appointed Detroit's superintendent of playgrounds. His observation that when play was unorganized juvenile crime fell and when organized it rose led him to believe that much juvenile crime grew from suppressed play instincts. However, a claim that he had paid for a young unmarried woman to have an abortion -- he may have said this to make a point -- forced his resignation. He then worked for the Solvay Guild, a welfare organization for employees of the Solvay Process Company. Influenced by the movement to create 'junior republics', which allowed male juvenile offenders to learn responsibility through self-government, Lane subsequently founded the Ford Boys' Republic (named after the local philanthropist who donated $45,000) in Detroit. He discovered what was to be his guiding principle -- the regenerative power of love or, as he was to say, being on the side of the malefactor. 
In 1912 Lane visited England to advise George Montagu on setting up a community in Dorset, on the lines of the junior republics, on a farm donated by Montagu's uncle, the earl of Sandwich. The Little Commonwealth would be co-educational and for those aged from a few months to nineteen years, some of whom would have come from asylums or orphanages, but the majority from reformatories. Within a year Lane became superintendent. The fifty or so 'citizens' (as they were called) lived in cottages under the care of a housemother. He pioneered group therapy and shared responsibility, with rules devised by the citizens. He would often encourage wrongdoers in their revelry so that, as he claimed, it ceased to be fun. His approach was that of 'the path of freedom instead of imposed authority, of self-expression instead of a pouring-in of knowledge, of evoking and exploiting the child's natural sense of wonder, and curiosity instead of a repetitious hammering home of dull facts' (Wills, 20). He believed that the need for rules had to be realized, not imposed. As at the Ford Republic, the citizens were paid for their work and taxed. Lane eschewed most punishment as a means of correction, and promoted self-expression and respect for and approval of the child. He believed that a child's nature was good and positive but became negative and anti-social through adult interference and moral teaching. 
In 1917 two female citizens ran away and then (with Lane's encouragement, as he believed that they would break down and admit to making things up) made allegations to the police that Lane had had 'immoral relations' with them. The Home Office ordered an inquiry, but the report was never published. The charge was not proven but Lane was not exonerated. However, the Home Office ordered that Lane be removed and changes made. The governing committee, sympathetic to Lane, decided in July 1918 to close the Little Commonwealth in the hope that it would reopen after the war. It never did. 
Lane then became a highly successful (but unqualified) psychotherapist and psychoanalyst in London. However, in 1925 he was arrested for failing to register as an alien. At his trial the earlier events were resurrected, along with allegations that 'indelicate water colours', 'French preventives', and incriminating letters from young women had been found in his home. Despite prominent supporters, who included the bishop of Liverpool, Albert David, the headmaster of the Liverpool Institute, Henry Simmonds, and Lady Betty Balfour (sister of Lord Lytton, governor of Bengal), Lane was sentenced to a month in prison with deportation recommended. To avoid both he agreed to leave for France voluntarily. 
Lane was hubristic, sought the limelight, and developed a 'Christ identification'. He accepted money from young female patients and may well have acted with them in a sexually improper manner. Yet despite his failings and human weaknesses he was to exert a deep influence, both in education and in the treatment of juvenile offenders. His disciples included A. S. Neill (whom Lane psychoanalysed), the founder and head of Summerhill School. David Wills ran residential communities that owed much to the Little Commonwealth, while Otto Shaw's Red Hill School in Kent mirrored much of its regime. Lane can also be seen as a pioneer of therapeutic communities. 
Lane died of heart failure brought on by typhoid and pneumonia on 5 September 1925 in the American Hospital, Paris, four months after leaving England. His wife and daughter Polly were present, together with a former citizen, Jane Bird. He was cremated two days later at Pere Lachaise cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 98143


Fletcher, Yvonne Joyce (1958-1984), police officer, was born on 15 June 1958 at 4 Kingsettle Estate, Semley, Wiltshire, the eldest of four daughters of Michael Henry James Fletcher, timber feller, and his wife, Queenie May, 'nee' Troke. Brought up in Semley, where she sang in the church choir, she was educated nearby at Gillingham School, in Dorset. Her parents said that from the age of three she had dreamt of becoming a police officer, but she was very short -- five foot two and half inches -- and the requirement in the Metropolitan Police for women recruits was five foot four inches. She was turned down several times, but continued to reapply. Eventually Scotland Yard's recruiters, impressed by her determination and drive, relented and gave her a dispensation to join. Enrolled on 14 March 1977 as the 4257th female officer in the Metropolitan Police, she was stationed, after training, at Bow Street, London, on 7 July 1977. She had the shoulder number 341CB. Having secured some distinction as Britain's then smallest police officer, she was regarded by her colleagues and superiors at Bow Street, where she was a home beat officer, as experienced, professional, and mature. Nicknamed Super Fletch, she lived in Grove Avenue, South Harrow, Middlesex, and was unofficially engaged to Police Constable Michael Liddle, a doctor's son from Norfolk. 
On 17 April 1984 Fletcher was part of a unit deployed outside the Libyan People's Bureau, Tripoli's diplomatic mission in St James's Square, London, to police a demonstration against Colonel Muammar Gaddafi. The protest was mounted against a background of deteriorating relations between the UK and Libya. In March MI5 warned police that bureau staff had discussed 'revolutionary action' against Gaddafi's opponents and within weeks there were bomb attacks in London and Manchester. Gaddafi supporters were arrested, questioned, and deported as police began guarding prominent opponents and the Foreign Office asked for assurances from Libya that the violence would stop. 
As the date of the demonstration approached the bureau tried unsuccessfully to get it banned and then warned the police there would be counter-measures. On the day of the demonstration about seventy demonstrators were kept back behind barriers. Fletcher was standing some 50 yards from the bureau, facing the protesters, when shots were fired about 10.18 a.m. and she collapsed, hit in the right side of the back by a single round. Rushed to Westminster Hospital, she died from extensive internal injuries to the abdomen two hours later. Eleven demonstrators were also wounded. 
Police reinforcements sealed off the square and evacuated thousands of office workers at the start of an eleven-day siege. Britain severed diplomatic relations with Libya, but after international negotiations thirty Libyans from the bureau were allowed to fly out of Britain. None was questioned because all had been given diplomatic cover. 
Fletcher's police hat lay in the road at St James's Square throughout the siege. It was retrieved in time for it to be placed on her coffin at her funeral, which took place at Salisbury Cathedral on 27 April 1984, attended by 600 Metropolitan Police officers. The service was followed by a private cremation. On 10 May 1984 an inquest jury at Westminster coroner's court returned a verdict of unlawful killing. 
One of the legacies of Fletcher's death was a national recognition that the death of police officers who sacrificed their lives on duty deserved to be publicly and permanently marked. The film director Michael Winner wrote to 'The Times' (21 April 1984) calling for a memorial to Fletcher. There was an immediate public and media response and donations flowed in. A Portland stone memorial, four feet high, with a granite face, was erected on the pavement in St James's Square on the spot where she fell. It was unveiled on 1 February 1985 by the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher. Winner enlarged his campaign to include other officers who had been killed in the line of duty and this led to the creation of the Police Memorial Trust. Ten years later, in 2005, a national memorial to 1600 officers killed on duty was unveiled by the queen at the junction between The Mall and St James's Park. 
No one has been convicted for Yvonne Fletcher's shooting. Claims were later made that the murder was the work of CIA or Israeli agents firing from another building with the intention of discrediting the Libyans but the police were satisfied the shots came from the bureau. Scientists said two Sterling sub-machine guns had been used and five witnesses reported seeing a gun barrel pointing from the bureau. A police search of the empty building uncovered 4300 rounds, seven handguns, including one used to kill a Libyan journalist, and magazines for a Sterling. MI5 archives show that the day before Fletcher's death the bureau asked Tripoli whether staff should shoot the protesters if the demonstration could not be stopped; on the night before the demonstration Tripoli authorized the bureau to open fire on the demonstration. Attempts to solve the murder were stymied as Libya became an international pariah, linked increasingly to terrorism in Europe and the Middle East. In July 1999 Libya publicly accepted 'general responsibility' for the murder and in November 1999 paid compensation to Fletcher's family, as diplomatic relations between Britain and Libya were resumed. British police teams visited Tripoli to investigate the murder, but came back empty-handed, and in 2006 the UK and Libya secretly signed an agreement, during trade talks, that no one would be extradited for Fletcher's murder. In October 2009 Colonel Gaddafi personally apologized for the murder during a television interview, but offered no fresh help to bring convictions. 


@@@@@


doc= 98146


Sheldon, Joseph Harold (1893-1972), geriatrician, was born at North View, Derby Road, Woodford, Essex, on 27 September 1893, the eldest son of John Joseph Sheldon (1858-1942), a bank clerk in the City of London and a noted horticulturist who was treasurer of the British Pteridological Society, and his wife, Marion Squire, 'nee' Spring, daughter of Henry Spring, a Lloyd's underwriter who insured sailing ships. He had two sisters and two brothers, Sir Wilfred Percy Henry Sheldon, a paediatrician, and Colin, a general practitioner. Sheldon assisted both his brothers in the cost of their medical training. 
Sheldon was educated at Bancroft's School, a Drapers' Company school at Woodford. He left at the age of sixteen to work for Lloyds Bank (for whom his father also worked) but became convinced that he should become a medical missionary. He obtained a Worsley scholarship in 1913 to assist with the cost of training at King's College, London. Following the outbreak of the First World War he joined the Royal Navy as a surgeon probationer, serving on HMS 'Wisteria' in the Mediterranean. He qualified in 1918, continuing to serve after the conclusion of hostilities as a surgeon-lieutenant on a minesweeper in the Baltic. While serving in the navy he decided not to become a medical missionary and gave up the Worsley scholarship, aiming to return the money he had been given. Following demobilization he was appointed to junior medical posts at King's College Hospital, London, and in 1920 became MD and MRCP. In 1921 he was appointed to the staff of the Royal Hospital, Wolverhampton, as a consultant physician, and on 6 July the same year he married Marjorie Bannister, the 29-year-old daughter of George Henry Bannister, schoolteacher, of Newport, Monmouthshire. They had one daughter, Margaret (Peggy) ('b'. 1924). 
A modest unassuming man with a considerable capacity for friendship, who was always ready to give help and who inspired affection and admiration, Sheldon was a gifted teacher with astute clinical observation. His renown soon spread across the west midlands. He was appointed Hunterian professor of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1928, elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1929, and appointed lecturer in medicine at Birmingham University in 1942. Initially his clinical research was into endocrine disorders, maternal obesity, and mineral elements, which culminated in a major study of haemochromatosis, presented to Royal College of Physicians in its Bradshaw lecture in 1934 and published as a detailed monograph in 1935. He subsequently developed a deep interest in older people. He held his out-patient sessions in Wolverhampton on market days so that patients could visit him more easily. He studied older people in the community using the ration card register to locate a sample of 583 old people. The results were published in 1948 as 'The Social History of Old Age', and were the basis of his F. E. Williams lecture to the Royal College of Physicians in 1949. More papers on age and ageing followed. His work was acknowledged internationally by his appointment as the president of the International Association of Gerontology in 1954. His presidential address, 'The social philosophy of old age', was given in London at the association's third congress that year, and subsequently published in 'The Lancet'. 
In the 1950s the Birmingham regional hospital board (whose consultant services committee Sheldon chaired from 1948) became concerned about the quality of care given to its elderly patients and asked Sheldon to survey its entire regional geriatric services. Sheldon's report was published in 1961. A highly unsatisfactory state of affairs was revealed. Hospital buildings, some of which were over 200 years old, were unfit for purpose, having been originally designed as 'human warehouses'. He recommended that six should be either partially or totally demolished. He found it totally unsatisfactory that the same room should be used for washing bedpans, and domestic crockery and bedpans stored for the night in the patients' bath. The report aroused considerable ire in the medical and national press. Subsequently the regional authorities designed purpose-built geriatric units, giving Sheldon's name to them as well as to new medical research fellowships. 
Sheldon was a councillor of the Royal College of Physicians from 1948 to 1950, and was awarded the college's Moxon medal in 1966. He examined in medicine in the universities of Birmingham, London, Bristol, Liverpool, and Kaherere, Uganda. He was appointed CBE in 1955, made an honorary fellow of King's College, London, in 1956, and awarded honorary doctorates by Bristol and Birmingham universities, in 1958 and 1965 respectively. It is said that he refused more professorial chairs in medicine than anyone else had ever done. His outside interests included cycling, ecclesiastical architecture, mountaineering, photography, and ornithology. He was a member of the Alpine Club and in 1928 took part in a courageous Alpine rescue operation on the Aiguille du Petit Dru, for which the French government honoured him. He published his observations on the northern golden plover in 'British Birds'. His first wife died in 1927, while on holiday in the Alps, and on 9 November 1963 he married Florence Maud Luckett, a secretary, and daughter of Herbert William Luckett. He died on 23 June 1972 at his home, Monkhams, Codsall Wood, Seisdon, Staffordshire, of bronchopneumonia, and was survived by his daughter, Peggy, and wife, Florence. 


@@@@@


doc= 98149


Kelly, Sir (William Archibald) Howard (1873-1952), naval officer, was born in Southsea, Hampshire, on 6 September 1873, the third son of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Holdsworth Kelly, Royal Marine artillery, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Johm Collum of Bellevue, co. Fermanagh. His elder brother was Admiral of the Fleet Sir John Donald Kelly (1871-1936). He entered the navy in January 1886 as a cadet in HMS 'Britannia' and in 1888 joined the battleship 'Temeraire'. Kelly became a sub-lieutenant in September 1892 and served as navigator in the gunboats 'Firefly' and 'Onyx' at Harwich and the gunboat 'Hebe' in the Mediterranean. He was promoted lieutenant in December 1894 and in May 1896 was in the sailing sloop 'Cruiser', used for training seamen in the Mediterranean. In January 1899 he joined as navigator another training ship, the corvette 'Calliope', followed by service in the cruiser 'Spartiate'. In May 1903 he qualified as an interpreter in French, an ability that would have important results for his later career. 
In July 1903 Kelly was selected as navigating officer and first lieutenant of the cruiser 'Hyacinth', the flagship of Rear-Admiral G. L. Atkinson-Willes, commander-in-chief of the East Indies station. He participated in the Somaliland campaign, earning the Africa general service medal with Somaliland 1902-4 bar, and was promoted commander in December 1904. Kelly was still in 'Hyacinth' when she became the flagship of Vice-Admiral Sir Edmund Poe, whose daughter Nora (died 1951) he married in 1907. They had one son and one daughter. 
Kelly next served in the battleships 'Russell' and 'Nile', followed by a period in the naval intelligence department at the Admiralty as head of the French section. He commanded the third-class cruiser 'Barham' in the Mediterranean, 1910-11, and in February 1911 was appointed naval attache in Paris. There he was greatly embarrassed when the French minister of marine referred to earlier secret staff conversations between the British and French staffs, assuming that Kelly had been informed of them. After returning to London he was ready to offer his resignation, regarding his position as untenable if the Admiralty did not take him into their confidence. In fact the information the Admiralty actually had on hand was vague and Kelly on his return to Paris was obliged to ask the French for their copy of the record to 'correct discrepancies' in the virtually non-existent Admiralty records. The tempo of the conversations with the French increased after the Agadir crisis of 1911, although in 1912 Kelly's paper advocating an alliance with France did not meet with favour at the Foreign Office. In 1913 Prince Louis of Battenburg, the first sea lord, travelled to Paris incognito for talks with his French counterpart but until the outbreak of war there would be no binding commitment on the part of the British. Nevertheless the very fact that the talks were taking place tended to create a moral obligation to go to the assistance of the French in the event of war. Kelly was promoted captain in December 1911 and in a major public manifestation of the Anglo-French entente was attached to the suite of the French president, Raymond Poincare, during the latter's state visit to Great Britain in June 1913. 
In March 1914 Kelly was appointed to command the light cruiser 'Gloucester' in the Mediterranean Fleet. As war became imminent in the summer of 1914 the greatest threat to the British and French in the Mediterranean was the German 'Mittelmeerdivision' consisting of the powerful new battle cruiser 'Goeben' and the light cruiser 'Breslau'. The situation was complicated by the uncertain attitude of Italy, then an ally of Germany and Austria-Hungary in the triple alliance. 'Goeben' and 'Breslau' had made use of the Italian port of Messina and 'Gloucester' had been detached to watch the southern entrance to the Strait of Messina. Italy's declaration of neutrality at the beginning of August 1914 clarified the situation but the German movements were uncertain. Kelly detected the two German ships passing through the Strait of Messina on 6 August and shadowed them for over a day and a half, reporting their movements by wireless, exchanging fire with the 'Breslau' but keeping out of range of the powerful guns of the 'Goeben', which could easily have destroyed the 'Gloucester'. Kelly, whose cruiser was running low on coal, was eventually ordered to break off the chase and the German ships made their escape to the Dardanelles where their presence in Turkish waters was an important (although not the only) factor in Turkey's entry into the war on the side of Germany and Austria on 29 October. Kelly's conduct was the only bright spot in the otherwise dismal British performance during the episode, which led to criticism of the two commanders, Berkeley Milne and Ernest Troubridge. Winston Churchill, first lord of the Admiralty, personally wrote the citation praising Kelly's 'combination of audacity with restraint' in a 'naval episode which may justly be regarded as a model' ('The Times', 15 Sept 1952). Kelly was made CB in April 1915 for his actions. 
Kelly and the 'Gloucester' remained in the Mediterranean or the Indian Ocean before being ordered to join the 2nd light cruiser squadron of the Grand Fleet in December 1914. In January 1916 he was called for several weeks to the intelligence division at the Admiralty but was back in the 'Gloucester' by March. It was only a short stay, for the following month he relinquished his command and was sent to Paris to serve as naval liaison officer with the French. His time in Paris coincided with the growing problem of German submarines and a preoccupation with countering the menace. In the summer of 1917 he was ordered to take command as a commodore second class of the British light cruisers at Brindisi in the southern Adriatic. As a result of the agreements bringing Italy into the war the British and French had been obliged to provide naval assistance to the Italians, and a mixed force of British warships and French destroyers co-operated with the Italians. They were joined in 1918 by American 'submarine chasers'. The Italians, however, insisted that supreme command in the Adriatic remain in their hands. A large portion of the initial British contribution had consisted of drifters who attempted to snare submarines in their nets and force them to the surface. This evolved into the so-called Otranto barrage, an attempt to bar the Otranto Straits to the passage of German and Austrian submarines working from bases in the Adriatic. The barrage grew more and more elaborate although its effectiveness remained doubtful. 
In April 1918 a reorganization took place and Kelly became 'commodore commanding British Adriatic forces', with detailed control of operations on the barrage and command of all British seagoing and air forces in the Adriatic, but with the obligation to keep both the British Mediterranean and Italian commanders-in-chief informed of his actions. It was a convoluted situation and hard to avoid friction. Kelly's problems remained even after the armistice for the Adriatic became the scene of intense and bitter rivalry between the Italians and the new south Slav state, supported by the French. The British, with a multitude of problems elsewhere, were forced to remain as peacekeepers. 
Kelly returned to England in April 1919 but his now proven ability to act in international situations led to his appointment as head of the British naval mission to Greece with the rank of vice-admiral in the Royal Hellenic Navy. It was not an easy position, for the Greeks were sharply divided between royalist and anti-royalist forces and efforts for reform were further hampered by the military operations in Asia Minor as the Greeks sought to expand their areas of control. The effort led eventually to disaster in 1922 but Kelly's period in Greece had ended in October 1921. He was promoted rear-admiral in May 1922 and in May 1923 became rear-admiral in the 1st battle squadron of the Atlantic Fleet. In 1924 he was charged with revising the fleet's signal books as head of the signal books committee. He commanded the 2nd cruiser squadron in the Atlantic Fleet, May 1925 - May 1927, and was promoted to vice-admiral in July 1927. Kelly was again chosen for a diplomatic position in July 1927, with a two-year appointment as British naval representative at the League of Nations in Geneva. This was followed in May 1929 with appointment as vice-admiral commanding 1st battle squadron and second-in-command, Mediterranean station. 
Kelly finally achieved a truly independent command in December 1930 when he was appointed commander-in-chief in China. During his first year what was probably the most controversial event of his career took place. On the night of 11 November 1931 the minesweeping sloop 'Petersfield', used as the commander-in-chief's yacht, ran aground and became a total loss. Kelly with his wife and daughter had taken passage in the ship and during the subsequent court martial of her captain it was revealed that the autocratic Kelly had frequently intervened with navigational instructions. When poor visibility altered the situation 'Petersfield''s captain had been afraid or unwilling either to deviate from those instructions concerning the course or to rouse the admiral, who had retired to bed. The court martial found against the officer concerned but opinion on the China station was sharply divided between those who felt Kelly had stifled the initiative of his officers and those who believed, as the court martial did, that the ultimate responsibility belonged with the commanding officer to take measures to ensure the safety of his ship when circumstances changed. The affair was made all the worse by the attention the press devoted to it. 
Kelly, who had been promoted admiral and knighted in 1931, was faced with a severe challenge at the end of January 1932 when the Japanese, apparently on the initiative of their local naval commander, attacked the Chinese at Shanghai, where there was a considerable British presence in the international settlement. The threat of war was great, especially since relations between Japan and the western powers supporting the League of Nations had been strained by Japanese aggression in Manchuria during 1931. Kelly, who had been away in Batavia in his flagship, returned at full speed, cabled for reinforcements, and over the next few weeks entered into personal negotiations to bring about a ceasefire. There were those in the Foreign Office and War Office in London who found Kelly's telegrams alarmist and his actions precipitate but by his combination of firmness and tact (including recognition of the Japanese need to save face) he was able to arrange a ceasefire between the two sides, and the British minister in China, Sir Miles Lampson, was subsequently able to broker a formal agreement. 
Kelly, while commander-in-chief, also sent warnings about the 'deplorable' situation of the defences of the Singapore base and its consequent vulnerability. He relinquished his command in 1933 but found no further active employment and was placed on the retired list in 1936 after a career of fifty years. He took an active part in the Royal Central Asian Society and Anglo-Hellenic League before being recalled to active service in 1940 and sent to Ankara as the personal representative of the Mediterranean commander-in-chief, Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham. He reportedly became well known in leading Turkish circles and a friend of the former chief of the Turkish general staff, with whom he played bridge regularly. Turkey did not enter the war on the allied side until February 1945, but the manner in which the Turks interpreted their neutrality was favourable to the British. Kelly returned from Turkey in July 1944 and reverted to the retired list that December. He resumed his role as an active member of the Royal Central Asian Society and was chairman in 1950. He died at the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 14 September 1952. 
Kelly was an imposing and intellectual officer with high standards and firm opinions who did not suffer fools easily and on occasion had a sharp tongue. He was a great contrast to his brother Sir John (Joe) Kelly, known for his congeniality, though reportedly not nearly as bright. This could account for the fact that unlike his brother Joe he never became a sea lord or received a major port command at home. There may have been a lingering effect of the 'Petersfield' affair, and Kelly might also have been considered too uncomfortable to work with. On the other hand a naval career of over fifty years with retirement as a full admiral cannot be considered unsuccessful. Naval historians tend to remember him best for his conduct of the 'Gloucester' in 1914 but his other missions or commands in an international context were equally if not more important. 


@@@@@


doc= 98155


Tupper, Sir Reginald Godfrey Otway (1859-1945) naval officer, was born at 30 Nottingham Place, Marylebone, London, on 16 October 1859, the second son of Charles William Tupper (1818/19-1881), an iron merchant and manufacturer who held the rank of captain in the Royal Fusiliers, and his wife, Letitia Frances (1821/2-1908), daughter of Sir Jonah Wheeler-Cuffe, an Irish baronet. His elder brother was the Indian administrator and legal historian Sir Charles Lewis Tupper. 
Tupper joined the Royal Navy through the cadet training ship 'Britannia' in 1873; his early career was solid rather than brilliant; he achieved only second-class certificates in navigation and gunnery, along with a first in seamanship. Serving on the Australian station under Admiral Sir George Tryon, in 1880-82 he took part in punitive operations and developed local expertise. In the mid-1880s he studied at the naval gunnery school 'Excellent', before becoming an instructor at 'Cambridge', the Devonport gunnery school. He married, on 30 April 1888, Emily Charlotte Greer (1863/4-1929), daughter of Lieutenant-General Henry Harpur Greer, of The Grange, Moy, co. Tyrone. They had three daughters. 
Service on the East Indies station included the Vitu expedition of 1890, where Tupper worked with Captain Assheton Curzon-Howe, who became a significant figure in his subsequent career. Between 1891 and 1895 Tupper served on the China station, emphasizing his regional specialization. Returning to Britain in 1896, he conducted early trials of the newly developed destroyers before joining the naval intelligence division, the naval planning centre, between 1896 and 1899. Here he worked on the Spanish-American War of 1898, among other subjects. After two years on the Australian station, which included acting as deputy commissioner for the Western Pacific, Tupper attended the first Royal Navy war course at Greenwich, where he lectured on the Spanish-American War. He was promoted captain on 30 June 1901. 
Discharged from the war course, in April 1902 Tupper served as secretary to the Camperdown committee, which recommended subsidizing merchant ships for use as auxiliary cruisers, resulting in the construction of the Cunard liners 'Lusitania' and 'Mauritania'. Tupper developed a friendship with the inquiry chairman, Robert Adam Philips Haldane Haldane-Duncan, third earl of Camperdown (1841-1918). In 1903 he took command of the cruiser 'Venus' in the Mediterranean, where he reverted to intelligence work, monitoring Russian activity in the Suez Canal during the Russo-Japanese War (1904-5). Subsequently he commanded British naval forces policing civil disorder in Crete, a role he retained when he took command of the battleship 'Prince of Wales' in July 1905. 
In July 1907 Tupper became captain of the 'Excellent', the most prestigious command for a gunnery officer, a post he held for four years. He directed the gunnery trials of the dreadnought era, working on improved ammunition, fire control, and armour protection in close co-operation with his friend Rear-Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. He organized an impressive display of amphibious power for visiting Commonwealth leaders in 1909 and the naval gun carriage that carried King Edward VII's coffin at the state funeral, for which service he was appointed CVO. Promoted rear-admiral on 23 September 1910, Tupper escorted high-profile guests at George V's coronation fleet review in June 1911, and in November 1912 took command of the reserve squadrons of the Home Fleet, based at Portsmouth, for a year. 
When war broke out in 1914 Tupper was on half pay, only returning to sea in January 1915, as senior naval officer auxiliary rear-admiral patrols. Based at Stornoway, he was tasked with securing the north-western approaches to the United Kingdom against enemy raiders and submarines. Having successfully discharged these duties Tupper was promoted vice-admiral on 26 January 1916. 
On 6 March 1916 Tupper was appointed to the command of the 10th cruiser squadron, a force of armed merchant cruisers intercepting neutral ships attempting to evade the blockade of Germany, with his flag in the 'Alsatian' (Captain Humphrey Smith). In October 1916 Tupper and Smith recommended convoying merchant shipping, but the Admiralty ignored their advice. In command, Tupper tightened up discipline, improved gunnery, and, critically, provided the leadership needed to maintain the morale and commitment of a force largely manned by reservists on a vital, but unglamorous, demanding, and dangerous mission, frequently conducted in appalling conditions. In April 1917 he was knighted KCB for his work, just as the entry of the United States into the war reduced the task. 
In December 1917 Tupper took over the 2nd cruiser squadron, which conducted anti-U-boat patrols over the northern minefield barrage, between Scotland and Norway. He hauled down his flag in August 1918 when his command was reduced, and went on half pay. In April 1919 he relieved Admiral Sir Lewis Bayly as commander-in-chief western approaches, based at Queenstown, now Cobh, in Ireland, a post he held for two years. Presiding over the break-up of the United Kingdom was painful for a man with his Anglo-Irish background and imperial service ethic. It was his last naval appointment. In May 1921, a month after leaving Cobh, Tupper voluntarily retired, to make way for younger officers. In 1923 he was appointed GBE. 
In retirement Tupper found outlets for his energy, as chairman of the council of the Royal United Services Institute, and with the British Fascisti, an aristocratic right-wing group. In 1929 Tupper published his 'Reminiscences', a slightly unreliable compilation of charming vignettes. After the death of his first wife he married second, on 24 June 1933, Caroline Maud Abadie (1863-1948), the widow of General Sir Henry Richard Abadie; she was the daughter of Colonel Fanshawe Gostling, of the Royal Berkshire regiment. In 1935 Tupper received a good service pension. In 1939, aged eighty, he volunteered his services to the Admiralty, but the offer was not taken up. He died, of pulmonary oedema, at 22 Draycott Place, Chelsea, London, on 5 March 1945. 
Characteristically Tupper avoided taking sides in the vicious controversies that split the service in the Edwardian decade, having good friends in both camps. A member of the masonic naval lodge, he was nicknamed 'Holy Reggie' by his sailors in the First World War and was considered a martinet. Tupper was a thoroughly professional sea officer. While he remained devoted to the class distinctions that had shaped the late Victorian navy, his gunnery expertise, intelligence work, and colonial administration demonstrated impressive intellectual range and depth, while his outstanding wartime leadership was based on mastery of the human factor in warfare. 


@@@@@


doc= 98156


Rendel, Leila Margaret (1882-1969), social worker and children's campaigner, was born on 11 October 1882 at 1 Palace Gardens Terrace, Kensington, London, the eldest child of William Stuart Rendel, civil engineer, and his wife, Ruth Frances, daughter of the publisher Kegan Paul. Her sister, Olive, became a doctor and her brother, Robin, an actor. Mary Stocks, Baroness Stocks, was a cousin. She left school at fifteen and was educated by a governess, Helen Higginbottom. She was then sent to a French finishing school, where she became friendly with Eleanor Roosevelt. She spent many of her early years at 23 Russell Square, the house of her grandfather, Sir Alexander Rendel, a Victorian radical. She trained as a teacher of physical training, and her teaching led to her appointment by the board of education as an inspector. However, nature had not intended her for an athletic life, and she was not inclined to be a civil servant. 
Leila Rendel enjoyed a close personal relationship with her aunt, Edith Rendel, an active poor-law guardian and militant suffragist, who in 1908 established a large day nursery in St Pancras. In her spare time Leila Rendel joined Phyllis Potter in running a nursery class at Whitfield's Tabernacle in Tottenham Court Road. It became clear to her what path she should then take. Her grandfather's sympathy for her work expressed itself in a financial endowment, which was enough to set her free for the unpaid work she wished to undertake. She founded her own nursery at Cartwright Gardens, St Pancras, in 1911, and for the next fifty-eight years ran a community that was to influence the lives of thousands of children and establish standards in residential care that were followed by many other pioneers. The nursery was surrounded with pictures by Randolph Caldecott and she took his name for her community. 
Rendel understood the needs of deprived children in ways that were innovative and pioneering. She believed in giving the children in her care the security they had missed in life, and also provided them with attractive and stimulating surroundings. In the moves that her community experienced each new house was adapted and made what she considered beautiful. In 1947, after the war and a period in Dorset, the Caldecott Community moved to Mersham-le-Hatch, Kent, a magnificent house built by Robert Adam and owned by Lord Brabourne. The surrounding fields, woods, and parkland were ideal for Miss Leila, as the children called her, to nourish the very deprived and often delinquent children she admitted. 
Rendel was a huge person with an equally large personality, and she exuded an air of authority respected by children and staff. She was a Quaker and ran a non-denominational service every Sunday in the chapel in the community. Her partner in the early days, Phyllis Potter, parted from Rendel in 1931 as she wished the community to work on specifically Church of England lines. Until then they had had a long and fruitful working relationship. Ethel Davies then became co-director, and she and Rendel lived and worked together until Rendel's death. Together they kept the Caldecott Community going through many difficult times, particularly during the Second World War. Rendel had a somewhat cavalier attitude to money and neither director ever received a salary. She believed that if the objective was right then God would provide. And he did. 
Rendel was the moving force behind a great many of the mid-twentieth-century developments in the treatment of disturbed and difficult children. With the financial help of the Nuffield Trust in 1947 she set up the first experimental reception centre in England, to assess the most appropriate placement for children who came into care, a project later developed by many local authorities. Throughout the following years the Caldecott Community served as a powerhouse of ideas for the better understanding of children and their needs, and the inspiration always came from Leila Rendel. She held three firm principles for dealing with young people. She maintained first that it was essential to give children continuity in their relationship with adults, and for them to receive appropriate affection from those adults. Second, she believed in integrating freedom and order within her community. Finally, she maintained that it was essential to recognize the individuality of each child and find an identity that might have been lost. Children recognized the love that Rendel intuitively gave them, but also that there were necessary boundaries. 
Rendel gave evidence to the Curtis committee, set up in 1945 to examine the changes that needed to be made in looking after deprived children. As a result children's departments were established by local authorities, and it was not surprising that she was then asked to be a member of the Home Office advisory council on child care. She was a lifelong friend of Kurt Hahn, the creator of Gordonstoun School, of which she became a founder governor and where she spent a week every year. She was a co-opted member of the Kent education committee and of the Kent children's committee from its inception in 1948, and remained an active member until her final illness. Her contribution to working with children was recognized in 1948 when she was appointed OBE. 
Rendel suffered a fall in her house on 16 March 1969. While she was lying on the floor with a broken hip, waiting for the ambulance to take her to Ashford Hospital, she insisted on reading the latest book on child care as she did not like to waste time. She died of heart failure during the operation later that day and was cremated at Lenham. She wrote in the Caldecott Community's charter that 'The Community exists solely that it may go forward on an eternal quest for ever seeking to discover God's purpose for his world and for each individual soul in his world.' That quest never left her. 


@@@@@


doc= 98157


Ibrahim (1873-1959). He was born on 17 September 1873 at Istana Bidadari, Singapore, Abu Bakar's only son with his second wife, Cecilia Lange. He was educated privately. In 1890 he joined the Johore military forces and served as aide-de-camp to his father for the rest of his reign. He paid the first of many visits to Europe in 1890-91, when his father introduced him to European royalty, and on his return he was installed as tunku mahkota (crown prince). He was proclaimed sultan on the day his father was buried and he was crowned on 2 November 1895 in a ceremony described at the time as 'a curious mixture of Oriental and European customs' (Gullick, 'Malay Society', 46). 


@@@@@


doc= 98158


Boyd, Sir Gerald Farrell (1877-1930), army officer, was born at 2 Colville Terrace West, Kensington, London, on 19 November 1877, the second son of Robert Boyd, merchant, and his wife, Lydia, 'nee' Isaacs. Educated at St Paul's School, he failed Sandhurst entry and enlisted as a private soldier in the Devonshire regiment in October 1895, giving 17 October 1877 as his date of birth, as he would otherwise have been too young. 
By 1899 Boyd was a sergeant, going with his battalion to South Africa in that year. He had a good war, being awarded the DCM -- not an easy decoration to win, since a tiny pension accompanied it -- and being commissioned as a second lieutenant in the field into the East Yorkshire regiment in May 1900. He had a busy war, too, being present at the relief of Ladysmith, Colenso (where he was captured but escaped), Wittebergen, and numerous other operations. While a second lieutenant, commanding a mounted infantry section, he was also appointed DSO and mentioned in dispatches three times. At the time he was the only officer to be DSO and to hold the DCM. In 1902 he was promoted lieutenant and in 1904 captain in the Leinster regiment. In 1907, appointed adjutant to his regimental depot at Birr, King's county, he courted Grace Sophia (1885-1954), daughter of Arthur Hugo Florian de Burdet Burdett, landowner, of Coolfin, Banagher, King's county. They married on 9 January 1913 and had two sons. In September 1912 Boyd took on his first staff job, as brigade major (chief of the brigade staff) of the 11th infantry brigade. 
Having received a glowing confidential report from his superior, recommending him for accelerated promotion, Boyd went as a captain with 11th brigade to France in August 1914. He stayed in that post until February 1915, when he left to be a general staff officer, second grade (GSO2), on the 1st division staff. He was promoted a substantive major in the Royal Irish regiment the next month, receiving a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy the following day. In July 1915 he was appointed GSO1 (again chief of staff) of 6th division, in which appointment he remained until June the following year, when he rose to temporary brigadier-general and chief of staff (BGGS) of the 5th corps. In less than two years he had risen from captain to brigadier-general. While a brigade major he was wounded (at Le Cateau), and was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. 
After two years as brigadier general of the 5th corps, in July 1918 Boyd was given his first field command, as general officer commanding 170th brigade, in 57th division. Though he spent several months training his brigade, he commanded it in action only for a few days. Nevertheless, these were during the battles of the Scarpe at the end of August 1918, and of the Drocourt-Queant line at the beginning of September. In both the brigade's efforts were attended with some success. 
On 4 September 1918 Boyd, aged forty, was promoted to temporary major-general and given command of the 46th (north midland) division. This formation had suffered very badly on the first day of the Somme in 1916 and thereafter had not been employed in any major operation. It might, therefore, have been seen as by no means a first-rank division, but under Boyd's command it achieved what many historians view as the finest feat of arms by British troops of the entire war. This was the storming of the Hindenburg line's main position at Bellenglise on 29 September 1918. Intended as a subsidiary attack to the main assault led by Australian and American forces to the north, which in fact was held up, the 46th division's attack, in which the troops crossed the steep-sided St Quentin Canal using lifebelts borrowed from channel steamers, cork rafts, and the like, was completely successful, as were subsequent operations to consolidate the success and force the Germans out of their last prepared positions. 4000 prisoners and 70 guns were captured. Boyd has been regarded as embodying 'the 'can-do' spirit of the army of 1918' (Boyd). By the end of the war he had been mentioned in dispatches four times and was created CMG in 1918 and CB in 1919. 
Boyd continued in command of the 46th division after the armistice, and then was allocated to take over the 6th division, part of the British army of the Rhine, occupying an area around Cologne. This command officially commenced on 2 April 1919, but on 10 April Boyd was appointed brigadier general and chief of staff at the general headquarters of the British army of the Rhine and on 3 June was made a substantive major-general. In January 1920 he took command of the Dublin military district during the Anglo-Irish war, a challenging appointment for him in view of his family connections with the southern Irish landed gentry. His main task was to chase members of Sinn Fein, using his nine infantry battalions, plus armoured cars and tanks, with RAF support. In addition, Black and Tans and auxiliary police were at his disposal. He organized raids on private houses in search of wanted men and arms, and it was on his orders that Arthur Griffith was arrested in November 1920. At one point Boyd had contact with an IRA peace envoy, but nothing came of their meeting; in any case he was not empowered to agree anything with the latter. He was created KCB in 1923. 
Boyd was commandant of the Indian Staff College at Quetta from 1923 to 1927, after which he returned to Britain to be military secretary to the secretary of state for war. He died of cerebral spinal fever at the Queen Alexandra Military Hospital, London, on 12 April 1930. After a funeral at the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, he was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 98161


Julian, John (1839-1913), Church of England clergyman and hymnologist, was born in Mithian, near St Agnes, Cornwall, on 27 January 1839, the eldest son of Thomas Julian, miner (later civil engineer), and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Ensor. He was educated privately and entered St Aidan's College, Durham, in 1864 to study for the Anglican ministry. Two years later he was ordained deacon by Archbishop William Thomson in York Minster, to serve his title as curate of Thornaby-on-Tees in the North Riding of Yorkshire. On 5 September 1866, at Eccleshall, he married Mary Bibby (1829/30-1890), youngest daughter of Samuel Cocker, steel manufacturer. They had two daughters, Mary Elizabeth and Ethel May, and a son, who predeceased him. 
In 1867 Julian was ordained priest, and moved from Thornaby to St Mark's, Liverpool, in 1868. In 1871 he began his third curacy, at St Peter's, Preston, Lancashire. In 1874 he wrote the hymn 'Father of all to thee', published in Godfrey Thring's 'Church of England Hymn Book' in 1882. It was the only one of Julian's hymns to be selected for inclusion in the second edition of 'Hymns Ancient and Modern'. 
In 1876 Julian became the incumbent of Wincobank, in the South Riding of Yorkshire, where he conducted most of his research for the main work of scholarship for which he is renowned: 'A Dictionary of Hymnology, setting forth the origin and history of the Christian hymns of all ages and nations, with special reference to those contained in the hymn-books of English-speaking countries, and now in common use, together with biographical and critical notices of their authors and translators, and historical articles on national and denominational hymnody, breviaries, missals, primers, psalters, sequences, &c., &c'. The first edition, published by John Murray in 1892, was in one volume of 150 pages. A second, enlarged and revised edition with a supplement was published in 1907, and is widely recognized as one of the most significant contributions to the study of hymnology. 
Having being made an honorary MA of Durham University in 1887, Julian was created a Lambeth DD in 1894 by the archbishop of Canterbury, Edward W. Benson, in recognition of his dictionary's significant editorial scholarship. In the same year he was made an honorary LLD of Howard University, Washington DC, and wrote 'History of the Use of Hymns in Public Worship, and their Proper Characteristics'. After the death of his first wife, he married on 3 February 1894 Eva Christine Katherine Pilipp, the eldest daughter of Johann Pilipp of Schweinan, Nuremburg. 
In 1901 Julian was made prebendary of Fenton, and honorary canon with a stall in York Minster. He left Wincobank in 1905 (with gifts of a candelabrum and a gold watch and chain) on his appointment by the dean and chapter of York as vicar of St Columba's, Topcliffe, near Thirsk in the North Riding of Yorkshire. As a senior cleric in the diocese he was also made a bishop's surrogate in 1903 and became rural dean of Thirsk in 1906. During his incumbency of Topcliffe he bought land and made minor additions and re-orderings to the church, such as moving the font slightly eastward, creating a choir vestry at the foot of the tower, and moving the pulpit to the north side of the nave. He continued to publish in the area of hymnology: 'Sacred Carols, Ancient and Modern, with Musical Illustrations' appeared in 1909, followed in 1911 by 'A Critical Monograph on Nearer my God to Thee'. After suffering from a brief illness, during which he underwent an operation, he died in his vicarage in Front Street, Topcliffe, on 22 January 1913. A memorial service took place at Topcliffe on 24 January and he was buried the following day. In a closely typed will, he bequeathed such items as 'the Madonna in my dining room', a 'presentation tea urn', a silver lamp, various musical instruments, the candelabra, and various pictures including etchings by Rubens and family oil portraits. 
Since its publication, Julian's 'Dictionary of Hymnology' has been the definitive work in the study of hymns and their authors, and it survives as Julian's most significant contribution to ecclesiastical, poetical, and historical literature. Involving the work of forty-three contributors as well as Julian himself, it is particularly important for its research into early Latin, Greek, and German hymns, for which Julian had a particular penchant. He also had a high opinion of his 'magnum opus': in his will he described it as a work on which he had 'spent much time and arduous labour' (it seems that he began work on it in 1881). In its preface he claimed that in order to attain 'minute technical accuracy', everything was meticulously researched at first hand, such that 'The pursuit of this aim has very frequently demanded, for the production of one page only, as much time and attention, as is usually expended on one hundred pages of ordinary history or criticism.' Ten thousand manuscripts were consulted, and over a thousand people wrote letters to Julian assisting him in his research into a field that, according to Julian, numbered more than 400,000 hymns. This being so, Julian's research and achievement was truly magisterial; his dictionary has remained at the forefront of hymnological research for over a hundred years. 
Three of the hymns that Julian himself wrote remain in use: 'Father of all, to thee', 'Hark, the voice eternal', and 'O God of God'. Before he died he gave his extensive library of books and manuscripts on hymnology to the library of Church House, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 98169


Macleod, Joseph Todd Gordon (1903-1984), poet and radio announcer, was born at 19 Inglis Road, Ealing, Middlesex, on 24 April 1903, the only surviving child of Scottish parents, James Gordon Macleod, who became managing director of the Rio Tinto Trading Company, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Todd. He was educated at Rugby School, where he published poetry, book reviews, and essays in 'The Rugbeian', the literary supplement he edited at Rugby from 1919 to 1921 with the art critic Adrian Durham Stokes. One of his poems was included in 'Public School Verse, 1921'. In 1922 he went to Balliol College, Oxford, where he took a third-class degree in jurisprudence in 1925. At Oxford he belonged to the Mantichorean Society, founded by Graham Greene, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship. Macleod had poems and short stories accepted for the 'Oxford Outlook', edited for a time by Greene, and 'The Cherwell', which he edited in the autumn of 1924. 'Oxford Poetry, 1924' included one of his poems, and three appeared in 'Oxford Poetry, 1925'. 
After graduating Macleod was admitted to the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar in 1928, the year in which he married Kathleen (Kit) Macgregor (died 1953), daughter of Robert Davis MD of Uddingston. While studying for the bar he wrote 'Beauty and the Beast', which the American poetry editor Alfred Kreymborg termed a 'racy' and 'rumbustious' book of literary comment (13 March 1928, NL Scot., Macleod papers), and which was accepted by Charles Prentice of Chatto and Windus in 1927. Also published by the Viking Press of New York in 1928, it was essentially Macleod's attempt to define the distinction between bad literature and good, with a modernist bias. His own first long poem, 'The Ecliptic', was accepted for publication by T. S. Eliot at Faber and Faber in 1930, at Ezra Pound's insistence. It is divided into twelve cantos, representing the twelve signs of the zodiac. Eliot included 'Leo, or, The Lion' in the July 1930 issue of 'The Criterion', and Pound included 'Libra, or, The Scales' in his private anthology 'Profile' (1932). Basil Bunting regarded the poem as 'the best thing since 'The Waste Land'' ('Poetry: a Magazine of Verse', 40, 1932, 267-8). Pound later referred to this section of the poem in 'Canto CXIV' (1969), and corresponded with Macleod for many years. The poem was criticized for its opaque modernist style: although admiring the poem's versification, the American poet Delmore Schwartz thought that it 'ignores the common reader' (4 Dec 1934, NLScot., Macleod papers) and discussed the poem in 'Mosaic: a Critical Quarterly' (spring 1935). Macleod's second poem, 'Foray of Centaurs' (1931), was rejected by Herbert Read of Faber and Faber, and by all other publishing houses to whom it was submitted. Sections were published by 'This Quarter' (Paris), 'Poetry' (Chicago), and 'The Criterion', but it was never published in book form during his lifetime. 
Macleod had abandoned the law to join the Cambridge Festival Theatre in 1929, and from 1929 to 1933 learned acting and theatre production under the tutelage of Terence Gray. In 1933 he succeeded Gray as theatre director and lessee at Cambridge, and held this post until 1935, when a shortage of finances forced him to leave. The theatre's highly stylized productions under both Macleod and Gray were regularly noted and praised by commentators who travelled from as far afield as Russia and the United States to watch them. Macleod wrote poems that steadily increased in their realism and clarity for the 'Festival Theatre (New Lease) Programme' (1933-5), which he edited; they anticipated the socialist realist poetry of the 1940s. He wrote a satirical novel 'Overture to Cambridge' (1936), adapted from his play of the same title that shows the influence of H. G. Wells and Aldous Huxley. Macleod's friendships with Aldous and his brother Julian Huxley were important in the development of his early, scientific-based verse. After completing his novel he was attracted by politics, and in 1937 became secretary of Huntingdonshire divisional Labour Party and was briefly a prospective parliamentary candidate. 
In 1938, after researching and recording a highly popular radio programme on Russian theatre history, Macleod was appointed a BBC announcer. During the war years he became a household name as a newsreader. His engagement with a mass audience influenced his poetic output, which now contained a strong simplicity while retaining his own distinct craftsmanship and intricacy of versification. Writing under the pseudonym Adam Drinan he published the poem sequences 'The Cove' (1940) and 'The Men of the Rocks' (1942), a verse-play 'The Ghosts of the Strath' (1943), and 'Women of the Happy Island' (1944) in rapid succession. At the suggestion of Naomi Mitchison, Macleod's 'Women of the Happy Island' was published by William MacLellan (1915-1996), the key publisher of the Scottish renaissance. Drinan was revered by W. S. Graham, Compton Mackenzie, Neil M. Gunn, William Montgomerie (1904-1994), and Edwin Muir, who marvelled at his ability to render Gaelic rhythms and assonance in English, and his vivid descriptions of the Scottish landscape and its inhabitants. The American beat poet Kenneth Rexroth included both Macleod and Drinan in 'New British Poets' (1949). Through the Drinan verse Macleod sought to develop a 'documentary' style that focused on community and locality, particularly the people of the Scottish highlands and islands, while referring to such past oppressions as the clearances. Macleod's ancestors were from Skye, Drinan being one of its towns. 'Women', a sequence of forty-one soliloquies by speakers of the Hebridean Isle of Barra, was his most popular and well-received work, selling over 650 copies. At this time he also rose to prominence as a theatre historian under his own name with the publication of 'The New Soviet Theatre' (1943). 
Macleod had an uneasy relationship with the BBC authorities, who were suspicious of his socialist politics and Soviet sympathies. After being suspended from newsreading in 1943, he eventually resigned in November 1945 and settled in Edinburgh. His book 'A Job at the B.B.C.' (1947) exposed his frustrations with the corporation's stifling, rigid conformity. He was managing director of the Scottish National Film Studios from 1946 to 1947, and was involved in theatre production. Vice-president of the Scottish-USSR society, he made a cultural visit to the Soviet Union in 1947. He revealed his identity as author on the cover of the final Drinan book, 'Script from Norway' (1953), a 2700 word poem written in the form of a film script. This follows a group of English and Scottish film-makers in Norway to make a documentary about the nation and its people. It reflects his Scottish nationalism, drawing a parallel between Scotland and Norway as controlled by England and Sweden respectively. Christopher Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) formed a singular dislike for the work of Drinan, perhaps since it was by a Scot writing in English. The pseudonym also irritated him, so that when Macleod finally revealed his identity, MacDiarmid dismissed his Drinan work as backward-looking, and insisted that he should have stuck to the early high modernist poetry of 'The Ecliptic'. 
After Kit Macleod's death in December 1953 Macleod ceased to produce publishable poetry, largely because his themes became intensely autobiographical. A final book, 'An Old Olive Tree' (1971), contained poems relating to his childhood, his family, poems about memory and the ageing process, and elegies to Greene and Stokes. By then he had married (on 10 December 1960) the sculptor Maria Teresa Foschini and long since settled into family life in Florence, where he died on 22 March 1984. His ashes were scattered at the Old Manse, his home in the Trossachs. 


@@@@@


doc= 98170


Herbert, Godfrey (1884-1961), naval officer, was born at 4 Warwick Road, Coventry, Warwickshire, on 28 February 1884, the younger son of John Herbert, solicitor, of Kenilworth, Warwickshire, and his wife, Lucy Mary, 'nee' Draper. He confided to a biographer that as a boy of eleven he was taken to the Isle of Wight in 1895 and the sight of the fleet anchored in Spithead decided him to seek a naval career. After preparation at Foster's School, Stubbington House, Hampshire, and the celebrated naval 'crammer' Littlejohn's School, Greenwich, he was admitted as a naval cadet to HMS 'Britannia' and gazetted a midshipman in June 1900. 
Promoted sub-lieutenant in July 1903, Herbert volunteered for the submarine service in January 1905 and spent three months training at the depot ship for submarines HMS 'Thames' before being appointed second-in-command of the submarine A4. The submarine's commander was Lieutenant Eric Nasmith, later an admiral and winner of the Victoria Cross. On 16 October Herbert had the first of his narrow escapes when the submarine flooded and settled to the bottom after a ventilator shaft had been inadvertently left open. 
Herbert was promoted lieutenant at the end of December 1905. In February 1911 his submarine C36 was one of three that began an unprecedentedly long passage to Hong Kong, in which he distinguished himself during a storm in the Red Sea by, at considerable risk to himself, reattaching a snapped hawser to the cruiser towing the submarine. 
When the war began in August 1914 Herbert was in command of the submarine D5 under the commodore of submarines, Roger Keyes, at Harwich. On 21 August he encountered the German cruiser 'Rostock' in the Heligoland Bight and, in what seemed like a perfect opportunity, fired two torpedoes. They both missed. It was only later that the British discovered that the torpedo warheads were some forty pounds heavier than those used in practice and without compensation would run deeper. He had another narrow escape when on 3 November D5, after putting to sea to repel a raid by German warships on Gorleston, struck a floating British mine that had come adrift. Only a handful of the crew survived. 
In January 1915 Herbert switched to the form of naval warfare that was to give him his greatest fame. He was appointed to command the Q-ship 'Antwerp'. The Q-ships were designed to look like innocent and vulnerable merchantmen, with the aim of luring an enemy submarine close enough on the surface so that at the right moment they could deploy their hidden weapons. The 'Antwerp' had no luck and in April 1915 Herbert was given command of the 'Baralong', a ship that resembled a typical tramp steamer. On 19 August, approximately 80 miles west of the Scillies in the western approaches, Herbert answered a wireless SOS from the steamer 'Nicosian' reporting that she was being chased by two submarines. The 'Nicosian' was forced to halt by the German submarine U-27 and the crew was either in the process of abandoning ship or had already taken to the lifeboats when the 'Baralong' arrived on the scene. Herbert, flying the still neutral American flag and with an American flag hung on boards over the side of the ship, approached as close as possible and then opened fire, raising the British naval ensign at the same time. U-27 was sunk. Approaching under false colours was a traditional 'ruse de guerre' and Herbert insisted he was not flying the American flag when he actually opened fire. 
However much the Germans might have protested at being caught by the ruse it was really what followed the submarine's destruction that caused the controversy. About a dozen survivors from the submarine were observed swimming towards the 'Nicosian' and attempting to board. Herbert, informed by the rescued master of the 'Nicosian' that the ship carried a cargo of mules purchased for the British government, feared the Germans might attempt to set fire to the fodder and ordered them to be 'shot away'. Some were apparently killed in the water -- there were no reported survivors from U-27 -- but about six Germans managed to board the 'Nicosian'. Herbert, remembering the initial report of two enemy submarines, assumed the Germans were going to scuttle the ship and sent a party of marines to board. He had also learned from 'Nicosian''s master that there were rifles and ammunition in the chart house and instructed the marine corporal in charge of the boarding party that they were facing desperate men, to take no chances and to shoot first. The Germans aboard the 'Nicosian' were hunted and shot, the bodies promptly buried at sea. The deaths were attributed to 'the heat of battle' and it must be remembered that feeling ran high at the time against German submariners because of the sinking of the liner 'Lusitania' the previous May and the news just received that the liner 'Arabic' had been torpedoed. 
Exactly what happened in the confined and darkened passages of the 'Nicosian' may never be known. The incident was kept quiet in England but 'Nicosian' had carried a party of American muleteers who on their return to the United States spoke to the press and the story came out, probably with a good deal of exaggeration. The Germans, who had been the target of numerous war crimes charges, now had one to lay against the British. They labelled the captain of the 'Baralong' a war criminal who had killed German sailors in cold blood and misused a neutral flag, and demanded that he be tried for murder and punished accordingly. A published diplomatic correspondence ensued at the end of 1915 and early in 1916. The ''Baralong' incident' became one of the most celebrated of the war and a German justification for the adoption of unrestricted submarine warfare. Herbert was appointed DSO for the action but the Admiralty seemed a bit embarrassed and only identified the 'Baralong''s commander as a Captain William McBride, possibly to protect Herbert should he ever fall into German hands. 
On 3 May 1916 Herbert married Ethel Ellen, daughter of William Daymond Hammick, the widow of Francis Arthur Nelson, a Royal Marines officer. They had two daughters. He briefly commanded the submarine E22, followed by the Q-ship 'Corrigan Head'. In October 1916 he asked to return to submarines and was appointed to command the K13, then under construction. The K-boats were an ultimately unsuccessful class of large, complex, steam-powered submarines, which nearly cost Herbert his life. On 29 January 1917 K13, on trials with eighty men aboard, foundered. The survivors were trapped in the sunken submarine, apparently doomed if not rescued before their air supply ran out. Herbert and another officer, who died in the attempt, made a perilous underwater ascent through the conning tower to seek rescue. Eventually K13's hull was raised sufficiently for forty-six survivors to escape. 
Herbert was next given command of a flotilla of four trawlers equipped with hydrophones working in the western approaches. On 13 June 1917 his flotilla detected and sank UC-66. He was promoted to commander but it was not until the submarine's destruction and identity was confirmed in 1919 that he received a bar to his DSO. He spent the remainder of the war on the staff of Admiral Sir Lewis Bayly at Queenstown, a base primary employed in anti-submarine warfare. 
Following the armistice Herbert spent a few months in the cruiser 'Caledon' engaged in operations against the Bolsheviks in the Baltic before retiring from the Royal Navy in November 1919 after twenty-one years of service. He subsequently became sales manager for the Daimler car division of the Birmingham Small Arms Company. Recalled to service in 1939, he commanded the armed merchant cruiser 'Cilicia', a converted liner primarily employed on the west coast of Africa. In 1943 Herbert left active service and worked in Beira as managing director of Allen, Wack, and Shepherd Ltd. He moved in 1948 to Umtali, Rhodesia, where he was chairman of Hodgson and Myburgh Ltd, 1955-9, and chairman of Rhodesian Insurances (Pvt Ltd) and Sunrho Ltd. He died in Umtali on 8 August 1961. 
Submarines nearly cost Herbert his life on at least three occasions and on a fourth they earned him the dubious nickname of 'Baralong' Herbert. The 'Baralong' incident is another example of how submarines did not fit into the traditional practices of naval warfare. Q-ships themselves were to be of diminishing utility as the Germans became more wary. This, however, had a certain advantage for by attacking while submerged the German submarines were forced to expend their limited supply of torpedoes, thereby curtailing their operations. The most successful submarine commanders achieved the majority of their results while surfaced by gunfire or explosive charges. In the long run, by provoking the Germans to resort to 'unrestricted submarine warfare', the British helped bring them into direct conflict with the United States, with decisive results for the outcome of the war. Herbert, however controversial his actions in August 1915, played at least a small part in this. 


@@@@@


doc= 98185


Fullard, Philip Fletcher (1897-1984), air force officer, was born at 9 Mayfield Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 27 June 1897, the only son of Thomas Fletcher Fullard of Hatfield, a foreign correspondent and former private secretary to the American ambassador to Russia, and his wife, Annie Harriet Maud, 'nee' Diver. Educated at King Edward VI School, Norwich, he played football with the Norwich City reserves before, in 1915, enlisting in the inns of court officer training corps. Commissioned into the Royal Irish Fusiliers in 1916, he became a machine gun instructor, an experience to which he attributed his practice of always being meticulous in checking his aircraft weapons and their ammunition. Accepted for the Royal Flying Corps, he attended the School of Military Aeronautics at Oxford. At the Central Flying School at Upavon, where he gained his wings in December 1916, he was retained for four months as a flying instructor, which meant that he had accumulated significantly more than the standard flying experience when he was eventually posted to the western front. 
In April 1917 Fullard joined 1 squadron at Ballieul in April 1917 to fly Nieuport fighters. Given command of C flight, he proved himself as a natural leader at a time when losses were high. In his first six weeks eighty-four pilots passed through the squadron, 'many of them not having unpacked their kit before they were casualties' (Staff College memoir, TNA: PRO, AIR 1/2387/228/11/4). His own growing personal score of enemy aircraft included one famous, but never officially confirmed, victim: Manfred von Richthofen (the Red Baron), whom he encountered rectifying a gun stoppage and shot down over Roulers, though von Richthofen was only wounded. He attributed the success of his flight -- every one of whose six members had at least five victories to his credit -- to teamwork. 
After some dozen victories by mid-July 1917 Fullard was awarded the Military Cross for his 'fine leadership, great dash and determination to close with the enemy'. Three weeks later, and after another ten or so victories, he received a bar to his MC for his 'utmost dash and fearlessness in attacking the enemy at close range [which have] in almost every instance resulted in disaster for the enemy'. In mid-August, and still a twenty-year-old temporary captain, he was appointed DSO: 'As a patrol leader and scout pilot he is without equal. The moral effect of his presence in a patrol is most marked. He has now accounted for 14 machines destroyed and 18 driven down out of control in a little over four months.' On one flight he damaged blood vessels in his eyes in a too rapid powered diving spin and he was rested -- but he rejoined his squadron in time for the opening of the battle of Passchendaele when ground strafing was added to the squadron's patrol and escort duties. 
The highest ever scoring 1 squadron pilot, Fullard claimed a further eighteen victories after his DSO. He was recommended for a bar to his DSO but this, and a rumoured recommendation for a higher gallantry award, was rejected by higher authorities. Although the leader of a successful flight he was outspoken in criticizing elements of the offensive tactics ordered by the Royal Flying Corps's higher command, particularly if surprise was lost when aircraft repeatedly followed the same route returning from offensive action over enemy territory. Further, strafing enemy balloons resulted in the enemy loitering in the vicinity awaiting the British aircraft whose performance was, by the summer of 1917, becoming inferior to the newer German machines. 
Playing football at Ballieul in November 1917 Fullard broke a leg, which required seven operations and the fitting of a metal plate. He later admitted that, after eight months of air fighting, his nerves had given way. He then spent ten months in hospital and convalescing. Out of the front line his name became overshadowed by those of his fellow air aces who achieved international fame. Promoted major but transferred to the new Royal Air Force in 1918 as a flight lieutenant, he carried out 'light duties' as a flying examiner for the York, then Glasgow, areas. Although he was due to join an operational squadron in December 1918 the armistice intervened and he was given a staff job working on applications for commissions. 
In 1919 Fullard raised funds for the victory loan in a tour of the western states of the USA, where large subscribers were promised introductions to air aces. On his return to London he joined 12 squadron, given the task of photographing the occupied areas of the Rhine. From June 1921 to May 1922 he was in Silesia as air adviser. In 1922 he joined 4 squadron monitoring Turkish activity around Chanak. After attending the RAF Staff College course at Andover in 1923 he toured the Baltic states and then spent five years in the Air Ministry directorate of operations and intelligence. In March 1929, and promoted squadron leader, he joined the air staff of Iraq command for two years before returning to England and, on 11 December 1931, marrying Pamela Gladys, the former wife of William McCargo Cross and the daughter of Arthur Hildebrand Ramsden-Tagore of Hassocks, Sussex. 
Fullard then commanded 2 (army co-operation) squadron at Manston before completing the Army Staff College course at Quetta, India, in 1934. Commanding a detachment of 5 (army co-operation) squadron from Rawalpindi and attacking -- with 20 pound bombs and small-arms ammunition -- rebellious tribesmen during the Mohmand campaign in the north-west frontier, he was mentioned in dispatches. Promoted wing commander in 1936, he commanded 3 apprentice wing at the RAF School of Technical Training at Halton for two years before, in June 1938, joining the air staff of RAF Maintenance Command. His first marriage had ended by 1937 and, on 20 June 1939, he married Winifred Helen, the daughter of Frederick Simeons, merchant. 
In 1939, as war again approached, Fullard was promoted group captain and commanded the component fighter group of the advanced air striking force of the British expeditionary force in France. He returned to England as senior air staff officer to 10 (fighter) group and was appointed CBE in January 1941; promoted air commodore in 1942, he was senior air staff officer at HQ Fighter Command. A year later he was sent to Lisbon to negotiate defence matters with the Portuguese government, particularly the allies' use of air bases in the Azores to fill the 'Atlantic gap'. 
Fullard retired from the RAF in November 1946 and took up a business career in the engineering industry, particularly with his firm Municipal Machinery Limited of Rochester. In spite of his fertile imagination, inventiveness, and energy, he never made the great fortune he often spoke of planning. He was slim and of medium height, the 'Daily Mail' describing him in January 1918 as 'a fair, curly-haired, good-looking boy, clear-eyed and fresh complexioned with regular features'. Like his father he was a keen philatelist; in later life his sport was skiing. One of the longest surviving air aces of the First World War, Fullard died of heart failure on 24 April 1984 at his home, Cardinal Lodge, Leybourne Road, Broadstairs, Kent, and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 98187


Booth, John (d. 1478), bishop of Exeter, was a younger son of Sir Robert Booth of Barton upon Irwell, Lancashire, and later of Dunham Massey, Cheshire, and his wife, Dowse, daughter and coheir of Sir William Venables. References in historical works to John's father as Roger Booth, esquire, arise from confusing him with his cousin John ['see below']. The Booth or Bothe family produced an unusual number of important clergy. Robert's brother William Booth (d. 1464) became bishop of Coventry and Lichfield and later archbishop of York, and their half-brother Laurence Booth (d. 1480) bishop of Durham and later archbishop of York. John studied civil law at Cambridge during the 1450s, graduating BCL, and was appointed master of Gonville Hall in or shortly before 1456, but the appointment was contested and became the subject of an appeal to the papacy. His first recorded ecclesiastical benefice is the rectory of Thornton-le-Moors, Cheshire, in 1451, to which he was presented by his father, Sir Robert, the patron of the living. In due course he acquired various other parishes including Barnack in Northamptonshire, Girton in Cambridgeshire, Leigh in Lancashire, and St Mary Magdalene, Old Fish Street, London, and was later promoted to the substantial posts of treasurer of York Minster (1457), provost of Beverley Minster, Yorkshire (1457), and archdeacon of Richmond, Yorkshire (1459), all three of which were in the gift of his uncle William Booth. John was also warden of Manchester College, Lancashire, from 1459 and a canon of St Paul's Cathedral, London, with the prebend of Mapesbury, from 1464. 
William and Laurence Booth had close connections with Henry VI and his queen, Margaret of Anjou, but transferred their allegiance to Edward IV after his accession in 1461. John occurs as Edward's secretary in 1462 and held the office until at least 1464. His rising status and influence led to his election as chancellor of Cambridge University in 1463. Promotion as bishop of Exeter followed in 1465, doubtless on the king's initiative. The pope provided him to the dignity on 15 March, the temporalities of the see were restored to him on 12 June, and he was consecrated on 7 July. One of his first acts, on 19 June, was to appoint Henry Webber, dean of Exeter Cathedral, as his vicar-general, and Webber carried out business for him in the diocese until the early months of 1467. The register of Booth's activities as bishop first indicates his presence in the south-west of England on 22 February of that year, when he is mentioned at Exeter. He stayed in Devon until January or February 1469, living mostly on the episcopal manors of Bishop's Clyst and Chudleigh but making a brief expedition to Penryn in Cornwall, where he did business in June 1468. From February 1469 to April 1473 the vicar-general again ran the diocese, apparently in the bishop's absence, until Booth's return to Devon, where he is next to be found in May 1473. Between then and 1477 Booth spent part of each year in the county and part at London, Chelsea, or the episcopal manors of Faringdon, Hampshire, and East Horsley, Surrey. From August 1477 until his death he is recorded only at East Horsley. 
Booth's register is wholly composed of routine business, and there is no evidence that he engaged in any great project in his diocese. He was more original in bringing to it three men who were northerners and Cambridge graduates and therefore unusual in the south-west, although he also promoted southerners and men who had studied at Oxford. The three were Robert Aiscough (archdeacon of Exeter), Robert Barford (archdeacon of Barnstaple), and John Stubbes (treasurer of Exeter Cathedral). Booth died at East Horsley on 5 April 1478 and was buried in the chancel of the local parish church, not, as the antiquary John Hooker believed, in St Clement Danes Church, London (a mistake for the bishop's brother Sir William Booth, buried there in the same month). The ledger stone over his grave was inlaid with a monumental brass that survives, showing a kneeling bishop in cope and mitre, holding a pastoral staff. Its inscription, as well as identifying him and the date of his death, includes a couplet in Latin verse with a variant of the commonplace sentiment of 'I am what you will be, and I was what you are'. The brass displays the bishop's coat of arms: argent three boars' heads erect and erased sable; in chief a label of three points gules. Obit masses for his soul and those of Barford and Stubbes were subsequently instituted at Exeter Cathedral and the collegiate church of Ottery St Mary, Devon. 

John Booth (c.1436-1496), who is sometimes confused with his cousin, Bishop John Booth, was the son of Roger Booth, esquire, of Mollington, Cheshire, Roger being a brother of Sir Robert Booth and Archbishop William Booth and a half-brother of Archbishop Laurence Booth. In 1449, when John was said to be only in his fourteenth year, William Booth, then bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, appointed him to a sinecure post as master of the hospital of St Andrew at Denhall, Cheshire. In 1459 Reginald Boulers, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, promoted him to be treasurer of Lichfield Cathedral, and William Booth, by that time archbishop of York, added a canonry of Beverley Minster, Yorkshire, in 1461. During the 1460s he studied at Cambridge University, graduating as a bachelor of canon law 'c'.1465-6, and he acquired a further canonry, of York Minster, from Archbishop Thomas Rotherham in 1465. John Booth resigned as treasurer of Lichfield in 1495 and died, still holding his canonry of York, in 1496, being replaced on 26 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 98188


Abu Bakar (1833-1895), sultan of Johore, was born in Teluk Belanga, Singapore, most probably on 3 February 1833, the eldest son of Daing Ibrahim (1810-1862) and his first wife, Encik Ngah (also known as Tengku Andak), daughter of Sultan Abdul Rahman of Pahang. His grandfather had been the hereditary temenggong (defence minister) of the sultan of Riau-Lingga, whose empire was partitioned following agreements in 1819-24 by which Britain acquired Singapore. As a result the temonggong had been left in charge of most of mainland Johore. Daing Ibrahim was installed as temenggong in 1841 and set about developing his domain. He encouraged the settlement of Chinese immigrants and courted British officials and businessmen in Singapore. As part of his modernizing strategy he enrolled Abu Bakar at the English-medium academy that Benjamin Keasberry ran in Singapore. From 1855, when he became heir apparent, Abu Bakar played an increasingly active role in state government, and in 1858 he persuaded his father to move its headquarters from Singapore to Tanjong Putri (later Johore Bahru) on the mainland. 
Abu Bakar succeeded his father as temenggong on 1 February 1862. One of his first decisions was to develop Johore Bahru as the state capital. The administrative apparatus remained rudimentary, but it did feature a state council, treasury, police stations, and provision for local government and education. The economy grew, and revenue increased. Abu Bakar encouraged European investment and oversaw the expansion of land under cultivation. He continued his father's scheme ('kangchu') of licensing Chinese entrepreneurs to cultivate pepper, gambier, and later tea and coffee, and to them he farmed out the taxation of opium and spirits. At a time when Britain was intervening in failing Malay states, Abu Bakar consolidated his grip on Johore. Thus, on the death of the last sultan of Riau in 1877, he gained the territory of Kesang-Muar. He also embarked on 'a flamboyant diplomatic offensive' (Trocki, 191). He acted as an intermediary between the British and other Malay rulers, although his attempts to extend his influence over the latter were checked. He paid frequent and prolonged visits overseas and was received by Queen Victoria, the emperor of Japan, and the Ottoman sultan. In these ways he raised his standing in the eyes of those who had hitherto regarded the temenggongs as upstarts. His royal status was confirmed in 1868 when both the Riau court and the British government recognized him as maharaja, equivalent to a high-ranking Indian prince. Observing that in 'his tastes and habits he is an English gentleman', the governor of the Straits Settlements commended Abu Bakar's commitment to the 'advancement and civilization of his people' and his deep attachment to 'the British government and nation' (Cowan, 38-9). By the 1880s, however, another governor, Sir Frederick Weld, regarded him as (in the historian Eunice Thio's words) a 'pretentious and rather unreliable potentate' whose wings should be clipped (Thio, 100). 
In 1885 Abu Bakar had little choice but to conclude an agreement whereby he surrendered Johore's external relations to Britain, excluded from his state western concessionaries (other than British), and agreed to accept a British agent. For their part the British recognized Abu Bakar as sultan and his state as independent. Moreover, they refrained from appointing an agent, whose status and powers would in any case have fallen short of those of a resident. Furthermore, while Abu Bakar was content to assist the colonial governor, for example in his dealings with the sultan of Pahang, he astutely parried the governor's attempts to interfere in Johore by communicating directly with the Colonial Office through the Johore advisory board that he set up in London. His position as sovereign ruler of an independent state was confirmed in the high court in 1893 when an attempt by Jenny Mighell to sue him for breach of promise of marriage was dismissed on the grounds that he was not subject to British jurisdiction. Two years later he promulgated a written constitution, which kept British expansion at bay and enhanced the image of the sultanate as a progressive monarchy. 
Abu Bakar married first, at Pahang in June 1858, Encik Wan Chik (also known as Che' Engku Chick) ('b'. 1843), daughter of Bendahara Tahir of Pahang and his wife, Tunku Chik, daughter of the sultan of Kedah. He married second, in 1870, Cecilia Catherina Lange 
(also known as Zubaida; 1849-1936)
, daughter of Mads Johansen Lange, a Danish resident of Bali, and Nonya Sang Nio, daughter of the kapitan china of Kuta in Bali. He married third, at Singapore in December 1885, Fatima (died 1891), daughter of the orang kaya of Ringgit. He married fourth, at Istanbul on 22 September 1893, Khadija (died 1904), who was of Turkish origin. He had a son and four daughters. He died at Bailey's Hotel, Kensington, on 4 June 1895. His remains were taken back to Johore Bahru and interred on 7 September in the royal mausoleum, Makam Diraja Mahmudiah. He was mourned in Britain as a 'valued friend and ally' ('The Times', 6 June 1895) and came to be revered in Malaya as the 'father of modern Johore'. During his reign Johore had certainly become a more efficient and prosperous Malay state without succumbing to formal British control. Yet both its autonomy and its Malay identity had been compromised by the economic pull of neighbouring Singapore and a growing dependence on Chinese enterprise. Furthermore, modernization had been curbed by Abu Bakar's style of personal rule; his pursuit of prestige and prolonged absences abroad had distracted government and sorely depleted the treasury. 
Abu Bakar was succeeded as sultan of Johore by his son 
Ibrahim was as jealous of Johore's independence as his father had been, but he had been inadequately prepared for the problems facing him on accession. Still a young man, he preferred sowing wild oats to attending to affairs of state. It seems that, during the three-month interval between the death and interment of his father, Ibrahim's claim to the throne was contested within the dynasty. This episode probably strengthened his determination to centralize power on himself at the risk of breaching the state constitution and further alienating his relatives. He soon clashed with the British over the construction of a railway that would eventually pass through Johore to link Singapore with the rest of British Malaya. He further alarmed them by making generous land grants to European concessionaries. In spite of his headstrong approach to government, Johore escaped incorporation within the federation of British protected states (the Federated Malay States, inaugurated in 1895-6), and for over a decade he staved off Britain's threats to appoint an agent to his court as it was entitled to do under the 1885 treaty. In 1909, however, he was induced to accept an adviser, who was renamed general adviser five years later and endowed with additional powers. Even so, the British failed to achieve the degree of hegemony that they enjoyed elsewhere in the peninsula, since Ibrahim cannily negotiated a number of face-saving arrangements relating to flags, salutes, reporting lines, and Johore's own military forces. 
In his subsequent dealings with the British government, Ibrahim insisted that Johore was unique among Malay states. He opposed British designs in the 1920s and 1930s to bring the nine Malay states within a common administrative system, a policy that somewhat misleadingly was called decentralization. As he matured, he took a keener interest in the administration of his country and vigorously promoted land use. Johore prospered from tin mining and especially the rubber boom, and the sultan amassed an immense personal fortune. Notwithstanding spats with British officialdom, he strongly supported the British connection. In 1915 he personally led the Johore military forces in the suppression of a mutiny of Indian troops in Singapore. He appreciated the strategic significance of his state, which faced Singapore across the causeway (completed in 1923), and took a keen interest in the construction of the island's naval base. Between 1931 and 1941 he also donated large sums to the imperial war chest. While some of his fixations tried their patience, Whitehall officials took care to ensure that the sultan's contributions received recognition; he was appointed honorary GCMG (1916), honorary GBE (1935), and honorary major-general in the British army (1947), and he rode in the carriage processions at the coronations of George VI and Elizabeth II. 
Ibrahim spent the Japanese occupation (1942-5) cooped up in one of his palaces in relatively spartan conditions. Although, as senior sultan, he was obliged to preside over a meeting of Malay rulers in 1942 to discuss co-operation with the new regime, the British completely absolved him of any taint of collaboration. He welcomed their return in September 1945 and without demur immediately fell in with their plans for post-war Malaya. Whether he was disconcerted by the unsettled circumstance in which it was presented or merely failed to comprehend its import, he signed a new treaty that empowered the British to include Johore in the Malayan Union, a centralized colony embracing all the Malay states. Leading Johore Malays were so incensed by their sultan's surrender of sovereignty that some conspired to dethrone him. The crisis was swiftly defused, however; the British eventually scrapped the Malayan Union, and Ibrahim regained his poise. He resumed his trips to Europe and once again defied challenges to his authority. Nevertheless, while he was away from home the suspicion his conduct had aroused at the time of the Malayan Union continued to fester in Johore. 
During the Malayan emergency (1948-60) Ibrahim boldly supported British military operations against the largely Chinese guerrilla forces of the Malayan Communist Party. Yet he did not share Britain's sympathy with the aspirations of Malay political leaders. He sacked his chief minister, Dato Onn bin Jaafar, on account of his leadership of the United Malays National Organization, and he later ridiculed Tunku Abdul Rahman's demand for independence. As the British prepared to withdraw from Malaya he foresaw a future in which Johore would be absorbed into a nation state controlled from the federal capital of Kuala Lumpur by elected politicians. He therefore tried to preserve his special relationship with Britain by retaining the British adviser in Johore Bahru, but to no avail. Ibrahim celebrated the diamond jubilee of his reign with panache in 1955, but in August 1957 he declined to be considered for the position of first constitutional monarch of independent Malaya. 
Ibrahim married six times. His first wife, whom he married in Singapore on 5 October 1892, was Maimuna (1876-1909), daughter of Ungku Abdul Majid. He married second, in 1897, Ruqaiya (1880-1926), who was probably of Indian origin. He married third Hasana ('b'. 1877), daughter of Dato Jaafar bin Haji Muhammad, first chief minister of Johore, and half-sister of Dato Sir Onn bin Jaafar. His fourth marriage, in 1926, was to Intan (died 1958), daughter of Ungku Ahmad. He married fifth, in London on 15 October 1930, Helen Wilson (1889-1977), the divorced wife of Dr William Brockie Wilson and daughter of John Bartholomew, tool manufacturer, of Glasgow; they were divorced on 31 December 1937. Ibrahim's last marriage, in London on 6 November 1940, was to Marcella Mendl (1915-1982), the daughter of Edgar Mendl, of Romania. He had four sons (one of whom died in infancy) and one daughter. 
Ibrahim was an imposing figure. In his prime he was respected as the most energetic and competent Malay ruler in the peninsula. On the other hand, he was self-indulgent, had an unpredictable temper, and his private life was peppered with scandal. He was frequently in bitter dispute with his sons. A hunter of big game, he also presented pairs of tigers and bears to the London zoo and was a fellow of Scotland's zoological society. He pioneered motoring in Malaya, and lordly road-rage became him. From the late 1920s onwards he spent long periods in Europe, ostensibly for health reasons, although he delighted in the comforts of London society. He died at London's Grosvenor House Hotel on 8 May 1959. His body was transported to Singapore in the ship 'Willem Ruys' and buried on 7 June in the royal mausoleum, Makam Diraja Mahmudiah, in Johore Bahru. He was succeeded as sultan by his eldest son, Ismail. His grandson, Sultan Iskandar, later conferred upon him the posthumous title of 'the Great' (al-Masyhur) but others remembered Ibrahim as a capricious autocrat. 


@@@@@


doc= 98193


Jones, Edward (b. 1824), trespasser, was born on 7 April 1824, the son of Henry Jones, an impoverished tailor living at Crown Court, Charlotte Street, Westminster. The Mary Jones listed in the census of 1841 may have been his mother or stepmother. In newspaper reports his name was sometimes given as Edwin or Edmund. He had three brothers and three sisters. As a child 'he manifested a very restless spirit, always inquisitive, active, and thirsting for information' ('Weekly Chronicle', 21 March 1841). According to one account he excelled at school, particularly in arithmetic, reading, and penmanship, and had ambitions to become an architect. He was reported as attending a Methodist chapel. Between 1836 and 1838 Jones was apprenticed to two separate apothecaries, and in August 1838 he took up an apprenticeship with a carver and gilder. 
On 11 December 1838 Jones suddenly left his employer and soon afterwards broke into Buckingham Palace by means that remain a mystery. Jones secreted himself in the chamber of the valet to Queen Victoria's groom-in-waiting (both men, as well as the queen, being at the time in residence at Windsor), where he slathered himself with the valet's bear-grease pomade, and coated himself with soot in an apparent attempt to escape via the chimney. Early on the morning of 14 December he surprised a porter, who chased the begrimed Jones into the palace grounds and the custody of the police. 
Brought before a police magistrate, Jones claimed to be William Cotton, and claimed first to have lived in the palace for twelve years, and then for twelve months. His tales were soon revealed to be a complete fiction. None the less, the myth of the Boy Cotton lived on in a number of histories of the palace and biographies of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert (Woodham-Smith, 207-8; Weintraub, 152; James, 115). Both Jones's invented and actual actions riveted public attention. Indicted for burglary, he was acquitted at Westminster sessions, his counsel depicting his trespass as a youthful lark, something he claimed Jones would not repeat. 
Soon afterwards a London theatre manager approached Jones with an offer of $4 a week for him to appear on stage in a drama depicting his exploits. Jones refused. He found employment until 1840 as a chemist's assistant. 
On 1 December 1840 Jones again slipped into the palace. The queen was in residence this time, having given birth to her eldest daughter, Victoria, less than a fortnight before. In the early morning of 3 December palace servants discovered Jones in the queen's dressing-room, under a sofa upon which Victoria had been sitting only hours before. Jones had had the run of the palace; his finger-marks were discovered around the soup-stock, and he claimed that he 'sat upon the throne, saw the Queen, and heard the Princess Royal... squall' ('The Times', 5 Dec 1840). The notoriety of the Boy Jones, or In-I-go Jones, as the newspapers now dubbed him, was even greater than before. Described as very short for his age, he was said to have 'affected an air of great consequence' ('The Times', 4 Dec 1840). Popular and journalistic sentiment held that Jones was an extremely clever lad, motivated -- over-motivated -- to improve his life, a representative of self-help taken to its ludicrous extreme. Jones's stated motive for entering the palace reinforced this interpretation: he claimed he simply wished to observe life in the palace, with an eye to writing a book. The government, as well, took an interest in Jones's state of mind, relevant because his intrusion followed the assassination attempt on Victoria and Albert in June 1840 by Edward Oxford, who had been declared insane. The privy council brought in two phrenologists to examine Jones, but with inconclusive results. On the afternoon of 3 December, in proceedings from which the press was excluded, privy councillors summarily sentenced Jones as a rogue and a vagabond to three months' hard labour at the Westminster Bridewell, Tothill Fields. There Charles Dickens, who disagreed with the popular assessment of Jones, arranged to visit him, because of his 'curiosity to see the Palace Victim; strongly doubting the popular belief in his sharpness of intellect' (M. House and G. Storey, eds., 'The Letters of Charles Dickens', 2, 1969, 246). 
Jones's second intrusion exposed to public view the chaotic administration of Buckingham Palace. Baron Stockmar attributed Jones's success to 'the absence of system, which leaves the palace without any responsible authority' ('Memoirs', 125). Prince Albert, at that time almost entirely shut out of Victoria's official life, eagerly took up this project of reform, a crucial early step in what became full involvement in his wife's affairs. 
At the end of Jones's imprisonment the governor of Tothill Fields asked Jones to promise not to return to the palace; he refused, claiming his curiosity was simply too great. Jones was released to his parents on 2 March 1841 with the understanding that he would go to sea. Two weeks later, on 15 March 1841, Jones again broke into the palace. This time he was apprehended soon after entering, emerging from the larder with a handkerchief full of meat and potatoes. Again privy councillors tried him at the Home Office, on 16 March, and sentenced him to three months' imprisonment at Tothill Fields as a rogue and vagabond; he was released on 14 June. 
While Jones was the source of a great deal of public amusement, he posed a serious problem to the Home Office, which decided to compel Jones to a life at sea. Soon after his second imprisonment, an officer of the Thames police, with the help of Jones's father's landlord, succeeded in separating Jones from his family and compelling him to travel to a number of English and Irish ports, finally finding him a berth on a merchant ship sailing from Liverpool to Brazil. His father, frantic at his disappearance, reported all that he knew of the mystery to the press, in an obvious attempt to enlist public sympathy. By December 1841 Jones was back in Liverpool, where he set off on foot to London, subsisting on turnips and sleeping in barns. By the end of the month he arrived in the metropolis, where his father had managed to obtain for him an apprenticeship with a tobacconist at Tothill Street, Westminster. 
After a month's contented employment there, Jones abruptly vanished; his father's landlord had convinced or compelled Jones to enlist in the Royal Navy. Jones served on HMS 'Warspite', 'Inconstant', and 'Harlequin', a dutiful if sullen mizen top mastman and seaman, whom the newspapers occasionally recalled to public eye because of his compulsion to jump overboard for no logical reason. Jones remained under government scrutiny: as late as 1846 Lord John Russell's cabinet discussed the problem he posed. Jones's last known sighting as a sailor was during celebrations for the queen's birthday in 1847, when, off the coast of Syria, he was displayed for the amusement of visitors. 
At this point Jones faded into obscurity, though by one account he settled in Perth, Western Australia, became a town crier, and was continually tormented by the children of the city because of his youthful intrusions. According to this account Jones died about 1896 (Lucy, 1.160). 
The Boy Jones's three breathtaking and unprecedented journeys from the slums of Westminster to Buckingham Palace made him a household name among the early Victorians, and an emblem of persistent, if inappropriate, ambition. 


@@@@@


doc= 98196


Mokhehle, Ntsu Clement (1918-1999), prime minister of Lesotho, was born at Hamokhehle ('Mokhehle's village'), Berea district, Basutoland, on 26 December 1918, the fifth of ten children of Cicerone Mokhehle, a headman and school inspector, and his wife, Mosonngoa Motebang. He attended Anglican primary schools in Basutoland before being sent in 1935 to the Anglican secondary school at St Matthews in the eastern Cape, South Africa. In 1940 he entered another eastern Cape institution, the South African Native College, Fort Hare, a college set aside for black students, where he was a classmate of Oliver Tambo, Nelson Mandela, Robert Sobukwe, and Seretse Khama. An activist on campus, he was expelled for participating in a student strike in 1942. Readmitted in 1944, he graduated BSc in zoology. After teaching at Modderport in the Orange Free State to raise money for further studies, he returned to Fort Hare in 1946 to study for an MSc in zoology. His thesis, completed in 1947, was on the parasitology of flatworms. He also earned a university education diploma that qualified him for teaching positions. 
As a young man Mokhehle was influenced in his political views by movements in both Basutoland and South Africa. As a teenager he was mentored by Josiel Lefela, the leader of Lekhotla la Bafo, a long-time Basotho anti-colonial movement. While a student at Fort Hare he joined the African National Congress (ANC) youth league. He participated in the ANC's 1949 national conference at Bloemfontein, which adopted the 'programme of action' that committed the ANC to militant, non-violent protest. 
After Mokhehle graduated from Fort Hare, British colonial officials, alarmed by his political activism, were reluctant to give him a teaching position in a government school in Basutoland. Thus, after graduation, he first taught at Ermelo in South Africa before returning to Basutoland in 1950, where he found a position at the higher primary school in Maseru. He married 'Maneo Kaloti in 1951 and had a son, Tseliso, and two daughters, Mosonngoa and Topollo. 
Back in Basutoland Mokhehle became a leader of a number of organizations. In 1951 he was chosen as president of the Basutoland Sports Association. The following year he was elected head of the Basutoland National Teachers' Association and was a founder and first president of the Basutoland African Congress, which changed its name to the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) in 1959. After rejecting a demand by colonial officials that he could not keep his teaching position if he stayed in politics, he was dismissed as a teacher in 1954. 
Mokhehle's BCP built up a strong base, especially among people who were educated and protestant and resided in the lowland areas of Basutoland. He was a strong advocate of quickly moving Basutoland to self-government, and criticized chieftainship and reforms proposed by the colonial administration. A staunch opponent of racial discrimination and of Basutoland being incorporated into the Union of South Africa (which was a proposal then much discussed), he also advocated an end to the apartheid system in South Africa. Although the ANC initially provided some financial support to his party, he broke with them to support the Pan-African Congress when it was founded in South Africa in 1959. 
Although Mokhehle was not part of the Basotho delegation sent to London in 1958 to discuss constitutional changes with the British government, he went to London at the same time to lobby on the issues. A staunch pan-Africanist, on his way home he attended the All-African People's Convention in Ghana, where he met Ghana's president, Kwame Nkrumah, and Guinea's president, Sekou Toure. The following year he travelled to west Africa to participate in protests against French nuclear tests in the Sahara. In the late 1950s and early 1960s he travelled even more widely, visiting Guinea, Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, China, and the United States. In 1962 he spoke at the United Nations decolonization committee in New York and called for Lesotho's independence. 
The main outcome of the constitutional talks in 1958 had been the introduction of an eighty-member legislative council that included forty elected and forty appointed members. Mokhehle's primary political rival was Chief Leabua Jonathan, who established the Basutoland National Party in 1958 largely because of his opposition to what he perceived as the BCP's radical politics. In the first election for the legislative council in 1960, the BCP won a majority of the elected seats. Thus when in 1964 Mokhehle joined the Basutoland National Council's delegation to finalize constitutional talks with Britain, he did so as the leader of the largest grouping of elected legislative council members. However, in 1965, the Basutoland National Party won the next election. Thus when Lesotho gained its independence in October 1966 Jonathan became the first prime minister. 
In the first post-independence election in 1970 Mokhehle's BCP was leading as results were coming in when Jonathan, claiming irregularities in voting, declared a state of emergency and nullified the election. That paved the way for political instability that lasted into the twenty-first century. Mokhehle was jailed after the election. After his release he tried negotiations with Jonathan, but once they failed, the BCP tried to organize a coup in 1974 which failed disastrously. Mokhehle was forced to flee into exile in Botswana, then Zambia. In the late 1970s the BCP formed a military wing, the Lesotho Liberation Army, which waged a low-level guerrilla war against Lesotho's government. Initially the South African government was opposed to the Lesotho Liberation Army, but as Jonathan's government entered into an alliance with the ANC and sought the support of socialist countries, Mokhehle began co-operating with South Africa, which allowed the Lesotho Liberation Army to stage operations from South African territory adjoining Lesotho. 
In January 1986 Jonathan was overthrown by a military coup led by Major-General Justin Lekhanya. Several years later the military regime negotiated an agreement allowing all Basotho in exile, including Mokhehle, to return to Lesotho. Despite his declining health Mokhehle remained a widely popular figure in Lesotho, but he presided over a BCP split by factionalism. The military's plans for a return to civilian rule did not take place until junior military officers overthrew Lekhanya in April 1991 and began preparing the country for fresh elections in March 1993. Mokhehle's BCP won a sweeping victory, winning 75 per cent of the vote and all sixty parliamentary seats, and on 2 April 1993 Mokhehle was selected as prime minister. Despite his continuing personal popularity his years in office were marked by disputes within his own party and with other political parties and by unrest among Lesotho's military. He also had to contend with a civil service largely controlled by members of the Basutoland National Party. 
On 17 August 1994 King Letsie III and the military overthrew Mokhehle's government, but after mediation from the Southern African Development Community, Mokhehle resumed his position as prime minister on 14 September. He headed the BCP until June 1997 when a rival faction won control of the party. That same month he led a breakaway to form the Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD). Long weakened by heart ailments, he turned over leadership to Pakalitha Mosisili in February 1998, but remained prime minister. After the Lesotho Congress for Democracy easily won national elections, taking seventy-nine of eighty seats in parliament, he finally stepped down as prime minister on 29 May 1998. Opposition parties disputed the election results, and unrest and rioting followed. In September an army mutiny led to an intervention by troops from South Africa and Botswana under the auspices of the Southern African Development Community, which restored Mosisili as prime minister. 
After a lengthy illness Mokhehle died of pneumonia on 6 January 1999 at a hospital in Bloemfontein, South Africa. He was buried on 15 January at St Agnes's Anglican Church in Teyateyaneng, Lesotho. 


@@@@@


doc= 98197


Moshoeshoe II (1938-1996), king of Lesotho, was born on 2 May 1938 at Thabang, Mokhotlong district, Basutoland, the son of Sebueng, a commoner who was the second wife of Simon Seeiso Griffith (1905-1940), briefly paramount chief of Basutoland from 1939 to 1940. At his birth he was given the name Bereng Constantine Seeiso. His father's death at an early age was unexpected. According to the Basotho rule of royal succession Bereng should have eventually succeeded his father as paramount chief because he was the first-born son of Seeiso's highest ranking wife. This was complicated, however, by the fact that Seeiso's first wife, 'Mantsebo Amelia 'Matsaba Sempe (1902-1964), who served as queen regent and acting paramount chief until Bereng came of age in 1959, was extremely hostile to Sebueng because she was a commoner and came from another ethnic group, the Batlokoa, rather than the Basotho. The regent favoured Leshoboro, who was three years older than Bereng, and the son of Seeiso's third wife, maLeshoboro. 
Because Sebueng believed that members of the royal family, including 'Mantsebo, might try to kill Bereng or prevent him from taking the throne, she went to great lengths to protect him. She sent him away from Matsieng, the royal capital, to be raised in the homes of sympathetic chiefs: Chief Kethisa Tau in Pitseng, Chief Gabashane Masopha in Berea, and Chief Matlere Lerotholi in Mokhotlong. As a boy he was first taught by private tutors, but when the decision was made to send him to school, the regent 'Mantsebo ignored the wishes of his mother that he be sent to a protestant school and instead placed him in Catholic schools: first a primary school at Mokhotlong and then a higher primary and secondary school at Roma, south-east of Maseru. 
Bereng's first visit to England was in 1953, when he travelled with one of his uncles to attend the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. The following year his mother, still fearing the regent might try to poison him, sent him to England for further schooling. He attended the Benedictine school at Ampleforth from 1954 to 1956 and then read philosophy, politics, and economics at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, from 1956 to 1959, when he was called home to become paramount chief. Despite the opposition of the regent and one of her principal advisers, Chief Leabua Jonathan, senior chiefs deliberated and overwhelmingly supported Bereng's claim to the throne. 
Basutoland was still under British rule, so Bereng was installed on 12 March 1960 as paramount chief rather than as king. The date had significance because the British had placed Basutoland under its protection on 12 March 1868. Bereng took the name Moshoeshoe after his great-grandfather, who was largely responsible for creating the Basotho kingdom in the early nineteenth century. He was made king when Lesotho became an independent nation in October 1966. Meanwhile, on 23 August 1962 he married Tabitha 'Masentle (1941-2003), daughter of Chief Thabo Lerotholi Mojela. She was popularly known as Queen 'Mamohato after their marriage. They had two sons, David Mohato Bereng Seeiso ('b'. 1963) and Seeiso Bereng Seeiso ('b'. 1966), and a daughter, Constance Christina 'Maseeiso (1969-1994). 
During the colonial period Moshoeshoe had limited authority because the 1959 constitution ceded power to other chiefs and civilians in a national council. Most civilian politicians were not prepared to grant the paramount chief any more than ceremonial functions. After independence Lesotho's constitution provided for a constitutional monarch who was expected to refrain from direct involvement in politics. Frustrated by his limited role, Moshoeshoe publicly criticized his status and advocated holding a national referendum for the citizens of Lesotho to vote on his powers. His monarchy was also defined by the continuing rivalry between the Letsies and the Molapos, two royal houses descended from Moshoeshoe I. In the post-independence period Moshoeshoe II, who headed the senior house, the Letsies, had a poor relationship with Lesotho's first prime minister, Leabua Jonathan, a low-ranking chief who represented one of the junior houses, the Molapos. 
Moshoeshoe and Jonathan clashed just a few months after independence when the king called for a prayer meeting of his followers on 27 December 1966 at Thaba Bosiu, the mountain that had been Moshoeshoe I's royal capital. Jonathan, believing that the monarch was going to use the occasion to make a political statement and mobilize his supporters, sent a police force that fired shots at the gathering, killing about ten people. Moshoeshoe was not hurt, but the government placed him under detention at his palace. In early 1967 the government pressed him into signing an agreement that he would strictly adhere to the constitution. His next major confrontation with Jonathan came after Lesotho's first post-independence elections in January 1970. As votes were being counted and it became apparent that Jonathan's Basotho National Party was losing the election to the main opposition party, the Basotholand Congress Party, Jonathan declared the result null and void and jailed many of his opponents. In April 1970 he banished Moshoeshoe to the Netherlands, where he was looked after by the Dutch royal family. He was only allowed to return to Lesotho in December 1970 after agreeing not to engage directly in politics either as an individual or in co-operation with any political party. He held little more than ceremonial functions for the rest of Jonathan's rule. 
Moshoeshoe's status significantly changed when Jonathan was toppled by a military coup in January 1986. 'Lesotho order no. 2' (1986) delegated executive and legislative powers to the king in consultation with a six-person military council headed by Major-General Justin Lekhanya. Moshoeshoe was comfortable with this relationship because he opposed a return to civilian rule. Although the monarch and military worked well initially, however, the relationship eventually soured because of the competition between royal and commoner military officers. After several royal officers were implicated in the killing of several former cabinet ministers, Lekhanya directed the king to replace four colonels, including two of his close relatives, on the military council. When Moshoeshoe refused, the military council stripped him of his executive powers and forced him into exile in Britain, on 10 March 1990. Faced with the dilemma of replacing a sitting monarch, senior chiefs prevailed on his elder son, David Mohato, to replace him. Taking the name Letsie III, he took the oath of office as king on 12 November 1990. From exile Moshoeshoe continued to criticize the military council and political developments in Lesotho. 
The removal of Moshoeshoe did not ease the tensions within the military. In April 1991 Lekhanya was himself overthrown by junior military officers who began preparing the country for a return to civilian rule with a constitutional monarch in elections in March 1993. Although the Basotho Congress Party won a sweeping victory and its leader Ntsu Mokhehle was chosen as prime minister, Letsie and military officers overthrew him in a coup in August 1994. After mediation by the Southern African Development Community and in particular Nelson Mandela, the newly elected president of South Africa, and with Letsie's agreement, Moshoeshoe returned to Lesotho and resumed his throne in early 1995, and Mokhehle's government was restored. 
On 15 January 1996 Moshoeshoe died in an accident when his driver fell asleep at the wheel and their car crashed down a mountain ravine. His grave is in the royal cemetery on top of Thaba Bosiu, where all the other kings of Lesotho, including Moshoeshoe I, are buried. His funeral was attended by Frederick Chiluba, Quett Masire, Robert Mugabe, and Nelson Mandela, the presidents of Zambia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, and South Africa, respectively. He was survived by his wife and two sons, the elder, Letsie, again becoming king. 


@@@@@


doc= 98199


Tongue, Richard (1795-1873), artist, was born in Bath, Somerset, on 20 February 1795, the son of Richard Tongue (died 1823/4) and his wife, Ann. His father, a currier and leatherseller with a house and business in Peter Street, Bath, left a half share in the business to Richard, who remained associated with the family firm of Tongue and Co. until 1839, when the premises were sold and he moved with his two unmarried sisters to Bathwick Hill, Bath. 
Tongue was a self-taught amateur artist who described himself as a landscape painter. Although he said he had been painting oils at least from 1818, the few known surviving paintings attributed to him date from the years from 1833 to 1837. He appeared to have no wish to sell his work, only to donate it to institutions where it could be seen. His main interests were prehistoric monuments, or 'Celtic antiquities' as they were described at the time, and precariously balanced rocks said to have druidic associations. 
Tongue's earliest known works were models: in 1822 he modelled a terracotta bust of Plato, which was given to the Bath Royal Literary and Scientific Institution in 1839. In 1826 he donated five models of 'druidical remains' in Cornwall and Devon to the institution and as a result was appointed curator of models, an honorary position he held until 1845. In 1832 versions of four of the same models were given to the Bristol Institution. In 1834 he gave the British Museum four plaster models of prehistoric monuments in Cornwall made in 1826 and 1828 and two of sites in Wales made in 1832, all on a scale of one inch to a foot. A later curator of the Bath Institution, C. W. Dymond, noted in his manuscript catalogue of antiquities ('c'.1894) that 'all these are very inaccurate and quite worthless for scientific purposes'. They were also easily damaged as they were made of unbaked clay and only those donated to the British Museum now survive. 
Tongue was encouraged by the British Museum's acceptance of his models 'to pursue the subject of Celtic Antiquities with additional interest' as he noted in a letter to the museum (10 July 1837). He had already painted 'Sheep Grazing, Stonehenge' and 'Rocking Stone on a Coastal Cliff' (Logan Stone, Cornwall) and presented them to the Bath Institution in 1833 (now in the Victoria Art Gallery, Bath). In 1835 he gave another pair of the same size as these (about 20 x 28 in.) to the Society of Antiquaries of London, possibly arranged through Joseph Hunter, who was a member of the committee of the Bath Institution from 1825 to 1833 and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries; Tongue stayed with him when in London. Although depicting two quite different views, 'Cromlech near Newport' (Pentre Ifan, Pembrokeshire) and 'Tolmen at Constantine' (Cornwall), they are clearly intended to be hung together. Most of these subjects are described and illustrated in Godfrey Higgins's 'The Celtic Druids' (1829). In 1835 he also gave an etching of a view in Loch Tay, Perthshire, to the British Museum, the only example of his work in this genre known. The same year he copied in oils an illustration from the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' showing the ascent of the Pieter Both mountain in Mauritius in 1832, with its remarkable balanced rock at the summit. The painting remained in the family of his executor until about 1970, and is now in a private collection. 
In the 1830s Tongue went on annual tours to sketch scenery and antiquities and later worked his drawings up into finished oil paintings. His largest work, 'Stonehenge from the W. S. W.' (60 x 83 in.), belonging to the British Museum, is a scaled up version of 'Sheep Grazing, Stonehenge'. This was given to the trustees in 1837 with a large version of 'Tolmen at Constantine' and another large painting, 'Double Cromlech, Plas Newydd' (Anglesey). They had taken him two years to complete and were intended to be displayed in a sequence showing light changing from morning to evening above the models, but he found it necessary to write frequently to the museum between 1837 and 1844 to complain about the delays in exhibiting them and the poor conditions in which they had been placed, and to explain the correct way in which they should be hung. 'Tolmen' deteriorated so badly that it was returned to him for restoration in 1844. At the same time he was greatly honoured that the museum had shown an interest in his models and paintings. At a time when history painting was growing in popularity he regarded his works as important recordings of ancient monuments peculiar to Britain, but whose remote locations made them inaccessible to the curious. He believed his views could be used for reference by historical artists and antiquaries and would also show that the monuments were worthy of preservation. He was one of the few artists at the time to focus on the prehistoric past and to attempt to depict the monuments in large-scale oil paintings for the public to view. However, despite his aim of faithful recording, Tongue gave his rocks and stones a somewhat woolly and twisted appearance, exaggerating the proportions, changing the backgrounds, and adding romantic overtones. The effect of his naive style is striking and paintings by him have aroused widely different views, from the art historian's 'decidedly mediocre' (Hawes) to the archaeologists' 'brilliant' (Hawkes, 'Guide') and 'verged on greatness' (Evans). 
Sometime around 1844 Tongue's mental health deteriorated to the extent that he was admitted into the Bailbrook Asylum, Batheaston, Somerset, and then to a succession of lunatic asylums in Wiltshire as a private patient until shortly before his death. In 1845 he was admitted to Fiddington House, Market Lavington; by 1851 he was in Northfield House, Calne, and from 1854 to 1873 he resided in Kingsdown House, Box. He died intestate at 2 Pierrepoint Place, Bath, Somerset, on 8 December 1873, two weeks after his last surviving sister. He never married and his nephew, William Titley, was granted letters of administration. 
The brief appearance of Tongue's models and paintings in the British Museum for a few years from 1838 was reported with considerable approval in the contemporary press. After they were removed from public display his work was largely forgotten until Jacquetta Hawkes drew attention to his painting 'Cromlech near Newport' in her 'Early Britain' (1945) and John Piper reproduced his 'Stonehenge' in 1949. Since then interest in him has grown, especially with the display of three of his paintings in the Society of Antiquaries of London's exhibition 'Making History' at the Royal Academy in 2007. 


@@@@@


doc= 98201


Cumming, Hanway Robert (1867-1921), army officer and author, was born at 37 Thurloe Square, Brompton, west London, on 29 October 1867, the fourth son of Hugh Macpherson Cumming, civil servant, and his wife, Emma Spencer Mary, 'nee' Cooke. Educated at King's College School, London, he entered the army via the militia, joining the 3rd battalion, the Buffs (East Kent regiment) as second lieutenant in May 1887, before gaining a regular commission in the Durham light infantry on 8 June 1889. He served with the 2nd battalion in India and, following promotion to captain in November 1897, proceeded to south Africa with the 1st battalion. During the South African War he participated in the relief of Ladysmith and saw action at Colenso, Vaal Kranz, Tugela Heights, and Laing's Nek, rising to brevet major in November 1900, receiving the Queen's Medal with four clasps, and being twice mentioned in dispatches. His career path now veered towards staff, rather than regimental, duties. 
Having attended the Staff College in 1901-2, Cumming held a succession of staff appointments, first in Ceylon as deputy assistant quartermaster-general (July 1903 - April 1905) and deputy assistant adjutant-general (May 1905 - January 1906) and then as staff officer for coast defence in the Welsh and midland command and western command until 30 July 1907. In a civil ceremony on 9 July 1903 he married Beatrice, the 28-year-old daughter of the late Colonel William Archibald Taylor, a former officer of the Gordon highlanders and yeomanry. The marriage was also solemnized at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 7 June 1905. From January 1909 to January 1913 he commanded a company of cadets at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, but the outbreak of the First World War found him serving with the 1st Durham light infantry on the north-west frontier of India and he briefly held a post on the staff of the 1st (Peshawar) division before returning home to become, on 11 June 1915, general staff officer (GSO) second grade, of the 31st division, a new army formation primarily composed of locally-raised 'pals' battalions from northern England. 
From this point Cumming's solid but hitherto somewhat uneventful career underwent a notable transformation. He was elevated to GSO first grade, with the rank of temporary lieutenant-colonel, on 24 August 1915, accompanying the division to Egypt in November. Soon after the division was transferred to France in March 1916, he moved on 2 April, still as GSO first grade, to the 48th (south midland) division, a territorial formation. He was centrally involved in the planning of that division's difficult operations around Ovillers and Pozieres in July and August 1916, during the battle of the Somme. On 26 August he was given command of his old regular battalion, the 2nd Durham light infantry, leading it in the fighting south-east of Ginchy and near Morval and Lesboeufs in September. He remained with the battalion for two more months but was evidently considered as fitted for further promotion and, on 26 November, was appointed commander of the 91st infantry brigade in the 7th division with the rank of temporary brigadier-general. His brigade major until March 1917 was Major Richard O'Connor, who had been in Cumming's cadet company at Sandhurst and who himself went on to high command in the Second World War. O'Connor learned much from Cumming's attention to detail and insistence on rigorous training and admired Cumming's willingness to put the preservation of the lives of his men before his personal ambitions. 
Endowed with both physical and moral courage, Cumming tended to question orders that he deemed unwise. Indeed, on 23 February 1917 he even stood up successfully to the impulsive commander of the Fifth Army, General Sir Hubert Gough, over the timing of an advance by Cumming's brigade in pursuit of German units that were beginning to withdraw to the Hindenburg line. Cumming was twice overruled in March by his divisional commander, Major-General George Barrow, after pointing out obvious flaws in plans for attacks at Bucquoy and Croisilles during later stages of the same pursuit. However, at Bullecourt in May, he pushed his luck once too often, his new divisional commander, Major-General Thomas Shoubridge, proving a tougher adversary than Barrow. When his brigade's assault on 12 May was checked in, and east of, Bullecourt village, Cumming argued against further attacks that day, advocating instead a surprise attack next morning without prolonged artillery preparation. An annoyed Shoubridge promptly accused Cumming of being 'too tired to cope with the situation', suggested that his judgement was therefore 'warped', and compelled him to relinquish his command (Cumming, 84). 
Despite this setback, Cumming was awarded the DSO in June 1917 and, as commander of the machine-gun corps training centre at Grantham from 3 August 1917 to 1 February 1918, he played a pivotal role in the reorganization that removed machine-gun companies from brigade control and formed them into battalions under divisional command. This timely reform, enacted in February-March 1918, gave the divisions of the British expeditionary force the potential to achieve greater concentrations, and tighter tactical control, of automatic firepower in the battles to come. Cumming's reward was a posting back to the western front on 16 March 1918 as commander of the 110th brigade in the 21st division under Major-General David Campbell, a more sympathetic officer who recognized Cumming's abilities and found his advice of 'inestimable value' (Cumming, 13). Cumming reached his new brigade, containing three Leicestershire battalions, on 18 March, three days before the Germans launched their massive offensive in Picardy. 
When the storm broke over the British Fifth Army on 21 March 1918 Cumming's brigade, defending the double village of Epehy-Peiziere, held its main battle zone throughout the first day, disrupting the German timetable and only falling back next morning under heavy pressure. In the fluid battle that followed, Cumming, like many other brigade commanders, conducted a skilful fighting withdrawal, often out of contact with higher headquarters but keeping in touch with his own scattered units as best he could and assembling scratch forces from his shattered battalions whenever circumstances permitted. On 23 March he narrowly escaped death. Having visited a neighbouring formation he strayed into a German-occupied village and came under close-range fire. His wounded horse died after carrying him to safety. Three days later, by which time the division had retired some 15 miles to positions between the Somme and Ancre, he had to organize a composite brigade from an entrenching battalion, stragglers, reinforcement drafts, and men returning from leave. On relief at the end of March, the division had barely 200 fit fighting soldiers in each battalion, but Cumming observed that their morale was unshaken, that the withdrawal had been carried out with 'steadiness and discipline', and that 'the front had remained unbroken' (Cumming, 129). 
Transferred to the Second Army, the 21st division went into the line near Voormezeele, south-east of Ypres, on 4-5 April. Within five days it faced a second German onslaught, the Lys offensive, but with less room to manoeuvre or withdraw than in March. As the battle spread north towards Ypres, the 21st division was soon engaged in another desperate struggle. This came to a head on 28-9 April when the Germans took Voormezeele and pushed on to Lock 8, Bedford House, Rifle Wood, and the Kruistraathoek crossroads. The 110th brigade was drawn into hand-to-hand combat before the Germans were halted. The 21st division was relieved by 1 May but, after this second testing spell of defensive action, Cumming was 'weary to the verge of breaking point' (Cumming, 150). 
The exhausted division was sent to a supposedly quieter sector on the Aisne yet, on 27 May, there found itself in the path of a third enemy offensive. The Germans advanced so rapidly that again it fell to Cumming and his fellow brigadiers to make crucial tactical decisions and order movements on their own initiative. This time, however, the ordeal was not lengthy, as the division was relieved shortly after the remnants of Cumming's brigade had pulled back across the Marne on 30 May. 
Cumming clearly profited from the experience of the spring battles. In the final, victorious British offensive of August to November 1918, when the conduct of operations once more largely devolved upon divisional and brigade commanders, he handled the 110th brigade with a mixture of determination, flexibility, and common sense. Fresh tactical challenges were encountered almost daily and brigade headquarters sometimes had to move two or three times in twenty-four hours, but Cumming maintained sufficient grip on his subordinate units to enable the 110th brigade to play its full part in the 21st division's successful advance from the Ancre to the Sambre and beyond. In David Campbell's words, Cumming 'proved himself to be not only a magnificent leader of men, but also a soldier of the very highest class' (Cumming, 13). With George Gater and A. J. McCulloch he was one of a remarkable triumvirate of brigade commanders in the 21st division in August 1918. 
Although awarded the Legion d'honneur, fourth class, and twice more mentioned in dispatches, Cumming surprisingly received no additional major honour after the war and was even on half-pay from April 1919 to June 1920. However, on 7 June 1920, he was made a substantive colonel and given command of the Durham territorial brigade with the rank, once again, of temporary brigadier-general. He held the post until 24 November, subsequently becoming colonel commandant of the Kerry infantry brigade and military governor of Kerry in Ireland. He was shot in the head and killed in a Sinn Fein ambush at Clonbanin, co. Cork, on 5 March 1921, while driving in convoy to his headquarters at Buttevant from Mallow, where he had presided over a court of inquiry into previous shootings. There is strong evidence to suggest, however, that the intended target of the ambush was actually Major-General Sir Peter Strickland, the commander of the British 6th division in Ireland, who was on a tour of inspection in co. Kerry at the time. His funeral, with full military honours, took place at Golders Green crematorium, London, on 10 March 1921. His widow's claims for compensation involved her in legal disputes, financial distress, appearances before the criminal courts in connection with alleged fraudulent dealings in works of art, and eventual penury. 
Cumming's book 'A Brigadier in France, 1917-1918' was published posthumously in 1922. While curiously written in the third person, it is an outspoken, illuminating, and vivid account of the demanding life of an infantry brigade commander on the western front in the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 98204


Cox, Edgar William (1882-1918), army and intelligence officer, was born at 191 Tufnell Park Road, Islington, London, on 9 May 1882, the son of George William Cox, banker's clerk, and his wife, Louisa Hannah, 'nee' Bull. Educated at Christ's Hospital, where he was captain of the school, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, where he passed out top of his class, he was commissioned into the Royal Engineers in December 1900. 
For the first seven years of his service Cox was engaged in survey work in Africa, serving on the Anglo-Liberian (1902-3) and Anglo-Portuguese (1904-6) boundary commissions before undertaking further survey duties in east Africa (1906-9). Promoted captain in 1910, he returned to England and regimental duties in Aldershot. On 6 March 1912 he married, at St Saviour's Cathedral, Maritzburg, South Africa, Nora Davis. A fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, he became a junior staff officer in the topographical section at the War Office in 1912 and was one of the British representatives at the International Map Conference in Paris in 1913. In that year he produced a revised edition of Charles Frederick Arden-Close's standard 'Textbook of Topographical and Geographical Surveying'. Already qualified as a military interpreter in French and German, he was mobilized in August 1914 into the intelligence section of the general headquarters of the British expeditionary force. 
By September 1914 Cox had transferred from the geographical sub-section (Ic) across to the operational intelligence sub-section (Ia). It was here that he established his reputation for painstaking hard work. His most significant contribution was the compilation, in the spring of 1915, of an updated and comprehensive order of battle of the German army. Known initially as the yellow book from the colour of its cover, it became subsequently the brown book and in its many editions served as the cornerstone handbook for all British intelligence officers on the western front. This work also provided the foundation of his subsequent reputation as the British army's leading expert on its enemy. 
Cox's work led, in June 1915, to his appointment as DSO. It also brought him to the attention of Brigadier-General George Macdonogh, the brigadier-general (intelligence) at general headquarters. Cox had first come into contact with Macdonogh in 1901 during his training at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham. In June 1915 Macdonogh was noticeably depressed following the death of his young son. At this time Macdonogh and Cox worked closely, dined late together, and took long walks. This social interaction seems to have cemented their professional relationship, and when, in January 1916, the reshuffle of the high command led to Macdonogh's promotion and posting to London as director of military intelligence he took Cox with him. 
At the War Office, Cox became head of MI2c, the sub-section then responsible for analysing Germany. By June 1916 he had been promoted major. His work continued to impress Macdonogh and this resulted, in January 1917, in his promotion to lieutenant-colonel and command of MI3, a reorganized section with responsibility for intelligence analysis of all the central powers. During 1917 relations between the intelligence staff in London and their counterparts in France became strained as Macdonogh and Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig's intelligence chief, Brigadier-General John Charteris, disputed the impact that the attritional strategy was having on the German army. When Charteris was forced out after the battle of Cambrai it was Cox who, after a short interlude, replaced him as brigadier-general, intelligence. This promotion apparently made Cox, at thirty-five, the youngest brigadier in the British army. Although he seems to have been popular and effective, Cox was hindered by the fact that he had never served in a front-line role. Because of this he appointed Colonel Stephen Butler (1880-1964), an experienced intelligence staff officer, as his deputy. 
In the spring of 1918 Cox faced a considerable intelligence challenge. With the British expeditionary force standing on the defensive for the first time in three years he had to predict the location, strength, and direction of the forthcoming German offensives. Although his assessments were not always perfect he did manage to provide Haig with a generally accurate picture of the German operational reserves that allowed his commander to resist French calls for redeployment of his forces. Yet he does not appear to have had a very good relationship with Haig. At critical moments, during the Lys offensive of April 1918 for example, Cox adopted a pessimistic attitude at odds with his commander's inherent optimism. When the German offensives petered out in July this dichotomy became more noticeable and Cox believed, incorrectly, that Haig was turning to his predecessor Charteris for advice. Although Charteris had been meeting Haig, there is no evidence that they had been discussing intelligence matters. 
By the summer of 1918, despite his near-legendary constitution and capacity for long hours, Cox seems to have been burnt out and was perhaps depressed. He was struck down by influenza for most of June and then again in early August. On the afternoon of 26 August 1918 he told his deputy that he was going for swim to reinvigorate himself. He was driven to the channel coast at Berck Plage near general headquarters at Etaples and allowed his driver to take a walk. When the driver returned Cox was missing. His body was found the next day. Although suicide brought on by the pressure of work and the apparent sidelining by his commander cannot be ruled out, the contemporary evidence of his poor health makes accidental death by drowning more likely. He was buried in France at Etaples military cemetery. His widow and two sons survived him. 'Strong, straight, clean, keen, selfless, humble-minded, loyal, true', his former headmaster wrote, 'he leaves a bright example of a character always prized as a moral asset in English life' ('The Times', 14 Sept 1918). In 1934 a scholarship fund at Christ's Hospital was established in his memory, and a plaque unveiled at the school. 


@@@@@


doc= 98206


Stroud, John Anthony (1923-1989), social worker and author, was born on 31 March 1923 at 51 St Philips Avenue, Maidstone, Kent, the son of Harry Richard Stroud, a Kent county council clerk, and his wife, Dorothy Mabel, 'nee' Farley, a teacher who had been a suffragette. He was educated at Maidstone grammar school, which he left in 1941 to work as a clerk in the local education department. When a few months later he was called up he joined the RAF, but poor eyesight prevented him from becoming a fighter pilot and he spent most of the Second World War working on the newly invented radar to plot aircraft movements. Later in the war he served in India and Burma. His comfortable childhood had not prepared him for witnessing poverty and deprivation, particularly the terrible conditions that the Japanese occupation had visited upon the Burmese. In the words of Charles Maule, the author's alter ego and the social worker-narrator of his novel 'The Shorn Lamb' (1960), he vowed that he would 'leave the world a little better than when he came into it'. 
After the war Stroud originally planned to return to Burma, perhaps as a missionary. As he needed a qualification he went to Birmingham University to read for the diploma in social sciences, which he later gave up to take a degree. On 28 June 1949, while still a student, he married Elizabeth Ruth, a fellow student four years his junior (daughter of Alfred Ernest Edwards, master printer), who later became a social worker. They had two sons, Nick and Ian, and two daughters, Rosaline and Sylvia. Having given up his ambition to become a missionary and having rejected too a career in the colonial service, Stroud, enthused by the Curtis report, which had led to the creation of local authority children's departments in 1948, went to work after graduation as a children's welfare officer for Middlesex county council. 
In 1952 Stroud moved to Hertfordshire as a boys' welfare officer, and in 1954 he helped to found the Association of Child Care Officers, which was to prove to be an influential body. He launched the organization's journal, 'ACCORD', which he ran for a decade. In 1971 he was appointed deputy children's officer for Hertfordshire. When the three branches of social work -- children's, welfare, and mental health -- were merged into the new social services departments, he was appointed assistant director of social services for Hertfordshire, a post he held until retirement in 1986. He remained, though, critical of the social services departments and of the kinds of people he believed were often attracted to work in them. His first marriage was dissolved in 1971 and on 8 June the following year he married Daphne Amy Pinkney, a 41-year-old secretary and daughter of Alexander Charles Balneaves, engineer. There were no children of this second marriage. 
Stroud was unique in producing a series of novels on the themes he knew best: social work and hardship and the attempts to alleviate it. The first and most successful of these, 'The Shorn Lamb', was a Book Society choice and was serialized on the radio. For many years it had its admirers, but it may be that the regard in which it was held had more to do with its being the first (and still very rare) example of a social-work novel written by a social worker, rather than any intrinsic literary merit. In style it is sub-Dickensian. Characters with self-descriptive surnames, like Bland, O'Hooligan, and Dashforth, live in places like Rat Yard, or Blight Street. 'The Waif' (1972) took as its theme the migration of poor children to the colonies, a practice that some charities had only stopped less than twenty years before the novel was published. He wrote fourteen books in all, including some non-fiction relating to his profession and, in 1971, 'Thirteen Penny Stamps', a history of the Church of England Children's Society. 
Stroud's more lasting impact was in the work he carried out with adopted people. In his first post he had been astounded at how ignorant young people were about their origins when they had been separated from their families through being in care or having been adopted, but at the same time thought it important for them to know their roots. This developed into his lifelong interest in reuniting those separated from their families, something he continued to do even when a senior manager. He specialized in tracing twins separated at birth, which often meant many hours spent searching in archives, which was, as one obituarist stated, 'coupled with inspired guesswork' ('The Independent', 29 Sept 1989). This led not only to the happiness of those he reunited, some of whom had not hitherto known of each other's existence. It also made Stroud a pioneer of search and reunion in adoption, which was later to become commonplace. His work in this area was at a time when adoption was still seen to offer a child a fresh start, unencumbered by knowledge of a past best left unknown. His work was comparatively small-scale -- about fifty people were involved -- but some of these reunited twins took part in the work of the twins research department at the University of Minnesota (investigating the nature versus nurture debate), for which Stroud was a consultant. As the journalist Margaret Jervis wrote of him, he was 'the man who founded his own branch of social work' ('Social Work Today', 2 Feb 1987). 
Stroud was a curious admixture of compassion and cheerfulness, gloom and rudeness; unclubbable, yet liking applause. His writing absorbed him, often at the cost of family, and he was frustrated that his ambition to be a full-time writer eluded him. In 1987 he suffered a stroke that caused him to stay in hospital for eight months and made necessary the use of a wheelchair. However, despite his disability, his work continued and even a few months before his death he united a 96-year-old mother with her child of seventy-three. He died on 31 August 1989 of heart failure at his home, 8 Portland Place, Hertford Heath, Hertfordshire. He was survived by his wife, Daphne, and the four children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 98207


Judge, John Thomas (1872-1938), music hall entertainer and composer, was born at 18 Low Town, Oldbury, Worcestershire, on 3 December 1872, the eldest son of John Judge (1849-1888), ironworker, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' McGuire (1853-1922). His father, from Carrowbeg, co. Mayo, was part of Oldbury's Irish community, drawn by opportunities for work. The family left Oldbury when his father lost his job, and Jack was educated at local Catholic schools in Wolverhampton and Moseley. They returned in 1883 when his father found employment at Bromford Iron Works. At nearly twelve Jack was tall and strong, and, although under age, bluffed his way into a job as well. Two years later his father left to start a fish business with a stall in Oldbury, but died in 1888, leaving a widow and seven children. The family struggled to maintain the business, and each morning Jack had to fetch fish on a handcart from Birmingham, before going to the iron works. On 9 June 1895, at St Francis Xavier Roman Catholic Church in Oldbury, he married Jane Ann (Jinny) (1869-1921), daughter of William Carroll, ironworker; they had four children. Soon after his marriage he left the iron works to concentrate on the fish business. 
Jack Judge and his sister, Jane Ann, had entered talent shows at local music halls and public houses. He built up a local reputation as a singer, comedian, and entertainer, with a powerful musical whistle. He never learned to read music, but composed songs, which musical friends wrote down. One such friend was Harry Williams, pianist and brother of the licensee of the Malt Shovel, next to Judge's house in Low Town, Oldbury. Judge was a lifelong gambler and drinker, and was soon in debt to Harry Williams. He promised that if he had a song published he would add Harry's name to it. 
In 1910 Judge entered a competition arranged by the magazine 'Encore' in London. Although he came third he received the most publicity, and started to tour theatres throughout the country as a professional entertainer, taking his song collection with him. Between performances he would earn beer money by getting fellow drinkers to wager that he could not write a new song overnight and perform it the next day. With a little revision a song from his old collection would easily win the bet. While performing at the Grand Theatre, Stalybridge, he pulled the 'new song trick', and on 31 January 1912 sang 'It's a Long Way to Tipperary' for the first time. The song was almost certainly a rewrite of something from his collection, probably 'It's a Long Way to Connemara'. 
'Tipperary' was well received, so Judge offered it for sale. It was published by Bert Feldman & Co., and first sung by Florrie Forde on 21 July 1913 in a show on the Isle of Man. Judge included Harry Williams as co-author to honour his promise. By 1914 Bert Feldman had published seventeen more songs by Judge, all typical music hall songs, catchy and enjoyable, but with little literary merit. Only 'Tipperary' was much remembered. The song received a unique boost when it was sung by the Irish Connaught Rangers as they landed in France in August 1914. Soon it was taken up by other regiments as a marching song, translated into other languages, sung worldwide, and recorded by John McCormack. Judge was liable for conscription in the later stages of the war, but granted exemption provided he continued to tour the country raising morale. He wrote songs that were more overtly patriotic, such as 'We're All under the Same Old Flag' and 'Proud I Am'. He helped wounded soldiers by fund-raising in and around Oldbury. His eldest son, John, was killed in Mesopotamia in 1917. 
After the war Judge continued his professional career as performer and composer, now writing peace songs, including 'Jerusalem: The Joyful Hymn of Victory and Thanksgiving', written 'with the greatest respect to all people, and with due reverence to all Creeds, in an honest endeavour to re-echo the sentiments of Civilisation' (pamphlet issued by Jack Judge, private copy). Harry Williams had left Oldbury and did not feature on his songs after 1917. After Williams's death in 1924 a continuing controversy arose over his contribution to 'Tipperary' and other songs. In 1915 Judge was quoted as saying: 'I am the composer and original singer of 'It's a long, long way to Tipperary'. Mr Harry Williams collaborated with me in writing the words. The same remark also applies to other songs' ('Midland Chronicle', 29 Jan 1915). He wrote a letter to 'The Stage' in 1924: 'I was the sole composer of 'Tipperary', and all other songs published in our names jointly. They were all 95% my work, as Mr Williams made only slight alterations to the music he wrote down for me from my singing the compositions' (quoted by Gibbons, 196). Later, he claimed to be the sole author: 'no other person ever wrote a word of the song...' (interview in 'Oldbury Weekly News', quoted in the 'Black Country Bugle', 1 April 1999). The exact circumstances of its composition are unlikely to be established. The 'joint' songs are typical of Judge's output before 1910 and after Williams's death, and must be mainly his work, although Williams probably harmonized and arranged them, as Jack Jesson did in the 1920s and 1930s. 
Judge's professional stage career ended on the death of his wife, Jinny, in 1921. This was the start of a period of sadness and turbulence in his life. He performed only locally, and returned to the fish business. On 18 April 1922 he married, second, Maria (Ria) Oliver (1887-1971), a war widow with three young children. His second son died of tuberculosis in that year. His remaining son did not accept the new extended family and joined the army, starting a period of separation until 1933, when he returned home and died soon afterwards of tuberculosis. Judge's daughter, Cissie, had died in 1924. 
By the mid-1920s Judge was working on his music again, initially with his adopted brother Edward (Ted) Judge, who was also a professional performer. The new songs were taken up by professionals, including 'You're All the Better for That' (1929, sung by Ella Shields) and 'I Go to Monte Carlo' (1933, sung by Florrie Forde), but none achieved the success of 'Tipperary'. He also wrote verses about local tradesmen, his favourite football team, West Bromwich Albion, and national events, which he sold locally for a penny. Songs about a malted loaf, 'Cremalt', made in Oldbury, were recorded in the 1930s, as advertising jingles. An enthusiastic admirer of royalty, he sent several songs to the king and queen, including 'Beloved Princess Marina' for her marriage in 1934 to Prince George, and 'Long Live their Majesties', for the jubilee of George V and Queen Mary in 1935. He then sold pamphlets containing the words, together with the reply from Buckingham Palace. 
In the late 1920s Judge's voice started to fail, and in 1930 he was diagnosed with a cancer at the base of the skull; this spread to his left eye, which had to be removed. In 1937 he retired from the fish business in poor health. He died at Hallam Hospital, West Bromwich, from a 'malignant tumour of the orbit and spheroid' (d. cert), on 25 July 1938 and was buried at Rood End cemetery, Oldbury, on 30 July. There were tributes from King George VI and the stage world, including Florrie Forde. 
A newspaper commented of Judge's most famous composition that: 'The structural pattern in which a salient phrase is repeated three times was responsible for its being easy to learn, but the repetition and failure to achieve an effective climax were weaknesses that helped, along with the change in emotions of war, to bring about its supercession by 'The Long, Long Trail', 'Pack up your Troubles', and 'Keep the Home Fires Burning'. But the refrain of 'Tipperary' can still recall more immediately than anything else the spirit and excitement of the early days of the War. ('The Times', 29 July 1938)' Contrary, though, to widespread belief Judge did not make a fortune from the song, having sold the copyright to Feldman for a limited royalty. He is commemorated with a statue unveiled in 2005 at Stalybridge, where 'Tipperary' was first sung, and in his native Oldbury by the new library building, Jack Judge House, and the streets Tipperary Walk and Judge Close near to where he lived. 


@@@@@


doc= 98212


Caen, John (c.1247-1310), notary public and royal official, was one of a small number of papal notaries known to have been active in England in the late thirteenth century. Rather unusually, he spent most of his long career in the near exclusive employ of the crown rather than of the church. Despite the association of his name with the duchy of Normandy, he probably belonged to the Cambridgeshire family whose members went by the surname of de Cadomo. Apparently the son of a man named Arthur, he spent some years on the continent completing a university education before returning to his native England. Precisely where he studied is not certain; both the papal curia at Rome and the University of Bologna have been suggested. He first appears as a notary in 1268, when he drew up a public instrument supporting a claim on behalf of Boniface of Savoy, archbishop of Canterbury, in a suit against the see of York. His movements for almost a decade thereafter are uncertain, but from 1280 he was in constant attendance on Edward I, on whose business he travelled widely in Britain and Europe. 
John Caen quickly became a valued member of the royal entourage. He was engaged in a variety of capacities: as notary, envoy, diplomat, clerk of the wardrobe, judicial arbitrator, senior chancery official, and eventually, if briefly, keeper of the great seal (in 1298 and 1302). He acted as Edward's agent in the delivery of messages and documents to La Rochelle in 1284 and at the papal curia in 1286. He was at the king's side in Aragon in October 1288 at negotiations for the release of Edward's ally Charles of Salerno, king of Naples, and once again in the king's company in 1297-8 at Ghent, where Edward had encamped the English army and where a truce with Philippe IV of France was eventually agreed. His active participation in the day-to-day business of high politics gave John first-hand experience in managing complicated questions relating to diplomacy, war, and civil law, and a rare opportunity to influence the king's policies towards his European allies and enemies. 
Distinguished though it was, John Caen's career might have passed largely unnoticed were it not for his involvement in the matter that came to be known as the Great Cause. In 1286 the sudden death of Alexander III of Scotland without male heirs threw that kingdom into disarray. Four years later the king's only direct descendant, his granddaughter Margaret, the Maid of Norway, had also perished, and the guardians of Scotland turned to Edward I with a request that he adjudicate the claims of some thirteen candidates to the throne. John Caen was already a trusted member of the royal council when the process leading to the award of the Scottish crown began, and he remained throughout the decade that followed a close adviser to Edward I on the legal and constitutional position of the Scottish kingdom. He was present at the proceedings held at Norham, and later at Berwick, from May 1291 until November 1292, taking an active part in learned discussions of the customs governing descent and inheritance at English and Scots law. Here he began to assemble both the written materials that Edward had ordered his agents to collect and the voluminous records of the claimants and their lawyers. John was particularly concerned to keep a faithful record of the oral testimony of the hundreds of expert witnesses who were called into Edward's presence. The care and attention that he brought to these tasks were nothing short of remarkable, but they were animated by a wholly pragmatic appreciation that the chief purpose of his archival efforts was justification of Edward's assertion of superiority over the smaller kingdom. Indeed, it has been argued that he co-operated with royal policy to the extent of drawing up documents that actively misrepresented the events they purported to describe, both to strengthen Edward's claim to overlordship and to avert papal intervention on behalf of the Scots. In short, John Caen was no impartial observer, and his bias must be kept in mind in any evaluation of his otherwise estimable record-keeping practices. 
As early as May 1297, after several distinct stages of editorial work, John Caen produced two exemplars of Great Cause proceedings, along the way taking the advice of Henry of Newark, another clerk in the king's employ, and Roger Brabazon, chief justice of the king's bench. His determination to produce a thoroughly authoritative account of the proceedings kept him occupied with the rolls until at least 1303, leading him to petition Edward I on at least one occasion for permission to add materials that he claimed had been 'inadvertently' omitted. Both copies of the great roll include a host of minor additions and corrections to stylistic or orthographic errors, each entry clearly identifiable by Caen's distinctive hand. Very soon after he had completed his compilation, Caen's comprehensive record was put to the use always intended for it, that is, as a 'weapon of propaganda and diplomacy' in Edward I's efforts to subjugate Scotland (Stones and Simpson, 1.91). A generation later another notary, Andrew Tange, used it as the basis for a fresh, and even more unreliable and tendentious, statement of the English claim to dominion over the smaller realm. The scrupulously organized great rolls (as they have come to be known) constitute an archival record unique among extant medieval English documents. To this day they remain a chief source of information about the antecedents of the war that divided England and Scotland down to 1560, and a rare example of the ways in which the English crown marshalled the written history that was everywhere preserved in monastic chronicles in support of its political designs. The scope and quality of the great rolls also secured John Caen's already considerable reputation as a legal expert, and from 1300 he was summoned regularly to parliament in his capacity as king's clerk, to act as a receiver of petitions and to advise the crown on questions of civil law. By now, however, age was beginning to take its toll, and although he remained active on behalf of the king he abandoned his peripatetic lifestyle and henceforth confined his energies to the precincts of the royal chancery. There he turned his well-skilled hand to scribal, clerical, and notarial tasks, occasionally issuing warrants under his own authority as custodian of the great seal. 
During his long professional life John Caen accumulated perquisites, preferments, and rewards that bear witness to his status as a highly valued and much favoured royal servant. These included a legacy of $20 from Edward's queen, Eleanor, for whom John may have acted as confessor, robes from the wardrobe, and oak trees from several of the king's forests -- a potentially lucrative source of ready cash. He was also presented to ecclesiastical benefices all over England and Ireland, among them the prebends of Driffield (York diocese), Leighton Manor and Wolverhampton (Lincoln), Wells (Bath and Wells), Glendalough (Dublin), and Darlington (Durham); prebends in the royal free chapels at Hastings, Penkridge, St Martin's-le-Grand (London), and Stafford; and rectories in Dorset, Essex, Cambridgeshire, and Warwickshire. Indeed, so numerous were his preferments that he became the target of sharp criticism from more than one archbishop of Canterbury, but his proximity to Edward I shielded him from prosecution for pluralism and absenteeism. At the time of his death, which occurred between 23 and 28 March 1310, John Caen had only recently retired from active service at Edward II's court, and still held several ecclesiastical offices. 


@@@@@


doc= 98213


Jeannette Caroline Pickersgill (1814?-1885), born in Amsterdam, exhibited works at the Royal Academy between 1848 and 1863 and was 'well known in literary and scientific circles' ('The Times', 27 March 1885). She was the first person to be legally cremated in the United Kingdom, following the trial of William Price, in 1884, when Sir James Fitzjames Stephen held that this mode of disposing of a body was not unlawful. She joined the Cremation Society in January 1885, and died of broncho-pneumonia shortly afterwards, on 20 March 1885, at her home, 5 Cornwall Residences, Clarence Gate, Regent's Park, London. Her will contained instructions for cremation and, after an autopsy, this was carried out on 26 March 1885 at the crematorium established by the Cremation Society at St John's, Woking, Surrey. Her ashes were deposited at Kensal Green cemetery in 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 98214


Eassie, William (1832-1888), sanitary engineer and pioneer of cremation, was born at Lochee, near Dundee, on 8 September 1832, the first of two sons of William Eassie (1805-1861), a carpenter and wheelwright, and his wife, Jean Boyd, whom he married in 1831. William Eassie senior worked on the East Lancashire Railway as an engineering contractor, before settling in Gloucester, where between 1845 and 1849 he established a timber yard on the banks of the Gloucester Canal; here the business supplied the Gloucester and Forest of Dean Railway and other projects. 
No definite information can be traced about William Eassie's early schooling in Dundee, though his later interests indicate that he had received a classical education. He trained as an engineer under Isambard Kingdom Brunel, and was described as a 'favourite assistant' to the great engineer ('The Times', 15 Sept 1888). He was involved in railway construction in south Wales before going to the Crimea in May 1855 to supervise the erection of wooden huts (then described as 'pavilions'), which had been prefabricated at his father's Gloucester timber works to a design by Brunel, for the military hospital at Renkioi, on the Dardanelles. At Renkioi, where he was assistant engineer, he met Edmund Parkes, an authority on military hygiene, and the surgeon Thomas Spencer Wells. While in the Crimea, Parkes, Spencer Wells, and Eassie went on archaeological digs; Eassie and another engineer, John Brunton, excavated at the site of ancient Troy. Eassie later recorded his observations of the Near East in 'Romaic Beauties and Trojan Humbugs' (1858), written under the pseudonym Rattlebrain. He was subsequently elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 7 April 1864 (he was proposed by Joseph Paxton) and was also a fellow of the Geological Society. 
After returning from the Crimea in 1856 Eassie continued as an engineering contractor, constructing the military camp at the Curragh of Kildare, and carrying out mining surveys in Germany, Poland, and elsewhere. He married, in 1858 at Gloucester, Rose Anna Hanlon, the daughter of a Kildare doctor. They had seven sons and two daughters; the fourth son became Brigadier-General Fitzpatrick Eassie (1864-1943), an army veterinarian. Following the death of their father in 1861, William and his younger brother ran the Gloucester timber business until the latter's death in 1875, when it was sold. By 1871 Eassie had moved to Child's Hill, Hendon, with London offices at 1 Great Winchester Street Buildings, then 11 Argyle Street, where he practised as a consulting sanitary engineer. In 1872 he published 'Healthy Houses', which reflected the growing importance attached to good plumbing and drainage in domestic dwellings. He also edited the dairy engineering pages of the 'Milk Journal'. He was a regular correspondent on sanitary questions; he advocated, for example, that there should be an agreed definition of what constituted domestic waste, which local authorities were required to collect from householders' dustbins under the terms of public health legislation ('The Times', 26 May 1885). With Ernest Hart he founded and was a regular contributor to the 'Sanitary Journal' and he was largely responsible for the establishment of the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain. 
Eassie was an early member of the Cremation Society of England, of which he was appointed honorary secretary on 29 July 1874, with an honorarium of $25 a year. The society had been founded earlier in 1874, following the publication in the 'Contemporary Review' in January 1874 of 'The treatment of the body after death' by the surgeon Sir Henry Thompson, who responded to critics in a further article in March 1874. This prompted a group of supporters to form a society to promote cremation: Spencer Wells, Ernest Hart, Charles Voysey, and Hugh Haweis were among the founder members. Eassie himself had written 'Cremation' in January 1874 in the 'London Medical Record', but his contribution was eclipsed by that of Thompson, whose standing in the medical profession commanded greater attention. 
The discovery of ashes in burial sites during his excavations on the Trojan plains nearly two decades earlier seems to have originally prompted Eassie to consider the benefits of cremation. His pioneering work 'Cremation of the Dead: its History and Bearing upon Public Health' (1875) discussed the various methods for disposing of the dead in different cultures and historical periods. He carefully refuted the idea that cremation was prohibited by the scriptures. His principal concern was to demonstrate that cremation was a more sanitary practice than burial, whose drawbacks included pollution of the air, soil, and water supplies, as well as encroachments upon space in urban areas. His book discussed the law, the problems of earth burial, the promotion of cremation on the mainland of Europe (he had witnessed the cremation in Germany in 1874 of Lady Dilke, first wife of Sir Charles Dilke), and finally the technicalities of cremation. In the last chapter he provided a comprehensive review of cremating apparatus and particularly recommended the furnaces invented by William Siemens. 
Eassie was an effective and diligent secretary for the Cremation Society. He negotiated with the London Necropolis Company concerning the purchase of one acre of land at Woking for a crematorium, supervising the construction of the cremator in 1879. The first legal cremation in Britain, of Jeannette Pickersgill, took place at Woking in March 1885. As engineer to the society, Eassie was present during many of the early cremations. He edited the early editions of the 'Transactions of the Cremation Society of England' and also lectured on the subject. In June 1886 he represented the society at the Cremation Congress in Dresden. He died on 16 August 1888 at his home, 73 King Henry's Road, Hampstead, and was buried in the family grave at St Mary's Roman Catholic cemetery at Kensal Green on 20 August. There is no memorial on the grave but a tablet on the wall of the gallery in the chapel at Woking commemorates his contribution to the work of the Cremation Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 98215


Arkwright, Sir John Stanhope (1872-1954), politician and hymn writer, was born at 11 Lowndes Street, London, on 10 July 1872, the only son (there were three daughters) of John Hungerford Arkwright (1833-1905), landowner and lord lieutenant of Herefordshire, of Hampton Court, Leominster, Herefordshire, and his wife, Charlotte Lucy, 'nee' Davenport (1839-1904). The textile machinery inventor Sir Richard Arkwright was an ancestor. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated with a third class in jurisprudence in 1895. A keen footballer in his youth, he played on the right wing for Hereford Town in the Birmingham league. In 1898 he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, and at the 'khaki' election of 1900, during the South African War, he was elected unopposed as Conservative MP for Hereford. The death of his father in May 1905 left him the owner of extensive lands in Herefordshire, but the properties were heavily encumbered with mortgages, as a result of falling rentals during the agricultural depression. 
On 21 December 1905 Arkwright married (Helen Muriel) Stephanie (1883-1947), youngest daughter of Stephen Robinson, landowner and cattle breeder, of Lynhales, Herefordshire, with whom he had two sons. Embracing tariff reform, he narrowly retained his Hereford parliamentary seat against a Liberal opponent in the general election of January 1906, but was returned with a somewhat increased majority at the two general elections of 1910. Ill health caused his retirement from the House of Commons in March 1912. During 1911 and 1912 he sold the family estate at Hampton Court and purchased a smaller property, Kinsham Court, near Presteigne, Herefordshire, formerly the seat of his brother-in-law Francis Lyndon Evelyn (died 1909). 
As a schoolboy at Eton, Arkwright had demonstrated a talent for versification, carried on at Oxford, where he won the Newdigate prize in 1895 for an epic poem, 'Montezuma'. His poetic contributions to the 'Black and White', on patriotic and imperial themes, and a 'Hymn for use in time of war' were gathered together in 'The Last Muster' (1901), which saluted the sacrifice of those who died in the war with the Boers. These sentiments anticipated his most enduring contribution to the literature of remembrance, his highly emotional First World War hymn, 'O valiant hearts'. 
During the winter of 1916-17, when he became private secretary to Alfred Milner upon the latter's joining the war cabinet, Arkwright was working on a requiem, set to a tune that he had previously heard and thought appropriate for the theme. This tune had been composed to accompany another hymn by Charles Harris (1865-1936), rector of Colwall in Herefordshire, and Arkwright obtained Harris's permission to use it as a setting for the remembrance hymn. The resulting 'O valiant hearts' cast those who fought and died in the First World War as knightly heroes and compared their sacrifice to that of Christ at Calvary. First sung in Colwall at a service to mark the unveiling of a plaque in memory of Harris's nineteen-year-old son, killed in Mesopotamia in April 1917, it was brought to wider notice when it was included at a service of solemn intercession attended by George V, Queen Mary, and other members of the royal family in Westminster Abbey on 5 August 1917 to mark the war's third anniversary. Two days before the service 'The Times' printed the first five verses of what it called 'the new hymn' (which had previously appeared in the 'Hereford Times' of 21 July 1917). The full seven-verse version of the hymn was also published about this time in leaflet form with the epigraph 'Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends'. A copy of this leaflet in the British Library has an accession stamp with the date 9 August 1917. 
In this leaflet 'O valiant hearts' was accompanied by Harris's tune 'The Supreme Sacrifice'. Harris's grave and sonorous melody was eventually destined to become inextricably linked with Arkwright's words but it took some years for the pairing to be established. When 'O valiant hearts' was sung at the Westminster Abbey service in 1917 it was to E. J. Hopkins's tune 'Ellers', rather than Harris's tune, which, however, was used at the service in Hereford Cathedral on the same day. 'Ellers' was also used on 11 November 1920 when the hymn was sung at the burial service in the abbey for the Unknown Warrior. 
In the years following the First World War 'O valiant hearts' acquired its popularity and its special association with remembrance day services. It appeared, amended, in a collection of Arkwright's wartime verse entitled 'The Supreme Sacrifice', published in November 1919 on the anniversary of the armistice, with illustrations by Bruce Bairnsfather, Wilmot Lunt, Louis Ramaekers, and Leonard Raven-Hill. In the same year it was also included in 'Laus Deo', a collection of hymns compiled by Walford Davies where it was set to Andrew Freeman's tune 'Limpsfield'. That tune was used to accompany the hymn in the 1923 publication 'A Student's Hymnal'. 'O valiant hearts' was brought to wider notice with its inclusion in 'Songs of Praise', published in 1925. Here it was given two new tunes, 'Valiant Hearts', specially composed by Gustav Holst, and 'Valor', adapted from a traditional melody by 'Songs of Praise''s musical editor, Ralph Vaughan Williams. The 'Baptist Church Hymnal' of 1933 was one of the first of several denominational hymnals to include it accompanied by Harris's tune 'The Supreme Sacrifice'. In that year unfavourable comments on Harris's tune by a music critic generated a lively newspaper correspondence about appropriate settings ('The Times', 7-23 Oct 1933). 
When Arkwright was knighted, in 1934, it was for the authorship of the remembrance hymn that he was best known. Active in Herefordshire affairs, as freeman and chief steward of the city of Hereford, he was also a noted gardener, producing a popular hybrid, 'Lychnis arkwrightii', and experimenting with the propagation of daffodils. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1925. One of his sons was killed in the Second World War and his wife died shortly afterwards. Latterly in ill health, he died at Kinsham Court, Herefordshire, on 19 September 1954. His funeral took place at Byton, Herefordshire, on 22 September. 
Arkwright's 'O valiant hearts' probably reached the peak of its popularity in the 1940s and 1950s (and was added to the revised version of 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' in 1950). From the 1960s it began to be purged from hymn books because of growing unease about its theology and focus. The compilers of the 'BBC Songs of Praise' hymnal of 1997 were taken to task by several reviewers for including it in full. The hymn has fallen foul of Christian critics of several different theological persuasions. Evangelicals are profoundly uneasy about its reference to 'lesser Calvaries' which they take to detract from the full atoning sufficiency of Christ's one perfect sacrifice on the cross. Those of a liberal and pacifist persuasion feel that it glorifies war and conflict and almost blasphemously suggests that those who in reality had been conscripted and called up for service in the armed forces were somehow voluntarily responding to 'God's message from afar'. Both camps are agreed that these and other factors make it virtually unsingable for a Christian congregation and that it should be regarded as a poem to the dead rather than a Christian hymn. 
Despite the vociferous protests of its mostly clerical critics, however, 'O valiant hearts' continues to be sung at remembrance day services and parades up and down the land and has many devotees among members of the British Legion. It is, in fact, one of the few hymns that directly link human suffering and sacrifice to the sacrifice of Christ. Harris's tune, however, seems destined to survive: it is regularly played at the annual act of remembrance at the Cenotaph and in several recent hymn books it accompanies a hymn by Fred Kaan ('b'. 1929), 'God! As with silent hearts we bring to mind how hate and war diminish humankind', which is more in keeping with modern sentiments about the proper theme and tone of remembrance services. 


@@@@@


doc= 98216


George Henry Powell (1880-1951), was born there on 27 April 1880. Their widowed mother became a dressmaker while they attended school in St Asaph; she married a widower, Frederick Fear, in 1896, but was widowed again in 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 98220


Jenkins, Edmund Thornton (1894-1926), composer and jazz musician, was born on 9 April 1894 in Charleston, South Carolina, USA, one of eight sons and three daughters of Daniel Joseph Jenkins (1862-1937), Baptist minister, and his wife, Lena, 'nee' James (1865-1912). His father's efforts for his fellow African-Americans placed the family in a musical environment, for practical tuition at the Jenkins Orphanage (founded in 1891) included music. His father, with a band including three of his sons, went to England in 1895, seeking support by playing in the streets. He was assisted by Sir George Williams, the founder of the Young Men's Christian Association, and visited orphanages including George Muller's in Bristol and Charles Spurgeon's in Stockwell, London. By 1898 Daniel Jenkins was importing instruments from Abraham Collins of London. 
Edmund Jenkins took piano and violin lessons, attended Charleston's elite black school the Avery Institute, and in 1908 went to Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia. His English tutor, later dean of the college, was the historian Benjamin Brawley; the music tutor Kemper Harreld directed the college orchestra in which Jenkins played both violin and clarinet. He played the cornet at the First Congregational Church and participated in Atlanta concerts. He also played in and managed orphanage bands touring the eastern USA every summer. 
Jenkins left Atlanta in May 1914 to play at the Anglo-American Exposition in London. His band (billed as the Famous Piccaninny Band) had its contract extended (and posed for six postcards, some utilized by the visiting South African journalist Solomon Plaatje). The exhibition closed in September 1914, but Jenkins remained in London to start seven years at the Royal Academy of Music. He studied the clarinet with Edward Augarde, the piano, and composition with Frederick Corder. His successes included a two-year orchestral scholarship and a medal for singing in 1915, a medal for clarinet playing in 1916, three medals (for clarinet, piano, and singing), the Prescott prize for composition in 1917, the Charles Lucas Prize in 1918, an extension to his scholarship, work as a sub-professor of the clarinet, the Battison Haynes prize, and the Ross scholarship in 1920. His songs and instrumental compositions were played with colleagues including Dorothy Howell, Jean Pougnet, Winifred Small, and John Barbirolli. Other friends included Caribbean students. They presented a concert of Samuel Coleridge-Taylor's music at the Wigmore Hall in December 1919. His own 'Folk Rhapsody' (later renamed 'Charlestonia') was also performed; the orchestra included Pougnet, Small, Barbirolli, and four members of the Southern Syncopated Orchestra, an all-black band whose leader, Will Marion Cook, associated with Jenkins in London. 
Jenkins left the academy as an associate (ARAM) in 1921 and participated in the Pan-African Congress in London the same year. He then led a jazz dance band that made several records; his pianist was Jack Hylton. He also provided opportunities for the future band leader Ted Heath. He visited America for only a few weeks in the summer of 1920, yet his 1921 discs reveal a mature jazz improvising stylist. Jazz was now the fashion, and black musicians were in vogue. Jenkins, alert to Afro-American folk traditions, had gained an additional feel for negritude thanks to his contacts with Africans, Caribbeans, and British-born blacks during his years in England. 
Performing paid well, and took Jenkins in 1922 to Paris, where he worked at the Club Danou, and then to Belgium. Back in London his associations with American visitors included the concert tenor Roland Hayes, the dancer Minnie McDowell, the singer Florence Mills, the pianist Lawrence Brown, and the composers Will Vodery and James P. Johnson. He also knew the Trinidadian cricketer Learie Constantine and John Alcindor (he served on Alcindor's African Progress Union committee and was active in the 1923 Pan-African Congress). Jenkins went to New York to work with Cook in late 1923, tried a partnership with Vodery, failed to obtain financial support, and, disillusioned, returned to Paris in October 1924. He then worked on a musical play ('Afram', set in South Carolina), led the International Seven band in Paris and Italy, started a music-publishing enterprise, and had his 'Charlestonia' presented in Belgium in 1925. Two compositions won prizes in New York, and he joined SACEM, the French society for composers, but the grind of club work left him tired and his compositions were not all fully orchestrated when in July 1926 he was admitted to the Hopital Tenon in Paris. He died there on 12 September 1926, possibly from tuberculosis. His body was shipped to Charleston and was buried on 30 September at the Humane Friendly cemetery. His music was sent to America where his younger sister Mildred later approached Boston and New York musicians, but failed to attract interest. George Gershwin, who had met Jenkins in Paris, later adapted the play 'Porgy' (which played London in 1929 with Jenkins Orphanage personnel) and in 1935 created 'Porgy and Bess'. It was a fusion of African-American music and society with a European orchestral tradition. When in 1996 'Charlestonia' was recreated by Vincent Plush (and recorded) it became clear that Jenkins had already achieved that feat between 1919 and 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 98221


Gwynn, Sir Charles William (1870-1963), army officer, was born in Ramelton, co. Donegal, on 4 February 1870, the third son in the family of six sons and two daughters of John Gwynn (1827-1917), Church of Ireland clergyman and regius professor of divinity at Trinity College, Dublin, and his wife, Lucy Josephine (1840-1907), daughter of the Irish nationalist William Smith O'Brien. Among his brothers were Stephen Lucius Gwynn, the author and nationalist MP; Edward John Gwynn (1868-1941), provost of Trinity College, Dublin; Robert Malcolm Gwynn (1877-1962), professor of Hebrew at Trinity College, Dublin; and John Tudor Gwynn (1881-1956), who entered the Indian Civil Service and wrote on Indian affairs. 
After schooling at St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, Dublin, Gwynn entered the Royal Military Academy in Woolwich; an army career offered an escape from the academic milieu of his family. After obtaining a commission with the Royal Engineers on 15 February 1889 he took part in military operations in 1893-4 against the Sofas in west Africa, was wounded three times, mentioned in dispatches, and appointed DSO. Promoted lieutenant, he joined the geographical section of the intelligence unit at the War Office in 1898. In 1900 he was sent with Lieutenant L. C. Jackson and a local Sudanese officer, Farag Efendi, to demarcate the Sudanese-Abyssinian border, and identified specific areas of Abyssinian influence within the territory that lay between the Blue Nile and the River Sobat. Their survey was successfully completed on their arrival at Fashoda on 2 April 1900. Appointed CMG in 1903, Gwynn was attached to the Egyptian army and promoted captain in 1904. On his return he married at Raheny, Dublin, on 1 November 1904, Mary (died 1951), the widow of Lieutenant Lowry Armstrong RN. Selected for study at the Staff College, Camberley, he graduated in 1906 and undertook a further year of study at the London School of Economics. In 1908 he was appointed commissioner of the Abyssinian and East African Boundary Commission and promoted to the rank of major, returning to serve in Dublin. 
Gywnn had been earmarked as an outstanding officer and in 1911 he took up the post of director of military art at the Royal Military College, Duntroon, Australia, an appointment that ensured his subsequent rise. At Duntroon, with the local rank of lieutenant-colonel, he made a considerable impression upon his Australian cadets as a tutor in military history, strategy, and tactics. After returning home in 1915 to join the staff of the Mediterranean expeditionary force he was ordered to Gallipoli as aide to Major-General James Legge of the 2nd Australian division, where he remained until the evacuation. In 1916 he became senior staff officer to Lieutenant-General Sir Alexander Godley, commander of the 2nd Anzac corps, and was posted to France in 1917, where he was able to fill a crucial supporting role to Godley during the British offensive at the battle of Messines. He served in France until the armistice, having taken part in the final advance of the First Army in 1918. Mentioned in dispatches six times, awarded the Belgian Croix de Guerre and the Legion d'honneur and promoted to the brevet ranks of lieutenant-colonel and colonel, he was appointed CB in 1918. 
Gwynn commanded a brigade with the army of occupation on the Rhine in 1919. From 1920 to 1924 he was on the staff of eastern command, and in 1925 was promoted major-general, and retired to Brittany on half-pay. His recall in May 1926 to become commandant of the Staff College at Camberley was remarkable, as that position was normally held by officers marked down for further promotion. He remained at Camberley until his retirement in 1931, when he was made KCB. 
In retirement Gwynn wrote on military affairs as a military correspondent for the 'Morning Post' and 'Daily Telegraph'. Of greatest long-term significance was his 'Imperial Policing' (1934), which became a key army text book. Taking case studies from Amritsar in 1919 to Cyprus in 1931 (a second edition in 1939 added Palestine in 1936 and Waziristan in 1937), but deliberately excluding the recent experience of Ireland, he set out the defining principles that shaped the British army's role in support of the civil authorities in colonial contexts. His aim was to offer insights into the military viewpoint and to identify the problems created when using the army to undertake policing duties, so as to 'eliminate many possible sources of friction and facilitate co-operation [with the civil authorities] in such cases' ('Imperial Policing', 1). The framework he presented for relations between police and the military and the identification of areas where the army would carry out police rather than military duties in the colonial era had continuing relevance; he correctly foresaw that the army would increasingly be called upon to carry out policing duties. He recognized that the role of the army and the colonial police forces could not be disentangled, and was clear that the one would always support the other despite there being a precedent of 'an element of prejudice against the employment of military force to maintain order' (ibid.). 
The semi-military colonial police forces were often a territory's first line of defence, and Gwynn demonstrated that in cases of public disorder or the outbreak of a 'colonial' war the army could be called upon to support the civil power, and even in some cases to assume police primacy. It was in these situations that he believed the army should adhere to certain general principles to ensure successful negotiations with the local authorities and the community. These included that the army was obliged to carry out government policy; that the military force employed should be the minimum a situation demanded; that military action be 'firm and timely'; and that there should be effective co-operation between the army and police. 
Gwynn's imperial policing theories gained importance after 1945 during the era of decolonization, when a spate of small colonial wars made it increasingly difficult for the police forces of empire to maintain control. 'Imperial Policing' continued to be studied in military academies in the spirit in which it had been intended: not to award blame or praise for the army's actions but to stimulate thought on the problems involved in containing public disorder and conflict. In retirement Gwynn lived at Englefield Green, Surrey, until 1952 when, after his wife's death, he moved to Leeson Park, Dublin. He died in Dublin on 12 February 1963, and was buried at Tallaght, co. Dublin. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 98224


Saunders, Alan (1886-1964), colonial police officer, was born at 12 Princes Square, Paddington, London, on 26 August 1886, the younger of two sons (there were also at least two daughters) of Alfred Dann Saunders, formerly of Bombay, company secretary, and his wife, Mary Jane, 'nee' Gibson. He was educated at Christ's Hospital, which moved from central London to Horsham in Sussex while he was a pupil there. In 1908 he joined the Indian police and served in India until the First World War, when he fought in France and Flanders, before heading to Palestine, being present at General Allenby's entry into Jerusalem in 1917. He held the rank of colonel and was mentioned in dispatches three times and wounded twice. In 1920 Saunders married Eva Helen (died 1952), daughter of Charles Worsley Strickland, inspector-general of the Egyptian customs administration. They had one son. 
Saunders was involved in policing in Palestine from the beginnings of the British mandate; when the first unified police force was instituted in 1920 he was made district commandant of Jerusalem district. He was promoted to deputy commandant (later deputy inspector of police) in 1926, the year the Palestine police force (PPF) formally came into being. This promotion was no surprise; against a backdrop of a high turnover of staff Saunders represented continuity, while his open-mindedness, consideration for others, and extensive knowledge of Palestine helped ensure that, although he was less versed in media presentation than some, he was later to become the most popular of all inspectors among PPF officers. His quietly spoken manner belied an austere imperialism and a belief in clean living and the virtues of work and self-improvement. 
Many British members in the PPF would look back on the 1920s as something of a halcyon period; the (relative) peace and quiet of Saunders's Palestine career was broken in August 1929 with the rioting of Arabs near Jerusalem's Wailing Wall, Hebron, and Safad. Saunders was in charge of policing while the commandant, Arthur Mavrogordato, was absent on leave. The riots took Saunders -- and most other Britons administering the mandate -- by surprise, but he acted quickly, organizing specials drawn from civil service departments and resident British civilians to patrol the centre of Jerusalem. However, he realized when the problem had become too great for the police to handle, and passed control of the situation over to the military. Although praised by the subsequent commission into the riots, he regretted not sending a sufficient number of relief constables to Hebron, where an inexperienced young superintendent, Raymond Cafferata, had to attempt to halt the slaughter of Jews aided only by a poor-quality police force. While most historians argue that Cafferata and some Arab families saved the lives of many Jews by placing them in hiding, 59 were killed; in total 133 Jews and 116 Arabs died across Palestine as a result of the disturbances. Nevertheless, Saunders was awarded the king's police medal in 1929. He was also made OBE in 1932, and CMG in 1941. 
Saunders illustrates the argument that in the inter-war period Palestine replaced Ireland as ''the' unofficial training and recruiting ground for senior colonial policemen' (Sinclair, 115). His first African posting came in February 1936, when he became inspector-general of the Nigeria police force. Coming as he did from one of the most efficient of all colonial police forces, Saunders was shocked by the Nigeria force, and set to reforming it in a variety of ways. As a firm believer in hierarchy and the notion of the police as a force of unimpeachable moral authority, he saw to it, for instance, that senior non-commissioned officers stopped spending their evenings socializing with the rank and file. He was a stickler for standards of dress: 'Nothing looks more 'unpolicemanlike' than slacks which, owing to heat and damp, become baggy at the knees' (Bodl. RH, MS Afr. s. 1827(1)/18). In the sixteen months in which he was inspector he issued orders with such impulsion that on more than one occasion he was asked to issue a retraction where differences emerged from the policies issued by the governor, Sir Bernard Bourdillon. Saunders did, however, successfully increase the size of the force's CID, and modernized the criminal record system by bringing it in line with that used in Palestine. He also spent time ensuring that the Nigeria police force's Christmas card was appropriately seasonal. 
After leave Saunders returned to Palestine in November 1937 as inspector-general of the police and prisons. He rejoined at a difficult time; the Arab revolt had recently resumed, and a lack of police meant that the British frequently lost control of large swathes of the mandate. The PPF was switching decisively towards a focus on military, rather than civil, duties, and was increasingly relying on torture to extract information from Arab prisoners (Hughes, 23). In spite of difficulties with Arab policemen, some of whom were feeding information to rebels, Saunders resisted their being sacked, fearing that this would drive them 'lock, stock and barrel' into the hands of guerrillas (Smith, 69). The PPF had several persistent problems besides understaffing, most notably the quality of intelligence and mobility. In addressing these difficulties Saunders could claim a fair amount of success. He improved the working relationship between patrols and CID and, besides doubling the British contingent of mounted police, established a 500-strong mobile police striking force in 1940 to act as a rapid response unit. Nevertheless, tempers flared, and Lieutenant-General Robert Haining, the commanding officer in Palestine, openly, though unsuccessfully, lobbied London for Saunders's removal from office; Saunders himself complained about the quality of his men, particularly those who had been drafted in to help put down the Arab revolt. 
Saunders left Palestine in August 1943, before Zionist terrorism became widespread. On his retirement from the colonial service he became chief police adviser at the allied military headquarters in Greece in 1944, the director of middle east censorship between 1945 and 1946, and then, from 1946, commissioner of police in Tripolitania, Tripoli, north Africa. He finally retired in 1952, and lived at Windlesham, Surrey, and then in south Devon, where he died at his home, Rock Hill, Thurlestone, on 26 March 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 98228


Morris, Noah (1893-1947), biochemist and physician, was born on 4 October 1893 at 150 Stobcross Street, Glasgow, one of five children (four sons and a daughter) of Henry Morris, formerly Sachs, general dealer, later jeweller, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Gershuni or Gersuny. His father was from Riga and his mother from Vilna, and they had borrowed their surname from that of the captain of the ship that had brought them from the Baltic to Scotland. Observant Jews, they were strict but loving parents. 
Morris was educated at Glasgow high school. He proceeded to Glasgow University, graduating BSc (with special distinction in physiology) in 1913, MB ChB (with commendation) in 1915, and MD with honours in 1921, when he won the Bellahouston gold medal. He also obtained the diploma in public health of Liverpool University (1917) and became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow (1921). During the First World War he served in France and Italy as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps before returning to Glasgow as Muirhead demonstrator and assistant to the regius professor of physiology, Noel Paton. He was appointed professor of physiology at the Anderson College of Medicine, Glasgow, in 1920. During this time he also worked as a general practitioner, when he was known to leave money for medicines in the poverty-stricken homes of his patients. This experience influenced his outlook and clinical teaching in later years. In 1921 he married Hattie Michaelis (1894/5-1982), daughter of Philip Michaelis of London. They had a son and a daughter. 
Morris's career was directly affected by the intentions of two successive vice-chancellors of Glasgow University, Sir Donald MacAlister and Sir Hector Hetherington, to promote medical education by whole-time university staff with scientific backgrounds. MacAlister encouraged the development of research in clinical science by establishing full-time academic appointments as university lectureships in teaching hospitals. One of the first of these was the post of university lecturer in biochemistry in relation to infancy and childhood and clinical biochemist to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children, to which Morris was appointed in 1928. During this period he co-operated with newly appointed lecturers in pathology and paediatrics to form a powerful research team, which published widely. He co-wrote 'Acidosis and Alkalosis' (1933), which became a classic text. He created a biochemical laboratory, available to members of the medical staff for their research. He continued to make regular ward rounds with the physicians and established a diabetic clinic, the first in Glasgow. He was made a DSc by the University of Glasgow in 1934. He later became a member of the Royal College of Physicians of London, in 1938, and a fellow in 1943. 
Morris's appointment in 1937 to the regius chair of materia medica and therapeutics was one of three appointments made by Hetherington shortly after his arrival in Glasgow. Hetherington's intention was to establish the role of the university in clinical teaching of medical students and to support scientific methods and research in teaching hospitals, by appointing whole-time professors. While pre-clinical teaching in basic medical sciences was already the responsibility of whole-time professors, in the independent teaching hospitals clinical teaching had hitherto been in the hands of part-time honorary senior staff who depended on private practice for their living. Hetherington, together with the medical officer of health (Alexander MacGregor), persuaded Glasgow corporation that developing Stobhill, the largest of the municipal hospitals (with 1709 beds) as a university teaching hospital would establish a national precedent, good for the city and the university. Morris was allotted six wards in Stobhill Hospital to develop his department. He also created a biochemical laboratory. 
In his inaugural lecture, 'Prolegomena to the study of therapeutics', published in the 'Glasgow Medical Journal' in 1937, Morris quoted Sir Clifford Allbutt that the practice of medicine 'had moved from tradition and sagacity to an applied science of analysis and law'. Despite his enthusiasm for laboratory science he warned of two opposite attitudes to be avoided -- unquestioning belief that the biochemical report solves the problem, and a reactionary attitude of refusing to make use of new-fangled test-tube methods. He reminded his students that the patient is a human being with all the desires, hopes, emotions, and fears of humanity. He stressed the primacy of bedside teaching and of the social worker. 
In the following years Morris played an important role in the development of geriatrics. In his presidential address to the university medico-chirurgical society entitled 'De senectute', published in the 'Glasgow University Medical Journal' in 1942, his opening statement was 'Only when one enters a Municipal Hospital does one realize how many old people there are in the world.' This was in contrast to voluntary hospitals, where the aged and chronic sick were generally excluded. He had contact with Marjory Warren of the West Middlesex Hospital and workhouse, the acknowledged pioneer of geriatric medicine, and arranged for some of his graduate students to spend time in her unit. He set up the first workshop in geriatric medicine in Scotland and was involved in setting up a geriatric clinic at the time of his death. Four of the first professors of geriatric medicine had worked in his department. 
Morris was profoundly affected all his life by his Jewish education and background. At a time when antisemitism was not uncommon in Britain, he was proud to be both Jewish and British. He played an active part in the Glasgow Jewish community, particularly in the field of education. In the 1930s he helped many German doctors who had come to Glasgow to requalify after their escape from Germany or Austria. In 1939 the family received a boy who had arrived in Britain under the 'Kindertransport' scheme. 
During the Second World War Morris was responsible, with the medical officer for health, for setting up the blood transfusion service in the west of Scotland, and he continued his war work into peacetime as director of postgraduate studies for former service doctors in Glasgow. 
Noah Morris was a man of great erudition balanced by humanity and approachability. For background to his teaching he drew liberally on resources built by wide reading from early childhood. His historical knowledge provided a proper perspective for his lectures and his reputation as a teacher rested not only on his medical expertise but also on his vivacity, his enthusiasm, and his provocativeness. It was his firm conviction that the teacher had failed in his intentions if at the end of his discourse he was not mentally exhilarated and physically exhausted. It was not always possible to agree with all his views, but because of the integrity of his character and sincerity of his purpose, he was esteemed by all who worked with him. Having lived latterly in West Chapelton Crescent, Bearsden, Glasgow, he died at the Western Infirmary, Glasgow, on 1 June 1947, of stomach cancer. He was survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 98231


Woodhull, Victoria Claflin (1838-1927), women's rights campaigner and first female presidential candidate in the United States of America, was born Victoria California Allen Claflin on 23 September 1838 in the town of Homer, Licking county, Ohio. She was the fifth of seven children of Reuben Buckman (Buck) Claflin (1795/6-1885), a local gristmill owner, and his wife Roxanna (Anna), 'nee' Hummel (1803/4-1889). Victoria's mother was interested in clairvoyance and took her children with her to religious revivals and camp meetings. Two of Victoria's brothers, Hebern and Maldon, became printers; one of her sisters, Tennessee Celeste Claflin (1845-1923), known as Tennie C, was inseparable from Victoria and shared her life in both America and Britain. 
Details of Victoria's early life are not plentiful; later on her biography is cluttered with stories, accusations and myths that are difficult to disentangle from the truth. As a child she received a very limited and infrequent education at the local Methodist church school in Homer. When her father's mill burnt down in suspicious circumstances -- it was said that he wanted the insurance payment -- the family was forced to leave town and commenced many years of wandering together as an itinerant medical show. As a member of the troupe Victoria was variously described as a 'medical clairvoyant' and 'magnetic healer' who told fortunes, held seances, and sold patent medicines. Later she would develop a genuine and lasting interest in spiritualism. 
Aged fifteen, in November 1853 she married Canning (or Channing) Woodhull, originally of Rochester, New York, and then a physician licensed in Ohio. They had two children together, Byron (1854-1932), who was born disabled, and Zulu Maud, later known as Zula (1861-1940). Canning Woodhull was an alcoholic and womanizer and the marriage was dissolved in 1865. Victoria then married in 1866 Colonel James Harvey Blood (died 1885), a Union army officer who had fought in the American Civil War, which had just ended. There were no children and this marriage also ended in divorce ten years later, but in the intervening decade Blood helped his bride become the most notorious woman in America. 
Woodhull and Blood moved to New York City with other members of the extended Claflin family in 1868. Woodhull threw herself into metropolitan social life and also into the related causes of suffragism and social reform. Women had played significant roles on the home front during the American Civil War and the conflict had further stimulated the development of an American women's movement. In the aftermath of the war the problematic legal and political status of the emancipated slaves in the south led to an extended national debate on the nature and attributes of citizenship and to the amendment of the federal constitution to protect black civil rights. Feminists and women's suffragists were part of the debate, arguing that they also deserved political and social equality. The late 1860s thus saw the development of the alliances, organizations, and arguments that would be used in the pursuit of women's suffrage for the rest of the nineteenth century. 
Woodhull was drawn to this exciting political milieu, but first she needed money and connections. Assisted by Blood's astute management she used her charm and talents to make herself known to some of the most influential figures in the city. Her chief benefactor and admirer was the great railroad promoter, Cornelius ('Commodore') Vanderbilt, who was recently widowed and interested in spiritualism. He helped Woodhull in successful speculations in the gold market in 1869 and with the profits from this she and Tennessee opened the first firm of female Wall Street stock brokers under the name Woodhull, Claflin & Co. 
Known as the 'queens of finance' and the 'bewitching brokers' the sisters were already objects of public curiosity when, on 14 May 1870, the first number of the 'Woodhull and Claflin Weekly' was published, its masthead declaring it to be 'The Organ of the Most Advanced Thought and Purpose in the World!'. Published for the next six years in New York, the 'Weekly' was a scandal sheet that openly discussed and advocated sexual equality, free love, sex education, dress reform, women's suffrage and employment, and the eight-hour day, and even supported legalized prostitution. It was edited by Woodhull's husband and by Stephen Pearl Andrews, a social reformer who wrote many of her lectures and articles. On 30 December 1871 the first complete English translation of the 'Communist Manifesto' was published in its pages. Woodhull linked labour and sexual reform together and with her sister was a leader of the women's section of the International Workingmen's Association, the Marxist First International, which had been established in London in 1864 and moved its headquarters to New York in 1872. Part feminist, part socialist, and adept at uncovering financial scandals on Wall Street, 'Woodhull and Claflin's Weekly' was also a vehicle for Woodhull's self-promotion. In it she set out her ideas on what she termed 'social freedom' or the right of all women as well as men to determine their own manner of life, free from social, religious or legal barriers. 
On 2 November 1872 'Woodhull and Claflin's Weekly' published intimate details of the affair between the most famous clergyman in America, Henry Ward Beecher, and Elizabeth, the wife of Theodore Tilton, a member of Beecher's New York congregation and his personal friend, with whom Woodhull herself was having an affair. Beecher had condemned Woodhull's advocacy of free love from his pulpit and was suspected of inciting more general criticism of her; she responded by unmasking a hypocrite. In what became the most sensational episode of the 1870s in America, Beecher was subsequently sued by Tilton for the 'alienation of affection' of his wife. 
Woodhull announced her candidacy for the presidency of the United States in a letter to the 'New York Herald' on 2 April 1870. There followed a series of articles setting out her views which were written by Andrews and published in the following year under Woodhull's name in the most important of her publications, 'The Origins, Tendencies, and Principles of Government'. In 1870 and 1871 she played leading roles in the second and third annual conventions of the National Women's Suffrage Association, established in 1869 by Elizabeth Cady Stanton. She followed Stanton as the second woman to petition Congress in person when, on 11 January 1871, she argued before the judiciary committee of the house of representatives that women, as citizens of the United States, already had the right to vote under the terms of the fourteenth amendment, which had been ratified in 1868. This argument, commonly deployed by the American women's movement at this time, was rejected by the United States Supreme Court in 'Minor v. Happersett' in 1875: according to the justices women were indeed citizens, but voting was a privilege granted by each state and not a universal women's right. Woodhull dramatized the denial of women's rights when, having got herself on the electoral register, she was prevented from voting in a municipal election in New York in 1871: 'Harper's Weekly' printed a half-page illustration of 'Mrs Woodhull Asserting her Right to Vote'. 
In the following year, on 10 May at a convention she had organized herself in the Apollo Hall, New York, attended by 1500 people, many of them well-to-do, Woodhull was nominated for president of the United States by the Equal Rights Party, the first woman ever to run for president. Although he never accepted the nomination, the former escaped slave, anti-slavery lecturer, and black leader Frederick Douglass was to be her running mate for vice-president in a move designed to heal the divisions that had opened up after the Civil War between the women's movement and abolitionists over the relative importance of black and women's suffrage. Her platform included women's right to vote, to employment, and to free love, as well as land nationalization, the regulation of prices and profits, and the more equal distribution of the fruits of labour. In an age when political parties were responsible for printing and distributing ballots, Victoria Woodhull's candidacy appeared only on ballots handed out by the Equal Rights Party. 
Woodhull and her supporters held that as a citizen she could run for and hold public office even if no state in the union then granted female suffrage. At just under thirty-five years of age in November 1872 she actually breached the constitutional requirement of the minimum age for president. There is no evidence that she received any popular votes at all. When the suffragist Susan B. Anthony tried to vote in the elections in conformity with the National Women's Suffrage Association's policy of attempting to storm the polls, she was arrested. (At her subsequent trial the judge directed a guilty verdict without letting Anthony speak.) Nor did Woodhull secure any vote in the electoral college. She went on to seek nomination for the presidency on another four occasions in the late nineteenth century. 
Ironically, on the day of the election Victoria and Tennessee were locked in Ludlow Street jail, New York, on a charge of sending obscene mail through the federal posts. This related to the unmasking of Beecher. The sisters were subsequently rearrested several times and tried on various counts. Though they were acquitted of all charges the prohibitive costs of the legal proceedings were financially ruinous. By now Woodhull's fortunes were in decline in all senses. Ever since her adoption as a candidate for the presidency she had been an object of scorn, easily wounded because of her scandalous opinions, notorious liaisons, and the unconventional behaviour of the Claflin family around her. Many leading suffragists considered her an unpredictable liability, all the more so because of her outspoken sympathy for the labour movement and association with socialists. Harriet Beecher Stowe satirized her as Miss Audacia Dangereyes in her novel 'My wife and I, or, Harry Henderson's History' (1872). She had long been known as 'the Woodhull'; soon it became Wicked Woodhull, and the cartoonist Thomas Nast turned on her and presented her in 'Harpers' Weekly' (17 Feb 1872) as Mrs Satan, who tempted good women out of marriage. 

'Woodhull and Claflin's Weekly' ceased publication in June 1876 and in October Victoria divorced Colonel Blood. In the following year Vanderbilt died and the two sisters, their mother, and Victoria's children left for England in August 1877; they settled at Warwick Road, South Kensington, London. They were joined by Victoria's father who, like the rest of her immediate family, spent his final years in England. It was said that the sisters had come to a financial agreement with Vanderbilt's heirs, who paid for their relocation to prevent a challenge to the Commodore's will. Victoria resumed lecturing in England, going on a provincial tour in September 1877, but though she discussed some of her favourite topics -- religion and the 'Bible', spiritualism, marriage and sexual responsibility -- she adopted a more restrained manner and advanced more decorous opinions in the attempt to establish a fresh reputation in her new country. 

John Biddulph Martin ['see below'], the banker, was in the audience at one of Woodhull's first London lectures ('The human body, the temple of God'), in December 1877. Despite his family's objections they were married at South Kensington Presbyterian Church on 31 October 1883, and set up home at 17 Hyde Park Gate, London. Thereafter she was known as Victoria Woodhull Martin. Tennessee was equally successful in the marriage market, marrying the widower Sir Francis Cook, baronet, a wealthy merchant and art collector, of Doughty House, Richmond Hill, Surrey, on 1 October 1885. (And in 1903 Utica Celestina Welles, the daughter of the sisters' niece, married the composer and heir to the Beecham pharmaceutical company, Thomas Beecham.) 
The sisters faced criticism and opprobrium in England as in America. Henry James's novella 'The Siege of London' (1882) was read by many as a fictionalized account of Victoria Woodhull's campaign to woo and win her third husband. Angered by constant public references to her past, in February 1894 Victoria Woodhull Martin and her husband brought an action for libel against the trustees and the librarian of the British Museum for making available to readers two pamphlets in the library on the Beecher-Tilton affair that were admitted to be libels against her. The action was an opportunity for Victoria publicly to clear her name, but the court's judgment was for the British Museum. She and Tennessee were largely accepted into the higher social circles in England, and this time they suffered no precipitous fall in reputation or fortune. Retaining her American citizenship, she sought nomination to the presidency in 1892, and between 1892 and 1901 she and her daughter Zula published the 'Humanitarian' magazine, in which they promoted their nostrums, now including selective breeding among a range of eugenic ideas. 
Widowed in 1897, Victoria Woodhull Martin inherited a substantial estate, her husband having survived his own father by only three days. In 1901 she and Zula moved to a country estate, Norton Park, Bredon's Norton, Worcestershire, which her father-in-law had gifted to her late husband in 1892. Featured in 'Country Life' (14 June 1902), she engaged in local educational and rural philanthropy, but ceased any involvement in women's suffrage or purity campaigns. A particular enthusiasm was for a scheme to develop a women's agricultural community at Bredon's Norton, renting out small plots of land to allow women to learn the rudiments of farming. She was one of the earliest motor car owners in Britain, driving a Mercedes Simplex and undertaking motoring tours in Britain and France, and was a founder member of the Ladies Automobile Club (1904). Having long urged that the fourth of July should be celebrated as Interdependence Day, she became a leading promoter of Anglo-American links, active in plans to mark the centenary (December 1914) of the treaty of Ghent. One outcome was the purchase of Sulgrave Manor, the ancestral home of George Washington in Northamptonshire, to which she donated $1000. She supported the Anglo-American Society in its commission and erection of a copy of Augustus Saint-Gaudens's statue of Abraham Lincoln ('The Standing Lincoln', 1887), situated in Lincoln Park, Chicago, in Parliament Square, Westminster, in July 1920. She also offered $5000 to the first person to fly the Atlantic. 
Having outlived her younger sister, Tennessee Claflin, who died in London (as the dowager Lady Cook) in January 1923, Victoria Woodhull Martin died at Norton Park on 9 June 1927. After cremation at Birmingham crematorium her ashes were scattered over the mid-Atlantic. She bequeathed her estate to her daughter Zula Maud Woodhull who, in memory of her mother and shortly before her own death at Norton Park on 12 September 1940, purchased property near Tewkesbury Abbey, enabling the demolition of a wall that had previously obscured the public's view of the abbey. Also at Zula's instigation, a memorial plaque to her mother was unveiled in Tewkesbury Abbey in July 1943, paying tribute to her as 'An American citizen long resident in this neighbourhood who devoted herself unsparingly to all that could promote the great cause of Anglo-American friendship'. 
Victoria Woodhull died an honoured member of her adopted country and community in a life of two quite distinct halves. That she was able to recreate herself so successfully in England after such notoriety and ignominy in America was tribute to her remarkable adaptability and force of personality. Though it may be tempting to dismiss her as a self-serving curiosity, her life in New York in the late 1860s and 1870s helps illuminate a seminal stage in the history of American feminism and radicalism when many of the arguments for women's emancipation and the modes of achieving it, including running for president, were first tried and tested by determined and bold women. Among them Victoria Woodhull was probably the most courageous and also the most brazen. 
Her third husband, 


@@@@@


doc= 98232


John Biddulph Martin (1841-1897), banker, was born at 21 Eaton Square, London, on 10 June 1841, the younger son in the family of two sons and two daughters of Robert Martin (1808-1897) of Overbury Court near Tewkesbury, a partner in the famous Grasshopper bank at 68 Lombard Street, London, and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1892), daughter of John Biddulph of the banking firm of Cocks, Biddulph & Co. Educated at Harrow School (1854-9) and Exeter College, Oxford (BA, 1862; MA, 1867), he became a partner in the family bank, which was known as Martin's Bank from 1891. His interest in the career of Victoria Woodhull was said to have arisen from the views of women's rights held by his sister Penelope, who died after childbirth in 1873, and to whom he was especially close. President of the London Athletic Club, he was also a prominent figure in literary and scientific London, belonging to the Society of Arts, Political Economy Club, the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies. In 1896 he was president of the Royal Statistical Society, to which he contributed papers on electoral statistics, the banking crisis of 1879, and gold currency. He wrote several pamphlets on the theory of banking and the nature of money and one, published in 1884, on 'The Future of the United States'. He published a history of the bank, 'The Grasshopper in Lombard Street', in 1892. Among his philanthropic activities he was treasurer of the Charing Cross and Royal Orthopaedic hospitals. He died of pneumonia at Hotel Santa Catalina, Las Palmas, Grand Canary, on 20 March 1897 and was cremated on 6 April at Woking crematorium. His elder brother, Sir Richard Biddulph Martin, baronet (1838-1916), of Overbury Court, chairman of Martin's Bank and a founder of the Institute of Bankers, sat as Liberal MP for Tewkesbury (1880-5) and as a Liberal Unionist for Droitwich (1892-1906), being created a baronet in December 1905. Both brothers died childless, and the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 98233


Quennell, Charles Henry Bourne (1872-1935), architect and writer, was born on 5 June 1872 at 44 Lower Kennington Lane, Lambeth, London, the eldest of the four sons and one daughter of Henry Quennell (1843-1926), a builder from Kennington, south London, and his wife, Emma Rebecca, 'nee' Hobbs (1842-1921), a school proprietor. He was privately educated and in 1890 began a three-year architectural training articled to the practice of Newman and Newman and working as an assistant for Messrs Yett and Sturdy. Between 1893 and 1896 he worked for the practice of J. M. Brydon and J. D. Sedding, followed by that of Henry Wilson. He simultaneously attended evening classes at South Kensington, where he obtained the national gold medal for architectural design, as well as a silver medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects, in 1895. In 1896 he started his own practice at 17 Victoria Street, Westminster, and began his career designing arts and crafts furniture for J. P. White of Bedford. 
Quennell's first architectural work was in the affluent suburbs of London, where he designed houses for the builder G. W. Hart, with whom he created the West Hampstead estate (1896-1914). He later built about sixteen large houses at Hampstead Garden Suburb both before and after the First World War. He subsequently worked for Hart in Bickley, near Bromley, Kent, where he had moved soon after his marriage on 19 May 1904 to Marjorie Courtney ['see below'], and designed picturesque medium-sized 'free style' houses. Quennell's work on the West Hampstead estate is notable for the range of scales it encompassed and for his techniques for introducing variety without creating visual confusion. In his later developments, particularly the Denewood estate in Highgate, north London, of 1920 onwards (for his brother Walter, a builder), the neo-Georgian dominated and a more uniform feel prevailed. 
By 1910 Quennell had established a successful practice and was participating in elite events like the international RIBA town planning conference, at which he delivered a paper on 'Town planning and land tenure'. He was unusual among architects in giving consideration to such issues. They arose partly from his historical interests and also from his experiences of working in the commercial world of speculative building. The conference exposed Quennell to the latest thinking in architecture and town planning in North America and Europe, providing an internationalist approach for which he became increasingly renowned. Quennell went on to become a respected and well-known figure in the architectural establishment, serving as an elected member of the RIBA council (1912-15) as well as on its board of architectural education (1928-30) and its town planning committee (1914-25). 
Besides his speculative building work Quennell developed a portfolio of individual commissions before the First World War, of which the best known is Aultmore House, Inverness (1913). He also designed a number of churches and schools that demonstrate his architectural versatility and eclecticism, including the Byzantine-style Campbell mausoleum at St Mary's Roman Catholic cemetery, Hammersmith (1904); the innovative neo-Gothic church of St John, Upper Edmonton (1905-6), inspired by Westminster Cathedral; and the neo-Georgian Mowden School in Brighton (1912). 
One of Quennell's most important pre-war domestic commissions was for the window manufacturer Francis Henry Crittall. He went on to co-design, with Francis's son Walter, the Clockhouse Way estate in Braintree, Essex (1918-20). The scheme consisted of sixty-five flat-roofed concrete workers' houses, the first in the country, built using an experimental standardized-unit construction system with no wood and with windows and doors of steel. In 1925 Crittalls built another 'model village' of 500 houses at Silver End, outside Braintree, now best known for its modern-movement houses by Thomas Tait and Frederick MacManus for Crittall family members and executives. However, two-thirds of the estate was designed in a stripped-down neo-Georgian brick idiom by Quennell and C. Murray Hennell. Quennell's shift towards a new form of modern Georgian can be seen in one of his last buildings, a neo-Palladian villa, 18 Frognal Way, Hampstead (1930). 
From the beginning of his career Quennell wrote books, the earliest being a 'Bell's Guide', 'The Cathedral Church of Norwich' (1898). 'Modern Suburban Houses' (1906) was the first written evidence of his desire to reconcile the traditional and the progressive in domestic design. He went further in 1912 in his essay 'The case for modern furniture' in Lawrence Weaver's 'The House and its Equipment', in which he compared furniture design to car manufacture. This marks out Quennell, along with William Richard Lethaby, as one of the first British advocates of an industrialized approach to architecture in the pre-war period. Quennell became an enthusiastic proponent and acknowledged expert on the new production methods, visiting the Ford motor plant in Detroit. 
Charles Quennell's best-known works were those he co-wrote with his wife, the artist and writer 
(or Tosswell; 1852-1896)
. She was educated at Oakhurst School, Shortlands, Beckenham, Kent, and attended various art schools. She and Charles Quennell had three children, of whom the eldest, Peter Quennell, became a noted author and poet, and whose autobiography, 'The Marble Foot' (1976), provides the best introduction to the family. The couple's second son, Paul, born in June 1915, was killed in Belgium in 1940, while a daughter, Gillian, born in September 1909, pre-deceased her mother. The family lived first at Bickley, near Bromley, and then moved, about 1919, to Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. 
Charles and Marjorie Quennell are best known for their joint publication 'A History of Everyday Things' (1918-34), a ground-breaking work for children that in four volumes covered the period from 1066 to 1934. The volumes were pioneering in their emphasis on social rather than political history and for dealing with how people 'passed their time; the kind of work they did, the things they used' ('History of Everyday Things', 1.viii). The work was wholly collaborative in both the extensive research undertaken and the production of the illustrations. The latter were central to the books in stimulating the imagination, which the Quennells felt essential for children's understanding and pleasure. Writing in 1936 Frank Roscoe of the Royal Society of Teachers credited the Quennells with inventing the modern teaching of history in British schools, claiming it was 'hardly too much to say that they made history while writing it' ('A Note on the Methods and Influence of C. H. B. and Marjorie Quennell on History Teaching in Schools', 1936). The book went through multiple re-issues and editions and remained in print until the 1970s, by which time over a million copies had been sold. 
Charles Quennell died on 5 December 1935 of arteriosclerosis at the couple's home, Crabtrees, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, and was cremated on 7 December at Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex. Earlier that year Marjorie Quennell had been appointed the first curator of the Geffrye Museum, in Shoreditch, east London. By that date London county council, which ran the museum, wanted to make it available to a wider public, particularly schoolchildren. Marjorie was responsible for rearranging the collection into its famous period room sequence and painted the dummy boards used to represent the costume of each period. So successful was she that by 1939 there was a staff of three 'giving four or five children's lectures daily' ('The Times', 21 March 1939). Under Marjorie's supervision the Geffrye's purpose became that of 'Everyday Things': 'to try and show in some measure the growth of English life' (M. Quennell, 'The Geffrye Museum, Kingsland Road, E.', 'Apollo', 27 Jan 1938, 11). The museum's closure for the war in 1941 came a year after the death in action of her favourite son, Paul, after which Marjorie left for the United States. She later returned to England but never resumed her museum activities, though she continued to work on revised editions of 'Everyday Things' through the 1940s and 1950s. She was appointed the first female honorary associate member of the RIBA in 1938. Marjorie Quennell died after a long illness on 2 August 1972 at her home, 6 Wallands Crescent, Lewes, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 98234


Marjorie Quennell (1883-1972). Born on 14 September 1883 at The Elms, 76 Masons Hill, Bromley, Kent, Marjorie was the elder of the two daughters among the seven children of Allen Courtney ('b'. 1843/4), merchant and later woollen warehouseman, and his wife, Clara Kezia, 'nee' Toswell 


@@@@@


doc= 98235


Barnes, James (bap. 1806, d. 1877), gardener, was born at Farnham, Surrey, where he was baptized on 6 July 1806, the son of Stephen Barnes and his wife, Susanna. His father was head gardener at Willey House, near Farnham, and subsequently all four of James Barnes's younger brothers also entered the family profession, his younger brother William Barnes (1809-1869) becoming a leading nurseryman at Camberwell. Barnes experienced no formal education and his working life began early: aged five he was put to work 'chiefly employed in weeding walks and nursery seed-beds, and in bird scaring' ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 24 Nov 1874, 655). 
From 1814 Barnes served an apprenticeship under his father at Eashing House in Godalming until in 1818 he went to London, where he continued his apprenticeship under Mr Moore, of the King's Road. At this time the land from Sloane Square to Fulham was occupied by market gardeners who supplied Covent Garden. After four years he moved to Mr Stone of Peckham, where he was employed as a 'framer' in charge of '1000 lights of framing, 2600 hand and bell glasses for growing Cucumbers, Melons, early Potatoes, &c., forcing Asparagus and Sea-kale' ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 24 Nov 1874, 655). His next position was as superintendent of the forcing department for a market gardener at Bermondsey, 'a very extensive grower of grapes, peaches, pines, strawberries, mushrooms, and all kinds of salads, fruits, and vegetables' (ibid.). Two years later he became superintendent in charge of 40 acres of market garden at Greenwich, a post he also held for two years. The cucumber was particularly fashionable and he regularly harvested 8 tons a day. He became so skilled at forcing cucumbers that he could harvest as early as mid-January, and regularly took first prize at the meetings held by various cucumber clubs. He also bred new varieties of cucumbers, his greatest success being 'Man of Kent', which was named by the (Royal) Horticultural Society, from whom he also received a medal. 
In his early twenties and master of growing all manner of edible crops, Barnes now learned a new set of skills, developing the extensive pleasure grounds to complement Decimus Burton's buildings at Beulah Spa at Norwood in Surrey. In 1831 he secured his first head gardenership, at Cranford House in Essex. There followed five years at Chislehurst in Kent before, in 1839 and aged thirty-three, he was engaged by Lord Rolle of Bicton, near Budleigh Salterton in Devon. 
Barnes's headship at Bicton lasted nearly three decades and brought head gardener, garden, and employer great repute, but ended in acrimony and dispute. Within three years John Claudius Loudon was effusive about Barnes's skills and achievements: 'we do not think we ever before saw culture, order, and neatness carried to such a high degree of perfection, in so many departments, and on so large a scale, and all by the care and superintendence of one man. From the commonest kitchen crop in the open garden, and the mushrooms in the sheds, up to the pine-apples, the heaths, and the Orchidaceae, every thing seemed to be alike healthy and vigorous. We could not help noticing the evenness of the crops of cabbages, cauliflowers, savoys, &c. in the kitchen-garden; and the extraordinary vigour and beauty of the pines, heaths, hothouse plants, chrysanthemums, &c., in the houses; and nothing could exceed the neatness of the lawn, the walks, and the flower-beds. ('Gardener's Magazine', 18, 1842, 554-5)' Barnes of Bicton, as he became affectionately and respectfully known within the horticultural profession, possessed phenomenal skills as a cultivator and as a manager. Examples of his successes included a queen pineapple, which he grew to 81/4 pounds; although not keen on shows and exhibitions, declaring that they had degenerated 'into something like horse-racing' ('Gardener's Magazine', 19, 1843, 45-6) he did, in May 1866, exhibit at the International Horticultural Exhibition and Congress, and took first prize for his smooth cayenne pineapples. He bred a new and very popular white strawberry called Bicton Pine, and raised the shrub named by John Lindley as 'Colletia bictonensis' (now 'C. paradoxa', syn. 'C. cruciata'), which was a matter of great debate between Charles Darwin, Charles James Fox Bunbury, and Lindley in 1856 ('The Correspondence of Charles Darwin', ed. F. Burkhardt and S. Smith, 16 vols., 1985-, 6.36-7). Barnes was also the first in the country to produce viable seed of the dioecious monkey puzzle ('Araucaria araucana'). The cones weighed up to 8 pounds. The famous avenue at Bicton was planted in 1842, and so successful was Barnes's conifer cultivation that on one occasion he was able to exhibit at a Royal Botanic Society show in Regent's Park a collection of about 100 species and varieties of conifer then coning in the Bicton arboretum. So respected a head gardener was Barnes that to have been an apprentice or journeyman gardener at Bicton carried a great cachet when applying for later positions. Many of the most successful and capable of the next generation of head gardeners learned their trade under him, including J. Taplin, who succeeded Sir Joseph Paxton at Chatsworth in 1858. 
However, in 1869 things turned sour. The widow Lady Rolle (Lord Rolle had died in 1842) was forcing the 62-year-old Barnes to work 18 to 20 hours a day. Not surprisingly he suffered a 'severe affliction, brought on by over-exertion and unremitting labour' ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 24 Nov 1874, 655) and, receiving no concession from his employer, in May of that year he left. Lady Rolle subsequently wrote, in two letters to third parties, that her former employee had left the gardens in disarray. Barnes, who prided himself on maintaining the most exacting standards -- he had even implemented an extensive set of rules for his staff, misconducts punishable by fine -- considered his impeccable reputation impeached. He sued for libel, and when the case was heard in December 1869 he was awarded $200 in damages (the equivalent of two years' salary), a decision that was seen as reaffirming the status of head gardeners. 
Barnes was also known for his interests as a naturalist, carefully noting the wildlife in his gardens, and contributing articles on the subject to 'The Field'. An obituarist commented that 'he was in early life blessed with a fine physique, and the story of his intelligence and energy was written in a fine face, like that of the stoutest type of Saxon, but lit up with a clear eye and the brightest intelligence' ('The Garden', 26 May 1877, 437). He was married to Mary Ann ('b'. 1809/10) and had a son born about 1848, but his wife seems to have predeceased him. He died at Exmouth, Devon, on 23 May 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 98237


Alexander, Alexander (b. 1781/2), soldier and writer, was born in Dundonald, Ayrshire, the illegitimate son of a wealthy Scottish merchant. Almost everything known about him comes from his remarkable autobiography, published in Edinburgh in 1830. After what he recalled as an unhappy childhood marred by physical violence, at the age of eighteen he was sent to work as an overseer on slave plantations in Curacao, in the Caribbean. On his first morning in the West Indies, in 1800, he was shocked when he witnessed a slave being flogged. Alexander's experiences of empire, however, stripped him of his youthful compassion and idealism. 
After returning home and a failed attempt to emigrate to Quebec in April 1801 (he abandoned ship before the coast of Ayrshire was out of sight, and swam to shore), Alexander enlisted on 24 April 1801 in the 6th battalion of the Royal Regiment of Artillery, under the command of General Phillip Martin, in Phillip Devonford's company. They sailed for Ceylon on 15 June 1802. He was employed in the garrison of Trincomalee, and was promoted from the ranks to bombardier in 1808. In Ceylon Alexander realized that the British empire had not fulfilled his hopes for advancement and status. He wrote that he suffered from 'the real bitterness of a spirit dissatisfied with itself, with the world, and all around it' ('Life', 1.141). He married a local woman (who remained unnamed in his narrative). According to Alexander the relationship grew solely out of his need for a live-in nurse to guide him back to health. He admitted beating and whipping his wife to keep her under his control. He left her, and his garrison, in October 1810. After unsuccessfully seeking the patronage of distant relations elsewhere in the military hierarchy in India he arrived back in London in August 1811. He served, unhappily, at Islandbridge, in co. Dublin, from 1812 to 1814. When he was finally discharged at the Woolwich barracks, on new year's eve 1814, he was aged thirty-two and was said to have developed 'chronic hepatitis which renders him unfit for service'. His discharge papers described him as 'five feet seven inches [tall, with] brown hair, brown eyes, brown complexion' (TNA: PRO, WO 97/1210 fol. 117). 
In 1815 Alexander crossed the Atlantic again, working as a slave overseer on plantations in Demerara and serving in the Venezuelan rebel army that was fighting for independence from Spanish colonial rule. In 1817 he walked through British Guiana and into Venezuela, rejoicing (temporarily) at entering a land peopled by 'the children of ease and plenty [where] a perpetual spring reigned' ('Life', 2.4). He enlisted in Simon Bolivar's army alongside many other British volunteers but was disappointed at his underemployment. His descriptions of the preparations for warfare, and the disease and ill discipline that plagued Bolivar's army, were the result of careful observation. After leaving the army in 1820 he returned to work as a slave overseer, this time near Santa Marta, on the Caribbean coast of New Granada. Here he met passing travellers including Gregor MacGregor, whom he described with compassion in his autobiography. After Santa Marta Alexander drifted unhappily as soldier, privateer, and merchant's assistant, unsuccessfully requesting a pension from the (now independent) Venezuelan authorities in late 1821. He then returned to Glasgow in 1822. Commenting on 'how strange had been [his] fate', Alexander felt he had completed a cycle of twenty-two years of 'misery and frustrated hopes' (ibid., 2.309). 
Alexander drifted around central Scotland until he was imprisoned for breaking the terms of an order forbidding him from seeing his father, spending a total of seven months in Irvine and then Ayr gaols. Here he wrote his life story, a tale of constant disappointment, disillusion, and despair. The reader marvels at the spirit of adventure that convinces him that status, respect, and fortune always lie on the other side of the ocean. On his release from gaol he met the writer and editor John Howell (1788-1863), who revised the manuscript and published it in Edinburgh in two volumes in 1830. Howell described Alexander as 'endowed with a... tenacious memory and... a great regard for truth.... He is a man according to my own heart; he will not sacrifice one iota of truth to give effect to an incident' ('Life', 1.vi). The original manuscript is now lost, so the extent of Howell's intervention is uncertain. The discharge papers corroborate much of the information provided on Alexander's military career, lending considerable credence to the autobiography as a whole, and suggesting that Howell's contribution was limited to style rather than content. 
What became of Alexander Alexander after the publication of his life story remains unknown. The sections of the narrative pertaining to independence from colonial rule were edited and translated into Spanish by Jaime Tello and published in 1975 as 'La vida de Alexander Alexander, escrita por el mismo' and have become widely recognized as an insightful and detailed historical source for the independence period. 


@@@@@


doc= 98238


Devereux, John (1778-1860), United Irishman and army officer in the Colombian service, was born in Taghmon, co. Wexford, Ireland, the son of William Devereux and his wife, Mary. As a young man he served in the Wexford militia and was involved in the rebellion of the United Irishmen in 1798. He remained for some time in Ireland, spending 1799 raising recruits for the king's army at Duncannon Fort, after which he was arrested and tried for treason corresponding to the events of 1798. Devereux claimed that he had been 'compelled to put on an appearance of associating with rebels' ('Trial of John Devereux', 60) to protect his family and property. He was sentenced to transportation for life on 9 January 1800, but had soon established himself in Baltimore, USA, where he dedicated himself to commerce and was responsible for raising the first statue of George Washington anywhere on the continent. 
In 1814 Devereux wrote to Simon Bolivar and other South Americans offering his services in the procurement of arms and soldiers for the rebel armies in the Spanish colonies. He claimed to be 'a member of one of the British empire's oldest and most noble Catholic families' who had left Ireland because of 'religious persecution' (Devereux to Crisanto Valenzuela, 16 June 1815, 'Memorias', 14.257-9). He inserted himself into the networks of rebel supporters in the British West Indian colonies, staying with Robert Sutherland, a friend of Simon Bolivar, in Haiti in 1815. It has been speculated that while in Haiti Devereux fathered a son, Jean-Louis Rempler (born 21 August 1818 in Jacmel). In 1819 Devereux returned to Ireland, to promote the cause and recruit men in Dublin, Cork, and Belfast. He and his associates proudly proclaimed the Irishness of their 'Irish legion'. The revival of romantic Irish nationalism -- with its symbols of harps and the colour green, and the love of liberty -- was an integral part of Devereux's speeches and letters in this period. His supporters included Daniel O'Connell and recruits included the sons and nephews of many United Irishmen, including Francis Burdett O'Connor, William Sampson, and Daniel O'Leary, in addition to O'Connell's own son Morgan. O'Connell wrote to Bolivar in 1820, hoping that 'my son may be enabled to form one link in that kindly chain which, I hope, long binds in mutual affection the free people of Colombia and the gallant but unhappy natives of Ireland' (O'Connell to Bolivar, 17 April 1820, 'Correspondence of Daniel O'Connell', 2.257). 
Devereux arrived in Colombia only after the rebellion and departure of the majority of his Irish legion, at Riohacha on the Colombian Caribbean coast in 1820. Their departure to the British colonies, citing poor provisioning and disillusion with the Colombian service, left General D'Evereux, as he took to signing himself, with only a few dozen soldiers to command. He was widely mocked, for example by the Colombian vice-president Antonio Narino, as 'a general without an army' (Narino to congress, 12 July 1821, in 'Archivo Narino', ed. G. Hernandez de Alba, 1990, vol. 6, pp. 187-90). 
Devereux did not fight or command troops in a single battle, and he suffered several personal humiliations in Colombia, including being gaoled in Cucuta in 1821 for challenging Narino to a duel over an alleged slight to the honour of a British woman, Mary English. Many of his problems were inflamed by his notoriously poor command of the Spanish language. Bolivar described Devereux's challenge as 'madness... a real disgrace, a stupidity that compromises the government' (Bolivar to Santander, 10 July 1821, 'Cartas Santander-Bolivar, 1820-1823', 3.119). This was the low point of Devereux's career in Colombia and he rapidly left South America after being released from gaol on a technicality. Bolivar named him envoy extraordinaire to northern Europe in order to get rid of him; in 1825 he was imprisoned in Venice for financial matters. Upon his release he returned to the United States, where he launched a successful application for substantial recompense for his efforts from the Venezuelan and Colombian governments. He even secured favourable acknowledgements in some (though not all) accounts of the period written by its protagonists, including Jose Manuel Restrepo and Tomas Cipriano de Mosquera. In 1840 he returned briefly to Colombia, where he renegotiated a personal debt owed to him by Restrepo. Restrepo paid him 1500 pesos and 800 pesos per year, for life, from which Devereux lived comfortably in Marylebone and, later, Mayfair. 
Devereux suffered problems with his eyesight, and he was completely blind in later life. Though he was remembered in the histories of the wars of independence in Colombia and Venezuela, in Europe he was quickly forgotten by the adventurers who felt defrauded by Devereux's promises when recruiting his mercenaries. His death, on 25 February 1860, at his home, 47 Hertford Street, Mayfair, London, was briefly recorded: 'He raised the Irish Legion which, under Bolivar, was engaged in the successful struggle for independence in Colombia' ('The Times', 1 March 1860, 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 98239


Greenup, Mary Courthope (1789-1846), adventurer and businesswoman in Colombia, was born in Faversham, Kent, on 22 March 1789, the second daughter in the family of three daughters and three sons of Joseph Ballard, a dock worker who later died a pauper in an asylum, and his wife, Ann. Little is known of her early life, or of how she acquired her significant literary skills. Contemporaries regarded her as charismatic and beautiful, and there are suggestions that she may have had important social connections. On 11 September 1809 she married James Delancy (or Delaney) at St George's Church, Hanover Square, London. He may have been a soldier. Their daughter Eliza was born in 1810. Mary visited Waterloo in the days after the battle in 1815, where she later claimed to have 'tried on Napoleon's dressing gown, moralised on the mutability of human greatness [and] reflected upon the scene of havoc we had just witnessed' (Scott, 'Mary English', 12). She and her husband separated. 
On 28 January 1819 in St Clement Danes Church in London, she married James Towers English (1782-1819), the newly appointed general in charge of raising a British legion of mercenaries to fight under Simon Bolivar. English had no significant military experience himself; he was an Anglo-Irish horse-dealer and many officers were surprised to find him in command. Ten days after exchanging vows the newly-weds embarked for Venezuela. Mary English's nine-year-old daughter Eliza was left in the care of John Tylden, who remained a close friend throughout her life; Tylden was associated with the City of London financiers of the expedition, and was a nephew of Samuel Auchmuty, the general in charge of Britain's invasion of Montevideo in 1807. One of the reasons for James Towers English being given the command was obviously his close links to the financiers; Mary English's friendships with John Tylden and Richard Jaffray buttressed her husband's position. 
During her brief career as the general's wife in Venezuela Mary English performed ceremonial and practical tasks; she reviewed the troops when they arrived and tended to their sickness when the expedition was devastated by yellow fever. Her letters home, especially to Richard Jaffray, provided much of the Colombian news reported in the 'London Weekly Dispatch' and the 'Morning Chronicle' in this period. On 26 September 1819 General English died in Margarita, Venezuela; Mary English went to live in the house of Admiral Louis Brion, who commanded the rebel navy. In early June 1820 she gave birth to a stillborn son in Brion's house. 
On 17 March 1822 Mary English married Colonel John Low in the Venezuelan port of Maracaibo, where the remaining British contingent was now based. The nature of her premarital relations with Low triggered a political scandal in nearby Cucuta, where the Colombian government was temporarily located. This saw both the vice-president, General Antonio Narino, and the commander of the Irish legion, General John Devereux, hauled before congress to explain their actions. Low and English separated within days for reasons that remain unclear; rumours of her continuing marriage to Delancy may have played a part. 
Later in 1822 Mary English returned to London, where she received $2000 in recompense for her services from Herring and Richardson, who had been paid $12,000 by Bolivar. She saw her daughter for some six months before returning to Colombia as commercial representative of Herring and Richardson. Upon arrival in Bogota in 1824, she found the Colombian capital to be flush with the recent successes against the Spanish army, with a flourishing social scene financed by an upsurge of British investment, into which she entered as a devoted adherent to the nascent cult of Bolivar, 'el Libertador'. She situated herself at the centre of this scene. Gossips speculated that all single elite men, including Bolivar, aspired to her hand in marriage. The British commissioner to Colombia, Patrick Campbell, courted her; in December 1826 their wedding was abruptly cancelled. On 1 January 1827 in Bogota, as 'Mrs English', she married the British merchant William Marsh Greenup. The Greenups left Bogota for the northern town of San Jose de Cucuta, where they bought an estate and dedicated themselves to establishing a cacao plantation for export to Europe. William returned to England in 1828 (where he cared for Eliza, now a teenager), leaving Mary Greenup to run the business herself for eight years, until he returned in 1838. He died in 1842, after which she declined into ill health and poverty. She died on the plantation at El Pescadero outside Cucuta, on 30 September 1846. 
Until her marriage to Greenup, rumours had continually questioned Mary English's honour by suggesting that she was still married to her first husband, and hence a bigamist. Her biographer (and great-granddaughter) Drusilla Scott suggests this was because Delancy himself pursued her, fanning scandal, throughout the 1820s. Her weak command of Spanish probably did not help. The Colombian (and later, New Granadan) Republic did not grant her citizenship, because of her gender and her failure to meet a property qualification. Through Eliza she had nine grandchildren, none of whom she ever met. As a non-Catholic she could not be buried in the Cucuta cemetery, so she was interred (alongside William Greenup) in the grounds of her neighbour's hacienda, La Victoria, which now forms part of the suburbs of Cucuta, the capital of the Colombian department of Norte de Santander. 
The independence and public activity that characterized Mary Greenup's time in Colombia made her unique among foreign residents. She was at the centre of British relations with Colombia during its first decade of independence from Spanish colonial rule and was for a while a leading figure in the social life of Bogota. As a businesswoman and farmer she acted as the representative of the bankers Herring and Richardson in Colombia at a time of great British investment in the country, and ran a cacao plantation until her death. Her letters from Colombia provide a valuable insight into social and economic relations in the newly independent republic. 


@@@@@


doc= 98240


Hand, Rupert (d. in or after 1846), army officer in the Colombian service and teacher in Venezuela, was born in Dublin into a Catholic family. Nothing is known about his life until 1818, when he joined the British legion of mercenaries who fought for the independence of Spain's American colonies. His military career was characterized by numerous cases of indiscipline and violence. The first incident took place in November 1819 in the Venezuelan town of Maturin, where his unit was quartered. Captain Hand challenged Lieutenant William Lynch to a duel, which resulted in a 'severe gunshot wound to [Hand's] left testicle' (Archivo General de la Nacion, Venezuela, ilustres proceres, vol. 40, fol. 9). He later claimed that he had received the injury by pulling heavy artillery in the subsequent campaign. Less than a year later he was involved in another violent confrontation with a fellow soldier. Out marching in Venezuelan Guayana in October 1820, Private John Lons had verbally insulted Hand. In response Hand drew his sword and hit Lons twice, leaving him for dead. Reacting to this, Hand's entire battalion rebelled and chased him through the streets of the town of Soledad, waving their rifles and bayonets, shouting 'Kill him! Kill him!' (Archivo General de la Nacion, Colombia, asuntos criminales, vol. 76, fol. 131). Hand's life was only saved when General Santiago Marino allowed him to hide in his house. A military court found Hand innocent of any wrongdoing, and ordered one in ten of the soldiers implicated to be executed -- this led to the deaths of fifteen soldiers, in addition to Lons. 
Hand continued in the republican service, taking part in the battle of Carabobo (1821), and the coastal campaigns on Zulia, Puerto Cabello, and Coro in 1822. In 1823 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel, and in 1824 he was retired due to ill health. He went to the Andean town of Merida to regain his health, but was shortly afterwards arrested for robbing the post office. A supreme court martial in Bogota later acquitted him of any crime, in response to the numerous references to Hand's character it received from high-ranking officers. Between 1825 and 1829 Hand lived in Bogota on a military invalid pension. There is no evidence that he had any partner or children. During this time he claimed to have been robbed of the 3250 pesos which the Colombian government had awarded him for his services. 
In 1829 Hand was recalled to the Colombian army and promoted to the rank of commandant, and attached to the expedition led by General Daniel Florence O'Leary to suppress the rebellion of Jose Maria Cordova in the province of Antioquia. The campaigning army was 900 strong and led almost entirely by such foreign officers as O'Leary and Hand. After crossing the Andes from Bogota they encountered the rebels at El Santuario, near Medellin, on 17 October 1829. Cordova was outnumbered three to one, but was undeterred. O'Leary's forces manoeuvred themselves into a victorious position within hours, and Cordova received serious wounds to the chest and shoulder, forcing him to retire to a small house to the side of the battlefield. An armed guard was placed on the door of the house, commanded by the Irish-Colombian officer Thomas Murray. At this point Hand's horse was shot from under him, and he clambered to his feet dazed from shock. Witnesses agreed that he appeared to be quite drunk as he staggered around. It was at this stage that Hand was either ordered or encouraged by Daniel O'Leary (historians disagree as to the element of Hand's own agency) to 'find Cordova, and kill him'. Several witnesses watched Hand brush past Murray, enter the house, and ask those present 'which one of you is Cordova?' When a figure slumped on a wooden box in a corner pointed to his chest and declared 'It is I', Hand plunged his sword once through the injured Cordova's chest, and a second time through his upper arm, and then gave him a final blow to the head. He then turned and left Cordova to die. The legend that one of the brightest talents of the new Colombian republic had been murdered by a cowardly, drunken foreigner was quickly established, and became a central aspect of the myth of Cordova as a national hero. 
The sudden nature of Hand's recall to the service, and his previous reputation, led many to believe that he had been specially selected (even trained) by the Colombian government to murder Jose Maria Cordova. This impression was given credence in the immediate aftermath of the battle when he was promoted rather than censured, and sent to the Choco as provincial governor; from there he continued on to Panama where he was named military governor of Chagres. In 1831, however, with the return to power of the liberals who had opposed Simon Bolivar's government, Hand was arrested and tried for Cordova's murder. He spent the next two years in gaol in Cartagena. Many of the other officers from El Santuario had gone into exile, leaving Hand to take responsibility. On the day Hand was sentenced to death, in August 1833, however, the prison guard took an unannounced half-day holiday, and Hand was secreted out of the gaol under the overcoat of the American consul. He fled to the Dutch island of Curacao. 
Hand returned to Venezuela in the mid-1830s. Here he found a receptive cabinet peopled by military veterans, many of whom had served alongside him during the wars of independence. Repeated requests for his extradition to Bogota were refused. He applied for and was awarded the job of English teacher in the first Caracas school of the Sociedad de Amigos de Pais, which later evolved into the Universidad Central de Venezuela. On the appointments board for the school was the Colombian general turned British diplomat Daniel O'Leary. During his career as an English teacher -- in which he taught many of Venezuela's foremost men of letters -- Hand was known for the severe discipline of his classes. He was granted a military invalid's pension by the Venezuelan government. Notorious for his part in the death of Jose Maria Cordova, Hand breathed his own last breath in peace and anonymity some time after the pensions department recorded his 'very bad health' in July 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 98241


O'Connor, Francisco Burdett (1791-1871), army officer in the Bolivian service, was born at Connorville, Bandon, co. Cork, on 12 June 1791, the son of Roger O'Connor (1762-1834), landowner and Irish nationalist, and his second wife, Wilhelmina Charlotte Caroline Bowen (died 1808). The Chartist leader Feargus O'Connor was his younger brother; Roderic O'Connor (1784-1860), a landowner and government commissioner in Van Diemen's Land, was a half-brother from his father's previous marriage. Christened William but soon renamed Francis after his godfather, the reformer Sir Francis Burdett, O'Connor was called Frank by his family. 
O'Connor's memoirs open with an account of a happy childhood in rural Ireland, with much attention devoted to fox-hunting, which sport must have contributed to his later prowess as a cavalry commander. However, the comforts of a large and wealthy family were rudely disturbed by the adhesion of his uncle Arthur O'Connor to the United Irishmen, and by the far less disciplined journalistic activities of his father Roger in the same cause. Rupturing a conservative clan that had acquired its estates from a fortune made in the London wine trade, O'Connor's uncle and father were jailed in 1798, narrowly escaping execution for treason. Released in 1802, Arthur went into exile in France while the increasingly unreliable Roger frittered away his brother's inheritance -- the subject of a number of suits -- as well as being associated with two infamous robberies. As a result Frank, Feargus, and their older brother Roderic came to rely heavily on Burdett, who was more able to support them financially once married to Sophia Coutts of the banking family, and who maintained the influence of constitutionalist ideas. In later life O'Connor occasionally made reference to Burdett and his uncle, but he rarely invoked his father. Among the several charges popularly laid against Roger was the burning down of his home, Dangan Castle (bought from the Wellesley family), in an insurance fraud. And yet his son's memoirs allow for the possibility that the conflagration, which hastened the death of Wilhelmina O'Connor, was begun by the boy himself, who spilled some lead with which he was casting bullets for his pistols. 
Educated at various grammar and military schools, Frank O'Connor was by 1819 estranged from his father, thoroughly opposed to British control of Ireland, and without a ready local outlet for his military training. In July 1819 he embarked on the 'Hannah' for Venezuela with 200 other Irish volunteers to join the faltering independence campaign against Spain. The next seven years were spent attached to the armies led by Bolivar and Sucre. First a regimental commander in Simon Bolivar's Venezuelan campaign against the Spanish crown, early in 1824 O'Connor became chief of staff of the united patriot army in Ecuador and Peru, planning the operations at the victory of Junin (August 1824). After the battle of Ayacucho (December 1824) he was charged by the new patriot commander, General Antonio Jose de Sucre, to secure the surrender of the remaining Spanish troops on the South American mainland. This he duly achieved, having suffered a severe wound by lance, at Tupiza in April 1825. 
Although there were some prolonged periods of reorganization and training -- most notably in Panama, where O'Connor was for several months the senior soldier in the cause of independence -- the campaign was exceptionally demanding and dangerous; very few volunteers survived in its service until the end. O'Connor himself probably spent a total of twenty-four hours in direct combat and some three weeks within an hour's ride of the enemy, suffering -- as did most lancers -- from 'lumbago' as well as a variety of largely malarial diseases, to which he developed erratic resistance and for which he improvised treatments, sometimes combining chocolate and celery infusions, sometimes Jalapa peppers with calomel and honey, but mostly relying upon opiate-based 'Dover salts'. Never as heavy a drinker or verbose a talker as his comrades, he experimented with increasing expertise in carpentry and as a farrier, kept his diary in good repair, and quite regularly drew down from Burdett's bills in order to clothe and support his men. Yet, a child of a rural oligarchy as well as of the Enlightenment, O'Connor refused to saddle his own horse and would always stand on ceremony in matters of protocol. As a result of the latter, Sucre declined to promote him general during the independence campaign, despite his recognized skill at Junin, a cavalry battle in which not a single cannon shot was fired. 
In 1826 O'Connor was formally declared a 'liberator' of Bolivia alongside Bolivar and Sucre, but he never wore this insignia nor any other medal, dedicated his 5000 peso reward to the country's new engineering school, and retired from the army, returning only when Bolivia was under attack from its neighbours. The only man to serve three times as chief of staff of the Bolivian armed forces (1826-7; 1835; 1838), General O'Connor played a prominent part in the battle of Socobaya (February 1836), against Peru, and that of Montenegro (June 1838), against Argentina, thereby preserving the frontiers and sovereignty of the republic. 
Early in the republic O'Connor tried to found New Erin, an agricultural colony in Tarija for Irish exiles, along lines similar to his brother's Chartist land company. The settlement, which he proclaimed in an address to the 'People of Ireland' (June 1827), never took off, and his subsequent political activity was limited to critiques of English free trade and ardent support for protectionism. For most of the forty-five years after his formal retirement from the army he lived as a gentleman farmer under an ethos of Spartan sufficiency. His estates ranged from the banks of the Pilcomayo towards the Chaco Boreal, through San Luis (now Entre Rios), where he held his largest farms and a salt mine, to Santa Ana, where he tended extensive vines close to the provincial capital. His marriage, on 3 May 1827, to Francisca Ruyloba ('b'. 1809) resulted from her nursing him when badly wounded and mentally distraught (when lanced, he had tried to shoot himself but his weapon failed to discharge). Of their seven children, only Hercilia survived beyond infancy. She married Adhemar d'Arlach, an employee of the French mission who himself died young, so that the elderly O'Connor was effectively obliged to bring up his grandson Tomas as a son -- a duty that was recognized by Tomas retaining the combined patronymic of O'Connor d'Arlach, still a surname in southern Bolivia. 
O'Connor became a distinguished figure in the small elite of the southern Bolivian province of Tarija, where he died on 5 October 1871, and was buried in the Tarija cemetery. In his will, drafted in 1866, he admitted to the loss of the telescope that had been a gift from Bolivar, but he died a wealthy man as well as a practising Catholic. Once he had joined the struggle for Spanish American independence in 1819, he was almost universally known as Francisco Burdett O'Connor, but with the Spanish patronymic unusually assigned to the second surname. In his final will he retained that nomenclature and expressly identified Burdett as his godfather. 
In Britain O'Connor's reputation has never matched those of his brother Feargus, his uncle Arthur, or even that of his father Roger. Yet Francisco, a soldier-farmer, did as much as any of his family to promote Enlightenment values and political radicalism in the modern world. His diary was published by Tomas in 1895, but the years after 1839 remain in manuscript form, as do the essays on political economy. Two photographic portraits remain and have served for the iconographic basis for O'Connor's memorialization in the province named after him. His gravestone has been lost, but the house he built for Francisca in the 1830s remains, along with decor and furniture dating from his residence there. 


@@@@@


doc= 98242


O'Higgins, Bernardo (1778-1842), army officer and supreme director of Chile, was born Bernardo Riquelme at Chillan, Chile, on 20 August 1778, the illegitimate son of Maria Isabel Riquelme de la Barrera y Meza ('c'.1758-1839), the teenage daughter of a landowner, and Ambrosio O'Higgins (c.1721-1801), an Irishman who served the Spanish crown as governor of Chile and later as viceroy of Peru. Aged four, he was suddenly removed from his mother by an army lieutenant and taken to Talca, where he was placed under the guardianship of his father's merchant friend Juan Albano Pereira and began his formal education. After many pleas from his mother's family the boy was returned to Chillan in 1788 where he entered a school run by Franciscan friars. There he studied alongside Araucanian youths and gained an appreciation of Chile's indigenous past. In 1790 he was taken to Lima and enrolled in the prestigious Colegio San Luis; five years later his viceroy father arranged for him to travel to Europe for further studies. 
Bernardo Riquelme lived briefly in Cadiz under the guardianship of the merchant Nicolas de la Cruz, and then in 1795 moved to England, where he spent his formative years. He lived in Richmond, Surrey, where he was a pupil at the private Catholic school of Timothy Eeles, and fell in love with his headmaster's pretty daughter, Charlotte Eeles. This ill-fated romance forced him to transfer to an academy in Margate. After his sponsors embezzled his funds, the impoverished young Chilean cut his formal studies short and moved to London, where he fell under the influence of the charismatic Venezuelan advocate of Spanish American independence Francisco de Miranda. Although he had been sad and lonely for much of his time in England, for the rest of his long and eventful life he retained a fondness for its culture and consistently surrounded himself with aides, advisers, military men, and material goods from England. In April 1799 he returned to Cadiz, quarrelled with his guardian, and eventually returned to South America in 1802. 
Viceroy O'Higgins had died in 1801, and upon his return Bernardo assumed his father's surname and filed a formal application for legitimization with the colonial authorities in Lima in 1802; the case dragged on for many years and permission to use the O'Higgins name was never officially granted. His honesty and famous name earned him a seat on the town council of Chillan in 1806, where he began to build up his personal reputation and power base in the agricultural region of Concepcion with its key port city. He also exploited his fluent English to act as interpreter and negotiator between local government officials and the English captains whose ships were stopping along Chilean shores with increasing frequency. 
During the confusing crisis that enveloped the Spanish monarchy during the Napoleonic occupation of Spain O'Higgins entered politics at the national level. On 28 February 1811 the provisional government appointed him lieutenant-colonel of the second cavalry regiment on the island of La Laja. A few months later, in May, he entered the newly called congress as the elected deputy for Los Angeles and was assigned a post in the department of war. He was associated with the radical group that advocated republicanism and opposed giving extra representation to the Santiago city delegation. He fell out of favour when Jose Miguel Carrera seized control of the government, and he retired to his estate. By the end of 1813, however, military exigencies had drawn O'Higgins into the fight against the Spanish counter-revolutionary force and he quickly rose to the position of commander-in-chief of the patriot army. He signed an ill-starred peace treaty at Lircay in May 1814, but the Spanish colonial officials merely used this as a pretext to buy time and later repudiated it. O'Higgins and the Chilean patriots made a last, desperate attempt to repel the Spanish forces at the battle of Rancagua (1-2 October 1814), but were hopelessly outgunned. 
O'Higgins, his mother, and his sister Rosa fled across the Andes to join the other Chilean patriot exiles in Buenos Aires. The family had lost all its possessions and barely made ends meet by selling sweetmeats, rolling cigarettes, and mending clothes. He accepted the offer of the 'porteno' government to join Jose de San Martin's patriotic army of the Andes, which was training and victualling in the northern province of Mendoza in preparation for a daring trans-Andean expedition to retake Chile from the Spaniards. Although he was not a particularly good tactician, O'Higgins was a talented organizer who commanded great confidence in his men. He deeply admired San Martin, and placed himself under the Argentinian's authority as a commander of a cavalry division. He led the charge at the battle of Chacabuco on 12 February 1817, which was a turning point in the southern theatre. 
Just days after the victory at Chacabuco O'Higgins was elected Chile's second supreme director when San Martin, a foreigner, wisely refused the job. In theory the supreme director enjoyed nearly unlimited centralized powers, issuing decrees and governing without the need to consult a legislature; in practice his ability to rule dictatorially was circumscribed by a strong inclination on the part of the council and populace to participate in governing their own affairs. Determined to entrench the new patriot regime and eliminate all vestiges of Spanish royal power, O'Higgins issued a series of edicts throughout 1817 and 1818. One of his first goals was to restore the health of the economy, which had been damaged by the war, in order to finance the next phase of the independence movement, San Martin's 'expedicion libertadora' (liberating expedition) northward into Peru. In February 1817 he confiscated all royalist property in Chile. That month he also established a national military school and a new national army, and ordered the new armed forces to root out all pockets of royalist resistance. He established a national newspaper, the 'Gaceta Ministerial de Chile', and established a tribunal to monitor the patriotic activities of the citizenry. The supreme director also took a more controversial step and began to attack the power of the Catholic church; he jailed royalist priests, sent the hostile bishop of Santiago to exile in Mendoza, and appointed a more sympathetic replacement. As a republican O'Higgins abolished aristocratic titles and ordered that all coats of arms and insignias were to be removed from houses and public display, claiming that these distinctions were incompatible with the new republican order. In June 1818 he decreed an end to entailed estates, an unpopular measure that was reversed by the senate the next year. He also announced that henceforth all citizens would be known by the name Chilean regardless of their racial or ethnic origins, and initiated a national census. Over time his orders took a more puritanical turn: he reduced the opening hours of cafes, bars, and billiard rooms, eliminated blood sports, and placed a wide array of petty infractions under the jurisdiction of harsh military justice in order to guarantee public order. By 1819 the supreme director was even attempting to ban card games in private houses. He undertook a dramatic modernization and improvement of urban spaces: here his most notable and lasting achievement was the creation of a broad, tree-lined promenade along the river in the southern part of Santiago, later a major thoroughfare bearing his name, the Avenida O'Higgins. 
O'Higgins created a naval academy in the port city of Valparaiso, recruited Thomas Dundonald, Lord Cochrane, to create a Chilean navy, and staffed it with British officers. He sent his close associate Antonio Jose de Irisarri to London to solicit political recognition, and he guaranteed freedom of worship to the rapidly expanding British community in his country. He invited James Thomson, as the representative of the British and Foreign Bible Society, to establish Lancasterian schools of mutual education in Chile, and welcomed him with a performance of Shakespeare's 'Othello'. He sponsored the creation of a national library under the directorship of the capable Manuel de Salas. In 1819 O'Higgins decreed that 'there will be total and absolute freedom of the press', but did not construe this to mean the right to slander individuals or the government. 
By 1820 O'Higgins's imperious style of government had begun to alienate important sections of the Chilean populace; his attempt to assert the rights of state over church, a lingering suspicion among his political enemies that he was an agent of foreign interests for his close relationships with Argentinians and Englishmen, and, most critically, his failure to adapt to civilian rule, elicited much hostility. In May 1822 he inadvertently insulted Ramon Freire and sparked a military rebellion in Concepcion which led to his removal from office in January 1823. 
O'Higgins left Chile, intending to take up residence in England or Ireland, but instead joined Bolivar's army in the final stages of the independence wars. Afterwards, he settled in Peru, where he was granted a house at Montalvan in Lima, and a hacienda in the Canete valley. The liberator of Chile never married and left no legitimate children, although he did raise a natural son known as Pedro Demetrio O'Higgins (possibly from a relationship with Rosario Puga in 1817) and two adopted Araucanian daughters. He lived out his years painting, playing the accordion, engaging in agricultural research, and enjoying the company of his beloved mother and sister Rosa. He died at Lima, of an unidentified virulent illness, on 24 October 1842, and was buried in Lima cemetery in the simple habit of a Franciscan friar. In January 1869 his body was returned to Chile amid great pomp and ceremony and today is buried at the Plaza de la Ciudadania (Citizenship Square) in Santiago. A commemorative plaque and bust mark his period of residence and study at Clarence House, The Vineyard, Richmond. 


@@@@@


doc= 98243


Staples, Robert Ponsonby (1784/5-1852), consul and merchant in Buenos Aires and Mexico, was born Robert Staples in Ireland, probably at Lissan, co. Tyrone, the fourth son of John Staples (1736-1820) and his second wife, Henrietta, daughter of the third Viscount Molesworth (1745-1813). His father sat as a member of the Irish parliament from 1765 to 1800, and briefly in the United Kingdom parliament in 1801-2, was a commissioner of customs and of excise, and was examinator of the Dublin customs from 1794 until his death. 
In his early twenties Staples sought his fortune in the recently opened South American republics. He was resident in Rio de Janeiro in 1809, representing the Belfast trading firm of Montgomery, Staples & Co. After establishing himself in Buenos Aires in 1810 he became associated with another British merchant, John McNeile, with whom he set up a jerked beef company, Staples, McNeile & Co. In March 1811 he was appointed 'His Majesty's Consul at Buenos Ayres and its Dependencies' ('London Gazette', 19 March 1811), the first British consul to be appointed to one of the new South American republics after the collapse of the Spanish American empire. His position was never officially recognized in Buenos Aires, whose new government received no response to letters addressed to the British government, which until 1823 had a policy of neutrality towards the Latin American republics, over which Spain still claimed sovereignty. 
In April 1812 Staples returned to Britain, where he tried unsuccessfully to persuade the Foreign Office to appoint him confidential agent to the River Plate. The only concessions he received from the Foreign Office were the granting of $1200 as compensation for the failure of his appointment as consul and a contract to procure bullion for the Treasury. In November 1813 he was back in Buenos Aires, where he resumed his commercial activities and in 1815 married Eliza Leonora Russell (1787/8-1871). At a public meeting on 15 July 1816 the British merchants in Buenos Aires asked him to represent them in an official capacity. In return, they undertook to remunerate him on the basis of the invoice value and tonnage of goods imported in British vessels at Buenos Aires. Although having no official authority to do so, he acted as British consul in Buenos Aires until 1819, when the Foreign Office ordered him to cease doing so. 
By 1820 Staples was back in London where he remained until at least 1822. In September 1822 a delegation sent by the Peruvian government, headed by the envoys and ministers plenipotentiary Don Juan Garcia del Rio and General James Paroissien, arrived in London on a mission to raise a loan of $1.2 million. Staples entered partnership with the contractor for the loan, Thomas Kinder, and they sent an agent, Robert Proctor, to Peru to organize the transfer of funds between London and Lima, Proctor publishing an account of his travels there. Political change in Peru led to Kinder and Staples losing the loan contract to John Parish Robertson. 
When the Foreign Office finally appointed consuls to Latin America, in October 1823, Staples received the minor posting of Acapulco and not Buenos Aires as he had hoped. Contrary to Foreign Office instructions that consuls should not enter into commercial transactions, Staples offered to lend money to the Mexican government, in association with Thomas Kinder, and was removed from his position in 1824, thus ending his diplomatic career. He became involved in a Mexican mining company, the Real del Monte Co., with his friend and partner Thomas Kinder, along with a new partner, Philip Chabot. The Real del Monte Co. was located some 30 miles from Mexico City and was launched on the market with shares each worth $100. Within a few months their value had increased to $240 but fell away and in 1831 the house of Robert Staples & Co. collapsed. By early 1834 Staples was back in London, where he was declared insolvent. From that point Staples disappeared from the public and commercial arenas, though Mexican property transactions in which he was involved with Kinder were the subject of litigation in 1844. He died, aged sixty-seven, at his home, 10 Chesterfield Street, Mayfair, London, on 2 June 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 98244


George Jackman (1801-1869), born at Woking on 25 March 1801, was the outstanding nurseryman among his brothers and he lent his name to the nursery. He married, on 28 October 1834, Mary Ann Freemantle (died 1840), with whom he had a son, George Jackman (1837-1887) ['see below'], who later entered the business. His wife died in 1840, and her unmarried sister became housekeeper. Holding 90 acres and employing thirty-five men and six boys in 1851, he expanded the nursery to in excess of 300 acres of growing plants. 
About 1850 the plant hunter Robert Fortune introduced to Britain a wild clematis species from China, 'C. lanuginosa', that offered the possibility of a larger flower than was previously possible. Jackman and his son recognized its potential and in 1858 a mixture of three clematis pollen parents, 'C. lanuginosa', 'C. Hendersonii', and 'C. viticella' 'Atrorubens', produced seed. The most significant resulted in the clematis cultivar 'C. Jackmanii', which was given the nursery code number 'seedling no. 1', indicating that it was probably the first of many deliberate hybrids the nursery attempted. With an abundance of large flowers, it was an immediate success and was awarded a first-class certificate by the floral committee of the Royal Horticultural Society on 4 August 1863. Whether the father or the son was the prime mover in creating the famous hybrid that bore the family name remains a matter of conjecture. George Jackman the elder died somewhat suddenly at Woking on 12 February 1869 following an attack of gout and was buried in St John's churchyard, Woking, where he had been churchwarden for twenty-five years. 
His son 


@@@@@


doc= 98245


Arthur George Jackman (1866-1926) was born at Woking on 16 July 1866 and was educated at the county school at Cranleigh, before entering the family business. Under the provisions in his father's will, the nursery at St John's was sold and transferred to a new site of about 60 acres at Mayford and 70 acres in Smart's Heath Road near to Woking Railway Station. On 17 October 1895 he married Florence Martha (1869-1907), daughter of George Pearson Stannage, painter and decorator. They had one son, (George) Rowland Jackman ['see below']. During this period the clematis 'C. texensis' (originally called 'C. coccinea') was introduced to Britain from Texas via France, and the Jackman nursery was at the forefront of using it to produce a strain of tulip-shaped cherry-pink to scarlet flowers, the most notable surviving cultivars being 'C'. 'Duchess of Albany' and 'C'. 'Sir Trevor Lawrence' (a president of the Royal Horticultural Society). During the First World War the horticultural trade slumped and the nursery, like many others, was put under the plough to grow food crops. Arthur Jackman died of leukaemia at his home, Alverstone, Wych Hill Lane, Woking, on 16 March 1926. He was buried at St Peter's Church, Old Woking. 
His only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 98246


(George) Rowland Jackman (1902-1976), was born at Alverstone, Wych Hill Lane, Woking, on 1 July 1902, and was educated at Dane Court preparatory school, West Byfleet, and then at St Lawrence, Ramsgate. On leaving school in 1919 he studied forestry and worked on several estates, as the horticultural business suffered during the post-war depression and appeared to offer limited prospects. When signs of recovery appeared he underwent formal training as a nurseryman, spending a year with Barbier of Orleans, France, who specialized in trees and shrubs, and another year with J. R. Pearson & Sons of Lowdham in Nottinghamshire. He returned to the family nursery in 1923 and three years later, on his father's death, he became a partner with his uncle Percy Jackman (1873-1934), who was content to leave the everyday running of the business to a manager. On Percy's death in 1934 Rowland took sole charge and under his direction the nursery became mainly a retail establishment. By 1938 the nursery extended to about 130 acres and employed seventy men. He married, on 28 July 1936, Muriel Jessie Barbara, daughter of Peter Murray Ross, and they had a daughter. 
Probably influenced by his broad training when young, Rowland Jackman had a keen eye for the unusual or good form of a genus across a wide spectrum of trees, shrubs, and perennials. His main method was to identify particularly fine forms of established plants and to propagate from them commercially, often spotting good plants while holidaying or travelling. He initiated a catalogue, 'The Planter's Handbook', and took great pains to ensure its accuracy for every year it was printed. Although he did not especially concentrate on raising new clematis, he did introduce three modern cultivars of note: 'C'. 'Barbara Jackman', named after his wife, 'C. alpina' 'Pamela Jackman', after his daughter, and 'C'. 'Barbara Dibley', after his secretary. In 1960 he sold the nursery site for use as building land, and moved it two miles to Havering Farm. Finally, in 1967, he sold the business, but remained there for another five years studying plants and their uses, writing articles, and giving lectures. He was a committee member and judge for the Royal Horticultural Society, which in 1973 awarded him its highest honour, the Victorian medal of honour. He died at his home, Pyrlands, Maybury Hill, Woking, Surrey, on 26 March 1976. 
The legacy of the Jackman family is the considerable number of large-flowered clematis cultivars that they produced and that continue to be available. 'Clematis Jackmanii', in particular, has stood the test of time for nearly 150 years and remains the best-known and most widely grown cultivar around the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 98252


Duroveray, Jacques-Antoine (1747-1814), political exile and politician in Geneva, was born at Geneva into a poor labouring family. Little is known about Duroveray's early life, aside from his education in law at the College de Geneve and his qualification as an advocate in 1771. In spite of his youth he was named from 1766 among the leaders of the 'representant' movement. This sought to reform the constitutional and penal laws of the city-state by expanding the powers of the sovereign 'conseil general', which met twice yearly to elect magistrates and to which grievances were 'represented'. From 1770 Duroveray and his associate Etienne Claviere served as members of a commission to provide a new law code for the city, and from 1775 Duroveray was a member of the executive 'conseil des deux cents', sitting alongside magistrates who sought to defend the 'status quo'. On 19 December 1779 Duroveray was elected to one of the leading magisterial positions, that of 'procureur general'. Speaking in the 'petit conseil', the highest executive council of state, Duroveray attacked French involvement in Genevan politics in what became known as the 'fameuse remonstrance' of 11 December 1780. Matters came to a head when the magistrates were overthrown by an armed rising, led by Duroveray and Claviere, in February 1782. Duroveray then made his first visit to London to seek support for the new regime. This proved unsuccessful, and in July the uprising was suppressed and Duroveray fled Geneva. His fate was to be permanently exiled by the returning magistrates. 
Duroveray went first to the Prussian protectorate of Neuchatel. Good relations between his fellow exile Francois D'Ivernois and Lord Mountstuart, the British envoy to Sardinia, led the 'representants' to formulate plans to establish a manufacturing centre -- to be known as New Geneva -- at Waterford in Ireland. The scheme, for which Duroveray acted as a commissioner while resident in Dublin, enjoyed the support of the prime minister, Lord Shelburne, and the lord lieutenant, the third Earl Temple, though it ultimately ended in failure. Despite this Duroveray became a British subject in 1783, and now sought to obtain a chair in public law at Trinity College, Dublin ('The Manuscripts of His Grace the Duke of Rutland', 4 vols., HMC, 24, 1888-1905, 4.130). On 19 March 1785 he was awarded an annual government pension of $300 in recompense for his contribution to the New Geneva project. 
In the previous year Duroveray, along with D'Ivernois, had moved to London. Here he became a prominent member of the exiled Genevan community, which from 1786 also included the pastor and political writer Etienne Dumont, who had taken up a position as tutor in the household of Lord Shelburne (from 1786 third marquess of Lansdowne). Duroveray developed a strong friendship with Dumont and this gave him access to Lansdowne's assembly of intellectuals and reformers -- the Bowood circle -- which included Jeremy Bentham, the diplomatist Benjamin Vaughan, the politician and legal reformer Samuel Romilly, Richard Price, and Charles Stanhope, Lord Mahon, to whom Duroveray was particularly close, having been acquainted with Stanhope since his residence in Geneva during the 1760s and early 1770s. Duroveray also maintained excellent relations with Etienne Claviere who, having left Ireland, pursued a financial career in Paris. In 1788 Duroveray visited the French capital with Dumont with the intention of persuading Louis XVI to repudiate the French 'guarantee' of Geneva's constitution. As with visits a decade earlier, the mission ended in failure. 
The exiles' banishment was ended on 17 February 1789 after a second rising in Geneva. Duroveray was torn between Geneva and Paris. While his central intention was to reform the Genevan constitution, he also realized that unless the French guarantee was abandoned any reform might be short-lived. With Dumont he left London in March 1789 for Paris, where he became part of the influential Genevan 'atelier de Mirabeau' responsible for many of the speeches delivered in the national assembly by the comte de Mirabeau, in addition to contributions to Mirabeau's newspaper, the 'Courier de Provence'. According to Dumont's posthumously published 'Souvenirs sur Mirabeau' (1832) Duroveray led the way in using Mirabeau to persuade members of the assembly to show sympathy for British laws and political practices. Indeed Duroveray's intention was that the French should institute a constitution on the British model. He was also reputed to be behind the creation of a national guard based on the bourgeois militia he believed to thrive in Britain, and he also favoured making French government ministers members of the new legislative assembly, following the practice of British parliamentary government. Duroveray's approach led, in June 1789, to accusations from Anglophobe members of the assembly that he was a British agent. 
In 1790 Duroveray returned to Geneva and once more took up a position of leadership, being credited with the authorship of the new constitution, the 'edit du 22 Mars 1791'. With D'Ivernois he was involved in negotiations to protect the independence of the state against France in 1792, an issue that pitted him against Claviere, now a minister in Paris working to create a more powerful French republic. Duroveray sought to combat both the French threat and the growing political unrest in Geneva. For a time he found a new recipient for his proposals in Charles Maurice Talleyrand, and he was involved in Talleyrand's diplomatic missions that went to London in an attempt to negotiate peace between Britain and France in 1792 and 1793. In October 1793 Duroveray left London for Morges on Lake Geneva, where he acted as a British agent with a brief to supply information about the French republic and its activities in Switzerland. He was subsequently denounced by the Jacobin Club as William Pitt's leading agent in the region. In correspondence with the British Home Office official Evan Nepean -- in which he offered his services and subsequently supplied reports on French military movements -- Duroveray mentioned a wife and daughter, though nothing else is known of his family. 
Duroveray returned permanently to London at some point before the French invasion of Switzerland in 1798. When France annexed Geneva he was not granted French citizenship on the basis of the threat he posed to the new state and 'for his attachment to England' (Soulavie, 5.217). There is very little information concerning his activities in the following decade. He remained close to Dumont and D'Ivernois, but did not establish a new career in Britain as they did, though he continued to draw his government pension. He retained his interest in Geneva and sent reform projects to friends and politicians after the city-state had regained its independence late in 1813. He was about to return to Geneva, and no doubt to front-line politics, when he died in London in 1814. 


@@@@@


doc= 98253


Claviere, Etienne (1735-1793), political writer and financier, was born in Geneva on 29 January 1735, the son of Jean-Jacques Claviere (1704-1776), a linen merchant originally from the Dauphine, in south-east France, and Jeanne-Elisabeth Rapillard, from Lausanne. As a young man Claviere was apprenticed to a Bavarian merchant firm and then to a trading and banking business part-owned by his family. In 1758 he married his cousin Marthe Louise Garnier-Hugue from Marseilles who brought him a dowry of 30,000 French livres; their daughter, Jeanne-Josephine, was born in 1761. Claviere came to prominence in Geneva as part of the 'representant' movement that attacked the dominance of a corrupting elite oligarchy, and its impact on Genevan politics, public morality, and the Calvinist religion. Claviere and his associates, Jacques-Antoine Duroveray and Francois d'Ivernois, were principally concerned with the historic 'guarantee' of Geneva's constitution by Bern, Zurich, and France that permitted mediators to intervene at times of political crisis -- a situation they feared was open to exploitation by France. From 1770 he was a member of the 'conseil des deux cents' and of the commission established to provide a new law code for the city. When, in February 1782, the 'representants' took up arms against the magistrates Claviere, along with Duroveray, was regarded as one of the movement's leaders. Following the uprising's suppression in July, he fled the city and, along with other 'representants', was sentenced to permanent exile. 
With his fellow exiles Claviere went first to the Prussian protectorate of Neuchatel. Here he became acquainted with the French 'parlementaires' Jacques-Pierre Brissot and the comte de Mirabeau, whom he employed to write in support of the 'representant' cause. Claviere and the 'representants' also considered the establishment of a New Geneva, following invitations from across Europe and further afield to establish a trading community of political exiles. A decision was taken to move to Waterford in Ireland, with the full support of the British prime minister, Lord Shelburne, and the lord lieutenant of Ireland, the third Earl Temple. Claviere moved to Waterford to participate in the project and, despite its failure after two years, he became a British subject, taking an oath to George III at Dublin. While his associates Duroveray and d'Ivernois moved to London, Claviere travelled to Paris in December 1784 to further his commercial career, becoming well known for his successful investments on the Paris bourse. 
Claviere's business activities did not distract him from political and economic reform projects. He was involved in the writing of Mirabeau's 'Considerations sur l'ordre de Cincinnatus', which was translated into English in 1785 by the politician and legal reformer Samuel Romilly, an associate of D'Ivernois, and also in the writing of Mirabeau's 'Doutes sur la liberte de l'Escaut, reclamee par l'empereur', which appeared in the same year. These works considered the prospects for perpetual peace in Europe based on an alliance between Britain and France and were significant in the successful campaign to establish a commercial treaty between the two countries negotiated by William Eden in 1786. Though resident in Paris Claviere was involved, along with his fellow Genevans in London, with a group of British political reformers and intellectuals centred on Lord Shelburne (from 1786 first marquess of Lansdowne). Claviere's point of contact was Charles Stanhope, Lord Mahon (from 1786 third Earl Stanhope), whom he had known since the mid-1760s when the Stanhope family had lived in Geneva. Prominent members of the group -- known as the Bowood circle after Lansdowne's Wiltshire residence -- included Romilly, the diplomatist Benjamin Vaughan, Joseph Priestley, Richard Price, and the Genevans D'Ivernois, Duroveray, and Etienne Dumont, who had taken up the position of tutor in Lansdowne's household. Those close to Lansdowne believed in the superiority, if not the perfection, of the British constitution relative to comparable monarchies (notably France), and in the universality of political liberty and political economy in different European states. They shared a desire for peace between Britain and France and thought this achievable through free trade between nations. As Eden's commercial treaty was not deemed a success, in 1787 Claviere (with Brissot) established the Societe Gallo-Americaine. This was intended to break Britain's mercantile system, which he regarded as corrupting, by means of a commercial alliance between France and the United States. 
In the final years of the 'ancien regime' Claviere criticized the financial policies of his compatriot Jacques Necker, Louis XVI's director-general of finances, for his support of the Genevan magistrates. Claviere promoted his own financial reform projects and, with the coming of the revolution, these were developed through numerous publications, including articles in Mirabeau's newspaper, the 'Courier de Provence'. Claviere was now reunited with Duroveray and Dumont as part of a Paris-based 'atelier de Mirabeau'. Together they began to use Mirabeau to pressurize Necker into abandoning the French guarantee of Geneva's constitution. Following a second rising in Geneva in January 1789 Claviere's exile was overturned and he was invited to return to his former position as a member of the 'conseil des deux cents'. Unlike many compatriots, Claviere remained in Paris and entered the legislative assembly as a deputy for the Seine. In the Girondin ministries he served as minister responsible for public finances, from March to June 1792, and from August 1792 until June 1793. 
While serving as a minister Claviere was accused by many Genevans, including some former friends, of seeking to annex the city state to the French republic. On 2 June 1793 he and other Girondins were arrested and Claviere was accused in several Jacobin pamphlets of being a British spy. This accusation continued to be levelled during the 1790s and afterwards. By 13 June it was reported in the British press that Claviere had escaped custody and on 17 July that the former minister had come to London. A report in 'The Times' for the following day noted that Claviere was resident at 57 Tottenham Court Road, London, 'until he can find asylum in the country near town'. This and other reports ('St James's Chronicle', 18 July) noted Claviere's earlier naturalization and questioned whether the 'privileges of an English Citizen' and the 'protection of our Government' should be afforded to someone who had signed Louis XVI's death warrant. Claviere was back in France less than two months later and on 18 September was reported to have been handed over to the revolutionary tribunal ('Lloyd's Evening Post', 5 September). Claviere committed suicide in prison on 8 December 1793, reputedly by stabbing himself in the heart. One of Claviere's last letters was to Earl Stanhope, who was then in negotiation with the French envoy, Charles Talleyrand, in an effort to end the war between their respective countries. Fittingly, it once more raised the issue of peace between Britain and France. 


@@@@@


doc= 98254


D'Ivernois, Sir Francis (1757-1842), political exile and politician in Geneva, was born Francois d'Ivernois at Geneva on 9 April 1757, the fifth of eight children of Francois-Henri d'Ivernois (1722-1778), merchant, and his wife, Marianne Dehors (1727-1796). During the 1760s his father became a leading figure in the 'representant' movement which, fearing the political consequences of an increasingly dominant oligarchy, sought to reform the city-state's constitutional and penal laws. Francois studied law at the College de Geneve until 1777 and became an advocate in 1781. On his father's death he established, with Pierre Boin and Jean-Francois Bassompierre, a publishing firm in Geneva to produce a complete edition of Rousseau's writings. This venture resulted in the 'Geneva' edition, though the project was dogged by pirate editions and was liquidated in 1784. By the time the first books appeared in 1779 d'Ivernois's attention had turned to politics. 
Despite his youth d'Ivernois became a prominent 'representant' in a movement now led by his friends Jacques-Antoine Duroveray and Etienne Claviere. The 'representants' believed that France increasingly treated Geneva as a protectorate, and that the city's magistrates had become agents of French government policy. In 1779 d'Ivernois began writing on behalf of the 'representants' and his 'Tableau historique et politique des revolutions de Geneve dans le dix-huitieme siecle' (1782) was dedicated to Louis XVI in the hope of altering French policy towards the 'representant' cause. D'Ivernois also served as a leader of the successful armed rising against the magistrates in February 1782. However, when Bernese, Sardinian, and French troops put down the uprising in July, d'Ivernois fled the city with twenty-one others and was permanently exiled following the magistrates' return. 
With his fellow exiles d'Ivernois went first to the Prussian protectorate of Neuchatel. During missions to Turin in 1782 he established good relations with the British envoy to Sardinia, Lord Mountstuart. Though Britain had remained neutral during the uprising, d'Ivernois was persuaded to lead the exiles in establishing a manufacturing settlement -- to be known as New Geneva -- at Waterford in Ireland. While resident in Dublin d'Ivernois petitioned Lord Abingdon for assistance in June 1782 and in September drafted plans for a settlement at an estimated cost of $50,000. The proposal was supported by the prime minister, Lord Shelburne, and prominent politicians including the new lord lieutenant, the third Earl Temple, who were both interested in the country's commercial development, especially by foreign protestants. D'Ivernois's proposal gained royal approval in April 1783 and was accepted by the Irish privy council, land being provided near Passage East by William Fitzgerald, second duke of Leinster, and Henry Loftus, first earl of Ely. Although the New Geneva project failed after two years, d'Ivernois became a British subject in 1783, taking the oath in Dublin before moving to London. 
D'Ivernois now began an association with the French 'parlementaire' the comte de Mirabeau, who came to London in 1784. He introduced Mirabeau to the politician and legal reformer Samuel Romilly who undertook the translation of Mirabeau's 'Considerations sur l'ordre de Cincinnatus'. D'Ivernois also attempted, unsuccessfully, to establish a periodical critical of French foreign policy, and between 1784 and 1786 was tutor to the son of the politician Sir Sampson Gideon, baronet, with whom he undertook a grand tour. On his return to London in 1786 D'Ivernois frequented the house of David Chauvet, another Genevan exiled from the city in 1782. Chauvet's residence in Kensington Square was a centre for expatriate Genevans and there D'Ivernois became further involved with the Genevan political writer Etienne Dumont, and through him re-encountered Lord Shelburne, to whose son Dumont was tutor. It was either through Shelburne or Charles Stanhope, Lord Mahon -- who had lived in Geneva during the 1760s and 1770 -- that D'Ivernois was granted an annual pension of $300 in August 1789. 
During the late 1780s D'Ivernois continued his work as a tutor and, with Sir George Wombwell, baronet, undertook a second grand tour, from which he returned to London in February 1790. Twelve months earlier D'Ivernois's perpetual exile had been ended after a second rising in the city state and he returned to Geneva later in 1790. In September he was elected to the council of two hundred ('conseil des deux cents') but, as demands for political equality grew, D'Ivernois and his anti-democratic stance fell out of favour and on 5 September 1794 he was condemned to death during Geneva's terror. 
By this date D'Ivernois had returned to London. After the failure of his proposal to move the academy of Geneva to the United States -- to prevent its destruction during Europe's revolutionary wars -- he established himself as a writer and diplomatic agent for the British cause against revolutionary France, becoming directly involved with the prime minister, William Pitt, through his intermediary William Wickham. D'Ivernois was constant in supporting the British policy of war with France and was condemned in the French national convention as one of Pitt's leading agents. Like his fellow Genevans Duroveray and Dumont, D'Ivernois was in these years a member of the Bowood circle of English intellectuals and political reformers, who gathered around Lord Shelburne (now marquess of Lansdowne). Other members of the circle included Romilly, Joseph Priestley, Richard Price, and Jeremy Bentham, who encouraged the translation of D'Ivernois's 'La revolution francoise a Geneve' (published in London in 1794) as a potentially instructive guide for British government ministers. In a letter to Lord St Helens, ambassador to The Hague, Bentham recommended D'Ivernois's study (which was translated into English in 1795) and spoke of its author as a 'man of good character' (5 Dec 1794, Bentham, 'Correspondence', 5.107-8). Bentham's letters also reveal D'Ivernois's closeness to Viscount Sydney, Pitt's former secretary at the Home department, the pair being 'sometime for days together' (23 Sept 1795, ibid. 5.153). In such later works as his 'Histoire de l'administration des finances de la republique francaise pendant l'annee 1796' (1797) D'Ivernois sought to reveal the weakness of French finances and the comparative strength of the British fiscal system. He was knighted on 11 May 1796 for such services and on 7 October 1800 received an additional government pension of $200 per annum -- backdated to July 1799 -- in recognition of his defence of Pitt's policies and his promotion of anti-French propaganda. He also continued to condemn both the excess of liberty in Geneva and the conduct of France towards the republic, particularly after the annexation of 1798. 
During the Napoleonic wars D'Ivernois continued his work on behalf of the British government, establishing himself as an indefatigable opponent of the imperial French economic, political, and civil systems. During this time he was resident at 11 Thayer Street, Manchester Square, London, from where he maintained a correspondence with Bentham. He served as an envoy in the British service to Sweden and to the Swiss and German states, and undertook a mission to Russia in 1813 to develop Anglo-Russian relations. D'Ivernois was heavily involved in maintaining the alliance between Britain, Russia, and Prussia in 1814. In December 1813 Austrian troops had liberated Geneva; with the republic's independence restored, D'Ivernois returned to his native city with Caroline Renee Frederique Louise (1780-1841), the daughter of Major-General Pierre-Rodolphe Bontems. D'Ivernois and Caroline Bontems were married in Geneva on 24 September 1814. 
D'Ivernois was one of two Genevan deputies at the Congress of Vienna. He was instrumental in establishing Geneva as a Swiss canton and in framing a new constitution to prevent the democratic upheavals that he considered had previously marred Genevan political life. In April 1814 he wrote to the foreign secretary, Viscount Castlereagh, to thank him for the actions of the British state in defeating French imperial designs over the previous twenty years. He also proposed the establishment of a chair of English literature at the University of Geneva, regarding the spread of the English language as vital for Europe's future stability. D'Ivernois served in the assembly until 1824 and clashed with his old friend Etienne Dumont, who favoured greater popular representation. During his retirement he became fascinated by the views of Robert Malthus, and defended them in several publications against the Genevan political economist Jean Charles Leonard Simonde de Sismondi. D'Ivernois died at Geneva on 16 March 1842 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 98255


Dumont, Pierre-Etienne-Louis (1759-1829), editor and promoter of the work of Jeremy Bentham, was born in Geneva on 18 July 1759, the youngest of six children of Abraham David Dumont (died 1762), jeweller, and his wife, Louise-Esther Illens. He was educated at the Genevan Academy and ordained to the pastorate of the Genevan Reformed church on 2 December 1783. He acquired an early reputation for eloquence, but his first sermon on 28 March 1784 contained political references to which the Genevan government took exception. After receiving a stern rebuke from the authorities Dumont moved to St Petersburg and in July 1784 took up the post of pastor of the francophone Reformed community there. 
In January 1786 Dumont arrived in England to take up a position in the household of the former prime minister William Petty, now first marquess of Lansdowne; his position was analogous to the one held earlier by Joseph Priestley, who had discovered oxygen while at Lansdowne's country house, Bowood, in Wiltshire. Dumont acted as mentor and travelling companion to Lansdowne's son Lord Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, and supervised the development of the marquess's fine library. Lansdowne was a Maecenas who enjoyed the company of unconventional intellectuals, including the dissenting cleric and philosopher Richard Price, the legal reformer and politician Samuel Romilly, and the philosopher, jurist, and reformer Jeremy Bentham. Dumont's involvement with Lansdowne thus brought him to the heart of an influential gathering of the whig intellectual elite. These habitues of the Bowood circle (as Lansdowne's intellectual associates were known) were very conscious of the failings of the British parliamentary system, but Dumont remained a lifelong enthusiast for the British constitution, something that later led him to modify the more politically radical sentiments he found in Bentham's manuscripts. Although Bentham was close to Lansdowne at this point, he and Dumont did not meet until 1788; for just as Dumont was on his way to England from Russia, Bentham himself was travelling to Russia to stay with his brother Samuel, who was in the employ of the Russian government. 
Through his close and lifelong friendship with Samuel Romilly, whose sister had married one of Dumont's Genevan friends, Dumont became an adviser to the French 'parlementaire' Honore-Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau. In the first year of the revolution Dumont was one of a small circle of Genevans who not only acted as a sounding-board for Mirabeau's ideas but also provided him with suggestions, wrote speeches for him, and edited his journal 'Courier de Provence'. Dumont was responsible for writing the national assembly's address to the king, which called for the removal of troops who had gathered in July 1789, and also for the preamble to the declaration of rights. It was while in Paris in 1789 that Dumont began to translate into French material written by Jeremy Bentham: this comprised extracts from Bentham's proposals for the reorganization of the French judicial system, and was published in the 'Courier de Provence' in the spring of 1790 (after Dumont had returned to England). In the following year Dumont sent a French abstract of Bentham's celebrated panopticon proposal to Paris in the hope that it might influence government reforms of the French prison system. 
Dumont soon grew disillusioned with the revolution, which he experienced at first hand in Paris and later in Geneva. He wrote an account of these experiences in 1799 but it was not published until after his death, as 'Souvenirs sur Mirabeau et sur les deux premieres assemblees legislatives' (English translation, 'Recollections of Mirabeau', both 1832). This offers a much more sombre assessment of the revolution than that in 'Letters containing an account of the late revolution in France, and observations on the constitution, laws, manners, and institutions of the English', which Dumont wrote with Romilly and James Scarlett, first Baron Abinger, and was published in 1792. The 'Souvenirs' created a furore in France at a time when Mirabeau had attained a heroic status, for Dumont's portrait of him, though affectionate and often respectful, was not without astringency. 
In March 1790 Dumont left Paris for England where he remained -- apart from occasional absences in Paris and Geneva, during one of which he served briefly as a member of the Genevan government -- until 1815, when he returned permanently to his native city. During this twenty-five-year period in England Dumont became a familiar figure in elite whig circles and a frequent visitor to Holland House, Kensington, home of Henry Richard Fox, third Baron Holland; here Dumont met the essayist and wit Sydney Smith and the poets Samuel Rogers and Henry Luttrell. The respect in which Dumont was held is evident from his induction into the Club of Clubs, founded in 1798 by Sydney Smith's brother Bobus (Robert) and the jurist and historian Sir James Mackintosh. Through this assembly Dumont became acquainted with the diarist Thomas Creevey; Henry Brougham, the future lord chancellor; William Lamb, the future prime minister; Francis Jeffrey, editor of the 'Edinburgh Review'; and the political economist Thomas Malthus. In the opening years of the nineteenth century Dumont also began a correspondence with Richard Lovell Edgeworth and his daughter, Maria, who regularly consulted him for help with the composition of her novels. About this time he also moved out of Lansdowne House (William Petty's London residence) into rooms at 19 Haymarket, London, where he lived until his departure for Geneva in 1815. Among those who later visited Dumont was the economist David Ricardo. For the final fourteen years of his life Dumont played a leading role in the new Genevan assembly, notably in his skilful drafting of its rules of debate, which effectively resulted in a shift of power from the aristocratic council of state to the assembly. 
During his residence in England Dumont gained an international reputation for what he described as his ''extraits' or abstracts' of Jeremy Bentham's publications. The first and most celebrated was the 'Traites de legislation civile et penale', published in Paris in three volumes in 1802 and translated into the major continental European languages soon after. Bentham was a prolix writer but he was not very good at rounding off his books for publication, with a tendency to abandon fields of study before completing the text in order to embark on new ones. Dumont's well-written abstracts provided summary accounts of Bentham's thinking in readily marketable form. In 1811 he published 'Theorie des peines et des recompenses' in two volumes -- translated separately into English as 'The Rationale of Reward' (1825) and 'The Rationale of Punishment' (1830) -- followed in 1816 by 'Tactique des assemblees legislatives' (2 vols.), which bore evident marks of the author's experiences in the national assembly in Paris in 1789. The two-volume 'Traite des preuves judiciaires' (1822; English translation, 'A Treatise of Judicial Evidence', 1825) was followed in 1828 with 'De l'organisation judiciaire et de la codification'. By this date further editions of Dumont's earlier abstracts had appeared. In turn Dumont's influence reached a British audience when most of his works, translated into English and revised with more or less reference to original Bentham manuscripts, appeared in the Bowring edition of Bentham's 'Works' (1838-43). 
More important than their use for Bowring's edition, Dumont's versions of Bentham became firmly entrenched through the translation, by the American writer Richard Hildreth, of two volumes of the 1820 edition of the 'Traites de legislation civile et penale' as 'The Theory of Legislation' (1840). This was first published in the United States and only became available in Britain in 1864, but it subsequently ran through many editions and the Hildreth text remains in print in the early twenty-first century. This book became the staple university textbook through which generations of English-speaking students were introduced to Bentham's thought. Only with the publication of scholarly editions of Bentham's manuscripts in the new Oxford edition of Bentham's 'Works' (1968-) has it become possible to see Bentham separately from Dumont, though on occasions (for example, 'Political Tactics') even this edition is to a degree reliant on Dumont. 
In general Dumont's versions are reasonably faithful renderings of Bentham's ideas, though in his desire to produce a polished and elegant text of wide appeal he tended to oversimplify the complexities of the original. However, Dumont was not above contradicting the master, especially when Bentham was more critical of the British constitution than Dumont thought appropriate. Bentham, for example, had no time for bicameralism whereas Dumont was convinced of the need for a second chamber. Bentham also satirized aspects of the British judicial system, but Dumont -- prone to contrast British practices favourably with those in France, a country of which he remained considerably suspicious -- tended to eliminate such material from his versions. The principal drawback of Dumont's presentation of Bentham was that it ultimately created a very limited view of Bentham's aspirations and interests in an intellectual life that may be divided into three main phases. Until the late 1780s Bentham focused on the creation of a new legal system by deduction from his fundamental utilitarian premise. In the second phase, to the early nineteenth century, he engaged in a concerted effort to implement his ideas for social and economic reform, particularly in his negotiations with the British government to build and operate a model panopticon penal establishment. In the third phase, lasting until his death, he became a kind of legal consultant to foreign statesmen -- an activity made possible by the global reputation that the dissemination of Dumont's works created for him. However, Dumont's abstracts publicized almost exclusively the achievements of the first phase of Bentham's career, and the sheer breadth of Bentham's interests and aspirations as expressed over the whole of his long and active life was as a result forgotten by later generations. 
Dumont was regarded with affection by Bentham, who seems generally to have approved of his work, though he was capable of expressions of exasperation regarding the Genevan's limitations -- even to the point of claiming on one occasion that Dumont did not understand a word of his argument. Some of this exasperation may be due to the fact that, while Bentham's interests developed and widened, Dumont continued to present a picture of the young Bentham. In particular nobody would have known from Dumont's publications that, over the last thirty years of his life, Bentham abandoned his political conservatism and became increasingly radical. Dumont was criticized by his friends for turning himself into the disciple of an ideologue of whom many of them had a poor opinion. In contrast the Genevan believed that Bentham had discovered the true science of morality and law, and saw himself as the propagator of this new science rather than as a slavish acolyte. The suggestion by Bentham's later disciple Sir John Bowring that the two men eventually became estranged seems to be wide of the mark, since it is known that they dined together just over a year before Dumont's death. 
Etienne Dumont died in Milan on 29 September 1829, while on a visit to Italy. He was buried in the Plainpalais cemetery, Geneva, where his simple grave is located next to that of his friend the Genevan statesman Charles Pictet de Rochemont. 


@@@@@


doc= 98256


Climping, John of (d. 1262), bishop of Chichester, is of unknown origins. His surname is also recorded as Arundel, Bishop, and Clipping, and the predominant use of Climping may have resulted from his having been rector of Climping, about 10 miles east of Chichester, no later than April 1222. However, it was as Master John of Arundel that he made his first documented appearance in the diocese of Chichester, witnessing an ordination by Bishop Ranulf of Wareham on 21 November 1219. A year later he was recorded as Wareham's clerk. John's being styled 'magister' indicates attendance at a university, possibly Oxford, and suggests that he was then at least in his twenties. He is said to have built all but the tower of the fine parish church at Climping. If he was indeed the builder, he must have had wealth derived from more than his living. His university training equipped him for ecclesiastical administration. By November 1231 he was a cathedral canon, with an unidentified prebend, and was also Bishop Ralph Neville's official; by December 1242 he was archdeacon of Chichester, and by July 1247 he had become chancellor of the diocese, appointed by Bishop Richard Wyche. 
Wyche died at Dover on 2 April 1253. Whereas his own installation as bishop had been stormy and prolonged, that of his successor could hardly have gone more smoothly. The positions he had held, and the experience he had acquired, in the service of three consecutive bishops probably made Climping an attractive, uncontroversial, perhaps even inevitable, candidate to succeed Wyche, in a diocese where over thirty years of service must have made him very well known. Licence to elect was requested from Henry III on 9 April, and granted five days later. On 21 May the cathedral canons asked for royal assent to Climping's election, and received it just two days later, while the temporalities were restored on 27 May. 
Climping was seldom involved in public affairs. Soon after he became bishop, in May 1254, he was appointed one of three collectors of the ecclesiastical tenth granted for Henry III's projected crusade, responsible for the dioceses of Canterbury, Rochester, Chichester, and Winchester, with 200 marks a year in expenses. He seems to have been conscientious in meeting his responsibilities during the three years he held this position. Climping witnessed no royal charters and received no royal gifts, but it would probably be wrong to assume that he was either unknown at court or 'persona non grata' there. In 1255 he was among the prelates invited to celebrate the translation of St Edward the Confessor on 13 October, one of the major festivals in Henry III's liturgical year, and on 30 September 1258 he was one of the bishops who attended the dedication of Salisbury Cathedral in the presence of the king and queen. But Matthew Paris was probably in error to record that earlier that year Climping and three other bishops were deputed to discuss the state of the church at a gathering of prelates summoned to Oxford following the dramatic showdown between Henry and the magnates; no other source mentions this assembly. 
Climping's absence from curial circles is doubtless principally attributable to his evident concern to foster the well-being of his diocese. His predecessor had been a notable reforming bishop as well as a man of holy life. Wyche's biographer, Ralph Bocking, leaves no doubt that the campaign for Richard's canonization was launched by his successor and the cathedral chapter. It enjoyed the enthusiastic support of the king and nobility, and was so effectively promoted at the papal curia that Richard of Chichester was formally proclaimed a saint less than nine years after his death, on 22 January 1262. The new saint's cult made Chichester Cathedral a centre of pilgrimage and enhanced its position as the focus for the diocese's spiritual life. Climping followed in Wyche's footsteps as a diocesan, showing himself concerned to provide pastoral care, not least by ensuring that churches and their incumbents were adequately endowed. He also fostered the hospital of St Edmund for retired priests at Wyndham in Shermanbury, founded by St Richard, to the extent that he was himself recognized as its co-founder. One of the properties he bought for the hospital cost him 55 marks. 
Climping was active in the land market, in ways beneficial both to the diocese and to its religious houses. His most important acquisition enabled him to endow the episcopal estate with the manor of Drungewick (near Loxwood), which he also stocked with cattle; the manor later became one of the principal residences of his successors. He also continued his predecessors' policy of enclosing and building on former pasture at Pubhurst, in the manor of Wisborough Green, and commuted to yearly cash payments the services due to his court at Bexhill from tenants of Battle Abbey. While still chancellor he had sold property to the dean and chapter; after becoming bishop he made them grants that included a knight's fee at Ilsham in Climping itself, and rents totalling $13 18's'. He had earlier given four plots in Chichester to St Mary's Hospital there. As bishop he licensed the Norman abbey of Sees to appropriate the rectory of Yapton (while reserving to himself the right to nominate the vicar), gave the abbey lands that he had received from Tortington Priory, and issued an 'inspeximus' of a charter by the dean and chapter of Hereford granting Sees an annual pension (he did the same with charters for Sele Priory and Robertsbridge Abbey). 
Climping died about 18 May 1262 and was buried before the high altar of the cathedral. His possible grave slab was moved with four others to the east end of the nave in 1731, when the choir was paved in marble, but has since been returned to the choir. His will does not survive, but he is known to have left $8 per annum to fund prayers for his soul at the altars of St Katherine, St Margaret, and St Agatha in the cathedral. In 1265 the Augustinian priory of Shulbrede (or Wolinchmere) also undertook to offer prayers for the late bishop's soul. One of his executors was Simon of Climping, archdeacon of Lewes, a possible relative whose career he may have fostered, along with that of Thomas of Climping, rector of Poling by 1248. There is no reason to believe that either man was unworthy of preferment. 
Writing of Climping's election as bishop, the chronicler Thomas Wykes described him as 'vir mirae simplicitatis et innocentiae' ('Ann. mon.', 4.103). This might be translated as 'a man of wonderful simplicity and innocence', with simplicity implying honesty, straightforwardness, guilelessness, rather than stupidity. Climping's actions show that he was more effective than this description implies. He dedicated himself to his diocese and was careful of its needs. Early in his career he showed determination in becoming involved in litigation with the locally powerful Savary de Bohun, later on he was no less resolute in pursuing Bishop Richard's canonization. But overall he seems to have been a peacemaker. In 1255 he negotiated a settlement with Battle Abbey of a number of disputed issues, including the bishop's jurisdiction and rights of visitation. The records of his episcopate, which were often witnessed by two or three cathedral dignitaries and a number of canons, suggest that he was careful to associate his chapter with his activities. Climping is undeniably overshadowed by his two predecessors as bishop, Ralph Neville, chancellor of England, and St Richard Wyche, and also by his successor Stephen Bersted, the strenuous ally of Simon de Montfort. None the less, he is entitled to be regarded as a good pastor, and servant, of the diocese of Chichester. 


@@@@@


doc= 98259


Lucena, Lorenzo (1807-1881), Roman Catholic and Church of England priest, translator, and Hispanic scholar, was born Lorenzo de Santa Maria Lucena y Pedrosa on 25 March 1807, at Aguilar de la Frontera, Cordoba, Spain, the sixth and youngest child of Jose Lucena Raya, a minor royal official and notary public, and his wife, Teresa Francisca, 'nee' Pedrosa. He was educated locally until November 1821, when he became a pupil at the Seminary of St Pelagius the Martyr, Cordoba. It is not clear when his master's degree was awarded by the University of Seville, but he was evidently an able student, with a particular aptitude for teaching, who promised to rise to high office in the Catholic church in Spain. Between 1828 and 1835 he held the terce chair of theology at St Pelagius, before being promoted to the vespers chair in the same subject. He was ordained deacon in 1830 and priest in 1831. 
On 8 January 1836 Lucena left St Pelagius, for reasons that were never clarified, but appear to have consisted of a mixture of career disappointment, in the form of the refusal of the duke of Medinaceli, in the summer of 1835, to appoint him to a chaplaincy in Cordoba, love for his third cousin, Micaela Castilla y Aguilar, and discontent with the state of the Spanish church in a turbulent period. The chaplaincy would, of course, have kept him in the Catholic church, and there is no sign of any personal or theological conflict between him and his colleagues at St Pelagius. In any case, on 19 January 1836, after a journey amid winter storms, he and Micaela presented themselves in the British consulate in Gibraltar. They had travelled there on false passports, issued by the mayor of Benameji in Malaga province, as a merchant and his wife. They were married at Holy Trinity Church, Gibraltar, on 24 January. The following month they travelled to London, remaining there for about a year, during which Lucena's diaconal and priestly orders were transferred to the Church of England, and he was licensed by Charles Blomfield, bishop of London. Once back in Gibraltar, he ministered to the Spanish congregation attached to Holy Trinity, being instructed by the governor of the colony to avoid religious controversy. In 1839 he was sponsored by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge as headmaster of a school for Spanish children, and in 1842 became an honorary canon in the newly established cathedral chapter of Holy Trinity, a dignity he held until 1858. During his time in Gibraltar he revised, for the SPCK, the Spanish translation of the 'New Testament' by Bishop Felix Torres Amat, and his work was widely distributed in Spain and Latin America. Two daughters were born in Gibraltar, Luisa Amelia in 1845 and Julia in 1848. In October 1849 the family sailed to Liverpool, where Lucena became a chaplain in the Foreigners' Mission, an Anglican charity for seamen. During this time he also taught Spanish at the Liverpool Mechanics' School of Arts, part of the Royal Liverpool Institute. 
In 1858 Lucena was elected to the new post of teacher of Spanish at the Taylor Institution in Oxford. His initial appointment was for five years, renewed until his death in 1881. The university conferred on him in 1877 the degree of MA by decree. He was required to lecture in the Taylor building on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday afternoons, and, in addition to his official pupils, who were few in number but included senior members of the university, from 1863 he was allowed to teach Spanish privately at home. Although modern languages was not a degree subject in Oxford until 1905, from 1865 Spanish was included among the languages offered for Taylor scholarships. Taylor teachers were not members of the university, but Lucena equipped the Taylorian Library with books that formed a comprehensive basis for Hispanic studies, including works on literature, history, archaeology, philology, and bibliography, as well as current political writing and newspapers. 
While in Oxford Lucena seems not to have exercised a public priestly ministry, but he became connected with St Aldate's Church, and his daughter Julia married Henry, elder son of its rector, Alfred Christopher. At the request of the SPCK Lucena revised the complete translation of the 'Bible' made by the sixteenth-century Spanish reformer Casiodoro de Reina and revised by Cipriano de Valera. The result was published in Oxford in 1862, and in subsequent editions, in whole or in part. Although this was his largest-scale work, influential in Spanish-speaking protestant circles, Lucena also published, between 1837 and 1856, translations of various Anglican writings, by Joseph Hall, John Jewell, John Cosin, Lancelot Andrewes, William Beveridge, George Bull, and Richard Crakenthorpe, as well as James I of England. His 1856 set of translations has a preface containing the only known expression of Lucena's own theological views, which appear to have been those of the liberal part of the Spanish Catholic church in which he had been brought up and ordained. On this evidence he hoped for a general reform of the Roman Catholic church, by means of a true general ecumenical council, which might incorporate a Church of England that was both catholic and reformed. 
Lucena brought to Oxford not only his teaching skills but a depth of biblical scholarship, evidently involving knowledge of Hebrew and Greek, and familiarity with the theology of St Thomas Aquinas, which had formed him at St Pelagius. Although he only taught Spanish publicly, he may well have contributed his distinctive theological understanding on a less formal basis, and his work at the Taylorian laid valuable foundations for Spanish studies in the university. He died at his home, 27 Walton Street, Oxford, of cirrhosis, on 24 August 1881, and was buried in St Sepulchre cemetery, Jericho. A sign of the esteem in which he and his family were held was the raising, by colleagues and pupils, of a fund totalling $1048 6's'. 0died, with which a trust was set up to support his widow, their daughter Luisa, and Luisa's son, James Lucena Mackenzie Wilson. Subscribers included most of the heads of the Oxford colleges, many professors and current college fellows, the Oxford MP, the earl of Aberdeen, and the curators of the Taylor Institution and the British and Foreign Bible Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 98265


Grant, Helen Frances (1903-1992), Spanish scholar, was born at Pill St George, Long Ashton, Somerset, on 26 December 1903, the daughter of Herbert Newsome, medical practitioner, and his wife, Christine Marguerite, 'nee' Gibbs. She attended a private school in Clifton and a finishing school in Lausanne. In 1921 she took a job in Brussels as secretary to a British accountant, who, she discovered, was involved in the arms trade and industrial espionage (in particular, trying to get hold of the secret process of making bakelite). In 1924 she became secretary to the attorney-general of Sierra Leone, and then to Walter de la Mare. Meeting his many cultivated friends decided her on applying to university. She initially thought of applying to Bristol, but her father had links with the principal of Somerville College, Margery Fry, who encouraged her to apply instead to Oxford. She did, and but for her age, she learned, she would have gained a scholarship. In 1927 she went to read French and Spanish. Her undergraduate years were fruitful. In 1928 she stayed in Granada with the socialist politician and intellectual Fernando de los Rios. It was then that she first read poems by Federico Garcia Lorca, a great friend of her hosts. She maintained contact with the poet's family ever afterwards. Back in Oxford she met other distinguished figures in Spanish letters who were passing through. The Hispanist J. B. Trend also visited. The professor of Spanish, Salvador de Madariaga, was joined in 1929 by the poet Jorge Guillen. Helen formed a lasting friendship with him and his family. He helped her with her translation of Diaz Fernandez's novel 'El blocao', published in 1930, the year in which she graduated with a second-class degree. Her time in Oxford was significant in two other ways. First, it saw her political awakening. She became and remained a stout-hearted member of the Labour Party, and an active defender of humanitarian values. Second, it was there that she met Alexander Thomas Kingdom (Alec) Grant (1906-1988), then an undergraduate at University College, later a distinguished economist and civil servant. They married on 19 July 1930; there were no children of the marriage. 
Supporters from the outset of the republican government that came to power in Spain in 1931, Alec and Helen Grant maintained this commitment after the outbreak of the civil war. In March and April 1937, although not herself a Quaker, Helen went to Spain as interpreter for a relief group sent by the Society of Friends, and kept a vivid diary of her experiences, later deposited in Cambridge University Library. Back in Britain she raised funds for Spain. On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 she joined the Royal Institute of International Affairs foreign research and press service, based in Oxford, in 1941 moving on to the BBC European service. 
In 1945 Helen Grant returned to academic life. She had already, from 1934 to 1939, been assistant lecturer in Spanish at Birmingham, combining that post with responsibility for Spanish teaching at Somerville and St Hilda's colleges in Oxford. Now she was appointed to a university lectureship at Cambridge, under Trend. From 1949 to 1964 she lived in Girton College, commuting at weekends to London to be with her husband. Girton elected her to a supernumerary fellowship in 1954 and a lectureship in Spanish from 1955, with an interval from 1955 to 1958 as a tutor and official fellow. On her husband's retirement from London and election to a fellowship of Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1966, she took a cookery course and they set up house in Cambridge, keen hosts to old and young alike. 
Grant's lectures delighted generations of undergraduates by their unpretentiousness, lively-mindedness, and first-hand knowledge of her subjects. Her supervisions, of both undergraduates and postgraduates, were similarly inspiring: with kindliness and patience she encouraged her pupils to independent thought. She was utterly generous in sharing her reading, ideas, and personal experience. She thus launched many teachers of her subject in schools and universities. As her 'Times' obituarist remarked, 'the pleasure she took in the success of the young was unselfish and complete' ('The Times', 13 June 1992). Unfeignedly modest, her reviews of other scholars' work brought out what was positive in it. 
On her own retirement in 1971 Helen Grant was elected to a life fellowship of Girton, and pursued research into the theme of the 'world upside down' (a carnivalesque topos pointing to the inversion of worldly values, and represented by such things as animals hunting humans or people standing on their heads). Earlier in her career she co-edited a selection of the romantic Mariano Jose de Larra's critical writings, and published with insight on Antonio Machado and Lorca, with special awareness of their indebtedness to native strains of folk literature. She was honoured by a Festschrift in 1972, and the Lazo de Dama de la Orden de Isabel la Catolica, bestowed on her in 1988 by the Spanish crown, was a welcome recognition of her contributions to Hispanism in Britain and beyond. Her husband predeceased her in 1988 and, much as she refused to give in to the infirmities of old age, she eventually needed professional care. Following cancer and a stroke, she died in the Hope Residential and Nursing Care Home in Brooklands Avenue, Cambridge, on 5 May 1992, and was cremated at the Cambridge crematorium on 14 May 1992 after a funeral service at St Mark's Church, Barton Road. A memorial service was held on 27 February 1993 at Girton College. 


