@@@@@


doc= 98604


Morley, Sheridan Robert (1941-2007), theatre critic and biographer, was born on 5 December 1941 at Five Trees nursing home, overlooking Ascot racecourse, Berkshire, the elder son of the actor, writer, and producer Robert Adolph Wilton Morley (1908-1992), and his wife, the actress Joan North, 'nee' Buckmaster (1910-2005), daughter of Dame Gladys Cooper. His birth coincided with the first night in London of 'The Man Who Came to Dinner', in which his father was playing the outrageous Sheridan Whiteside, after whom he was named. 
As a child of the theatre, with which he fell deeply in love at a very early age, Morley was never going to enjoy a traditional English childhood. His formal education began at Rupert House preparatory school in Henley-on-Thames. 'Hopeless at art and handiwork', read his autumn term report in 1947. 'Avoids sport whenever possible... Imitates teachers well. Totally unable to catch or throw balls' ('Asking for Trouble', 42). The following year he left for America with his mother and younger sister, Annabel. They stayed first with Gladys Cooper in California. After a year in New York, where his father's hugely successful play 'Edward, My Son' was playing on Broadway, and an eighteen-month tour of Australia and New Zealand, the family returned to England and his father set about finding a suitable school for him. To this end he inserted an advertisement in the personal column of 'The Times': 'Father with horrible memories of his own schooldays at Wellington is searching for a school for his son where the food matters as much as education, and the standards are those of a good three-star seaside hotel' (ibid., 81). A number of headmasters were interviewed, and the job finally went to a Dutchman called Harry Tuyn who ran Sizewell Hall, an eccentric school on the Suffolk coast near Aldeburgh where the forty or so children decided what they wanted to learn. The star-struck teenager spent his school holidays wherever his father happened to be filming -- most memorably in Ravello with Humphrey Bogart and Gina Lollobrigida shooting John Huston's 'Beat the Devil'. 
Given that Sizewell was not an ideal preparation for anything else -- 'more of a total once-in-a-lifetime experience' ('Asking for Trouble', 84) -- it says a lot for Morley's determination that he managed to gain a place at Merton College, Oxford, in 1960 to read French. An immediately recognizable figure in Oxford, large, exuberant, with an enormous gift for friendship, for three years he roamed the theatrical and journalistic landscape, cultivating his many skills -- as a trenchant critic for 'Isis', assistant producer to Peter Dews who came to direct 'Henry IV', parts 1 and 2, at the Playhouse, secretary of the Oxford University Dramatic Society, and, given half a chance, actor. But he always knew that, however else he might emulate his father, it would not be on the stage. 
Morley graduated with a third-class degree in 1963 and, having landed a job with ITN, first enjoyed a year in the drama department of the University of Hawaii in Honolulu, where he met Margaret Gudejko from Boston, who in 1965 became his first wife and with whom he had three children. Meanwhile, in the autumn of 1964 he took up his job at ITN as a newscaster, reporter, and scriptwriter. Three years later he moved to the BBC where he spent four happy years on the pioneering, open-ended discussion programme 'Late Night Line-Up' alongside Joan Bakewell, Denis Tuohy, Michael Dean, and Tony Bilbow. 
Nevertheless Morley yearned to be a drama critic and began to realize his ambition when 'The Times''s revered arts editor John Lawrence employed him as third-string reviewer. When John Higgins took over from Lawrence he commissioned Morley to write a series of profiles, 'Great Exiles'. One of his first subjects was Noel Coward, who not only agreed to be godfather to Morley's son Hugo, but also that Morley should be his first biographer. The publication of 'A Talent to Amuse' in 1969 coincided with Coward's seventieth birthday celebrations and launched Morley on a long and distinguished career as an author of theatrical biographies. His next subject -- while still working as monthly reviewer for 'The Tatler' and London drama critic of the 'International Herald Tribune' -- was Oscar Wilde (1976), chosen not least because his father had been the first actor to play him on stage and screen. Ever since childhood Morley had been susceptible to star quality, and his books reflected his passion. A biography of Sybil Thorndike (1977) was followed by 'Marlene Dietrich' (1977), which concentrated on her hitherto unchronicled post-war stage life. 
For the next thirty years Morley juggled drama criticism, journalism, television and radio broadcasts, and book writing. In 1973 he joined 'The Times' as deputy features editor under Margaret Allen, and in 1975 he moved to 'Punch', where he was at his happiest for the next fourteen years as arts editor and drama critic under the editorships of William Davis and Alan Coren. It was a matter of great pride to him that he and Robert Morley were the only father and son to have been made members of the 'Punch' table (other than members of the Agnew family). While at 'Punch' he continued to celebrate the lives of such legendary stars as his grandmother Gladys Cooper (1979), Gertrude Lawrence (1981), Katherine Hepburn (1984), Ingrid Bergman (1985), Elizabeth Taylor (1988), and James Mason (1989). In 1983 he published 'Tales from the Hollywood Raj', a glorious account of the heyday of the British acting colony, whose denizens included Sir C. Aubrey Smith, Ronald Colman, Leslie Howard, Nigel Bruce, Basil Rathbone, the Oliviers, and David Niven, whose biography, 'The Other Side of the Moon' (1985), he wrote at the request of Niven's sons after their father's death. 
It was inevitable that, sooner or later, Morley would start writing for the stage, which he did in 1983 with 'Noel and Gertie', a highly entertaining and at times touching account, compiled from their letters and diaries, of the loving friendship of Noel Coward and Gertrude Lawrence. By the time of Morley's death more than fifty productions had been mounted all over the world. Other musical shows devised by Morley included 'Spread a Little Happiness', an anthology of the songs of Vivian Ellis (King's Head and Whitehall, 1992), and the 'Jermyn Street Revue' (2000). He made many cabaret appearances, notably at Pizza on the Park with the nostalgic American pianist Steve Ross, and with Michael Law, with whose Piccadilly Dance Orchestra he appeared as the narrator in a programme of songs by Coward, Cole Porter, and Irving Berlin. 
Despite bouts of depression, Morley's appetite for work was undiminished. His marriage to Margaret was dissolved in 1990. He moved from Waltham St Lawrence, Berkshire, to London and in 1995 married the television producer and writer Ruth Lucille Leon, with whom he wrote four books: 'Gene Kelly' (1996), 'Marilyn Monroe' (1998), 'Hey, Mr Producer: the Musicals of Cameron Mackintosh' (1999), and 'Beyond the Rainbow: Judy Garland' (1999). When his father died in 1992 he immediately sat down and wrote an affectionate biography, 'Robert, My Father' (1993). He followed this with 'Audrey Hepburn' (1993), 'Ginger Rogers' (1995), and, much against his subject's will, 'Dirk Bogarde: Rank Outsider' (1996). Meanwhile, to his great and lasting sadness, 'Punch', as he knew and loved it, was dying on its feet and in 1990 he joined 'The Spectator', where he enjoyed ten years as its drama critic, followed by several rather less happy ones at the 'New Statesman' and the 'Daily Express'. In 2001 he completed the book that stands alongside 'A Talent to Amuse' as a major theatrical biography, 'John G: the Authorised Biography of John Gielgud'. The following year he published his own memoirs, 'Asking for Trouble'. 
His health failing, Morley still managed to direct Vanessa and Corin Redgrave in a revival of Coward's 'A Song at Twilight' (King's Head and Gielgud, 1999). In 2002 he was invited to play a corrupt judge in the BBC series 'Judge John Deed'. Following a long hot day in court, he removed his robe to find printed on the label: 'Outsize Judge. Robert Morley. 1968'. He died in his sleep of heart failure on 16 February 2007. His ashes were buried next to his parents' in the churchyard of St Mary's, Wargrave. He was survived by his wife Ruth and the three children of his first marriage, Hugo, Alexis, and Juliet. 


@@@@@


doc= 98607


Nuttall, Anthony David (1937-2007), literary scholar, was born on 25 April 1937 at 150 Whitecross Road, Hereford, the younger son of Kenneth Nuttall, schoolteacher, and his wife, Hilda Mary, 'nee' Addison. His brother Jeff Nuttall (1933-2004) was a celebrated figure in the 1960s counter-culture -- poet, artist, musician, and author of 'Bomb Culture' (1968). The two boys enjoyed childhood together in rural Herefordshire, but if Jeff strayed far from his origins, Anthony, known as Tony, was always spiritually close to his roots, and remained devoted to long walks in the countryside until his death. He was educated at Hereford Cathedral School and Watford grammar school, and went to Merton College, Oxford, in 1955. There he formed a lifelong friendship with his fellow undergraduate Stephen Medcalf. Both read for classical moderations (in which both took seconds) before switching to study English (in which both graduated with firsts), both became literary scholars and critics, both taught at the University of Sussex, and both died in the same year. Nuttall's handsome, classical features and dark curly hair, coupled with his wit and charm, made him the heartthrob of 'half the girls at Oxford' ('The Independent', 8 Feb 2007). On 1 July 1960, at Leeds register office, he married Mary Donagh ('b'. 1933), a fellow student, later a secondary school teacher, daughter of Ernest Percy Donagh, engineer's toolmaker. They had a son and a daughter. 
Nuttall retained strong interests in classics and philosophy, which he applied throughout his career to the analysis of English literature. His BLitt thesis (1963) was on the philosophical implications of Shakespeare's 'The Tempest', and formed the basis of his second book, 'Two Concepts of Allegory' (1967). (His first was a short study of 'The Winter's Tale', published in Edward Arnold's 'Studies in English Literature' series in 1966.) He had appreciative supervisors of his work in the philosopher and novelist Iris Murdoch and later the philosopher Tony Quinton. Indeed Murdoch described Nuttall and Medcalf as the most brilliant students she ever taught. But it was said that his path to a doctorate was blocked by the traditionalism of another well-known Oxford figure, Helen Gardner, who objected to the combination of philosophy with literary criticism. 
Nuttall had begun lecturing at the University of Sussex in 1962, a year after its foundation, in an institution where interdisciplinarity, the mark of his early work, was embedded in the very structure and ethos of the university. He was appointed to a readership and chair at Sussex in 1970 and 1973 respectively, and to the horror of some colleagues took on the administrative role of a pro-vice-chancellor between 1978 and 1981. But growing responsibilities did not blunt the extraordinary range of his interests or the abundance of his publications. 'A Common Sky: Philosophy and the Literary Imagination' (1974) examined the relationship between literature and the reality of the external world -- one of Nuttall's distinctive interests -- in Locke, Hume, Sterne, Wordsworth, and others. A study of 'Crime and Punishment' in 1978 considered the murder committed by Raskolnikov as an experiment in philosophy. The book grew out of a course on the modern European mind that Nuttall had helped to devise and teach at Sussex. Two years later 'Overheard by God', a study of the devotional poetry of George Herbert, Milton, and Dante, considered how God could be made the subject of literature. 'A New Mimesis: Shakespeare and the Representation of Reality' (1983) was published when the vogue for literary theory was especially intense and was an eloquent defence of traditional ways of thinking and writing about literature in opposition to the then rising tide of discourse analysis and Jacques Derrida's 'deconstructionism'. Much of it was based on Nuttall's close reading of Shakespeare, but in its appreciative use of structuralism it was never merely traditional or reactionary. Nuttall's last book written at Sussex was his study 'Pope's Essay on Man' (1984). 
Nuttall seems to have grown weary of Sussex, perhaps as a result of disenchantment with student radicalism and some ignorant criticism of his work in a local student newspaper. His wife noticed that a fellowship in English at New College, Oxford, had just been advertised and Nuttall was duly elected in 1984, though he was much older than the norm for an appointment as a college tutorial fellow. He explained the reasons for his return to Oxford with a characteristic mix of truth and humour: 'I want to spend the morning in a library which has every book I could possibly want, and then have lunch in a pub not designed by Basil Spence' ('PBA', 315). Though it entailed more teaching and a cut in salary as compared with his previous position, Nuttall thrived in collegiate life. The breadth of his interests and publications were well suited to the range of undergraduate teaching he now undertook and he was an inspiring, generous, indiscreet, and always entertaining tutor. In 1992 he was appointed to a personal chair at Oxford. 
Despite Nuttall's new responsibilities, publications on the most diverse subjects, all written with his blend of philosophical rigour and playful, witty criticism, continued as before. A brilliant study of 'Timon of Athens' (1989) was followed by a collection of his essays, 'The Stoic in Love' (1989). 'Openings: Narrative Beginnings from the Epic to the Novel' (1992) explored how works of literature start; his next work, 'Why Does Tragedy Give Pleasure?' (1996), first delivered as the 1992 Northcliffe lectures at University College, London, analysed how tragic heroes come to their end and why we find that compelling. In his study of gnostic heresy in Marlowe, Milton, and Blake, 'The Alternative Trinity' (1998), he returned to his earlier theme of the relations between literature and theology. A quite different subject then formed the basis of his penultimate book, 'Dead from the Waist Down: Scholars and Scholarship in Literature and the Popular Imagination' (2003). It cleverly wove together the life and work of Isaac Casaubon, the Renaissance classical scholar; Mark Pattison, the nineteenth-century Oxford don who spent many years studying Casaubon, though he never completed and published his great work on the man; and the dessicated pedant Edward Casaubon, supposedly based on Pattison, who appears in George Eliot's 'Middlemarch'. The book was dedicated 'to Oxford'. Nuttall's final work, published posthumously, was 'Shakespeare the Thinker' (2007), and in it he returned to his first theme and abiding interest: the place of philosophy in Shakespeare's works. In between his first and this last work Nuttall had followed his remarkably broad interests across four centuries of English literature, exemplifying the best traditions of humane criticism and close reading. 
Nuttall was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1997. When he retired in 2004 he had to vacate his rooms in New College. The college bursar looked the other way when Nuttall found himself another room elsewhere in the college and began to 'squat'. He was found there on 24 January 2007, having died from a heart attack. A Festschrift entitled 'Thinking with Shakespeare', composed of essays by his colleagues and friends and including 'The last word' by Nuttall himself, was published shortly after his death. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 98609


Pimlott, Steven Charles (1953-2007), opera and theatre director, was born at 332 Wellington Road North, Stockport, Cheshire, on 18 April 1953, the younger child of Arthur Pimlott, a fire insurance assessor, and his wife, Marian, 'nee' Whittaker. At the time of his birth registration the family lived at 42 Preston Road, Levenshulme, Manchester. In 1955 they moved to Brooklands, a quiet residential area of Sale; and from 1964 Pimlott attended Manchester grammar school. He went to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1971, and graduated three years later with a degree in English literature. His school years set the tone for much of his later work. A gifted adolescent actor excelling in middle-aged female roles -- his Mother Courage in Bertolt Brecht's play and what he described as a 'definitive' Gertrude (aged twelve) in a school production of 'Hamlet' were specially thrilling -- he also found time to indulge a love for the oboe, and lifelong obsessions with board games, rollercoasters, and the operas of Gilbert and Sullivan. At Cambridge, as a member of a set that included his younger schoolfriend Nicholas Hytner, he added directing to this portfolio. Vivid university society stagings of 'Don Giovanni' and 'HMS Pinafore' demonstrated his talent, not for fashionable conceptual or intellectual readings, but for theatrical bravura and sensual immediacy. 
In 1976 Pimlott became a staff producer at English National Opera, collaborating notably with the director John Copley, before joining the newly formed Opera North in 1978. Of his many Leeds productions 'Nabucco' (1979), 'Der Freischutz' (1980), and the British stage premiere of Borodin's 'Prince Igor' (1982) were representative in their darkly powerful mastery of theatrical effect. On the strength of this success Pimlott swiftly amassed a long list of operatic credits throughout Europe and beyond. A spectacular, bullring 'Carmen' starring Maria Ewing at Earls Court (1989, revived with Jose Carreras as Don Jose in Tokyo and elsewhere) was the most monumental of these; the much revived production of 'La Boheme' for English National Opera (1993) captured perfectly the youthful high spirits of the piece, while charting the sadness at its heart. His sensuous, lucid 'Coronation of Poppea' for the same company (2000) was another career highlight. 
Yet Pimlott's honest admission of the directorial limitations proper to opera led him to spend increasing time in 'straight' theatre, starting with a stint as associate director under Clare Venables at the Sheffield Crucible (1987-8). Productions there of 'Twelfth Night' and Botho Strauss's 'The Park', added to a spiritually luminous cycle of 'The Mystery Plays' for the city of York (1988), marked him out as a rising star of the mainstream. About this time, too, his collaborations with the stage designers Tom Cairns and Stefanos Lazaridis led to a sea change in Pimlott's working method, away from minutely detailed pre-planning towards a more intuitive, organic approach. 
Pimlott's National Theatre debut with Stephen Sondheim's 'Sunday in the Park with George' (1990, nominated for an Olivier award) and 'The Miser' (1991) were less sure-footed than usual, but his work with the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC), latterly as associate director (1996-2002), proved much more congenial, with new writing as well as classic revivals. A mordant 'Richard III' (1995) and sexually graphic 'Antony and Cleopatra' (1999) were memorable, his work in Stratford's more intimate spaces especially so. Working without the visual trappings available to the large auditorium freed him up as an 'actor's director', and 'Richard II' (The Other Place, 2000, with Samuel West) was a milestone. This RSC period was capped by a 'Hamlet' (2001, again with West) bound by bleak searchlights from lowering watchtowers. 
Pimlott's forays into commercial theatre were artistically as well as financially lucrative. He brought the same brilliance to the blockbusters 'Joseph and his Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat' (London 1991, Broadway 1993), 'Doctor Dolittle' (1998), and 'Bombay Dreams' (2002) as to his work in the subsidized sphere, admitting no contradiction between the two. For Pimlott, good theatre was good theatre, whether it came from Aeschylus or Agatha Christie -- another of his extramural passions. 
Of his late projects, one in particular enjoyed signal artistic success. As part of a triumvirate (with Martin Duncan and Ruth Mackenzie) coming together to run the Chichester festival, reduced by 2003 to its nadir, Pimlott breathed some fresh life into the once great space with boldly spiritual productions of Shakespeare, Chekhov, and Gotthold Lessing's 'Nathan the Wise' (2003), as well as introducing strong new writing and a wondrous staging of Bulgakov's novel 'The Master and Margarita' (2004). Chichester's educational and rehearsal building was named after him following his death. 
As a personal turning point, the most important of all Pimlott's productions was Paul Dukas's rarity 'Ariane et Barbe-Bleue' (Krefeld, 1986), in which he directed the German soprano Daniela Christina Bechly ('b'. 1956), daughter of Adolf Friederich Bechly, whom he married at Holy Trinity, Clapham, on 27 July 1991. They had three children, one daughter preceded by two sons. Pimlott was appointed OBE in 2007, and died of lung cancer on 14 February that year, at his home, Old House, Old House Road, Great Horkesley, Essex. He was survived by his wife and their children. His gift for conveying the relish of the moment, whether in opera, drama, or the musical, marked him out as a rare theatrical magician of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 98612


Richardson, Ian William (1934-2007), actor, was born on 7 April 1934 at 21 Duff Street, Edinburgh, the only son and eldest of three children of John Richardson (1909-1990), a manager at the McVitie and Price biscuit factory, and his wife, Margaret Pollock (Peggy), 'nee' Drummond (1910-1988). His parents had met at the McVitie factory, where, Richardson claimed, his father invented the Jaffa cake. 
Richardson was educated at Balgreen primary school and Heriot's and Tynecastle high schools, all in Edinburgh. He felt he was 'a hopeless student' ('The Independent', 6 Dec 1997) but showed some aptitude in art and piano playing, and his dramatic leanings manifested themselves early, when he was chosen to read Laurence Binyon's 'For the Fallen' at an armistice day service. 'It was my turn to say 'They shall not grow old as we that are left grow old': I did it without looking at the paper and in front of the altar, not at the lectern' (ibid., 1 Nov 1995). He made his first visit to the theatre at fourteen, and his first appearance as an aristocratic boy in an amateur production of 'A Tale of Two Cities'. The director told him that he needed to modify his accent to progress, so his mother arranged elocution lessons. Thereafter he took on stage-management jobs with the Edinburgh People's Theatre and with the visiting Wilson Barrett Company. His three years of national service were spent mostly in Libya, and involved locating and retrieving remains for burial in the Tobruk war cemetery. He then became a duty announcer with the British Forces Broadcasting Service, working on classical music programmes and directing dramas. Influenced heavily by the clipped tones of the chief announcer, he learned to suppress his Scottish accent still further, and determined to become an actor. 
On returning to Scotland Richardson entered the College of Dramatic Art in Glasgow, and concurrently studied for a teaching qualification at Glasgow University. His father, an austere Presbyterian, had strongly disapproved of his son's choice of profession, but was won round on seeing him perform at college, and thereafter was supportive. Richardson left college in 1957, having won the James Bridie gold medal, and the following year joined the Birmingham Repertory Theatre, under the actor and director Bernard Hepton. His roles included John Worthing in 'The Importance of Being Earnest', and the title role in 'Hamlet', directed by Hepton. Among those who admired his youthful Hamlet was the critic J. C. Trewin, who wrote that he entered as 'a slight, sad-eyed figure of settled melancholy, earnest, sweet and boyish, who could suggest heartbreak in an inflection, a twist of the lip' ('Daily Telegraph', 10 Feb 2007). 
Richardson's performance was also seen by the Shakespearian scholar and director John Barton, who recommended him to Peter Hall, the newly appointed director of the Shakespeare festival in Stratford upon Avon. Richardson was offered a three-year contract, becoming one of the first in an ensemble that, a year later, was renamed the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC). He stayed for fifteen years, fast becoming a cornerstone of the company. He gained attention even in minor roles. His somewhat inbred Prince of Aragon in Michael Langham's production of 'The Merchant of Venice' (1960) was 'the last expiring flicker of an effete lineage -- preceded by his own portrait which had evidently adorned the Academy at Saragossa, and escorted by a matriarch of 'endless age'' (Speaight, 278). The matriarch was played by the actress Maroussia Frank ('b'. 1940), whom Richardson married on 2 February 1961. Six years his junior, she was the daughter of Alexei Frank, a Russian emigre, and his wife, Elizabeth (Betty) Scorer, a dancer, and later ballet and theatre critic for the 'News Chronicle'. They had two sons, Jeremy ('b'. 1961), later a graphic designer, and Miles ('b'. 1963), who was to become an actor. 
Richardson's other early roles at Stratford included a glittering and devilish Oberon opposite Judi Dench's Titania (1961), and a wonderfully flamboyant Antipholus of Ephesus in Clifford Williams's hugely inventive, and much revived, 'Comedy of Errors' (1964). He played Malatesti to Peggy Ashcroft's Duchess in the 'Duchess of Malfi', the RSC's first production at the Aldwych Theatre (1960), which thereafter became the company's London home, and in 1964 toured the eastern bloc and America as Edmund in the legendary Peter Brook-Paul Scofield 'King Lear', and played the Herald in Brook's equally ground-breaking production of Peter Weiss's 'Marat / Sade'. In 1965 he made his New York debut playing Marat in 'Marat / Sade', causing something of a sensation, in that he was the first actor to appear naked on the Broadway stage. He first played Ford in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' in 1964 and repeated the role for a number of years. As a suburban man driven to distraction by his own suspicions of cuckoldry, his was a great comic performance, 'a study of obsessional jealousy as frightening as it was funny' ('The Independent', 10 Feb 2007). In 1965 he gave what John Barton considered the definitive Chorus in 'Henry V', followed by, among others, a dazzling Vendice in Trevor Nunn's reclamation of Tourneur's 'The Revenger's Tragedy' (1965 and 1969), a neurotic and patrician Coriolanus (1966), an ice-cold Cassius in 'Julius Caesar' (1968), a wildly camp Proteus in 'Two Gentlemen of Verona', and a wonderfully despairing Prospero in 'The Tempest' (both 1970). 
In 1970 Richardson took time out from the RSC, and faced a year of unemployment when a television project was cancelled, and he and Maroussia were reduced to scouring Covent Garden for discarded fruit and vegetables. He was rescued by the Bristol Old Vic Theatre, and gave a touching performance as Tom Wrench, the sweet-natured playwright, in 'Trelawny', Julian Slade's and Aubrey Woods's musical version of Pinero's 'Trelawny of the 'Wells'', which then transferred to Sadler's Wells (1971-2). He returned to the RSC in 1973 to give one of his greatest performances, as Berowne in 'Love's Labour's Lost'. Berowne remained his favourite role, exercising all his technical prowess. In John Barton's acclaimed production of 'Richard II' (1974) he and Richard Pasco shared and alternated the roles of Richard and the usurper Henry Bolingbroke, Barton's intention being to show the King and Bolingbroke as mirror images. His Richard was (in Michael Billington's words) a performance of 'infinite sweetness, bruising irony and thunderous scorn' ('The Guardian', 10 Feb 2007), in a production that redefined the play for years to come. Richardson's final roles with the company included Iachimo in 'Cymbeline' (1974), and the title role in 'Richard III' (1975). His Richard, in a highly conceptualized production set in a psychiatric ward, resembled a grotesque child unrestrained by social customs. 
In the Americas Richardson proved himself a consummate Shavian. In 1976, as Henry Higgins in the twentieth-anniversary Broadway revival of 'My Fair Lady', he gave a dazzling performance of lightning speed and attack, winning the Drama Desk award and a Tony nomination, and the following year at the Shaw festival in Niagara on the Lake, Canada, he played Jack Tanner in 'Man and Superman' and the Doctor in 'The Millionairess'. In 1979 he returned to the British stage, on tour and at the Old Vic, as Mercutio, and, in another great comic performance, as Khlestakov, in Gorky's 'Government Inspector'. Richardson was an astonishingly accomplished stage actor, combining physical grace, great energy, impeccable style, and quicksilver comic timing. As a man he was quite emotional and vulnerable, and often suffered sickness before going on stage. There was an inner turbulence that underscored his work. But it was his voice that finally marked him out. He was a masterful verse-speaker, of matchless clarity and dexterity, with formidable breath control. He seemed to take long speeches on one breath, his voice variously described as oboe-, trumpet-, and bell-like. 
Richardson had made his television debut in the early 1960s, repeating his performances in filmed RSC productions. In 1971 he played Anthony Beavis in Aldous Huxley's 'Eyeless in Gaza', and in 1979 Montgomery in 'Churchill and the Generals' and 'Ike: the War Years'. As Bill Haydon, the mole in MI6, in John le Carre's 'Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy' (1979) he gave a mesmerizing and mischievous performance. He later credited Sir Alec Guinness, the star of 'Tinker, Tailor', with teaching him to act for the camera. In 1981 he won the Royal Television Society's best actor award for his bravura performances as several characters -- a Scottish crook, a 'dodgy' British agent, and a bungling Nazi officer -- in 'Private Schulz'. Other television roles included impressive performances as Sherlock Holmes in 'The Sign of Four' and 'The Hound of the Baskervilles' (both 1983), Nehru in 'Mountbatten: the Last Viceroy' (1986), Anthony Blunt in 'Blunt' (1987), the Master in Tom Sharpe's 'Porterhouse Blue' (1987), Sir Robert Morton in 'The Winslow Boy' (1989), and the Falkland Islands' governor Sir Rex Hunt in 'An Ungentlemanly Act' (1992). 
As Francis Urquhart, the Conservative Party chief whip who will stop at nothing, including murder, to get to Downing Street, in Michael Dobbs's 'House of Cards' (1990), Richardson found his defining role as a screen actor, and was every bit as accomplished as he was on stage. The critic James Wolcott wrote that: 'Like the late Sir Laurence Olivier, [Richardson] is a master of the raised eyebrow, and he carries his head as if it belonged on a coin. His nose gleams like a dagger. His narcissism is cut so fine that he seems to be peeling off a personal supply of thin smiles. ('New Yorker', 17 Jan 1994)' Richardson's Urquhart was a charming, sardonic, and wholly captivating creation, addressing the camera in direct asides he made the audience co-conspirators in his schemes, and coined a catchphrase ('You might think that: I couldn't possibly comment') that resonated long afterwards and was quoted by Prime Minister John Major in the House of Commons. Richardson won awards from the British Film Academy and the Broadcasting Press Guild, and received further nominations for his work in the two sequels, 'To Play the King' (1993) and 'The Final Cut' (1995). Later parts included Lord Groan in 'Gormenghast' (2000), and the voice of Death in Terry Pratchett's 'Hogfather' (2006). 
Although his television career brought him fame and reward, Richardson's cinema appearances were rare. Early roles included filmed versions of 'Marat / Sade' (1967) and of Peter Hall's production of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1968). Other film work included the Priest alongside Peter O'Toole in 'Man of La Mancha' (1972), an incisive Polonius in 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead' (1990), and various mandarins or judges in 'Brazil' (1985), 'Cry Freedom' (1987), 'M Butterfly' (1993), 'From Hell' (2001), and 'Becoming Jane' (2007). In America he was probably best known for his appearances in commercials for Grey Poupon mustard, 'a matter of infinite regret' ('New Yorker', 13 Aug 2007). 
Partly at the prompting of a young actor who confronted him with the irresponsibility of denying a younger generation the opportunity of seeing his work on stage, Richardson returned to the theatre to play the title roles in Moliere's 'The Miser' (1995) and Pinero's 'The Magistrate' (1998), both at the Chichester Festival Theatre. He continued his association with the RSC, taking part in occasional all-star tours of 'The Hollow Crown' from 2002 to 2004, alongside his fellow RSC alumni Sir Donald Sinden, Sir Derek Jacobi, and Dame Diana Rigg. It seemed wrong that Richardson, who had been appointed CBE in 1989, did not have a title himself. After another gap he played in a West End thriller, 'The Creeper' by Pauline Macauley, in 2006, and rather more happily made his much belated National Theatre debut the same year, voluptuous as Sir Epicure Mammon in Nicholas Hytner's production of 'The Alchemist'. It was to be his last stage appearance. 
Richardson had been about to start work on an episode of the popular television series 'Midsomer Murders' when he died suddenly, in his sleep and at his home, 131 Lavender Sweep, Battersea, on 9 February 2007, of heart failure, with his wife by his side. They had been a devoted couple, Richardson having said that 'without Maroussia I cannot function. I don't know which bank my account is with, the name of my accountant or how to work the Aga' ('Daily Mail', 25 Feb 2006). He was also survived by his two sons. A memorial service was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, and his ashes were interred in row A in the stalls of the newly rebuilt Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, where he had given so many memorable performances. 


@@@@@


doc= 98613


Roberts, Sir Gareth Gwyn (1940-2007), physicist and university administrator, was born on 16 May 1940 at Craig Beuno Nursing Home, Bangor, Caernarvonshire, the son of Edwin Roberts (died 1974), a wages clerk in the local granite quarry, and his wife, Meri, 'nee' Jones (died 1959). He was brought up with his twin sister, Gwyneth, and younger sister, Enid, in the family home at 3 St David's Terrace, Penmaenmawr, where Welsh was the spoken language and weekly attendance at chapel compulsory. His mother was a considerable influence, engendering in him a steely determination to succeed that remained with him throughout his life. From John Bright Grammar School in Llandudno he progressed to the University College of North Wales, Bangor, where he gained a first-class honours degree in physics in 1961 and studied for a PhD in the rapidly developing field of semiconductor physics (his thesis was entitled 'A theoretical study of space charge currents in solids') before taking up a lectureship in physics there in 1963. A year earlier, on 15 August 1962, at George Street Congregational Church, Croydon, he had married Charlotte Standen ('b'. 1942), insurance clerk, and daughter of Albert John Williams Standen, shop manager. They had two sons and one daughter. The marriage ended in divorce in 1993. 
In 1966 Roberts moved to the Xerox Corporation in Rochester, New York, working as a senior research scientist on selenium and other materials used in copying machines. The American culture of competitiveness and high expectation suited him admirably, but in 1968 he accepted an invitation from his PhD supervisor, Richard Tredgold, to join him at the New University of Ulster at Coleraine and help establish a department of physics. Roberts went on to become professor and head of the department of physics and dean of the school of physical sciences. His research in this period was aimed at modifying the properties of materials like gallium arsenide and indium phosphide by doping to produce improved semiconductor devices. After eight years at Ulster he took on a fresh academic challenge -- the headship of the department of applied physics and electronics at Durham University, which provided the perfect setting for his research at the interface between science and engineering. Following his involvement in a successful visit to Durham by the University Grants Committee he was invited to join its equipment committee, which he subsequently chaired. It was the first of many public and professional bodies to seek his services. 
Roberts believed that scientific research and its applications should go hand in hand, and each of his senior academic appointments was combined with a post in industry. During his time in Ulster he worked in ICI's corporate laboratory in Runcorn, with Geoffrey Allen as his mentor, and after the laboratory's relocation to Durham he developed even closer research links with the company. He had no thought of leaving Durham, but when the package of chief scientist (later research director) at Thorn EMI for four days a week and an Oxford visiting professorship in engineering science for one day a week (not to mention a fellowship at Brasenose College) was offered to him in 1985 he felt compelled to accept. Colin Southgate, chief executive of Thorn EMI, was engaged in a major programme of modernization and delegated to Roberts responsibility for reorganizing the company's Central Research Laboratories and devising technology strategies for each of its operating divisions. 
At Oxford Roberts established a new research group in the field of molecular electronics, an area in which he had an international reputation. His particular interest was the physical behaviour of Langmuir-Blodgett films -- ultra-thin films of organic material deposited sequentially on a solid substrate in layers one molecule thick. Roberts was among the first scientists to appreciate the versatility of these films. Working with ICI researchers in Durham he designed a new type of trough for precisely assembling the monolayers and extended the range of organic materials used in making them. He also investigated their applications in such electronic devices as field-effect transistors. In his Oxford laboratory he focused his energies on the unique sensing properties of Langmuir-Blodgett films and their potential use as heat sensors for security devices and vapour sensors for environmental monitoring. He was the author of over 200 publications and patents, and two books, 'Insulating Films on Semiconductors' (1979) and 'Langmuir-Blodgett Films' (1990). His membership of the prime minister's Advisory Council on Science and Technology (1989-92) gave him the opportunity to discuss Langmuir-Blodgett films with Margaret Thatcher, who had worked in this field during her time as a research chemist. Roberts was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1984 and received the Holweck gold medal of the Institute of Physics in 1986. 
When the University of Sheffield's chancellor, Lord Dainton, sounded out Roberts for the post of vice-chancellor he faced competition from a number of other universities, but Roberts liked what he saw at Sheffield and moved there in 1991. His tenure was strikingly successful and the university rapidly ascended the league tables for research and teaching on the back of judicious appointments to chairs, which on occasion brought in entire research teams. He led from the front in a campaign of relentless initiative, though his urgency could sometimes offend the university's most collegiate instincts. However, his personal qualities of integrity and fairness, combined with his formidable powers of persuasion, enabled him to implement far-sighted policies (such as multidisciplinary research groupings) that won the support of the academic community. One of his great legacies at Sheffield was the early outreach scheme, lauded by the government, providing a route into higher education for underprivileged pupils in inner-city schools. 
Roberts was the networker supreme, adept at founding national and international partnerships, such as the Russell group of leading UK universities; the White Rose University Consortium of Leeds, Sheffield, and York universities; and the Worldwide Universities Network, an alliance of pre-eminent universities in four continents. He was equally committed to the regeneration of Sheffield, serving on the boards of the Sheffield Development Corporation, the Sheffield Health Authority, and the Regional Development Agency for Yorkshire and the Humber, and co-founding the Sheffield First Partnership with the leader of the city council. Many of these enterprises had their origins in 'town and gown' dinners held at his formal residence, The Croft, which he shared with his second wife, Carolyn Mary Rich, 'nee' Butler ('b'. 1948), a health service executive and trained nurse (daughter of Albert Edward Butler, musician, and former wife of Stephen Rich), whom he married at Leeds register office on 18 February 1994. She had two daughters by her first marriage. 
Roberts's election in 1995 as chairman of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals -- the collective voice of the UK higher education system -- marked his entry onto the national political stage and almost immediately he was plunged into conflict with the Conservative government over its latest round of cuts in university funding. His refusal to listen to a speech from the minister for higher education, coupled with a vigorous national campaign mounted alongside the unions to highlight the systematic underfunding of higher education, signalled a new way forward for the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals. The outcome was the Dearing report of 1997 (named after the chairman of the national committee of inquiry into higher education, Sir Ronald Dearing), largely accepted by the incoming Labour government, which mirrored many of the recommendations made by the committee to alleviate the funding shortfall, including the introduction of means-tested tuition fees. 
Roberts was knighted for his services to higher education in 1997. In the same year he joined the board of the Higher Education Funding Council for England and went on to chair its research committee. He had previously been a member of the Universities Funding Council (1989-92). In 1998 he was elected president of the Institute of Physics and two years later he became founding president of the Science Council, set up to promote the profession of scientist by the designation 'chartered scientist'. He also served a four-year term as chairman of the Defence Scientific Advisory Council (1993-7). As a chairman he was practical and pragmatic, always polite and charming, but above all incisive. 
The presidency of Wolfson College, Oxford, to which Roberts was appointed in 2001, was described by 'The Guardian' as 'one of the best post-VC jobs in the business' (30 May 2000). Importantly it afforded him sufficient time to pursue his many national and international initiatives. He was a driving force in the development of UK policy on university research, chairing a critical review of the research assessment exercise and addressing the urgent need for better career opportunities for the growing numbers of contract research staff in universities. In 2001 he was commissioned by the Treasury to investigate ways of increasing the numbers of skilled scientists, engineers, and technologists needed to support a competitive modern economy. His landmark report, 'SET for success: the supply of people with science, technology, engineering and mathematical skills', published in the following year, was commended by the prime minister and fully funded by the government at all levels, from schools through to universities and research councils. Stipends for PhD students were almost doubled and the 'Roberts money', as it became known, enabled universities to provide transferable skills training and career development programmes for all their graduate and postdoctoral researchers. 
Throughout his career Roberts took a keen interest in the promotion of science to young people. In 1988 he presented the Royal Institution Christmas lectures, 'The home of the future', on BBC television, and in 2005 he was appointed chairman of SETNET, the government-sponsored body charged with enriching school science. In the following year he took on the presidency of the Association for Science Education and also became chairman of the Engineering and Technology Board. His expertise was sought overseas, most notably in Hong Kong, Singapore, and Australia, where he advised the government on the best way of assessing the quality of publicly funded research. He retained an active interest in the business community through his visiting professorship in the Said Business School at Oxford and his directorship of Isis Innovation, Oxford University's technology transfer company. He was also chairman of the healthcare and biotechnology company Medical Solutions. He received honorary degrees and fellowships from ten university institutions. 
Roberts was a transformational leader, a man of extraordinary vision, energy, and determination who had a profound impact on science policy and higher education in Britain. At Wolfson College, as in all his other appointments, he was open and accessible to students and staff, and this in turn inspired great loyalty among those who knew him. He was admired as a public speaker and his dinner parties and attendant quizzes were legendary, as too was his warm personality and his support of Tottenham Hotspur Football Club. Conceding little to his final illness (and remaining president of Wolfson College), he died from cancer on 6 February 2007 at his home, 10 Chadlington Road, Oxford, and was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 16 February. He was survived by his wife, Carolyn, his two stepdaughters, and the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 98614


Stoyle, Roger John Blin- (1924-2007), physicist, was born on 24 December 1924 at the City Maternity Home, Westcotes Drive, Leicester, the only son and elder child of Cuthbert Basil St John Blin-Stoyle (1894-1978), an engineer's fitter, later a driver then foreman for the Birmingham and Midland Omnibus Company, and his wife, Ada Mary, 'nee' Nash (1893-1983). His education began in South Wigston, and in September 1935 he won a scholarship to Alderman Newton's Boys' School in Leicester. Not until the sixth form did physics, thanks to some inspirational teaching, become exciting for him. He was brought up an Anglican, and was a member of the Church Lads' Brigade and the Anglican Young People's Association. In 1943 he was awarded a senior scholarship in natural science at Wadham College, Oxford. However, he was conscripted for military service in September 1943 and in April 1945 was commissioned into the Royal Corps of Signals. After a brief posting in Cologne he served as an officer instructor at Mhow, a cantonment near Indore, India. After demobilization in September 1946 he started at Wadham. At Oxford he met Audrey Elizabeth Balmford ('b'. 1927), a mathematics student at St Hugh's College, and daughter of Joseph Clifford Balmford, schoolmaster, of Liverpool; they were married on 30 August 1949, just after his graduation with first-class honours in physics. They had a son, Tony, and daughter, Helena. 
Blin-Stoyle continued at Oxford as a graduate student in the department of theoretical physics under the supervision of John Spiers, working initially on polarized nuclear reactions, and then on the general formulation of greekLetterbeta-decay theory, the decay of radioactive atomic nuclei through the emission of an electron (or positron). This work led to his first paper, published in 1951, and, in the same year, his DPhil degree. A Pressed Steel research fellowship enabled him to stay at Oxford and immediately he became the 'house theorist' for the local experimental research group working on deuteron-deuteron collisions. This was the first of several close and fruitful interactions with experimental groups, which were a feature of his later work. In 1953 he spent one year in Birmingham as a lecturer in mathematical physics and was encouraged by Rudi Peierls to work on the calculation of nuclear magnetic moments; this led to his first book, 'Theories of Nuclear Moments' (1957). After returning to Oxford as a senior research officer in theoretical physics he began a collaboration with Michael Grace, leader of a group doing experiments on polarized nuclei. About this time he also collaborated on mesonic exchange effects in greekLetterbeta-decay with John Bell, a theorist at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment in Harwell, and with Henry Primakoff, a visitor from Washington University, St Louis, USA. The protons and neutrons (nucleons) that make the nucleus are subject to quantum fluctuations caused by the exchange of fleeting 'virtual' particles, such as mesons. These fluctuations affect the nuclear properties and permit their use as a 'laboratory' in which to discover properties of the possibly exotic virtual particles. Blin-Stoyle used this to great effect later. Following the arrival in 1957 of Denys Wilkinson in Oxford he became interested in the parity-violating internucleon potential generated by meson exchange, and this led to the publication in 1960 of a much cited paper, 'Parity non-conserving internucleon potentials', in the 'Physics Review'. It was written while he was a visiting professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a year that changed his view of how physics and science generally should be taught at universities. 
Fortuitously Blin-Stoyle had an opportunity to implement his ideas about the teaching of science when, in 1962, he was appointed professor of theoretical physics at the then very new University of Sussex, and dean of its first science school, the school of physical sciences, which contained three subject groups: mathematics, physics, and chemistry. Some courses, in mathematics and in the structure and properties of matter, taught by Blin-Stoyle himself, were compulsory for all first-year students. His research continued to use the nucleus as a laboratory, and in 1970 he and Joan Freeman, an experimentalist at Harwell, inferred the existence of heavy intermediate vector mesons, later called W- and Z-bosons, from precision data on (superallowed) greekLetterbeta-decays; the direct detection of these particles at CERN was not made until 1983. In 1976 they received the Institute of Physics Rutherford medal and prize for this work, and in the same year Blin-Stoyle was elected a fellow of the Royal Society for his overall contributions to nuclear physics. His account of this field appeared in his book 'Fundamental Interactions of the Nucleus' (1973). 
Blin-Stoyle's many administrative posts at Sussex included a period as deputy vice-chancellor (to Asa Briggs) in 1970-72, and as pro-vice-chancellor (science) in 1977-9. Service in 1978-83 on the joint committee of the Royal Society and the Institute of Physics afforded him opportunities to influence science education from the age of five upwards, and in 1983-8 he chaired the School Curriculum Development Committee. He retired from Sussex in 1987, but continued to serve on various professional bodies. In 1990-92 he was president of the Institute of Physics; he and the chief executive, Alun Jones, launched a Campaign for Physics resulting in a 30 per cent increase in the institute's membership. His continuing interest in school science education led to his appointment in 1993 as president of the Association for Science Education, a task that was informed by his concurrent experience of teaching ten-year-olds in a Lewes primary school near his home. An accomplished pianist and organist -- who had considered trying for an organ scholarship at Oxford if he failed to win a natural science scholarship, and who became an associate of the Royal College of Music in 1949 -- he played in most churches in Lewes and many further afield. He died at Claydon House nursing home, 8 Wallands Crescent, Lewes, on 31 January 2007, of acute on chronic heart disease, and was survived by his wife, Audrey, and their two children. His humanist funeral was in Brighton on 12 February, with a commemoration at the University of Sussex on 15 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 98621


Tutin, Dame Dorothy (1930-2001), actress, was born on 8 April 1930 at 63 Warrington Crescent, London, the only child of John Tutin, naval architect, and his wife, Ada Evelyn (Adie), 'nee' Fryers. She had a half-brother, Eric, five years older, from her mother's first marriage, who died aged ten. She was educated at St Catherine's School in Bramley, Surrey, but she left at fifteen to train as a musician. She spent a year studying the piano, flute, and singing, but decided that she was not talented enough. Her parents persuaded her to go instead to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, although much later she said, 'I never, ever wanted to act' ('The Times', 7 Aug 2001), and she was afflicted throughout her career by nervousness and a lack of self-confidence. 
Tutin's first stage appearance was at the club theatre, The Boltons, where in September 1949 she played Princess Margaret in William Douglas Home's 'The Thistle and the Rose'. She joined the Bristol Old Vic Company in January 1950, where among other parts she played Phoebe in Shakespeare's 'As You Like It'. She returned to London for the Old Vic's 1950-51 season. She was meant to be understudying Anouk Aimee as Princess Katherine of France in 'Henry V', but Aimee was unavailable and Tutin got the role, for which she won excellent reviews. That season she also played Ann Page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' and Win-The-Fight-Littlewit in Ben Jonson's 'Bartholomew Fair'. At the Lyric, Hammersmith, in September 1951 she played Martina in Christopher Fry's 'Thor, With Angels'. She then played Hero in John Gielgud's production of 'Much Ado About Nothing' at the Phoenix in January 1952; dissatisfied with her acting, she was about to give up the stage when she was cast as Rose Pemberton in Graham Greene's 'The Living Room' (1953), playing a Catholic girl driven to suicide through her guilt at having an affair with a married man. Kenneth Tynan described her in this role as 'ablaze like a diamond in a mine' ('The Times', 7 Aug 2001). 'The Living Room' made her name on stage and brought her the Variety Club's actress of the year award, but it also destroyed her soprano singing voice. As she later recalled, the director complained, 'You're being too British! Where's your temperament?'. So she went on stage and screamed and choked. 'That caused my trouble. I went to a voice specialist who said I had to be silent for nine days. We opened in Edinburgh in ten' ('Daily Telegraph', 7 Aug 2001). The nodules healed, but her singing voice never fully returned. 
Tutin scored another triumph at the New Theatre in March 1954 playing Sally Bowles in 'I am a Camera', based on Christopher Isherwood's novel, 'Goodbye to Berlin' (1939), later to become the musical 'Cabaret'. Caryl Brahms applauded her for the skill with which she combined 'the satiric with the entirely credible', and memorably described her voice as 'the kind of curdled cooing that could only come from a turtle-dove with laryngitis' ('Daily Telegraph', 7 Aug 2001). Tutin's next play, a translation of Jean Anouilh's 'The Lark' in which she opened at the Lyric, Hammersmith, playing Joan of Arc in March 1955, was less successful, and was compared unfavourably with Bernard Shaw's 'Saint Joan' starring Siobhan McKenna, which was then playing in the West End. At the Saville in December she was Hedvig in Ibsen's 'The Wild Duck'. Caryl Brahms, who did not care for the play, bemoaned the fact that she played the part at all, but noted that it was inevitable, since all serious young actresses wanted to play Hedvig. She won better reviews for her portrayal of Caroline Traherne in John Whiting's 'The Gates of Summer' (on tour in 1956), and of Jean Rice, playing opposite Laurence Olivier, in John Osborne's 'The Entertainer' (at the Royal Court in 1957). 
In 1958 Tutin joined the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Company at Stratford upon Avon where she played Juliet in 'Romeo and Juliet' and, directed by Peter Hall (who became a great admirer), Viola in 'Twelfth Night'. Peter Jackson wrote: 'Dorothy Tutin's golden Viola is wonderfully boyish, breathless, bewildered and always completely audible. She is alive and to be alive in a cast like this [it included Geraldine McEwan, Richard Johnson, and Patrick Wymark] means working double overtime.' Further successes followed as Ophelia in 'Hamlet' (in which part she toured with the company to Leningrad and Moscow in December 1958), Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice' in 1960 (Peter Roberts comparing her conception of the role to that of Ellen Terry), and Cressida in 'Troilus and Cressida' in the same year. She received the 'Evening Standard' award for best actress for her portrayal of Viola in 'Twelfth Night' at the Aldwych in December 1960. In February 1961 she played Sister Jeanne in John Whiting's 'The Devils', which Peter Hall had commissioned specially for his first London season at the Aldwych. Frank Granville-Barker called it a brilliant new play, comparing it to 'Peer Gynt' and 'King Lear', and was particularly enthused by Tutin's performance. Back at Stratford in August 1961 (with what was now called the Royal Shakespeare Company) she once more played Juliet and was Desdemona to Gielgud's disatrous 'Othello', directed by Franco Zeffirelli. She was with Gielgud again in December 1961 when at the Aldwych they were in Chekhov's 'The Cherry Orchard'. In January 1963 she made her New York debut with the company in 'The Hollow Crown', devised by John Barton. 
On 23 December 1963 Tutin married Derek Barton-Chapple, the actor Derek Waring ['see below']. They had two children, Nicholas and Amanda, who as Nick Waring and Amanda Waring followed their parents into the acting profession. 'We never thought they would act', Tutin later said. 'They had seen so much of the pain and anguish of the profession' ('The Times', 7 Aug 2001). Nevertheless she was delighted by her children's success. 
Following her marriage, Tutin continued to receive plaudits for her work with the Royal Shakespeare Company and elsewhere. At the Bristol Old Vic in March 1965 she played Queen Victoria in an evening compiled from documentary material and letters, called 'Portrait of a Queen'. Her portrayal of Rosalind in 'As You Like It' at Stratford in 1967 and in Los Angeles the following year won glowing reviews. She then took on the lead in the musical (based on H. G. Wells's novel) 'Ann Veronica', opening at the Belgrade Theatre, Coventry, in 1969. Nevertheless she was uncertain about her ability to succeed in such a role, and chose not to play the part in London. Notable further successes included her portrayals of Francine in 'Play on Love' at St Martin's Theatre and Alice in 'Arden of Faversham' at the Roundhouse, both in 1970, Kate in Harold Pinter's 'Old Times' at the Aldwych in 1971, and Peter Pan at the Coliseum in 1971 and again in 1972. 
At Chichester in 1974 Tutin played Natalya in Turgenev's 'A Month in the Country', and the critics agreed it was the best thing in the season. In November 1974 she played Maggie in J. M. Barrie's 'What Every Woman Knows' at the Albery Theatre. Garry O' Connor acclaimed her 'completely endearing and moving performance, in which there is no nuance of understanding or sharpness of mind passed over. Miss Tutin has a perfect combination of toughness and pathos' ('Daily Telegraph', 7 Aug 2001). In the following November she played Natalya once more, at the Albery, and once more received the 'Evening Standard' award for best actress. Further triumphs in the late 1970s included her portrayals of Madame Ranevsky in 'The Cherry Orchard', Lady Macbeth, Lady Plyant in Congreve's 'The Double Dealer', and Genia Hofreiter in Tom Stoppard's version of Schnitzler's 'Undiscovered Country', all at the National. In the 1980s and 1990s she was less often seen on stage, and complained of the lack of parts for women 'of a certain age' ('The Scotsman', 7 Aug 2001). Nevertheless she gave memorable performances as Hester in Terence Rattigan's 'The Deep Blue Sea' (at Greenwich in 1981), Sarah Bernhardt in Ronald Harwood's 'After the Lions' (at the Royal Exchange, Manchester, in 1982), Deborah, a woman recovering from sleeping sickness in Harold Pinter's 'A Kind of Alaska' (at the Duchess in 1985), and the widowed sister in Neil Simon's 'Brighton Beach Memoirs' (at the Aldwych in 1987). A late success was as one of the inmates of an old people's home in D. L. Coburn's 'The Gin Game' (at the Savoy in 1999). She was also a regular, and much acclaimed, fixture at the Chichester festival. 
Tutin scored notable early film successes as Cecily in 'The Importance of Being Earnest' (1951), Polly Peachum in 'The Beggar's Opera' (1954), and Lucie Manette in 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1956). Later successes included Sophie Brzeska in Ken Russell's 'Savage Messiah' (1972), for which she won the Variety Club's award for best film actress of the year, and Lady Minnie Nettleby, opposite James Mason as Sir Randolph Nettleby, in 'The Shooting Party' (1984). Her last film was 'Maybe Next Year' (1998). Later in life she said that 'I would have loved to be in more films, but I didn't exactly have 'the face of the moment' when I was young' ('The Independent', 7 Aug 2001). Somewhat contradictorily, she also said, 'I think we get what we desire. I was once offered a Hollywood contract but I turned it down. I wouldn't have been right for it. I didn't want the trappings that went with it. So perhaps I got what I desired: a great deal of hard work and not much money. I wanted to be a good actress. ('The Times', 7 Aug 2001)' Tutin was even less proud of her work for television, and in her 'Who's Who' entry recorded merely 'Has appeared on television'. Nevertheless, her television appearances included a much-acclaimed portrayal of Anne Boleyn in 'The Six Wives of Henry VIII' (1970), a notable success as Sarah Burton in the thirteen-episode serialization of Winifred Holtby's 'South Riding' (1974), and a well-received performance as Florence in 'The Great Kandinsky' (1995), as well as many lesser roles. 
Small and elfin, Tutin was described by Caryl Brahms as 'a small-scale hurricane. And once she is unleashed upon a part, there is bound to be, one feels, a short, sharp tussle. But Miss Tutin comes out on top, and having subdued it to her temperamental and technical measure, parades in it, all smiles and sequinned tears. She can be gay, pathetic, lively, stunned -- part minx, part poet, part sex-kitten. A comedienne of skill and a pint-sized tragedienne. ('The Guardian', 7 Aug 2001)' She was made a DBE in 2000, having been appointed CBE in 1967. In her last years she suffered from acute myeloid leukaemia, from which she died at the King Edward VII Hospital, Easebourne, Sussex, on 6 August 2001. 
Tutin's husband, Derek Barton-Chapple (1927-2007), actor, was born on 26 April 1927 at St Clair, 30 Goodwyn Avenue, Mill Hill, London, the son of Wing Commander Harry John Barton Chapple (1898-1978), RAF officer and electrical engineer, who assisted John Logie Baird with his early television experiments, and his wife, Ada Marian, 'nee' Chuter (1897-1998). He was educated at Dulwich College. After national service with the army in India he declined a place at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, to read modern languages, and went instead to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, where he adopted the stage name Derek Waring, before spending five years in repertory theatre. He made his West End debut in 'The World of Suzie Wong' (Prince of Wales Theatre, 1958). From 1962 to 1964 he acted with the Royal Shakespeare Company, where he met Tutin. He played Albert to her Victoria in 'Portrait of a Queen', both in the West End (Vaudeville Theatre, 1965) and on Broadway (Henry Miller's Theatre, 1968). Other stage appearances included Michael Pertwee's 'Sextet' (Criterion Theatre, 1977), the Agatha Christie thriller 'Cards on the Table' (Vaudeville Theatre, 1981), George Bernard Shaw's 'You Never Can Tell' (Haymarket Theatre, 1987), and the musicals 'Cowardy Custard' (Mermaid Theatre, 1972) and Leslie Bricusse's 'Sherlock Holmes' (Cambridge Theatre, 1989), in which he played Dr Watson. He was perhaps better known for his roles on film and especially television. He made his cinema debut as a surgeon in the Ealing comedy 'Barnacle Bill' (1957), starring Alec Guinness. There followed a large number of character parts in a wide variety of largely forgotten British films of the 1960s and 1970s. His television appearances included 'The Adventures of Sir Lancelot' (1957) and 'The Adventures of Robin Hood' (1957-8), 'Z Cars' (1969-73, as Detective Inspector Neil Goss), 'Moody and Pegg' (1974-5, as the antique dealer Roland Moody awkwardly sharing a house with the civil servant Daphne Pegg, played by Judy Cornwell), 'Partners' (1981, written by his brother Richard, who had adopted the pen name Richard Waring), the sketch show 'The Funny Side' (1985), and 'Keeping up Appearances' (1995). He was described by one television executive who worked with him as an excellent 'company chap' but 'lightweight' ('The Guardian', 22 Feb 2007). He was an enthusiastic and talented cook as well as gardener. He died on 19 February 2007 at Petworth Cottage Nursing and Convalescent Home, Petworth, Sussex, of cancer. He was survived by his two children. 
Sheridan Morley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 98622


Webster, Henry George (1917-2007), automotive engineer, was born on 27 May 1917 at 53 Sir Thomas White's Road, Coventry, the only son of William George Webster, engineer (and later hotel proprietor), and his wife, Daisy Maud, 'nee' Thompson. He was educated at Welshpool county school, Montgomeryshire, after which he studied engineering at Coventry Technical College. On leaving college in 1932 he took up an apprenticeship at Coventry's Standard Motor Company. After six years he became an assistant technical engineer, a post held until 1940, when he was appointed deputy chief inspector in Standard's aircraft department. A year after the war ended he reverted to automotive engineering. Meanwhile, on 1 August 1943, at St Barbara's Church, Earlsdon, he married Margaret Alice (Peggy) Sharp (1916-2003), also from Coventry, daughter of Harry Sharp, engineer. They had one daughter. 
In 1948, under the auspices of the firm's director of engineering, Ted Grinham, Webster was appointed Standard Motor's chief chassis engineer; in 1955 he was promoted chief engineer. He was made a director of Standard Triumph International, as the firm became in 1957, while remaining chief engineer. He held these positions until 1968 when, following the creation of British Leyland (BL) through a series of mergers in the car industry, he became technical director of BL's Austin Morris division at Longbridge, Birmingham, where he remained until 1974. 
From 1948 until 1952 Webster's prime responsibility at Standard was for the design and refinement of the Triumph sports car, which was in great need of regeneration and modernization. The TR2, launched in 1953, proved a sporting, commercial, and export success. On his subsequent appointment as director of engineering in 1957 he assembled an enthusiastic team of engineers at Standard's Canley site and between them they established a pre-eminent reputation in developing sports cars and derivatives within a short time and with limited finance. Throughout its post-war history Standard was extremely short of investment capital until it was taken over by the truck-maker Leyland in 1960-61. Webster's personal relationship with the Italian car designer Giovanni Michelotti of Turin began in 1957 and lasted for many years. 
When Standard was taken over by Leyland, Triumph sports cars were beginning to show their worth in the marketplace. Consequently Webster's superiors, including Alick Dick, Stanley Markland, and Donald Stokes, gave him their support. Crucial to Standard's success in this niche market was the advent of the Triumph Herald in 1959. The sleek lines of the Herald were Italian in origin and it was sold as a saloon, a coupe, and a convertible. Remarkably the car had a better turning circle than a London taxi. It also enjoyed an initial basic selling price of $702, representing excellent value in the early 1960s. The car was designed very quickly, and with precious little finance available Webster had to prove resourceful. Normally a car of this period would have had a monocoque body and chassis unit, but the sums of money required for this were far beyond Standard's resources. To compensate for this there was a reversion to pre-Second World War technology. This involved using a strong separate chassis and then adding modern all-independent suspension. This type of thinking was considered ingenious and helped define Webster's reputation in the field of automotive engineering. Additionally the Herald helped establish Triumph cars as 'sexy', which was unusual for such a small firm and led to the identification and exploitation of several niche markets. From the Triumph stable then flowed a range of cars like the sporty Triumph Vitesse, the Spitfire, and the GT6. Perhaps the most remarkable was the Triumph Dolomite 2000, an executive car that rivalled both BMW and Rover as well as bringing refinement to middle-class motoring in Britain, while the TR5 was the first UK-produced vehicle to have fuel injection as a standard feature. This period represented the high point of success for Triumph, especially when in 1961 its TRS racing sports car won the team prize at Le Mans and its Spitfires claimed victory in the capacity class there. 
On the creation of BL in 1968 Webster was transferred to Longbridge, the firm's Austin Morris division. Although BL enjoyed 33 per cent of the UK market in 1968 it had little capital and suffered from the problem of ageing models with few new ones on the immediate horizon. Within six years of its foundation the firm was all but bankrupt and taken into public ownership under the National Enterprise Board. Webster found Longbridge quite different from his Coventry base at Canley. In addition to having little money, weak management, and a seeming lack of corporate vision, the company was racked by industrial disputes. Moreover, his job at BL included confronting Sir Alec Issigonis, whose Mini 1100 and 1300 designs were technically excellent and popular but singularly unprofitable, leaving Webster little choice but to shunt Issigonis aside and put him in command of the company's research arm. This left Webster free to work on such new models as the Austin Allegro and the Morris Marina, but under financial constraints so severe that neither product was developed properly and both were failures in the marketplace. In 1974 Webster left BL to become group technical director at the automotive component manufacturer Automotive Products, based in Leamington Spa. He retired in 1983. He was chairman of SKF Steel UK from 1982 to 1987. He was a fellow of the Society of Automotive Engineers, and was appointed CBE in 1974. 
Throughout his career Webster appears to have been a modest man and was 'flabbergasted' when after his retirement from public life several of his vehicles were designated as 'classic cars' ('The Independent', 17 Feb 2007). He himself was somewhat revered by a group of Triumph car owners who had formed the Triumph Sports Six club at Lubenham in Leicestershire, where a walkway on the premises was named Webster Way. He died of heart disease at his home, the Old School House, 2 Barrowfield Lane, Kenilworth, Warwickshire, on 6 February 2007. His daughter as well as his wife predeceased him, but he was survived by grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 98632


Budden, Julian Medforth (1924-2007), musicologist and radio producer, was born on 9 April 1924 at Brynmor, The Promenade, Hoylake, Cheshire, the only son of Lionel Bailey Budden (1887-1956), lecturer in, and later professor of, architecture at Liverpool University, and his wife, Dora Magdalene, 'nee' Fraser, an Edinburgh-born writer, poet, and (as Maud Budden) author of the 'Liverpool Echo''s 'Curly Wee' cartoons. He was educated at Stowe School, and then, in 1942, went to Queen's College, Oxford, to read classics. Declaring himself a conscientious objector, he worked in the Friends' Ambulance Unit from 1943 to 1946, serving both in Italy and in Austria. Returning to Queen's, he graduated BA in 1948 and then studied piano (with Thornton Lofthouse), composition (with Patrick Hadley), and bassoon (with Archie Camden) at the Royal College of Music. 
In 1951 Budden started at the BBC, where he remained for his entire working life. His first post was as a clerk and script editor (although he found time to take a BMus degree at Trinity College of Music in 1955); he then rose through the BBC ranks to become a producer (1956-70), chief producer of opera (1970-76), and external services music organizer (1976-83). His time at the BBC was a golden age for broadcast opera: little-known works were produced regularly, there were numerous broadcasts from elsewhere in Europe, and Budden was personally responsible for many important revivals, including the resurrection of a number of Verdi's more obscure titles (including the original versions of 'Macbeth', 'La forza del destino', and 'Simon Boccanegra'). 
Remarkably, though, Budden's work at the BBC continued in tandem with a second occupation as a writer on music. At first this 'deuxieme carriere' took the form of articles and reviews for 'The Listener' and other publications, but in the 1970s and early 1980s it flowered into his monumental three-volume study 'The Operas of Verdi'. It is difficult to overestimate the effect these books had. Their scholarship was impeccable and in many instances entirely original: no source, however obscure, was overlooked, and the assessments of Verdi's literary source material were always fresh, with a formidable cultural background worn lightly. Most impressive of all, though, were the musical judgements. Budden's first volume, covering the operas from 'Oberto' to 'Rigoletto', came out in 1973, at a time when Verdi's early operas were by no means universally respected among musicians. Budden somehow managed to communicate the force of these still rather alien works by looking at them within their own cultural and musical context. His authorial personality was uncommonly welcoming and generous: to his hero Verdi, of course, and to past scholars who had tried to understand him, but also to his readers. His prose was full of wit and relaxed communication, never striving merely to impress. 
Budden took early retirement from the BBC in 1983 and then divided his time between a modest flat in London and homes in or near Florence. He became a feature of the Italian operatic scene in his role (by no means self-consciously assumed) as 'un vero gentleman inglese'. His Italian was extraordinary: its elegance of expression and command of the lexicon were praised by the most discriminating judges, and the fact that he continued to deploy these skills within a resolutely English cadence was part of the charm. His books were translated into Italian and inspired a younger generation of Italian Verdians; and he condensed and revised his three-volume 'Verdi' into a 'Master Musicians' volume (1985). His last years as a writer were mostly devoted to Puccini: a monograph (more modest in size than the Verdi project, but on the same high level critically) about the life and works appeared in 2002. He was also a member of the editorial board of the Verdi complete edition, served loyally and conscientiously as president of Lucca's Centro di Studi Giacomo Puccini until his death, and was much involved in the Istituto Nazionale di Studi Verdiani in Parma. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1987 and appointed OBE in 1991. 
This was Julian Budden the scholar and writer. The man was harder to know. Particularly in later years he could sometimes cut a lonely figure at the social jamboree of conferences. But the generosity that so characterized his writing also characterized the man: it was harder to locate, but never entirely submerged. During his Italian years he became close to the Innocenti family in Florence: to Luigi, who was the son of the landlady who housed him during his first Florence sojourn in the 1960s; and to Luigi's son Jimmy, who lived with him for a time in his last house, in Pontassieve. He died in Florence on 28 February 2007 and was buried in a little cemetery outside Doccia, in the undulating Tuscan hills, in the shade of a large cypress tree. 


@@@@@


doc= 98638


Corner, Beryl Dorothy (1910-2007), paediatrician, was born at 7 Waterford Road, Westbury-on-Trym, Bristol, on 9 December 1910, the eldest of three children of Edward Graham Corner (1881-1952), a clerk in the port of Bristol authority, and his wife, Cicely Rose, 'nee' Menzies (1885-1976). She won a scholarship to Redland High School for Girls, then became a prize-winning medical student at the London School of Medicine for Women at the Royal Free Hospital, where she qualified in 1934 and sailed through her higher medical exams in 1936. It was during her student years that her interest in paediatrics took hold, when she attended ward rounds at Great Ormond Street Hospital and was taught by Robert Hutchison. After house officer posts at the Royal Free and the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital the realistic option for her, as a woman doctor, was to try to obtain a post in general practice or in public health. She was all set to join a general practice in Bristol when a surgeon friend of the family suggested that she apply for a vacant post as resident medical officer at the Bristol Children's Hospital. 
Paediatrics was only just beginning to be developed as a speciality separate from adult medicine and, contrary to the view of the professor of medicine at Bristol, Corner became convinced of the need for doctors who specialized in the care of children and were based at the Children's Hospital rather than adult physicians who dropped in to do rounds. Seeking further training in paediatrics she found she could not apply to Great Ormond Street Hospital, which had an official policy of not employing women house physicians. She applied for a post as registrar at the Westminster Children's Hospital only to be told in a letter from Donald Paterson, consultant paediatrician and secretary of the British Paediatric Association, that although she was the outstanding candidate they could not appoint her because she was a woman. Eventually she obtained a post at the Brompton Hospital before returning to Bristol, where she was appointed honorary physician to the outpatients in 1937 and became one of the first full-time paediatricians in the UK, surviving with money from lecturing to nurses and some private practice. 
Seeing the need to improve the care of newborn babies Corner ventured onto the maternity wards at Bristol, but was told by the obstetricians that her presence was not welcome. She simply ignored this instruction and set about improving the medical and nursing care of babies, which almost certainly was a major factor in reducing perinatal mortality in Bristol. With the support of the medical officer of health, appointed consultant paediatrician in 1942, and influenced by the work of Julius Hess in the USA and Mary Crosse in Birmingham, she went on to set up the special care baby unit at Southmead Hospital, which opened in 1946, gained an international reputation, and provided the example and stimulus for many other units in the UK. She was a founder member of the Neonatal Society and became an adviser to the World Health Organization in neonatology. Among a wider public she reached worldwide attention for the successful care of the Good sisters (the first quadruplets in the world all to survive a birth by caesarean section) in 1948, and in 2006 gained fame through the BBC 2 programme 'Beryl's Babies', about her pioneering work as a paediatrician. 
Between 1942 and 1947 Corner was the only paediatrician in the south-west of England. She was an enthusiastic teacher, and as well as lecturing to nurses she started one of the first courses in the UK in paediatric medicine for medical students. She published many research papers and was one of the first to use exchange transfusion to prevent brain injury due to jaundice in premature babies, was innovative in introducing a breast-milk bank, employed outreach neonatal nurses to help with the care of premature babies after discharge from hospital, and wrote a widely read book, 'Prematurity' (1960). 
Corner made a tactical decision to try not to be seen as a campaigning feminist but was very supportive of women doctors who came to her for help with problems of discrimination. She waited until 1954 before she joined the Medical Women's Federation, at which time both she, and perhaps the federation itself, had become a part of the medical establishment. She later became its president. Her achievements and those of other women who were pioneering paediatricians brought into focus the inequity of barring women from the male bastions of medicine, and in 1945 she and four other distinguished women paediatricians were finally allowed to become members of their own professional body, the British Paediatric Association. 
Short of stature and given to travelling at speed around Bristol in a large white Mercedes which could at first sight seem driverless until it passed by and her distinctive profile was revealed behind the wheel, Beryl Corner had an unforgettable personality. Sociable and charming with friends and colleagues, loyal and supportive to her extended family, helpful to young paediatricians who showed commitment, she had no hesitation in showing disapproval at work, with her ire typically directed at everyone on a ward-round including the innocent, and there were occasions when her handbag was swung and made contact. None of this was personal and the anger disappeared as quickly as the morning dew. Most of those who worked for her came to regard her with great affection and respect. Among parents there were many who were devoted to her and welcomed her certainty and authority, but there were some, including the mother of the Good sisters, who were upset by what they perceived as a failure to respect their views. 
Corner enjoyed conversation, taking centre stage whether in a small group, in a medical meeting, or with parents. She was less comfortable in a purely listening role. She was an accomplished amateur musician, made contributions to the study of medical history, and became 'paediatrician' to the Bristol Zoo, where she was an innovator in the care of sick newborn primates. On at least one occasion she admitted a sick primate into an incubator alongside the babies in the neonatal unit. She was a committed Christian and an active member of Christ Church, Clifton. Appointed OBE in 2006, she kept her sharp intellect until her death from a stroke in Southmead Hospital, Bristol, on 4 March 2007. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 98642


Dally, Ann Gwendolen (1926-2007), doctor and medical historian, was born on 29 March 1926 in a nursing home at 27 Welbeck Street, Marylebone, London, the first of the three children of Claud William Mullins (1887-1968), reforming magistrate and author, and his wife Elizabeth Gwendolen (Gwen) Brandt (1904-1997), craftswoman. Her mother belonged to a wealthy German-Russian banking family; her father was the son of the prominent Victorian sculptor, Edwin Roscoe Mullins. Aged two, Ann moved with her parents from 24 Eldon Road, Kensington, to Summerdale, Burgh Heath Road, Epsom. 
A voracious reader from the age of four, Ann Mullins attended small progressive schools, first the 'enlightened but not freakish' Sherwood House near her home, then Wychwood School in Oxford as a boarder because, according to her father's diary, the eleven-year-old Ann was completely unmanageable, not to mention 'rude', 'detached', and 'stubborn'. She had defeated the child psychiatrist Emanuel Miller by refusing to say a word at their twice-weekly sessions. She flourished at Wychwood, benefiting from its wartime collaboration with the academically rigorous Oxford high school, although her 'disdain for authority or any form of control' remained noteworthy. Expelled on her sixteenth birthday, she continued at the high school and won an open exhibition to Somerville College, Oxford, the following year. 
In her first term at school Ann Mullins was befriended by a classmate's mother, Dorothea Nasmyth, a doctor who had served in the Mediterranean during the First World War and who was an important influence on Ann's life. After taking a second-class degree in modern history in 1946 Ann worked for the War Office, giving history lectures to British troops in Germany and Austria, before starting medical training at St Thomas's Hospital in 1947 (the first year women were admitted). On 1 April 1950 she married Peter John Dally (1923-2005), a fellow medical student, with whom she rapidly produced six children, two before she graduated MB BS in 1953. From 1955 the family lived in Dulwich, Peter training in psychiatry, the children and their nanny (and her child) staying frequently with Ann's parents and sister in Graffham, Sussex. (In 1963 Ann's mother bought them a farmhouse in the village, which eased the congestion.) 
With the move to Dulwich, Ann Dally had intended to work part-time until her children were in school, but later that year Peter contracted polio and became almost completely paralysed for several months, forcing her to focus on her career. She worked as a research registrar in general medicine and acquired a diploma in obstetrics before finally leaving hospital jobs in 1959. Over the next decade she had a small general practice, worked in other people's practices, conducted baby clinics, worked for the Family Planning Association, and was an active medical journalist and broadcaster. From 1960, as Ann Mullins, she produced regular columns and articles for the 'Sunday Telegraph', 'Evening News', and 'Family Doctor' that related to her interests in mothers, children, and psychological medicine, with titles like 'What is normal?' and 'The child who won't conform'. A steady stream of books followed, starting with 'An Intelligent Person's Guide to Modern Medicine' (1966), 'A Child is Born' (1966), and a biography of Cicely Williams (1968), which entailed a research trip in 1962 to Beirut, where Williams was teaching. She also recorded and transcribed in the early 1960s a series of interviews with Sylvia Payne about the early history of the psychoanalytical movement. Later Ann Dally became one of the first radio psychiatrists, on a pioneering Radio London programme presented by Robbie Vincent. 
In 1968 Ann and Peter Dally bought 13 Devonshire Place, a large house in the heart of medical London, where Peter, by now a consultant psychiatrist at Westminster Hospital, had a thriving private practice. Their intention was that Ann would assist with Peter's patients while building a practice of her own, and that a great deal of commuting time would be saved. Ann occupied one consulting room, Peter another, two more were rented out, the receptionists worked at desks in the enormous hallways, and the family lived on the top three floors, Peter occupying the mews flat above the garage. Their marriage was over, but Ann and Peter did not divorce until 1969, seeing no need to upset Ann's father (founder of the Marriage Guidance Council) while he lived. The two Dallys shared a medical practice until they retired, and remained intellectual soulmates all their lives. On 29 June 1979 Ann Dally married Philip Wellsted Egerton ('b'. 1920), a management consultant. 
By the 1980s Ann Dally was seeing a large number of opiate addicts (often referred to her by other doctors), whom she viewed with a sympathy that was at odds with the increasingly punitive emphasis on criminalization and rapid withdrawal favoured by the medical and political establishments. She argued instead that such people could, by means of maintenance programmes (and not being forced to seek drugs on the black market, often at great risk to themselves), be enabled to hold down jobs, look after their families, and generally lead normal lives; indeed, she went further, to argue that prohibition was the real problem, not the opiates themselves. She was twice found guilty of professional misconduct by the General Medical Council, in 1983 and 1987, for allegedly issuing prescriptions for controlled drugs in an irresponsible manner, though she was not struck off, and restrictions on her right to prescribe drugs were removed in 1988. She and her supporters felt that she was being victimized by the medical establishment, not so much because of her work with addicts but because she spoke out about the problems she encountered. 'Had I kept silent and simply treated patients, as other doctors did, I might never have got into trouble', she wrote later in her autobiography, 'A Doctor's Story' (1990). 
Ann Dally spent much of her later life working on medical history, based at the Wellcome Institute in London. Her history of gynaecology, 'Women under the Knife', was published in 1991. When the house on Devonshire Place was sold in 1994 she and her husband Philip moved to a flat on Wimpole Street, but thereafter lived mainly at Wiblings Farm in Graffham, where Ann wrote books and welcomed grandchildren until she suffered a stroke, dying shortly after, on 23 March 2007. She was survived by her husband Philip, and by two sons and two daughters from her first marriage, two sons having predeceased her. Her friend Margaret Drabble admitted to using Ann's house on Devonshire Place in her novel 'The Radiant Way' (1987), but further parallels can be discerned between its protagonist (a Harley Street child psychiatrist raising a large family above the shop) and Ann Dally. 


@@@@@


doc= 98643


Davie, George Elder (1912-2007), philosopher and historian, was born on 18 March 1912 at 4 Baxter Park Terrace, Dundee, the only child of George Myles Davie, master pharmacist, and his wife, Isabella Calder, 'nee' Elder, schoolteacher. He was a pupil at Dundee high school and then, offered a place at both Edinburgh University and Oxford, chose the former, where he read classics and philosophy, graduating with first-class honours in 1935. For the following six years he was assistant to Norman Kemp Smith, professor of logic and metaphysics at Edinburgh, before serving, from 1941 to 1945, in the signals corps in north Africa and Italy. On 5 October 1944, at Bonnyrigg church, he married Elspeth Mary Dryer ['see 'Davie, Elspeth Mary (1919-1995)], who was later to achieve high distinction as a novelist and short-story writer. Anne, their only child, was born in 1946. 
In 1945 Davie joined the moral philosophy department at Queen's University, Belfast, and stayed there until 1960, when he took up a lectureship in the department of logic and metaphysics at Edinburgh University, where he remained (latterly as a reader) until his retirement in 1982. By 1960 he had already spent many years of intensive work on Scottish philosophy from the eighteenth century to the twentieth, one result of which had been a thesis, 'A Scotch metaphysics: the theory of knowledge in the Scottish universities 1730-1860', for which in 1953 he was made DLitt by Edinburgh. While preparing the thesis for publication Edinburgh University Press asked him to write an introductory chapter on the intellectual and social background of the Scottish philosophers. It was the series of insights he had while doing this that led to his writing instead a separate, rather long, book, 'The Democratic Intellect: Scotland and her Universities in the Nineteenth Century'. This was published in 1961, quickly gained many admirers in the fields of educational philosophy and Scottish intellectual history, and was never out of print in Davie's lifetime. 
Davie argued in 'The Democratic Intellect' that the great strength of Scottish education through the eighteenth century and well into the nineteenth was its generalist approach, the promotion of the idea that a broadly based education encompassing arts and sciences, as against one requiring early specialization, had distinct advantages in respect of the intellectual flexibility and depth that it instilled. He also noted as part of the Scottish educational scene a democracy not only in respect of the disciplines, in that all had a place in the sun, but also in respect of the recipients, in that education, and especially higher education, was available to the generality of the population and not just the privileged few. Within the Scottish way of education, philosophy held pride of place because it taught universal principles that gave strength to a person's thinking in any and all the academic disciplines. Davie's DLitt dissertation was eventually published in 2000, under the title 'The Scotch Metaphysics', nearly half a century after it was written. 
Davie's retirement in 1982 was marked by a Festschrift in his honour, entitled 'Philosophers of the Scottish Enlightenment'. In 1983 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and three years later he published his second major book, 'The Crisis of the Democratic Intellect: the Problem of Generalism and Specialisation in Twentieth-Century Scotland'. In this he criticized modern Scotland's failure to prevent the encroachment of the bad English habit of requiring early specialization in the educational field. Thereafter two volumes of his essays appeared, 'The Scottish Enlightenment and Other Essays' (1991) and 'A Passion for Ideas: Essays on the Scottish Enlightenment' (1994). In 2003 he published 'Ferrier and the Blackout of the Scottish Enlightenment', in which he claimed that James Ferrier's a priori thinking about human consciousness brought down the curtain on the Scottish Enlightenment, a claim later disputed but in such a way as to acknowledge the importance of Davie's argument. His writings were in the main far removed from the concerns of most professional philosophers in Scotland and beyond, but he was quite unconcerned by this fact. 
Davie was a prominent member of the Edinburgh literati, on close terms with distinguished figures like Hugh MacDiarmid and Sorley MacLean. In 1987, five years after his retirement, he was made reader emeritus by Edinburgh University. Among other awards conferred on him were honorary doctorates of the universities of Dundee and Edinburgh. His wife, Elspeth, died in 1995 and ten years later he moved from Edinburgh to Sutton Veny, Wiltshire, to be near his daughter, Anne, and her family. He died at Sutton Veny House nursing home on 20 March 2007 of cerebrovascular disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 98648


Forte, Charles, Baron Forte (1908-2007), caterer and hotelier, was born on 26 November 1908 in the hamlet of Mortale, outside the village of Casalaticco, in an area of Italy known as the Ciociaria, the eldest son of Rocco Giovanni Forte and his wife, Maria Luigia, daughter of Michelangelo Antonio Forte. His parents were distantly related. The name of his birthplace was altered in his honour from Mortale to Monforte some eighty years later. People from the Ciociaria had been settling in Scotland since the 1880s; in 1911 Rocco Forte joined his brother and cousin, who had several small shops there. He opened a business, the Savoy Cafe in Alloa, that boasted the earliest American soda fountain and Italian espresso coffee-machine in Clackmannanshire. In 1913 Rocco's wife with her adored eldest child joined him there. The five-year-old had hitherto been called Carmine Forte, but his forename was soon Anglicized. He was educated in Alloa, briefly at a boarding-school run by Marist fathers in Dumfries, then at Collegio Scheppers and the Liceo Mamiami in Rome. In 1926 he took a six-month course in accountancy and bookkeeping in Scotland. 
Forte first worked in an ice-cream parlour and sandwich bar in Weston-super-Mare, which his father owned with two cousins, and then in his father's cafes in Bournemouth and Weymouth. In 1929 he became manager of the Venetian Lounge in Brighton, which his father had started in partnership with another cousin. In 1935 he opened his own milk-bar adjacent to Regent Street Polytechnic in London, and began serving a novelty called milkshakes. Failing to draw enough passers-by, he decided that he needed more conspicuous premises but lower costs. Accordingly he sacked three staff, and extended into an abutting shop. Thereafter he always understood that the sites of his enterprises were decisive to their success, and never relented in his strict costing. The Mayfair property dealers Howard and Basil Samuel helped him to find good sites for further milk-bars in Charing Cross Road, Oxford Street, and Leicester Square. By the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Forte had nine milk-bars in central London, and was saving 20 per cent on buying costs by supplying them from centralized premises where cakes, sandwiches, and fruit syrups were prepared. 
When Italy entered the conflict as an axis ally in 1940, Forte was briefly interned as an enemy national on the Isle of Man. In January 1943 he married Irene Mary (1920/21-2010), only daughter of Olga Chierico, a redoubtable Venetian widow who ran a delicatessen in Soho; her long-dead husband had been Giovanni Chierico. They had one son and five daughters. Forte became a British subject after the war. 
During the depths of post-war austerity Forte began collaborating with a jovial cockney property developer, Joe Levy. Levy had an estate agent's credo: 'If you can't make a damned good living within three square miles of Piccadilly Circus, don't try in this profession. And never go into a back street' (Marriott, 182). Forte learned much from Levy, including the buying and leaseback of property. At Levy's prompting he bought the Lyons tea-room at Rainbow Corner on Shaftesbury Avenue, near Piccadilly Circus, with a $35,000 loan from Prudential Assurance. By leasing part of the site to himself at a rent of $4000 a year, and leasing the rest at $8000, he achieved an annual income of $12,000. Thereafter he enlarged his fortune by property deals as well as catering, and became known to the City pages as a property financier as much as a restaurateur. In 1950 he leased the resplendent Criterion building on the south side of Piccadilly Circus at an annual rent of $12,000, used its Marble Hall restaurant as a cafeteria serving chicken Maryland, ice gateaux and the like, and leased back other parts of the building. As an expert in mass feeding and the costing of cheap food he secured half of the catering concession for the Festival of Britain in 1951. In 1953 -- again advised by Levy -- he bought the Cafe Monico site at Piccadilly Circus from the Express Dairy. Finally, in 1953, he and Sir Leslie Joseph obtained a twenty-one-year lease from London county council to run a funfair in Battersea Park, and to turn the Cremorne beer garden into a restaurant (he severed his connection when the funfair gained an insalubrious reputation as a haunt of hooligans). These deals made Forte a millionaire. Journalists nicknamed him Mr Piccadilly (Hennessy, 5). 
In April 1954 Forte was co-opted onto the board of the Cafe Royal, and soon stretched his resources by buying its Regent Street building. At critical moments of expansion he dared to take on high leverage, and there were phases of his career in which he was personally short of money. The glamorous Cafe Royal was Forte's favourite property: for years he kept a private penthouse office there. In July 1954 -- ten months after an earlier offer of 6's'. 6died per share had been rejected -- Forte paid 10's'. per share to buy the entire Criterion site, including the Criterion Theatre. The deal cost about $800,000. At the same time, after convoluted manoeuvres, he bought the caterers Slaters and Bodega, with a valuable property portfolio. In 1955 he formed a new subsidiary, Forte's Popular Restaurants, and received the first catering concession at Heathrow airport. In 1957 he went into partnership with Bernard Delfont to convert the London Hippodrome music-hall into a theatre restaurant called Talk of the Town. His ambition to have a luxury restaurant was satisfied by buying the Hungaria restaurant in Lower Regent Street. 
Forte befriended the Labour politician Alf Robens, who introduced him as a potential sympathizer to the party leader, Hugh Gaitskell. Gaitskell, who described him in 1956 as ''the' great caterer in the country', was delighted when Forte undertook to give an annual subsidy of $5000 to the Glasgow socialist weekly 'Forward' ('Diary of Hugh Gaitskell', 470). In 1959 Gaitskell offered to recommend him for a peerage. Forte, who was by then expending his extra-business energies as chairman of the charity fund-raising National Sporting Club, declined, for he was far from a socialist and fixed in his resistance to union recognition in his operations. In 1980 only about 10 per cent of his staff was unionized: he frequently voiced his dislike of being bullied by union officials or anyone else. 
Until 1948 Forte lived in flats off Portland Place, a short walk from that stretch of London, Regent Street between Oxford Circus and Piccadilly Circus, which was the focus of his interests. He then moved to 7 Greenaway Gardens in Hampstead, and installed his parents and other relations nearby. In 1970 he took over Chester House in Upper Belgrave Street from Lord Bruntisfield, and subsequently moved to nearby Lowndes House. A keen shot, in 1965 he bought the 1500 acre Ryde farm estate at Ripley in Surrey. His interests were controlled by his privately owned company, Forte Holdings, with headquarters at 251-9 Regent Street, overlooking Oxford Circus. 
During the 1950s Forte was chairman of the London Publicity Committee, a forerunner of the London Tourist Board (on which he also served). He envisaged a vast expansion of tourism, and recognized that this could not be accomplished while holiday visitors to London, 'the greatest city in the world', remained seasonal. His strategy to attract off-season visitors was to promote London's conference business by a publicity drive. In an article for 'The Times' (25 March 1958), he wrote: 'Paris, Geneva, Brussels and many continental cities, most of which are not only smaller than London but have a fraction of London's amenities, do far better at encouraging conferences. We in this city are too complacent in a world which is becoming more publicity-conscious than ever... many Continental cities are vying to become the capital of a more united Europe. Why should this not be London?' In the 1960s Swan Tours and Milbanke Travel became wholly owned Forte subsidiaries, and he held a stake in Thomas Cook until 1970. By 1978 almost half of Forte's guests in British hotels came from abroad. 
In 1958 Forte bought his first hotel, the Waldorf Hotel at Aldwych, for $600,000, which he raised by selling his lease of the Monico site in Piccadilly to Jack Cotton for $500,000. He then arranged a sale and leaseback deal with Prudential Assurance on the Waldorf. The following year he bought the Quality Inn chain of restaurants and extended his ownership of lower-grade provincial hotels: there were about 100 in 1980. By 1960 Forte was a top table guest at Cotton's famous annual luncheon at the Dorchester Hotel. He did several property deals with Sir Isaac Wolfson, from whom he bought Jay's fashion store at Oxford Circus in 1961, and by 1962 Anthony Sampson was writing, 'the era of Nuffield and de Havilland is being succeeded by the era of Charles Forte and Jack Cotton' (Sampson, 499). In 1969 Forte bought the Frederick Hotels group, with eight hotels including the Russell in Bloomsbury. In 1970 he bought three Paris hotels, the George V, Plaza Athenee, and Tremoille. Subsequently he acquired the Ritz Hotel in Madrid and the Hotel des Bergues in Geneva. His company built airport hotels at Heathrow, Birmingham, Manchester, and Glasgow as well as the Golden Sands Hotel near Famagusta in Cyprus. He bought three hotels in Bermuda from Sir Harold Wernher and another hotel in Jamaica, and erected a village of holiday cottages in Sardinia. 
Forte's other acquisitions included the Kardomah coffee houses and Henekey wine-bar chains, Fuller's tea-shop and chocolate business (1959), Bellevue Stadium in Manchester (1962), the Mr Whippy ice-cream business (1962), and Joseph Terry, chocolate manufacturers, for $4.3 million (1963). He invested $50,000 in the publishers Sidgwick and Jackson in 1956, and joined the board: later the firm published his anodyne and forgetful memoirs, 'Forte' (1986). 
Forte successfully tendered to run the Newport Pagnell service-station cafeteria on the M1 motorway from London to Leeds, which opened in 1959. Another eight Forte motorway cafeterias were opened over the next twenty years, and damaged the Forte brand by the poor quality of the food. In 1961 he opened (outside Oxford) the first of his Travelodge chain of motels, with restaurants and petrol stations attached, sited on trunk roads. It was rumoured that Enrico Mattei, Forte's friend who was the controversial chairman of the Italian state oil company ENI, would join him in the motel business. In 1961 Forte became chairman of the wholly owned English subsidiary of AGIP, the marketing arm of ENI. AGIP began opening petrol stations on prime English sites. After Mattei's aircraft crashed in dubious circumstances in 1962 Forte was stunned into speechlessness for the only time in his life. He assisted the sale of AGIP's English petrol stations to Esso for about $12 million, but did not take up share options worth $1.5 million. 
Forte looked distinctively Italian, standing five feet four inches tall, dapper, with a neat moustache, bristling energy, and formal punctilio. He was a smiling, courteous martinet. At home, he liked order and refinement: he was stern and exacting with his children. In business, he was a forceful, even imperious presence who vitalized, chivvied, and rewarded his employees. Always he was self-consciously dignified. Punctuality was a passion with him. He prided himself on working openly with a team of trusted deputies, strove to be considerate, and enjoyed the admiring dependence of his senior managers. Wages in his group were higher than average in the sector, but the annual turnover of his low-paid staff of about 70 per cent was also above average. He did not take defeat well, but never repined over reverses: his driving will spurred him forward to jump at the next challenge. The future for him was not problematic but promised satisfactions. 
Forte Holdings was one of the largest privately owned businesses in Britain. In 1961 he agreed a $30 million merger with Mecca, a publicly quoted company operating bingo halls, ballrooms, ice-rinks, and diners. This news delighted the stock exchange, which was eager for investors to get a stake in Forte's flourishing, fast-expanding business. The deal however collapsed because of the difficulties met by accountants in valuing the diverse components of Forte Holdings at a price acceptable to its owner. Speculators who bought heavily in Mecca shares as a way of getting a slice of Forte's earnings lost heavily when the amalgamation was discontinued. Mecca was subsequently acquired by Sir Max Joseph's Grand Metropolitan Estates. Despite this stumble Forte was impatient to stride into the motel business, and to develop his chain of steak houses, but with each motel costing about $250,000 his organization's financial needs were too big for his resources. Forte Holdings was therefore floated on the stock exchange in 1962 to raise the necessary millions. The issue proved a resounding success, being heavily over-subscribed. Control of this holding company was retained by its founder's specially created private company, Forte Investments. Effectively he had 71 per cent voting control. 
About this time Forte bought the City catering group Ring and Brymer (which catered for the lord mayor's banquet, Chelsea flower show, and Farnborough air show), the restaurant Gennaro's of Soho, and an amusements business, Fairwater Glides. In 1969 he bought Lillywhite's clothes store on the corner of Lower Regent Street and Piccadilly Circus. He took over the promenade piers at Blackpool, New Brighton, and Llandudno, and opened the Serpentine restaurant in Hyde Park. When Forte acquired provincial hotels their interiors were gutted, their furnishings were given a monotonous modernity that soon dated, their purchasing was centralized, their meals were ruled by 'portion control', and their prices were standardized. The beautiful gilt mosaic ceiling of the Marble Hall at the Criterion was hidden by a shoddy, lowered ceiling and forgotten for several decades under Forte's stewardship. His view was that his Little Chef and Happy Eater diners, and Travelodges, were reliable, hygienic, and affordable. Detractors complained of their soul-immolating uniformity, indifferent cooking, and stifling mediocrity. 
By 1970 Forte's company employed 16,000 and had assets of $70 million. It vied with Trust Houses, long known for its medium-sized provincial hotels with old-fashioned charm but embarrassing plumbing. Under an ambitious chairman, Lord Crowther, Trust Houses had lately developed a bland but lucrative chain of Post House motor-hotels. In 1970 it was agreed to merge the two businesses in a new company, Trust House Forte, which with assets of $120 million surpassed Maxwell Joseph's Grand Metropolitan as Britain's largest hotelier. These assets included 215 hotels in Britain, thirteen foreign hotels, 250 restaurants and cafes, and 1500 canteens, catering for fifty airlines, ten piers, seven motorway service areas, and four amusement parks. Trust House was strong in industrial catering and English hotels (including the Grosvenor House, Hyde Park, Brown's, and Cavendish hotels) while Forte's strengths lay in public catering and foreign hotels. Forte expected his own way: if someone submitted a carefully argued policy paper that went against what he wished to do, he ignored it. This attitude riled both Crowther and the Trust House management, whose methods Forte found cumbersome and bureaucratic. There were other tensions: Trust House headquarters staff left work at 5.30 sharp, but Forte's management was instilled with his habit of long, punishing hours. Crowther had intimated that he would retire after a year as chairman to be succeeded by his deputy chairman, Forte, but reneged on this deal. The two men came to loathe one another, and traded public insults: Crowther accused Forte of costing the company a million pounds a year in trappings and expenses. Whereas Crowther relied on the support of old Trust House directors Forte nominated Sir Charles Hardie and the Conservative Party chairman, Lord Thorneycroft (who had an Italian wife), to the merged board: their backing proved decisive. 
In October 1971 Allied Breweries launched a $128 million takeover bid which intensified the animosity. Forte outmanoeuvred Crowther by jockeying onto the board his friend Alf Robens (by then a peer), and thus obtained a majority among the directors. Recognizing that his grip on the chair was precarious, Crowther supported Allied's offer. Forte, who owned the largest stake in the company, borrowed $2 million to outbid Allied for shares in the market: he mustered friends such as Delfont and Max Joseph to buy with him, and paid for an adroit public relations campaign to sway shareholders. Allied's bid was defeated, Crowther and his cohorts resigned, and Forte's merger with Trust House evolved into a delayed takeover. Crowther dropped dead a few days later. 
Forte installed Thorneycroft as chairman of Trust House Forte and served as chief executive until he replaced Thorneycroft in 1978. (The two men were co-trustees of the Italian Hospital in Bloomsbury, which they abruptly shut in 1989.) During the 1970s Forte participated in several huge overseas hotel projects, notably the al-Jazira in Bahrain, the Plaza of the Americas in Dallas, and the Riyadh Palace in Saudi Arabia. In 1973 he acquired 460 American hotels and motels by purchasing TraveLodge International of California. The Pierre Hotel in New York was bought soon afterwards. In 1976 Trust House Forte paid $25 million for the Lyons group of thirty-four hotels, including the Cumberland, Strand Palace, and Regent Palace hotels in London; in 1981 it bought the entertainment interests of Sir Jules Thorn's Thorn-EMI, including three London theatres; and in 1986 paid $186 million for the hotel and catering interests of the Imperial group, which Lord Hanson had recently taken over. Forte injured his reputation by a prolonged attempt -- beginning in 1981 with the backing of Kuwaiti investors, and fizzling out in 1989 -- to wrest control of the Savoy Hotel from interests led by Sir Hugh Wontner. Forte's siege of the Savoy and antagonism to Wontner were comparable to Tiny Rowland's siege of Harrods and loathing of Mohamed Fayed in 1981-92. Both episodes were in all senses vain. Forte spent $38 million to buy 69 per cent of Savoy's equity, but held only 42 per cent of voting capital. 
Forte was knighted in 1970, and received a life peerage in 1982 on the recommendation of Margaret Thatcher. He was one of the entrepreneurs -- along with Kenneth Keith, Arnold Weinstock, Marcus Sieff, John King, and James Hanson -- who were promoted to the House of Lords in Thatcher's first term, and signalled the capitalism she admired: despite her commitment to reviving small businesses, her favourite businessmen were despotic rulers of colossal fiefs. Forte venerated Mrs Thatcher, who spoke at his eightieth birthday dinner, attended by 1200 guests, at the Grosvenor House Hotel. This gala was described in acidulous detail in Woodrow Wyatt's diary for 22 November 1988: 'Charles Forte made a speech, far too long. He kept on saying how much he loved his wife and how marvellous she was. Then came the cutting of the cake ceremony which was preceded by a fanfare of Household Cavalry trumpeters, or Life Guard trumpeters, with their great banners, all looking very royal... and somewhat overdoing it for vulgarity. Then we had Vera Lynn who sang the most appalling song, 'from all the women especially, and Irene Forte, to Charles Forte'. ('Journals of Woodrow Wyatt', 1.670)' In 1983 Forte appointed his son Rocco as chief executive, while retaining the chairmanship. The corporate name was changed in 1991 to Forte plc. Sales in that year were worth $2641 million, and shareholders' funds stood at $2961 million -- of which nearly two-thirds represented freehold land and buildings. Institutional shareholders grew restive at his baronial style of management, and complained that Forte's board was a gerontocracy. Finally, in 1992, he relinquished the chairmanship to his son, and was named life president, but his renunciation was too late. After a fierce takeover battle, control of his vulnerable empire was seized by Granada for $3.9 billion in 1996. Latterly, although physically hale, Forte was afflicted by senile dementia. He died at his London house, Lowndes House, Belgravia, on 28 February 2007, and was survived by his wife and their six children. His son Rocco and eldest daughter Olga had by then built up a chain of luxury hotels throughout Europe, Rocco Forte Hotels Ltd. 


@@@@@


doc= 98649


Francis, Frederick William (1917-2007), cinematographer and film director, was born on 22 December 1917 at 32 Offord Road, Islington, London, the son of Frederick William Francis, railway worker, and later commission agent, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Wilkins. About the age of thirteen he developed an interest in photography, and when he left school at sixteen he was apprenticed to a stills photographer. However, a visit to a film studio ignited a passion for film-making and he took a job as clapper boy at British International Pictures at a time when British cinema was experiencing one of its periodic booms. He slowly worked his way up through the camera department, and on the eve of the Second World War was already an experienced camera assistant, recently having served on Carol Reed's acclaimed 'The Stars Look Down' (1940). 
Francis spent seven years in the army, gaining considerable experience with the army kinematograph unit, making training and propaganda films. On 12 May 1940, at St Luke's Church, Islington, he married Gladys Florence Dorrell ('b'. 1919), daughter of William James Dorrell, caterer. They had a son, but the marriage ended in 1961. After the war Francis re-entered the British film industry when it was once more in an optimistic mood, his first assignment being second-unit photography on 'The Macomber Affair' (1947). He was fortunate, from the late 1940s onwards, to serve as camera operator for two of the industry's leading cinematographers. He assisted Christopher Challis in the shooting of Michael Powell's 'The Small Back Room' (1949), 'The Elusive Pimpernel' (1950), 'Gone to Earth' (1950), and 'The Tales of Hoffman' (1951), and then worked with Oswald Morris on the John Huston pictures 'Moulin Rouge' (1952) and 'Beat the Devil' (1953). Francis later acknowledged the significance of this experience and the opportunity to work with two such adventurous directors. The demanding Huston worked Francis to near death on the difficult production of 'Moby Dick' (1956). 
With ambitions beyond simply operating a camera, Francis accepted the opportunity to serve as director of photography on 'A Hill in Korea' (1956), directed by Julian Aymes. He built a reputation on some modest productions, including Joseph Losey's 'Time without Pity' (1957), and quickly established himself as a leading cinematographer, especially with his trend-setting work in black and white on the 'new wave' dramas 'Room at the Top' (1959) and 'Saturday Night and Sunday Morning' (1960). He then extended his range to two period dramas shot in black and white Cinemascope, winning an Oscar for his stunning visual treatment of D. H. Lawrence's 'Sons and Lovers' (1960), while brilliantly evoking the chilling atmosphere of 'The Innocents' (1961), based on the celebrated novella by Henry James. In the latter film Francis captured a remarkable intimacy within the widescreen frame and his work on this production ranked among the cinematographer's own proudest achievements. On 20 April 1963 Francis married Pamela Anne Mann ('b'. 1927), a script supervisor, and daughter of Raymond Claude Mortlake Mann, proprietor of a finance company. They had a son and a daughter. 
Francis's ambition led him to directing, and in this capacity he worked on three minor films in 1962: the uninspired comedy 'Two and Two Make Six', the low-budget horror 'The Brain', and some additional scenes for 'Day of the Triffids', a production that had fallen into trouble. It was with his success on his fourth film, 'Paranoiac' (1963), that he was unrewardingly typecast in the modestly budgeted horror film. He worked extensively for the leading production companies in the genre, contributing Dracula and Frankenstein tales to the lucrative cycle of Gothic horrors produced at Hammer, and varied shockers for its rival Amicus. However, his best work at Hammer was a series of contemporary psychological thrillers made in the wake of Hitchcock's 'Psycho' (1960), which began with 'Paranoiac' in 1963 and included 'Nightmare' (1964) and 'Hysteria' (1965); while his most influential productions at Amicus were a cycle of anthology horror stories, including 'Dr Terror's House of Horrors' (1965), 'Torture Garden' (1967), and 'Tales from the Crypt' (1972), films that later acquired cult status. He worked regularly with the horror star Peter Cushing, for whom he developed a great admiration, and also with his son from his first marriage, Kevin, who had formed Tyburn Pictures and produced 'The Ghoul' (1975) and 'Legend of the Werewolf' (1975). But Francis was essentially unhappy within the limitations of genre film-making. Too often he was shackled to intractable material and unsympathetic producers, and had to face the professional humiliation of seeing his name attached to such 'stinkers' as 'The Deadly Bees' (1967), 'Trog' (1970), and 'Vampire Happening' (1971). He was greatly disappointed when his own cherished production, the perverse black satire on class and the family, 'Mumsy, Nanny, Sonny and Girly' (1970), confused audiences and critics, and flopped. During this period he returned only once to the camera, shooting the moody 'Night Must Fall' (1964) as a favour to its director, Karel Reisz. 
In the mid-1970s the low-to-medium budget horror film lost its market and Francis himself became disenchanted with the genre: 'I used to get invited to all these horror film festivals, and I'd start talking about the directors I most admire, the Billy Wilders and the William Wylers, and they didn't know who I was talking about... And I suddenly realised that most of these people were only interested in horror -- not just horror films, but horror pure and simple. Well, you know, that wasn't for me. I'm not a weirdo at all. ('Sight and Sound', Nov 1992)' Francis gave up directing for a number of years, but was eventually lured back into a highly successful second career as a leading lighting cameraman in Britain and Hollywood. The opportunity arose when the American director David Lynch wanted to shoot 'The Elephant Man' (1980) in black and white, and Francis was approached for his experience and expertise in what was rapidly becoming a lost art. It proved the last major monochrome film made in Britain. He shot two further productions for the idiosyncratic Lynch, 'Dune' (1984) and 'The Straight Story' (1999), the final picture on which Francis worked. Other significant productions included 'The French Lieutenant's Woman' (1981), which reunited Francis with Karel Reisz, and Martin Scorsese's remake of 'Cape Fear' (1991), where the director relied on the cameraman's developed sense of the Gothic. Francis won a second Oscar for his work on the American Civil War epic 'Glory' (1989), making him the only British cinematographer to pick up Academy awards for both black-and-white and colour cinematography. In 1997 he received the lifetime achievement award of the British Society of Cinematographers, and the following year was granted the prestigious international award of the American Society of Cinematographers. He never lost the ambition to direct and gratefully accepted the opportunity to lead the production of 'The Doctor and the Devils' (1985), a strong moral tale of grave robbing that he had harboured for a number of years; however, it was not a success, possibly the victim of a producer's tinkering to raise the requisite horror levels. 
Francis also worked regularly as a director in television, contributing to such hit series as 'The Saint', 'Man in a Suitcase', and 'The Champions' in the 1960s, and supplementing dwindling feature assignments in the 1970s with work on 'The Adventures of Black Beauty' and 'Star Maidens'. Late in his career, and as a personal tribute, he photographed a television documentary on his friend Peter Cushing. In time the best of his own horror films acquired the status of classics of the genre. The films offered a pronounced compositional sense, incorporated long graceful camera movements, and managed a visual richness that belied their limited budgets, raising them alongside the very best of horror film production in Britain at the time. He died of complications arising from bronchopneumonia at the Atfield House nursing home, St John's Road, Isleworth, London, on 17 March 2007; he was survived by his wife Pamela and his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 98650


Garson, Mary Sunniva (1921-2007), nun and founder of the Benedictine sisters of Grace and Compassion, was born on 3 October 1921 at Denend, Udny, Aberdeenshire, the only daughter and eldest of four children of David Garson, merchant seaman and later harbour master, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Anderson. She was educated at Invergordon Academy and at the University of Aberdeen, where she graduated MA in psychology. During the Second World War she served as an officer in the Women's Auxiliary Air Force, working on the interviewing procedures for RAF recruits, and was seconded to the army to assist the diagnostic testing of soldiers returning from Burma. On demobilization she worked as an industrial and educational psychologist. 
Mary Garson had been brought up as a presbyterian but in 1947 was received into the Roman Catholic church. She was at first, by her own admission, a reluctant Catholic. Her contacts with a Jesuit priest, Bernard Bassett, who had been involved in RAF leadership courses, persuaded her that she had a religious vocation, but its character was discerned slowly. While practising as a psychologist in Brighton she began to work, encouraged by the local clergy, among the many elderly in the town and witnessed their desperation and loneliness. Perhaps her inspiration was similar to that of her fellow Catholic converts Leonard Cheshire and Sue Ryder and so many other former service personnel of her generation. She had great determination and an ability to overcome a shortage of funds for her initiatives: 'If we do our best, God will do the rest' she would say (personal knowledge). 
Mary Garson was small in stature, about 5 feet 2 inches in height, and of average build. She had a personal serenity and meekness and was quietly spoken with a faint Scottish lilt. She was a woman of few words but they were always well chosen. She had a shrewd business sense and a determined character. She always believed that what good she did was simply God's will. 
Garson's residential home for the elderly in Brighton, St Mary's House, Preston Road, which opened in 1954, was always a place of prayer as well as of work. Her co-workers gradually turned themselves into a religious community not resident in one place but united in purpose and lifestyle. In 1959, only five years after the first home opened, Cyril Cowderoy, the Roman Catholic bishop of Southwark (whose diocese then included Brighton) recognized the community as a 'pious association'. Holy Cross Priory, near Heathfield in Sussex, became the headquarters of Mary Garson's charitable and religious activities in 1965. Gradually habits were adopted, blue in colour and with black veils, and in 1978 the rule of St Benedict, with its moderation and wisdom, was adopted. She was greatly influenced by the monks of Worth Abbey in Sussex and in particular by their first abbot, Victor Farwell. Her spirituality, in her early Catholic days, was Jesuit-inclined and her houses hosted 'cell' meetings inspired by Bernard Bassett. She gradually saw that the Benedictine rule, in its origins intended for a closed community, was easily adapted for an active congregation, as for similar groups like the Sisters of the Good Samaritan in Australia. She lived in a convent within the grounds of Worth Abbey, which served as her generalate from 1977 until 1994. The sisters remained there until 2003. In 1992 Cormac Murphy O'Connor, bishop of Arundel and Brighton, had recognized them as a diocesan congregation. Their dedication to ecumenism would particularly have appealed to him. 
On 18 September 1992 the sisters were admitted into full association with the international Benedictine confederation. Garson was by then styled Mother Mary Garson, prioress general of the Benedictine sisters of Grace and Compassion. Their life was not that of the cloistered nuns but their observance was centred on shared liturgical prayer; their active work was compassion, especially for the elderly. It was a mixed life, fully informed by the Second Vatican Council and with a strong emphasis on collaboration with lay professionals and helpers. It attracted many vocations and by the time of her death there were more than 200 sisters in Europe, Africa, and Asia, representing a truly multinational community, running twenty-seven care homes for the elderly and needy. This was a key part of the congregation's charisma and explains, alongside Garson's own inspiration and initiatives, why, at a time when many European Catholic congregations of women were in decline, the sisters of Grace and Compassion flourished. 
Mary Garson celebrated the jubilee of her first foundation in Arundel Cathedral in 2004, a year before her retirement as prioress general in 2005. She was appointed MBE in 2004 'for devoting her life to the care of others', having both promoted 'the vision of individual dignity' and 'engendered an overwhelming family feeling about the charity, attracting people of all religious faiths', who, by her example, 'foster participation and unity'. She died on 8 March 2007 at St Joseph's Home, Albert Road, Bognor Regis, Sussex, and, after a requiem at Worth Abbey, she was buried at Holy Cross Priory, Heathfield, Sussex, on 27 March 2007. 


@@@@@


doc= 98651


Gaster, Moses (1856-1939), scholar and rabbi, was born in Bucharest, Romania, on or about 16 September 1856, the eldest son of Abraham Emanuel Gaster (died 1926), then the commercial attache of the Netherlands consulate in that city, and his wife, Phina Judith Rubinstein. Gaster was educated at the universities of Bucharest and Leipzig. After graduation from Bucharest he proceeded to the rabbinical seminary in Breslau, at which he was ordained as a rabbi in 1881, but the same year he returned to Bucharest as a lecturer specializing in the history of Romanian literature and in comparative mythology. Gaster also found employment as a school inspector and a member of the council for the examination of teachers. However, he incurred the wrath of the Romanian political leadership through his activities on behalf of Romanian Jews, who had become entitled to Romanian citizenship under the treaty of Berlin (1878); this right had been obtained only after considerable pressure from Disraeli, acting at the behest of Jewish leaders such as the Rothschilds in Britain and France. Gaster was expelled from Romania in 1885; he never returned. Instead he sought refuge in England, where he had friends and was naturalized in 1893; he spent the rest of his life there. In 1890 Gaster married Leah Lucy (1871-1940), the only child of Michael Friedlander (1833-1910), principal of Jews' College, London. There were seven sons and six daughters of the marriage. 
Gaster's subsequent career falls into several interconnected spheres. He was a man of outstanding intellect, a most accomplished linguist -- speaking, reading, and writing many European and Near Eastern languages (the Gaster papers, now housed at University College, London, are in ten languages), and a leading scholar in many fields. In 1886 he accepted an invitation to deliver at Oxford the Ilchester lectures, on Graeco-Slavic literature (published 1887); he was reappointed Ilchester lecturer in 1891. In purely Jewish subjects he was responsible for the first translation of the Jewish liturgy into Romanian (1883); additionally he published a number of monographs on subjects as diverse as Hebrew illuminated bibles of the ninth and tenth centuries and early Jewish magic. He also wrote in the fields of mythology and folklore (on which he became an internationally acknowledged authority) and on the Samaritans. In 1891 he published a two-volume study of Romanian language and literature which came to be regarded as the standard work on the subject. His intellectual eminence was publicly recognized through (for example) his election as vice-president of the Royal Asiatic Society and of the English Folklore Society, of which he became president. In 1930 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society for Literature. Meanwhile, the authorities in Romania had become, after a fashion, reconciled with him. In 1929 he became an honorary member of the Romanian Academy and he was also invested with the Romanian orders of the Crown and Bene Merenti. 
In 1887 Gaster accepted an invitation to fill the historic office of 'haham' of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews in England, which had remained vacant since the death of Rabbi Benjamin Artom eight years previously. The 'haham' -- meaning, literally, 'wise man' -- was in effect the chief rabbi of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews, who followed the Sephardi ritual and who had constituted the first Jewish community of the Cromwellian resettlement in the mid-seventeenth century. By the end of the eighteenth century they were far outnumbered by the Ashkenazi, or German and Yiddish-speaking Jews, who had come to Britain from central Europe. But the Sephardim, led for much of the nineteenth century by Sir Moses Montefiore, regarded themselves as the senior of the two Jewish 'nations' in Britain, and stubbornly refused to place themselves under the ecclesiastical authority of the Ashkenazi chief rabbinate, an office filled from 1845 until his death in 1890 by Nathan Marcus Adler, and from 1891 until 1911 by his son Hermann Adler. 
Gaster was not, of course, Sephardi. That did not bother the elders of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews, who needed a strong figure to stand up to the presumed authority of the Adlers. And it certainly did not bother Gaster. He relished and exulted in the role of underdog, which might have been made for him, and used the majesty of his office (an image which in a sense he created) to make the voice of Sephardi distinctiveness heard in every corridor of power to which he could gain access. He had no hesitation in turning personal prejudices into religious principles, a task made easier by Hermann Adler's comparative ignorance of Talmudic matters. So, for example, while Adler used his influence discreetly on behalf of the Conservatives in the general election of 1906, Gaster was publicly outspoken in his support for Liberalism. While Hermann Adler denounced before the royal commission on divorce (1910) the activities of foreign-born rabbis who insisted on their right to conduct religious marriages on their own authority, Gaster in turn denounced Adler. In 1929 Gaster helped undermine the attempt of Adler's successor, J. H. Hertz, to have the Ashkenazi chief rabbi recognized as the sole authority competent under English law to certify Jewish slaughterers of cattle and poultry. 
If the Spanish and Portuguese leadership hoped that Gaster would put the Sephardim back on the map of Anglo-Jewry, they were certainly not disappointed. But Gaster fell out with this leadership, just as he fell out with most other people with whom he came into contact. Gaster was (and had already in Romania been) a confirmed Zionist, a believer in the right of Jewish national self-determination, and an espouser, therefore, of the view that Jews did indeed constitute a separate nationality. He was one of the earliest supporters in England of the founder of political Zionism, the Austrian Jewish journalist Theodor Herzl. When, on 13 July 1896, Herzl had made his first public speech on political Zionism (just a few months after the publication of his seminal pamphlet 'Der Judenstaat'), the meeting had been chaired by Gaster at the Jewish Working Men's Club, Whitechapel. Gaster helped found the English Zionist Federation (of which he later became president) in 1899, and it was at his house in London that the dialogue was initiated between leading Zionists and the representative of the British Foreign Office, Sir Mark Sykes, which resulted in the promulgation of the Balfour declaration in 1917. 
Gaster was immensely proud of his part in the triumph of Zionism. But the Sephardi leadership became increasingly angry and alarmed over his activities, which they viewed as compromising, undermining, and perverting his ecclesiastical position -- and also their status as British citizens. Gaster's claim (in a volume of essays edited by the Manchester Zionist Harry Sacher in 1916) that those who regarded themselves simply as 'Englishmen of the Jewish persuasion' were guilty of 'an absolute self-delusion' enraged the Sephardi elders. Other causes of friction added to their list of complaints. Chief among these were his management of the Judith Montefiore Theological College, Ramsgate (which was closed in 1896), and his defence of the right of foreign-born Jews not to be conscripted into the British armed forces during the First World War. There was, additionally, a feeling that Gaster had come to put his national profile before his purely parochial obligations. When the Zeppelin raids over London were launched by the Germans, Gaster took refuge in Brighton. This provided the pretext for his dismissal in 1918. But he continued for the next two decades to harry the Anglo-Jewish establishment at every opportunity. On 5 March 1939 Gaster suffered a heart attack while driving with his wife to give a lecture in Reading. He was pronounced dead at The Gables, Appleton, Berkshire, and was buried in the Hendon cemetery of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews, north-west London. 
Gaster's second youngest child, Jacob Gaster (1907-2007), solicitor and communist activist, was born on 6 October 1907 at 193 Maida Vale, London. He spent a year at the London School of Economics before becoming an articled clerk in 1925; he qualified as a solicitor in 1931. A talented speaker and organizer, he joined the Independent Labour Party in 1926 and was active in its revolutionary policy committee. In 1935, following the Comintern's endorsement of the idea of a 'popular front' against fascism, he, along with the other members of the committee, joined the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB). It was through the party that he met his wife, Maire Lynd (1912-1990), daughter of Robert Wilson Lynd, journalist; they married on 7 October 1938 and had two daughters and a son. On the outbreak of the Second World War (and following the Nazi-Soviet pact) Gaster voted against the CPGB's policy of 'revolutionary defeatism' but reluctantly acquiesced in it. After the German invasion of the Soviet Union he volunteered for active service, and joined the Royal Sussex regiment. Injured in training, he spent the remainder of the war in the army education corps. From 1946 to 1949 he was one of two Communist members of London county council. In 1946 he was a member of the CPGB's national Jewish committee, which submitted a memorandum for the Anglo-American commission on the future of Palestine, arguing vehemently against the creation of a Jewish state, proposing instead a Palestinian state with safeguards for the Jewish minority. In 1952 he was a member of the delegation of the International Association of Democratic Lawyers that visited Korea to investigate claims that the USA had engaged in germ warfare. On his return he published a pamphlet, 'I Saw the Truth', that claimed to provide evidence of the use by the Americans of biological weapons. As a solicitor he represented a wide variety of left-wing individuals and causes, from anti-fascists in the 1930s to striking miners in the 1980s; among his clients were Joe Slovo and Tariq Ali. He finally retired in 1990. After the dissolution of the CPGB in 1991 (which he opposed, and regretted) he joined the Socialist Labour Party. He had a reputation of being abrasive and even aggressive, but was a devoted family man. He died at his home, 1 Antrim Road, Belsize Park, London, on 12 March 2007, and was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 98652


Philp, Hugh (1786-1856), golf club maker, was born in the Fife village of Cameron, some four miles from St Andrews, on 19 March 1786, the son of Thomas Philp, an agricultural labourer, and his wife, Helen Shaw, also from a local labouring family. He moved to St Andrews, where he trained as a wright and worked as a home carpenter from premises in Argyle Street. On 23 November 1810 he married Agnes Berwick (died 1860), three years his junior and sister of James Berwick, the local harbour master. They had five daughters and two sons, all of whom were educated at the town's Madras College. 
The links of St Andrews were accessible to all townsfolk and Philp was reported as occasionally playing golf, but his name came to be associated with helping others play rather than any personal prowess. Around 1812 he began to repair golf clubs and, as he gained experience, he moved into making them, using his knowledge of wood and meticulous craftsmanship to change the nature of the product. Golf clubs, like all recreational equipment of the time, were hand-produced, often admired as much for their craftsmanship as for their functionality. Those of Philp combined both beauty and utility. 
Philp is often credited with the development, if not the introduction, of hickory imported from Tennessee for the shafts, which gave much greater flexibility than the old ash ones. But his real claim to fame lay in his long-nose club heads, especially the putters, which were items of craftsmanship, always made out of blackthorn, varnished and polished thirty to forty times to get a gleaming finish. The concave faces were long and narrow with graceful lines and curves but they were also designed for their task as they had perfect balance. Unlike other club makers he fastened the horn on to the club face with pins set at a slightly forward angle so that when the club hit the ground the force of the blow would drive the pegs further in. He also devised a stronger method of fastening the head to the shaft, a combination of a scored and tenon joint. 
In 1819 Philp was appointed club maker to the Society of Golfers at St Andrews, the organization later to become the Royal and Ancient Golf Club. However, golf was not yet popular enough to provide his only income and in the census of 1831 he was listed as a wright. In fact his appointment with the Society of Golfers had lapsed in the late 1820s when his retainer of 2 guineas a year fell victim to the cost-cutting of the financially strapped organization. From then on his official dealings with the society were limited to payments for joinery work when the society's premises were refurbished in the 1830s and for supplying a wheelbarrow for use on the links in 1848. Indeed his main occupation in St Andrews was internal woodworking on local building projects, including Strathtyrum House, the Union Parlour (a clubhouse in St Andrews), and other large building developments. He is also credited with the internal work on the Free Church at St Andrews, of which he was a staunch member. 
Nevertheless the society's members continued to purchase Philp's clubs and his shop at Pilmour Links became a meeting place for golfers who stored their clubs there and for adult caddies awaiting an engagement, both perhaps listening to the golfing stories told with a dry humour by the bespectacled proprietor. His club making business expanded during the 1840s and he employed at least six men to assist him. Among those who learned the art of club making with Philp as mentor was James Wilson, who went on to establish a name in the trade himself. Such was the reputation of Philp's clubs that they were counterfeited even during his lifetime. 
Phil's club making career was ended by the coming of the gutta-percha ball. Throughout his life golf had been played with a ball made from leather stuffed with feathers, which his slim, elegant clubs had been designed for hitting. However in the 1840s a new ball was invented using gutta-percha gum. It was much cheaper than the feathery ball and became the ball of choice for the rest of the nineteenth century. The gutta-percha balls were also harder and Philp's clubs were not robust enough to withstand the impact of striking them. Nearing his seventies, Philp was too set in his ways to change, although Robert Forgan, a relative by marriage whom he took into the business in 1852, was less conservative and experimented with new woods and even metal. 
Philp died from cancer of the oesophagus at Pilmour Links, St Andrews, on 2 April 1856, and was buried in the burial ground at St Andrews. By the time of his death his children had left St Andrews and Forgan took over the business, which he ran until the death of Philp's widow in 1860. Forgan then branched out on his own but continued to make use of the Philp name. Under his innovative leadership the firm developed and by 1895 employed forty men, perhaps the world's largest golf club manufacturer of the time. Many of its products, particularly the putters, were still based on Philp's design, albeit using different materials, and carried the Philp imprint. Philp's traditional clubs continued to be admired -- if not played with -- by connoisseurs, who were said to regard them with the same appreciation as of the work of Stradivarius or the Amati. They were sufficiently collectible items by 1901 to be featured in a special display on golf at the Glasgow International Exhibition. 


@@@@@


doc= 98656


Hetherington, Sir Thomas Chalmers (1926-2007), lawyer and civil servant, was born on 18 September 1926 at 4 Francis Street, Langholm, Dumfriesshire, the elder son and eldest of three children of William Maxwell Hetherington, medical practitioner, and his wife, Alice Mary Cooper, 'nee' Booth. After Rugby School he was commissioned into the Royal Artillery from 1945 to 1948. He enjoyed his army service and remained in the Territorial Army until 1967. In 1948 he entered Christ Church, Oxford, and graduated with a second-class degree in jurisprudence in 1951. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple the following year. On 23 May 1953 he married June Margaret Ann Catliff, a secretary three years his junior, daughter of Frank Ivor Catliff, chartered surveyor. They had four daughters. 
In 1953 Hetherington joined the legal department of the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance. Nine years later he moved to the law officers' department, as part of a small team assisting the attorney-general and solicitor-general in their wide-ranging remit. In 1966 he became legal secretary, that is head of that department. The department's work included significant involvement in criminal prosecutions, many of them of considerable public interest. The experience was to serve him well. In 1970 he was appointed CBE. 
The Treasury solicitor is the most senior government lawyer. Hetherington was his deputy for two years from 1975, with an expectation of assuming the top post when it became vacant. In the event Sir Norman Skelhorn retired unexpectedly as director of public prosecutions in 1977 and Hetherington was appointed his successor. Criminal cases of particular importance or difficulty were reported to the director's department. It was seen as requiring reform to cope more expeditiously and reliably with its increasing caseload. Hetherington had established a reputation in government circles for administrative skills combined with sound legal judgement. On assuming office he took immediate steps to bring the workload under control. The prosecution of offences regulations, detailing the cases to be referred to his office, were rewritten. Greater flexibility was introduced into the reporting mechanism, allowing the submission of abbreviated reports in some cases. At Hetherington's request the home secretary appointed more assistant directors -- the level at which most prosecution decisions were taken. Only cases of the utmost public interest reached Hetherington personally. The prosecution of the Liberal Party leader Jeremy Thorpe for attempted murder, eventually resulting in acquittal, was an early example. He concerned himself, too, in a succession of terrorist and espionage prosecutions and allegations of corruption in the police service. 
At the outset of his tenure Hetherington announced that the invariable response of 'no comment' to media inquiries must change; information that could be given would be given. He maintained the friendly relations with legal journalists formed in the law officers' department. In 1981 he allowed the BBC broad access to the department to prepare a 'Panorama' programme. In 1983 he authorized a 'warts and all' study of the department's workings by the Oxford Centre for Criminological Research. He, his staff, and departmental files were made freely available. The research was influential in the code for crown prosecutors, published in 1986 when the crown prosecution service came into existence. Hetherington's approach to openness, and much else in his style of management, permeated the service during the tenure of each of his several successors. 
After Hetherington's early reforms there followed a several-year period of calm before the storm. He was appointed KCB in 1979. In 1981 the royal commission on criminal procedure, chaired by Sir Cyril Phillips, presented its report. Its most radical recommendation was that locally appointed, independent crown prosecutors should take over the conduct of most prosecutions from the police. A Home Office working party, including Hetherington, was established to advise on the government's response. The working party's report was annexed to a white paper published in October 1983. Instead of the locally based structure advocated by the royal commission the government accepted the working party's recommendation of a national service, with offices throughout England and Wales. The 'Prosecution of Offences Act' 1985 laid the foundations of that service. Conveniently sized areas of England and Wales were each to be headed by a chief crown prosecutor reporting to the director of public prosecutions. The establishment of the crown prosecution service was Hetherington's major preoccupation for the remainder of his term of office. 
There were concerns that a nationally structured service would create an unwieldy bureaucracy, with decisions of any moment concentrated at the service's headquarters in London. These concerns were comprehensively dispelled by the publication in December 1984, during the passage through parliament of the 'Prosecution of Offences Bill', of a white paper reflecting Hetherington's determination that the overwhelming bulk of casework, of all degrees of complexity and gravity, should be handled in local offices. He believed, then and in his earlier senior positions, that if people could demonstrate an appetite and aptitude for responsibility they should have it. Staff found this a motivating stance. Hetherington was a popular first head of the crown prosecution service, despite the burdens created by the initial acute shortages of funding and staff. Through the considerable personal loyalty thus engendered, a service with thirty-one area offices, about ninety branch offices, and several thousand staff could be launched in 1986, remarkably soon after the government announced its proposals three years earlier, and only one year after the enabling legislation was passed. 
During his term as director of public prosecutions Hetherington was a member of the Criminal Law Revision Committee. The reports of the committee underlay various statutes of central importance in the criminal justice field. He wrote of his time as director in 'Prosecution and the Public Interest' (1989). Meanwhile, shortly after his retirement in 1988, he and William Chalmers, his Scottish counterpart, were appointed to inquire into the feasibility of prosecuting persons then resident in the UK for German war crimes in the Second World War. Their report led to the highly contentious 'War Crimes Act' 1991. The advanced ages and infirmity of potential defendants meant that only two prosecutions were practicable. 
Tony Hetherington was a tall man of genial appearance, entirely consistent with his warm and wholly unstuffy personality. He had a lively sense of humour reflected in an infectious chuckle. A journalist said he 'made a well-cut suit look lived in'. Whatever the cares of office, any mention of his four daughters brought a twinkle to his eyes. His private office had standing instructions that calls from his family must be put through immediately, whatever his commitments. He took a genuine interest in the families and concerns of his staff, irrespective of their seniority. He and his wife lived at Lingfield in Surrey throughout their married life. He was much involved in the development of a fine community centre there. In his latter years he suffered from a gradually more debilitating neurological illness. His wife, June, cared for him with total commitment until his death, following a stroke, at Tandridge Heights Memorial Care Home, Oxted, Surrey, on 28 March 2007. 


@@@@@


doc= 98661


Jeger, Lena May, Baroness Jeger (1915-2007), politician and journalist, was born on 19 November 1915 at 14B Northbrook Road, Wood Green, Middlesex, the daughter of Charles Chivers, a sorter for the Post Office, and his wife, (Eugenie) Alice, 'nee' James (died 1965). She attended Southgate county school in Middlesex and went on to study English and French at Birkbeck College, London, during which period she became vice-president of the National Union of Students. She joined the civil service on graduation and her first job in 1936 was at a relatively junior level in the customs and excise department. She then moved to the Ministry of Information and later joined the Foreign Office, where her linguistic skills were recognized and she learned Russian. At the end of the Second World War she became the deputy editor of the newspaper 'British Ally', which was produced for propaganda purposes for circulation in the Soviet Union, and she spent some months in the British embassy in Moscow. 
In 1945 Lena Chivers was elected as a Labour councillor for St Pancras in London and she served in this capacity until 1959, chairing the borough housing committee. Between 1952 and 1955 she was also an elected Labour member of London county council. Her political work brought her into contact with the popular local MP for St Pancras South East, elected in the 1945 general election, Santo Wayburn Jeger (1898-1953). He was a Jewish medical practitioner, a founder of the Socialist Medical Association, a staunch advocate of the new National Health Service, and a well-respected and experienced figure in the Labour Party in London. They were married at St Marylebone register office on 19 March 1948; there were no children. A year later Lena Jeger left the civil service, and from 1951 to 1954 she worked as a journalist on the London staff of the 'Manchester Guardian'. She retained her links to 'The Guardian' (as it was renamed in 1959) for the rest of her life, working for it as a columnist during the period when she was out of parliament, and writing articles for it thereafter when she was a member of the House of Commons and subsequently of the House of Lords. Some of these pieces were portraits of her political colleagues, others were political obituaries. 
Santo Jeger died unexpectedly in 1953 and Lena Jeger was selected as the Labour candidate for the consequent by-election in the marginal constituency of Holborn and St Pancras South (as it had been renamed in 1950). It was widely expected that the seat would be taken by the Conservative candidate but Jeger fought a good campaign, local sentiment in her favour was strong, and she retained the seat for Labour, increasing the majority to 1976 votes. One of her stories from this campaign was often repeated as an example of the problems to be met in canvassing: when Jeger was trying to persuade a constituent from Camden Town who lived at the top of a block of flats of the dangers of German re-armament the woman replied, 'If you can't stop them pissing in our lift, how can you expect me to believe you can stop the Germans re-arming?' ('Camden New Journal', 8 March 2007). 
In the 1955 general election Jeger's majority fell to only 931 votes and in 1959 she lost to the Conservative candidate by 656 votes. Yet her deep identification with the constituency and her local popularity helped her to win back the seat in the general election of 1964 and retain it in four subsequent elections (in 1974 it changed to Camden, Holborn and St Pancras South). She was universally admired for her political courage and honesty and widely liked for her personal warmth and humour. In 1960-61 and from 1968 to 1980 she was a member of the Labour Party's national executive committee, then a more influential body than it subsequently became. 
Jeger was generally perceived as a left-wing Labour MP, a so-called Bevanite in the 1950s. She was personally close to Aneurin Bevan and his wife, Jennie Lee, was a friend of Barbara Castle, and was a devoted neighbour of the socialist thinker and historian R. H. Tawney during his latter years before his death in 1962. She was against British development and possession of nuclear weapons, criticized the Vietnam War, disagreed with restrictions on immigration, and opposed the attempt by Labour governments in the 1960s and 1970s to control the economy by prices and incomes policies and legislation. She was against continued British membership of the EEC in the 1975 referendum on that issue. She also opposed cigarette smoking, and wrote a section of 'Common Sense about Smoking' in 1963, republished in 1965 as a 'Penguin Special'. 
Jeger was a prominent supporter of the reforming legislation of the 1960s that ended capital punishment and legalized homosexuality. A passionate campaigner for the legalization of abortion, she was a sponsor of the 'Abortion Law Reform Act' of 1967. In 1951 she had edited a pamphlet for the National Council for the Unmarried Mother and her Child entitled 'Illegitimate Children and their Parents', which summarized the relevant law and the social support available for one-parent families. On the issue of women's rights she played a role in securing the 'Equal Pay Act' of 1970. She also campaigned successfully against rules that reduced widows' pensions if they worked. She long favoured the separate taxation of married women, a reform eventually introduced by Margaret Thatcher's Conservative administration. Her constituency included a substantial community of Greek Cypriots and she was persuaded by their arguments in favour of self-determination for Cyprus, and for the exclusion of Turkish influence in Cypriot affairs. She became a notable exponent of their cause whose advocacy shaped Labour Party policy on the future of the island. 
As a committed campaigner drawn to some unfashionable and controversial causes Jeger was not considered ministerial material by either of the Labour prime ministers of the 1960s and 1970s, Harold Wilson and James Callaghan. She made her mark in other and sometimes unglamorous ways, not least as the admired chairman in 1969-70 of the government's working party on sewage disposal, which made a good case for increased investment in, and better management of, the disposal of sewage and the improvement of water quality. 
In 1979 Jeger stood down as MP for Camden, Holborn and St Pancras South, which she had made a safe seat for Labour, passing it on to Frank Dobson. She was made a life peer by James Callaghan in his resignation honours in that year. With Labour divided over ideology and personalities after the 1979 election defeat Jeger, as chairman of the Labour Party in 1979-80, had the almost impossible task of chairing the party's annual conference in Blackpool in 1980, where she tried valiantly to prevent the sessions descending into personal attacks and procedural confusion. She was remembered for a characteristic peroration to her opening speech there: 'We have to take the poetry of our ideals and translate it into the prose and policies of everyday life.' 
In the House of Lords Jeger, with a front-bench brief as opposition spokesman on health (1983-6) and also on social security (1983-90), proved an able and fluent defender of the collectivist values she had always believed in. She retired to the back benches of the Lords in 1990. She continued to attend and participate in Lords' debates in the last years of her life, never wavering in her long-held convictions. She died on 26 February 2007 at Ashton House nursing home, Bolnore Road, Haywards Heath, West Sussex, of breast cancer and multi-systems failure. Speaking in the month after her death at a graduation ceremony at Birkbeck College, the historian Eric Hobsbawm paid tribute to her life and social contribution: 'She didn't make millions or have a glittering ministerial career. But she served her cause and the people of London as well as she could. It was a good life, lived by a good person' (Hobsbawm, 'She served her cause'). 


@@@@@


doc= 98662


King, Alexander (1909-2007), chemist, international civil servant, and environmentalist, was born on 26 January 1909 at 5 Battlefield Avenue, Langside, Glasgow, the eldest child of James Mitchell King, a cashier in the Nobel Explosives Company, later a director of ICI, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Dale. He was educated at Albert Road Academy, Pollokshields, and then, after the family had moved to London, at Highgate School and the Royal College of Science (part of Imperial College), London, graduating in chemistry. While an undergraduate he edited the college's literary magazine, 'The Phoenix', and was president of the literary and debating society. He also attended Edith Sitwell's Saturday afternoon salons in Bloomsbury. After graduate research at the University of Munich, in 1932 he was appointed a demonstrator in physical chemistry at Imperial College, where he also pursued research on surface chemistry and emulsification, and wrote three chemistry textbooks. On 27 March 1933 he married, at the Presbyterian church in Falstone, Northumberland, Sarah Maskell Thompson (1909-1999), a talented pianist whom he had met in Munich, daughter of John Charles Read Thompson, solicitor, and niece of the Liberal politician Walter Runciman. They had three daughters. In 1938 King led the Imperial College expedition to Jan Mayen; he received the Gill memorial prize of the Royal Geographical Society in 1938, and served on the society's council from 1939 to 1940. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War King was a senior lecturer in physical chemistry at Imperial College. After a short period investigating sabotage techniques, in 1940 he was recruited as assistant director of scientific research at the Ministry of Supply. One of his tasks was to examine intercepted communications containing scientific information that might be of use to the war effort. One such communication, from the Geigy company in Switzerland to its Manchester subsidiary, contained details of an organochlorine, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), that one of Geigy's chemists, Paul Muller, had identified as an effective moth-balling agent, harmless (as he thought) to humans. King recognized the chemical's potential as an insecticide, particularly against lice and mosquitoes, and its usefulness in limiting the spread of typhus and malaria. Within months he had arranged for the mass production of the chemical, which was later credited with saving thousands of servicemen's lives, particularly in the Far East. (He later expressed regret at the indiscriminate use of DDT as an agricultural pesticide in the post-war period.) In 1942 he was transferred to the Ministry of Production on its formation, as deputy scientific adviser, and then in 1943 was sent to Washington to share knowledge of DDT's properties with the Americans. In Washington he was made head of the British scientific mission, and scientific attache at the British embassy; he was awarded the American medal of freedom in 1946. 
King returned to the UK in 1947 to become secretary of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy and scientific adviser to the lord president of the council, Herbert Morrison, who was charged with the co-ordination of economic planning. He was appointed CBE in 1948. In 1950 he moved to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research as chief scientific officer, in which post he played an important role in deciding which research programmes would be funded by the government. He also served as chairman of the productivity and industrial research committee of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation. 
In 1956 King became an international civil servant, as deputy director of the European Productivity Agency, a semi-autonomous agency within the framework of the OEEC, which aimed to increase industrial and agricultural productivity in western Europe by encouraging the adoption of American technological and managerial techniques. When the OEEC was transformed into the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development in 1961 King became its director (from 1968 director-general) for scientific affairs, again concerned with promoting technological and scientific innovation in order to underpin and sustain economic growth. 
While working at the OECD, which he later described as the 'high tabernacle of economic growth' (King, 293), King became concerned about the long-term social and environmental consequences of the untrammelled pursuit of industrialization. In 1966 he came across the transcript of a speech given in Argentina by the president of Olivetti, Aurelio Peccei, in which Peccei voiced his concerns about population growth, environmental degradation, and the misuse of technology, and predicted (if humanity failed to change its ways) a future of environmental crisis, food shortages, conflicts over energy and other resources, and a catastrophic decline in standards of living. King wrote to Peccei, the two met to discuss their concerns, and in April 1968 they organized a two-day meeting at the Accademia dei Lincei in Rome, bringing together some forty high-ranking scientists, industrialists, politicians, civil servants, and others, to explore future scenarios. The participants agreed to continue to meet regularly, choosing to name their organization the Club of Rome, under which name it was incorporated as a non-profit organization, with permanent headquarters in Switzerland. The club achieved a spectacular success with the publication of 'The Limits to Growth' in 1972, based on research the club had commissioned from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, modelling the impact of future population growth and economic activity on the environment, and making clear the need for a more sustainable approach. Published just before the oil crisis ushered in a period of acute economic turbulence across the developed world, the book sold some twelve million copies in the first few years, and was translated into thirty-seven languages. King developed many of the concerns raised by the Club of Rome in his own writings, which included 'The International Stimulus' (1974), 'The State of the Planet' (1980), and, with Bertrand Schneider, 'The First Global Revolution' (1991). He also travelled indefatigably on behalf of the club, which he served as its second president from 1984 to 1991, following the death of Peccei. 
King retired from the OECD at the age of sixty-five, in 1974. For the next ten years he served as chairman of the International Federation of Institutes of Advanced Study. He was a visiting professor at Brandeis and Montreal universities, an associate fellow of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and an adviser to the government of Ontario. He was awarded honorary doctorates by the National University of Ireland, the Open University, and Strathclyde, Guelph, and Bucharest universities, the Erasmus prize in 1987, and the great medal of Paris in 1998. He was appointed CMG in 1975. 
Both physically and mentally agile, King (known to friends and colleagues as Alex) was described by one obituarist as 'a man of engaging impatience' ('Daily Telegraph', 26 March 2007). Ricardo Diez-Hochleitner, his successor as president of the Club of Rome, described him as 'a peace-searching, wise world citizen', and 'a real humanist because a solid scientist' (King, v). He published an engaging autobiography, 'Let the Cat Turn Round: One Man's Traverse of the Twentieth Century', in 2006. He enjoyed literature and music, but above all liked to keep in touch with global affairs. He kept a flat in London (in Chartwell House, Ladbroke Terrace, Hammersmith) and also a house in Callian, Fayence, Provence. He died at Hammersmith Hospital on 28 February 2007, of sepsis following a urinary tract infection, and was survived by two of his daughters (one having died in a climbing accident in the Swiss Alps). 


@@@@@


doc= 98666


Marshall, Sir Arthur Gregory George (1903-2007), aviator, pilot instructor, and industrialist, was born at Gregory Villa, De Freville Avenue, Chesterton, Cambridge, on 4 December 1903, the eldest of the eight children of David Gregory Marshall (1873-1942), college servant, later steward of the Pitt Club, Cambridge, and independent businessman, and his wife, Maude Edmunds, 'nee' Wing (1879-1931). He was born thirteen days before the Wright brothers' first powered flights. In 1909 his father launched the Brunswick Motor Car Company, initially with two chauffeur-driven cars. In 1914 he renamed the business Marshall's Garage. During the First World War the garage undertook war work and David Marshall ran canteens for the army, Woolwich arsenal, and the Ministry of Munitions; he was appointed MBE for his services. 
Arthur Marshall was educated at the Perse School, Cambridge, Tonbridge School, and Jesus College, Cambridge, where he obtained a first-class degree in engineering. Cambridge became the centre of his life, particularly in his efforts to diversify the economy of the city away from the university-centred structure that his father had known. A Cambridge blue for running, he was selected as a reserve member of the British team (which included Harold Abrahams and Eric Liddell) for the 1924 Olympic games. 
In 1926 Marshall joined his father's garage business. However, he was already an enthusiast for aviation: in 1911 he and his father watched the 'Daily Mail' round Britain air race and in 1912 he carried petrol and oil to the army airship Beta II, which had made a precautionary landing at Cambridge near his father's garage in Jesus Lane (Beta II's engine was repaired in the Marshall workshop). Then came a visit to William Rhodes-Moorhouse's aircraft workshop and hangar at Huntingdon (Rhodes-Moorhouse, later the first airman to be awarded the Victoria Cross, had made several landings on Cambridge Commons near the Marshall garage). After the First World War the family's home on Newmarket Road was renamed Aviation Hall following his father's purchase of a war-surplus Handley Page bomber for $5 and a Bessoneau canvas hangar, in which it was stored in a paddock behind the house. His first flight came in July 1919 as a joy-ride with his father in a Fairey seaplane at Brighton (there were no seat-belts so Marshall stood for part of the flight); his first commercial flight was in August 1922 when he flew to Paris in a Handley Page airliner (wicker seats for the passengers and an open cockpit for the pilots). 
In 1928 Marshall obtained his B (private) pilot licence; the aviation journal 'Flight' reported that his first solo was a 'splendid show' and that the landing was 'a treat to watch' ('Flight', 12 July 1928). In 1929 father and son established the first civilian aerodrome within the city boundaries of Cambridge in a field behind the family home. There they founded the Marshall Flying School with a de Havilland Gipsy Moth biplane and Arthur Marshall as chief instructor. The first three Marshall pupils were Norman de Bruyne (later inventor of the Redux bonding process), Bill Humble (later chief test pilot at Hawker Aircraft) and H. G. Barrington (later a test pilot at de Havilland). Later in the 1930s Peter Masefield was a Marshall pupil. At this time separate Marshall companies were incorporated to run the garage and flying school activities. Marshall qualified for his commercial pilot's licence in March 1930; he was admitted an upper freeman of the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators in 1931 and liveryman in 1958 (at his death he was by far the longest serving member of the guild; in September 2003 he delivered the guild's Sir Frederick Tymms lecture). On 22 April 1931 he married Rosemary Wynford Dimsdale (1908-1988), daughter of Marcus Southwell Dimsdale, fellow of King's College, Cambridge, and granddaughter of the sixth Baron Dimsdale. She was his constant companion and staunchest supporter for the next fifty-seven adventurous and exciting years, as he later described them. They had three children, Michael, David, and Judy. 
In 1936 the family bought land that subsequently formed the core of the Marshall aerodrome, which became Cambridge airport. Marshall was always immensely proud that the aerodrome provided the region with a fully licensed airport at no cost to central or local government. The fully engineered runway, the hangars, and other facilities were also company-funded. In February 1938 the Air Ministry established No. 22 Elementary and Reserve Flying School at Cambridge under the management of Marshall's Flying School, to train Royal Air Force aircrew; the company rapidly established the school's reputation as the country's most productive. In all over 20,000 RAF pilots, instructors, and navigators were trained by Marshall; Johnnie Johnson and Leonard Cheshire were among those who learned to fly with him. Marshall developed a revolutionary programme for training 'ab initio' candidates as pilots and flying instructors; despite initial resistance Marshall persuaded the RAF in 1941 to accept his training method, which subsequently became the basis of RAF training. In 1939 Marshall and his father founded the Cambridge squadron of the Air Defence Cadet Corps, later named 104 (City of Cambridge) squadron, Air Training Corps; he served as chairman of the squadron's civilian committee from 1939 until 1976 despite the pressures of his wartime and post-war business duties, and subsequently wrote its history. 
During the Second World War Marshall was a test pilot for his company's work, which included the repair or modification of more than 5000 military aircraft. The heaviest type in his log-book was the B17 Flying Fortress, and he was always proud of his permit to fly the Typhoon fighter-bomber. During the battle of Britain, by deft management of the production schedules, he ensured that there were always available two overhauled and armed Gladiator fighters so that he, and his chief test pilot, might fly in defence of the airfield. The pair 'scrambled' frequently but were never called upon to engage the enemy; for lack of radio their signal to return to base was seeing the Cambridge buses running again after the all-clear siren. Marshall's management style imbued his workforce with the same 'can-do' spirit. He was appointed chairman of the Marshall companies after the death of his father in 1942. 
In the immediate post-war years the garage business was expanded beyond its original base in Cambridge into a regional business with twenty depots throughout the south-east of England, selling cars and commercial vehicles. Aircraft skills were held together by branching out into building vehicle bodies (including those for buses) as a further diversification of Cambridge's economy and by the maintenance of commercial aircraft; then came the demands of maintaining RAF aircraft for the Berlin airlift in 1948-9. In the cold-war era Marshall supported the RAF's nuclear strike force with work on the Valiant and Canberra bombers and on the Blue Steel missile. Additionally Venom jet fighters were assembled at Cambridge and ejector seats were fitted to Vampire jet training aircraft. The company also became a centre of excellence for the repair and modification of aircraft for major airlines. 
The Marshall company was involved in practically every major post-war British aircraft project including the Concorde supersonic airliner, for which the company designed and built the droop nose and visor (Marshall secured that contract himself within hours of an invitation to join the project; he also secured for his company design authority for the task, the sole delegation of authority for structural design granted to a United Kingdom contractor for Concorde). He then demonstrated a stroke of genius when the Ministry of Defence decided in 1965 to acquire the Lockheed Hercules for the RAF. Recognizing that the Hercules fleet would require technical support, he was successful in persuading the ministry and Lockheed that the Marshall company was ideally qualified. The first Hercules landed at Cambridge in December 1966, marking the start of a continuing Hercules business with the RAF and overseas services. During the Falklands conflict in 1982 he supervised the design and installation of a flight refuelling capability into batches of RAF Hercules; the first aircraft was delivered within three weeks of a telephoned instruction to proceed. The modified type proved vital to the liberation of the islands. After the conflict the Ministry of Defence accepted Marshall's proposal to modify a batch of TriStar airliners into a long-range trooping and air refuelling role for the RAF. 
The first contribution to space travel was made in the 1950s when, under the sponsorship of the National Research Development Corporation, Francis Thomas (Tom) Bacon developed his fuel cell at the Marshall works with the assistance of Marshall staff. Bacon recalled, 'I wanted a practical works atmosphere in which we could get things done... Arthur Marshall is a man who takes instant decisions and, after we had talked about it for a little while, he said 'Yes -- we'll do it.' I am very glad he did' (P. Fairley, 'Project X', 1970, 120). Marshall was always proud that electrical power and drinking water generated by Bacon cells made possible the United States' Apollo programme of lunar exploration. President Nixon acknowledged that, without the cells, 'we wouldn't have gotten to the Moon' (K. R. Williams, 'Francis Thomas Bacon', 'Memoirs FRS', 39, 1994, 13). Space work continued in the 1980s with the design and build of a space sled to investigate space motion sickness on behalf of the European Space Agency. The sled was flown in the space shuttle 'Challenger' for 121 orbits over seven days in 1985. 
Marshall remained an active pilot of the corporate executive jet until 1988, having upgraded his licence ten years earlier. He retired as chairman of the Marshall Group at the end of 1989, when he was succeeded by his son Michael, who had joined the family business in 1955. Retirement was, however, a concept foreign to Marshall. Elected honorary life president by the shareholders, he moved his office to a company-owned farmhouse on the edge of the aerodrome where, seated at his father's old desk, he continued to take a keen interest in the company's well-being and in the fortunes of his wide circle of friends and acquaintances. He was able to devote more time to his charitable activities; he was an active fund-raiser for the Royal Air Force Benevolent Fund and, for many years, he was president of the Cambridge 'chariots of fire' charity run. He was a governor of Cranfield University between 1979 and 1997. 
Marshall was knighted in 1974; it is typical of the man that he chose for his motto the words 'Felix qui laborat' ('Happy is he who works'), for he was known to be in his office even on Christmas day. He had been made an OBE in 1948 and a deputy lieutenant of Cambridgeshire in 1968, and served as high sheriff of Cambridgeshire and the Isle of Ely in 1969-70. He was a member of the Air Cadet Council (1951-9 and 1965-76); chairman of the Aerodrome Owners Association (1964-5); and a member of the Advisory Council on Technology (1967-70). Among many other honours he was made an honorary member of the Royal Air Force Club (1969); an honorary old Cranwellian (1978); a companion of the Royal Aeronautical Society (1980) and of the Air League (1997), which gave him its founders' medal in 2003; an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge (1990) and of the Royal Aeronautical Society (2001); and an honorary freeman of the City of Cambridge (2004). He received honorary doctorates from Cranfield and Cambridge universities (in 1992 and 1996). In 1990 he was awarded the order of Istiqlal, first class, by King Hussein of Jordan (the country's highest award for a non-Jordanian other than a head of state). 
A quiet, unassuming man (but a shrewd businessman whose watchwords were 'price, delivery, quality'), Marshall took his flying club of the 1920s into supersonics and the space age, served his country well in both war and peace, and created an internationally recognized aerospace engineering company, which at the time of his death was one of the largest family-owned companies in the country. He was not active politically but he took pride in a compliment paid him by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher during a factory visit: 'It's men like you who should be running this country, not us politicians' ('The Times', 5 April 2010). Marshall bore with stoicism the frailties of advancing years but he always retained an inquiring mind and unquenchable cheerfulness: he closed his autobiography, 'The Marshall Story: a Century of Wheels and Wings' (1994), with the words that he had been 'a lucky fellow' (p. 360). He died at his home, Horseheath Lodge, Linton, Cambridgeshire, on 16 March 2007, of cerebrovascular disease. He was buried at Horseheath parish church beside his wife, Rosemary; following the committal Tiger Moth training aircraft of the Cambridge Flying Group flew past in salute. A service of thanksgiving for his life was held in 17 hangar, Cambridge airport, his last, and largest, building project at Cambridge. He was survived by his three children. He was commemorated by the Sir Arthur Marshall trophy of the Air Training Corps, established to recognize achievement by individual squadrons. Cambridge University established the Sir Arthur Marshall Institute for Aeronautics in 2001, and in 2009 established the Sir Arthur Marshall chair in sustainable urban design. The Royal Aeronautical Society established a Marshall lecture, and in 2008 unveiled an aeronautical heritage plaque in his honour at Cambridge airport. There are Sir Arthur Marshall memorial rooms at the engineering department and the athletics pavilion at Cambridge University, at Jesus College, Cambridge, and at the Imperial War Museum, Duxford. His running medals are on loan to the Hawks Club, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 98827


Phyllis Doreen Sellick (1911-2007), a talented pianist who specialized in the twentieth-century English and French repertory. She was born on 16 June 1911 at 13 Newbury Road, Newbury Park, Ilford, Essex, the daughter of George Montague Sellick (1871-1933), electrical engineer, and his wife, Rosetta Grace, 'nee' Reynolds (1875-1964), an amateur painter, and studied at the Royal Academy of Music, London, and the Paris Conservatoire. She made her debut at Harrogate in 1933, playing Grieg's piano concerto. She also broadcast live on television, early broadcasts closing with a close-up of her hands playing suitably soporific music. For a few years after their marriage Cyril Smith and Phyllis Sellick continued to pursue independent careers, and during the war Smith toured for the Entertainments National Service Association, often playing several concerts a week. Smith played at the National Gallery lunchtime concerts while continuing to perform the piano concerto repertory with the leading English orchestras, especially the Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra under Malcolm Sargent. Sellick gave the first performance of Michael Tippett's 'Fantasy Sonata' for piano at the Queen Mary Hall, Bloomsbury, in 1938, and of his 'Fantasia on a Theme of Handel' at the Wigmore Hall in 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 99234


Margaret Jean Legum (1933-2007), economist, journalist, and political activist, was born on 8 October 1933 in Pretoria, South Africa, the daughter of Andrew Henry Roberts, civil engineer, and his wife, Margaret (Peggy), 'nee' Mackenzie. Her father was the founder of one of South Africa's largest construction companies, but a greater influence was her mother, a member of Black Sash (the white women's group set up to campaign against apartheid). She was educated at Rhodes University, Grahamstown, South Africa, and Newnham College, Cambridge. She then spent a couple of years lecturing in economics at Rhodes University before returning to England as a research assistant at the London School of Economics. After her marriage she worked briefly for the Fabian Society before becoming a full-time housewife and mother. She returned to work in 1984 for Voluntary Service Overseas, organizing health and social development programmes abroad, mainly in Africa. She was a long-standing member of the Iona Community, and sought to bring a Christian perspective to bear on political and economic questions. After her and her husband's return to South Africa she was a notable supporter of the African National Congress (ANC), but not an uncritical one. She was a founder of the South African New Economics Network, and her most notable book, 'It Doesn't Have to Be Like This' (2002), based on a series of lectures at the University of Cape Town, argued for the introduction of a basic income grant (a policy rejected by the ruling ANC). In 2007 she published a well-received book of poems, 'Learning to Saunter'. She died in Cape Town on 1 November 2007, after surgery for cancer. She was survived by her three daughters, her son David having died in Israel in 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 99433


(Katharine) Jean O'Neill, Lady O'Neill of the Maine (1915-2008), horticulturist, was born on 16 January 1915 at 41 Upper Brook Street, Mayfair, London, the fourth daughter and youngest of five children of (William) Ingham Whitaker (1866-1936), and his wife, Hilda Guilhermina, 'nee' Dundas (1877-1971), daughter of Charles Saunders Melville Dundas, sixth Viscount Melville. She grew up at Pylewell Park, near Lymington, Hampshire, which had been bought by her paternal grandfather with a fortune derived from the import of Marsala wine. Her father, who inherited the estate in 1893, was a keen horticulturist and traveller, who brought back various Asian and Australian plants and created a renowned garden at Pylewell. She was educated at home, but most enjoyed helping the head gardener, and mucking about on a small sailing boat. In 1937 she toured Europe with a friend in a Ford V8, and met Unity Mitford and Joseph Goebbels, neither of whom impressed her. During the Second World War she served as a Voluntary Aid Detachment nurse. After her marriage, as well as bringing up her two young children and acting as a dutiful politician's wife, she cultivated a five acre garden at Glebe House, Ahoghill, near Ballymena, advised the National Trust on the restoration of its gardens at Rowallane, Mount Stewart, and Castle Ward, and served as the first president of the Rose Society of Northern Ireland. On the family's return to the mainland in 1970 she created a new garden of rare plants at Lisle Court (in the grounds of Pylewell Park), many of them collected on her travels, particularly to Australia, where her son had settled. She also researched horticultural history, publishing many articles in 'Country Life', the 'Garden History Journal', and the 'Journal of Natural History'. Her biography of Peter Collinson, the eighteenth-century collector, written jointly with Elizabeth McLean, was published posthumously in 2008. She was a fellow of the Linnean Society and in 2000 was awarded the Veitch memorial medal of the Royal Horticultural Society. Her last expedition, undertaken at the age of eighty-eight, was a two-week excursion down the Amazon. She was a devout Christian and had disliked the sectarian atmosphere of Northern Ireland. She died of a stroke on 15 July 2008 and was survived by her two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99759


Perkins, Geoffrey Howard (1953-2008), comedy writer and radio and television producer, was born on 22 February 1953 at the maternity hospital in Bushey, Hertfordshire, the son of Wilfrid John Perkins, electronic engineer, and his wife, Peggy, 'nee' Patterson, of 1 Manor House Cottages, Elm Park, Stanmore, Middlesex. He first revealed his talent for comedy in the sixth form at Harrow County School for Boys, a grammar school that boasted a particularly gifted year. In his class were Michael Portillo, who became a Conservative cabinet minister, Nigel Sheinwald, who became the UK's ambassador to Washington, Francis Matthews, who became a theatre director under the stage name Matthew Francis, and the future television presenter Clive Anderson, with whom Perkins produced the school's Christmas revue 'Happy Poison'. Perkins won an exhibition to read English at Lincoln College, Oxford, where he joined the Oxford Theatre Group Revue as a writer and director. When he left university his career took a somewhat aberrant turn when he and Portillo, on the advice of the university careers service, took jobs at a Liverpool commercial shipping company, Ocean Transport and Trading. So disruptive were Perkins's continual anarchic comic interjections that a corner of the open-plan office was boxed off to contain him. 
A year later, in 1976, Perkins returned to London to join BBC Radio light entertainment. His potential was immediately evident to his radio trainers. During a quiz programme he devised during training, a long pause was followed by the presenter saying, 'This is a question in two parts. Was this pause by Harold Pinter or Samuel Becket? And the second part is, which line of dialogue preceded it?' (private information, B. Maxwell). Over the next six years he produced more than twenty different programmes and 200 individual shows. He managed to cajole the famously procrastinating Douglas Adams into completing the scripts for 'The Hitch-Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy' (1978 and 1980), turning it into a cult classic. He made creative use of the BBC's Radiophonic Workshop in devising unusual sounds for actors playing aliens. At this time he met his future wife, Lisa Charlotte Braun ('b'. 1951), a studio manager on the series, and daughter of Rudolph Herbert Braun, accountant. They married on 18 January 1986. Their first-born, Jack, died a cot death. They had two more children, Charlotte and Arthur. 
Perkins co-wrote with Angus Deayton the popular 'Radio Active' series (1981-7), a spoof on local radio. It was later turned into television, as 'KYTV' (1990-93), for once putting him in front of the camera as the character Mike Flex. The series won the silver rose of Montreux in 1992. Meanwhile, after a brief stint with Thames TV, Perkins had in 1988 co-founded Hat Trick Productions, whose successes included 'Drop the Dead Donkey' (1990-98), 'Father Ted' (1995-8), and 'Have I Got News for You' (1990-). By now he had acquired a reputation as a brilliant script editor with a meticulous line-by-line approach, and had developed an acute sense of what was or could be made funny. For 'Father Ted', for example, he persuaded the writers to transform their draft mock documentary into a highly successful sitcom. 
In 1995 Perkins was appointed head of comedy at BBC Television to bolster a department criticized for its stale sitcoms. The job enabled him to work with performers and writers who had previously been unavailable to him and he introduced a new generation of edgier, more irreverent series to the corporation's output. Perkins described himself as a 'nurturer' of comedies and comic dramas. He was well aware that past classics like 'Fawlty Towers', 'Only Fools and Horses', and 'One Foot in the Grave' had taken time to be accepted, so he was prepared to stay loyal to shows that didn't make an immediate impact. He was responsible for such popular fare as the 'Harry Enfield' programmes, 'The Fast Show', 'The Thin Blue Line', and 'My Family'. He nurtured performers too, particularly emerging talent like Catherine Tate and Harry Enfield, giving them the confidence to realize their potential. He kept traditionalists happy by continuing such stalwarts as 'Last of the Summer Wine', while ensuring that the scripts remained fresh. He made the occasional error of judgement. He was lukewarm about 'The Royle Family', a sitcom about a northern working-class family of couch potatoes. But the views of the writers Caroline Aherne and Craig Cash prevailed and the series, launched in 1998, became very popular. 
For his outstanding contribution to the industry Perkins was made a fellow of the Royal Television Society in 1999. In 2001 he left the BBC to become an executive producer with Tiger Aspect Productions. In an interview with 'The Independent' in October that year he criticized the BBC's director-general John Birt for hindering the creative process through an obsession with budgets and bureaucracy. His Midas touch continued at Tiger Aspect with such series as 'Gimme Gimme Gimme' (1999-2001), 'The Catherine Tate Show' (2004-6), and another series teaming up Harry Enfield and Paul Whitehouse called simply 'Harry and Paul'. On 29 August 2008, only days before this series was broadcast, he suffered a heart attack before falling under a lorry in London's Marylebone High Street (it was at first thought he had died in a road accident). He was survived by his wife, Lisa, and his children, Charlotte and Arthur. 


@@@@@


doc= 99761


Pippard, Sir (Alfred) Brian (1920-2008), physicist, was born at 41a Penywern Road, Earl's Court, London, on 7 September 1920, the younger son of (Alfred John) Sutton Pippard (1891-1969), civil and aeronautical engineer, and his wife, (Frances Louisa) Olive, 'nee' Field (1892-1964). His father was professor of civil engineering at Bristol University from 1928 to 1933 (he was later professor of civil engineering at Imperial College, London, from 1933 to 1956, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1954). It was in the Bristol area that Pippard received his schooling. After junior school at Westbourne House, Penarth, from 1925 to 1928 and Bristol grammar school until 1930, he attended Clifton College preparatory school. He was then awarded an entrance scholarship to Clifton College, which he attended from 1934 to 1938. 
Pippard had begun learning the piano at the age of five and became an excellent pianist, a passion which remained with him all his life. His teacher at Clifton, Douglas Fox, seriously suggested that he should consider a career in music but he realized his own limitations as a pianist and musician when compared with his contemporary at Clifton, David Willcocks. He thoroughly enjoyed physics and chemistry at school but believed he could not compete with the best students in mathematics. Rumour had it that mastering the new physics of quantum mechanics demanded high mathematical ability and so he considered physical chemistry a more appropriate career choice. He won a minor entrance scholarship to Clare College, Cambridge, and in his first year read physics, chemistry, physiology and mathematics with outstanding academic success. The Second World War broke out in his second year and his tutor informed him that the country did not need chemists but that there was a demand for physicists. Pippard soon found that physics was indeed what he had always wanted to do. In 1941 he graduated with first-class honours in part two of the natural sciences tripos. 
In the spring of 1941 Pippard was interviewed by C. P. Snow to judge his suitability for research in support of the war effort and was assigned to work on radar. The four-year period during which he was employed as a scientific officer at the Radar Research and Development Establishment (from 1941 to 1945) was devoted to mastering and developing microwave radar techniques. Magnetrons and klystrons provided powerful new sources of microwave radiation which, combined with parabolic antennae, provided higher angular resolution than the existing radar arrays, which operated at much longer wavelengths. Pippard made numerous contributions to the development of radar techniques. These four years of war work provided an ideal training in research techniques. Specifically, he developed the discipline of carrying out experimental work with economy and imagination. 
The immediate postwar years provided many opportunities for innovative research. Basic physics had been on hold for six years while a vast array of new experimental capabilities had become available. In 1945 Pippard was awarded a Stokes studentship at Pembroke College and became a member of the Royal Society Mond laboratory, which was the centre of low temperature physics research in Cambridge. He was already familiar with the skin effect, the restriction of microwave fields to a thin surface layer when radio waves are incident on a metallic surface, and began investigations into this phenomenon in superconducting metals (materials which lose all electrical resistance below a transition temperature close to absolute zero). He built microwave resonant circuits of superconducting materials such as tin and mercury and successfully observed a dramatic reduction in microwave absorption when the materials were cooled through their transition temperatures. 
Pippard's doctoral work contained the seeds of two further developments. First, he noticed that he could obtain an unambiguous value for the complex conductivity of his samples. Second, he reaffirmed Heinz London's observation in 1940 that in normal metals the surface resistance did not continue to decrease with falling temperature as the direct current resistance did, but reached a limit. Pippard developed a theory of this 'anomalous skin effect' using a simplified model in which he regarded as 'effective' only those electrons moving at such a small angle to the surface that they remained within the skin depth between scatterings. To develop the theory further, he found he had inadequate mathematical tools and so sought help from Ernst Sondheimer, who formulated the problem more precisely using three-dimensional Fermi statistics and the Boltzmann equation. With the assistance of G. E. H. Reuter, these equations were solved and the full theory of the anomalous skin effect was published, fitting all Pippard's data remarkably closely. An important feature of this work was the understanding that the anomalous skin effect was a 'non-local effect': the current depended not only on the electric field at a particular point, but also on the field at neighbouring points through which the electrons had travelled since last being scattered. 
In 1947 Pippard was appointed a university demonstrator, and returned to Clare College as a research fellow and director of studies in physics. After his doctorate (in 1949) he became interested in the geometry and dynamics of normal-superconducting boundaries, and introduced the idea that their stability was determined by whether the magnetic penetration depth was larger or smaller than a characteristic 'coherence length', which, like the penetration depth, diverged at the transition temperature. A phenomenological theory of superconductivity was proposed by Lev Landau and Vitaly Ginzburg in 1950 and, unknown to Pippard, their theory also contained a coherence length. They had come to similar conclusions about the normal-superconducting interface energy. At about the same time, Pippard (who was appointed a university lecturer in Cambridge in 1950) made two significant new observations on the penetration depth. First, he measured the skin depth of tin alloyed with indium to reduce the electron free path. The alloying not only increased the normal state skin depth as expected, but also increased the superconducting penetration depth. Second, he measured the anisotropy of the penetration depth in pure tin, and found that it varied with surface orientation in a manner that was in conflict with Heinz London's equations of superconductivity, but was very similar in form to the anisotropy of the normal state skin depth, governed by Chambers's non-local equation. 
Pippard drew the bold conclusion that non-local effects were being observed in the supercurrent, and in a celebrated paper of 1953 proposed that the local London relation should be replaced by a non-local equation analogous to Chamber's formula. He solved the penetration depth analysis exactly, the new theory fitting the data remarkably well. In early 1957 Pippard made a short visit to Moscow with a delegation of British scientists, where he encountered Landau, Ginzburg, and Alexey Alexeyevich Abrikosov. Landau strongly rejected Pippard's proposal, partly because the Ginzburg-Landau theory led to no non-locality of the supercurrent. Later that year, John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and John R. Schrieffer published their revolutionary pairing theory of superconductivity and in it they were at pains to demonstrate that their new theory confirmed Pippard's model almost exactly, the coherence length being interpreted as the scale over which pairs of electrons are correlated. The Moscow theorists generously sent Pippard a private message conceding that he had been right; indeed they regarded his brilliant insights as of Nobel prize standing. 
Meanwhile, Pippard's interests had shifted to the Fermi surface, a theoretical three-dimensional boundary in momentum space within which the conduction electrons of a metal were thought to be contained at absolute zero. In 1952 Onsager had interpreted the de Haas-van Alphen effect, the oscillations of the magnetization of metals with applied magnetic field, in terms of the Fermi surface. The shape of this surface determines many of the properties of the metal but there was no experimental determination of its shape for any metal. In 1954 Pippard first showed that in the extreme anomalous limit the surface resistance provides a measure of one component of the curvature of the Fermi surface. By making sufficient observations of the surface resistance in different orientations, the geometry of the Fermi surface in a fairly simple case, such as that of copper, could be determined. He planned to carry out these experiments during the sabbatical year he was about to take in Chicago. In the meantime, through his musical connections, he had met Charlotte Frances Dyer, who was studying calligraphy at the art college. Two years his junior, she was the daughter of Francis Gilbert Dyer, a professional musician. They were married at St Edward's Church, Cambridge, on 2 July 1955, and had three daughters, Corinna ('b'. 1957), Deborah ('b'. 1960), and Eleanor ('b'. 1962). 
After their marriage Brian and Charlotte Pippard left almost immediately for Chicago. Morrel Cohen had arranged for the Institute for the Study of Materials to grow a very large single crystal of copper. The data were taken successfully and Pippard was able to map out the Fermi surface of copper, a widely recognized tour de force. This was the first time any Fermi surface had been measured experimentally. Pippard was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1956, the same year as his return to Cambridge. In 1959 he became a university reader and was awarded the Royal Society's Hughes medal. He was appointed John Humphrey Plummer professor of physics in 1960. Among his first programmes was the development of a magnet laboratory which provided the physicists with very strong steady magnetic fields. The complex subject of magnetoresistance remained a major preoccupation, culminating in his definitive text, 'Magnetoresistance in Metals' (1989). In 1961 his graduate student Brian Josephson developed a new theory of quantum tunnelling between superconductors which subsequently earned him a Nobel prize for physics. 
From 1966 to 1973 Pippard was the first president of the newly founded college, Clare Hall, which offered hospitality to distinguished academic visitors and their families in Cambridge. He was responsible for overseeing the design of the college by the architect Ralph Erskine. He succeeded in making the college an informal and happy home for graduates, visitors, and their families. His humanitarian instincts came to the fore when the college provided a home for Rudi Dutschke, a left-wing German student activist who had been shot by a maverick right-winger after a campaign against him in the German press. 
During the late 1950s Neville Mott had become convinced of the need to move the Cavendish Laboratory to new buildings in west Cambridge, and Pippard quickly became the protagonist in promoting this enterprise. He was deeply involved in all aspects of the planning of the new buildings and successfully oversaw the move of the Cavendish to the new site. In 1971 he was elected Cavendish professor of experimental physics. He was president of the Institute of Physics from 1974 to 1976 and knighted in 1974. During his tenure as head of the physics department, he took a strong interest in the teaching programme. The role of the teaching committee was strengthened and he was proactive in the reform of undergraduate physics teaching. There were some subjects that he abhorred -- four-vectors, operator formalism, and the grand canonical ensemble, to mention but a few. His horror was of mathematical formalism that obscured what he considered to be the underlying physics content. 
When the University of Cambridge offered a generous early retirement package in 1982, Pippard took that opportunity. In retirement, he maintained an active interest in the areas of physics he found absorbing. He investigated in considerable detail the perturbations of the Foucault pendulum and designed and had built a drive and mount that eliminated many of them. His parametrically driven Foucault pendulum was displayed in the Science Museum, London. His books 'The Physics of Vibrations', vol. 2 (1983; he had published a first volume in 1978) and 'Response and Stability' (1985) were published during this period. A major undertaking was his editorship of the three-volume work 'Twentieth-Century Physics' (1995). 
Brian Pippard was a brilliant experimental physicist who made numerous pioneering contributions to condensed matter physics. The particular achievements for which he will be remembered were the first determination of the Fermi surface and his non-local theories of electrical conduction in metals and superconductors. He was capable of great kindness and he was always intellectually stimulating. But he also had an enormous boyish relish in simply being clever. In April 1994 he suffered a serious accident when he was knocked off his bicycle after a walk with his wife at Wandlebury county park. He suffered a mildly fractured skull and a broken shoulder, as well as losing the sight of his left eye. Nevertheless he made an excellent recovery and was soon back playing the piano. He died of a stroke at the Hope Residential and Nursing Care Home, Cambridge, on 21 September 2008, and was survived by his wife, Charlotte, and their three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 99765


Rooke, Sir Denis Eric (1924-2008), engineer and industrialist, was born on 2 April 1924 at 42 Erlanger Road, New Cross, London, the younger son of Frederick George Rooke, printer and commercial traveller, and his wife, Ada Emily, 'nee' Brown. As a very young child he spent four years in and out of Great Ormond Street Hospital, and did not learn to read and write until he was seven. He was educated at Westminster City School and Addey and Stanhope School, New Cross, and in 1944 graduated from University College, London (evacuated to Swansea during the war), with a first-class degree in mechanical engineering. Commissioned into the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in 1944, he served in Britain and India, rising to the rank of major. After demobilization in 1948, he studied for a postgraduate diploma in chemical engineering at University College, London, which was awarded in 1949. On 22 January 1949 he married (Elizabeth) Brenda Evans ('b'. 1922), an investigator providing research services, and daughter of David Daniel Evans, chief clerk of the Miners' Federation, of Ystradgynlais, Brecon; they had one daughter, Diana. 
After a temporary job with the South Metropolitan Gas Company, Rooke was appointed assistant mechanical engineer for the South Eastern Gas Board in 1949, the year of the nationalization of the gas industry, working at the coal tar by-products works in Greenwich; he was appointed deputy manager of the tar works in 1954. The gas industry had been searching for natural gas (methane) since 1952, and in 1957 Rooke was seconded to the North Thames Gas Board to explore the possibility of securing a supply of liquefied natural gas to replace 'town gas', manufactured from coal, which was dirty and smelly. He was invited in 1959 to join the team of technicians sailing on the first voyage of the experimental tanker 'Methane Pioneer', bringing liquefied natural gas across the Atlantic from Louisiana to Britain. The Gas Council set up a development and planning section to be responsible for planning new production and processes and to develop a new integrated supply system, and in 1960 Rooke was appointed development engineer to head the new organization. Following the successful trials of this method of transporting methane, the first natural gas terminal in Britain was built on Canvey Island, and natural gas began to be shipped from the United States and Algeria, and distributed through pipelines to the area gas boards. 
In 1964 methane was discovered under the North Sea, the first licences were issued to oil companies to prospect for North Sea gas, and the Gas Council committed itself to the supply of North Sea gas. Rooke joined the board of the Gas Council in 1966 as member for production and supplies, responsible for exploration and controlling the delivery of gas from the gas fields to the consumer via the area boards. This entailed the design and construction of new onshore terminals on the east coast to receive the gas, and expansion of the gas grid throughout the mainland. The first supplies of gas began coming ashore at Easington in 1967. Over the next ten years Rooke played a leading role in the conversion of every gas appliance in Britain, in 12 million households, as natural gas did not burn satisfactorily in appliances designed to burn manufactured gas, and also oversaw the construction of a national pipeline system. When in 1977 he announced the completion of the appliance conversion programme, he described it as 'perhaps the biggest peacetime operation in the nation's history' ('The Times', 2 Sept 1977). Meanwhile, appointed deputy chairman of the Gas Council in 1972, he was responsible for the reorganization of the distribution network, replacing the twelve area boards with a new regional structure for the British Gas Corporation (BGC), created in 1973. 
Rooke was appointed chairman of the BGC in 1976. In 1979 a Conservative government led by Margaret Thatcher was elected, committed to reforming the nationalized industries (though not yet to their wholesale privatization). One of its first targets was the gas industry, and a few months after the election the government proposed the sale of the oil interests of the BGC. The latter had been building up its interests in North Sea gas exploration, and had developed onshore oilfields, the most important of which was at Wytch Farm, in Dorset, a collaboration with British Petroleum. Rooke, opposed to the break-up of the gas industry, as were many members of his board, also resisted the plan to part with its oilfield interests, continuing to battle with Nigel Lawson, the new secretary of state for energy, despite a government direction in October 1981 to dispose of Wytch Farm for the best price, and doing his best to frustrate the sale: 'The detailed information... had to be supplied by British Gas, and extracting this proved very much more difficult than extracting the gas itself' (Lawson, 214). This sale was concluded in 1984, by which time the government had sold all the other oilfield assets of the BGC. 
Government intervention in fuel-price setting had already attracted Rooke's ire. In 1979 David Howell, the energy secretary, increased the price of domestic gas by ten percentage points more than the rate of inflation for the following three years. These large annual increases were attacked by Rooke in a leaflet which was enclosed with every household bill, blaming the government for the price rise. In 1981 Nigel Lawson took steps to weaken what he called 'Rooke's empire', including the abolition of the BGC's monopoly in the purchase of gas and its resale to industry, which had given it full control of the exploitation of North Sea gas fields and the volumes available to British industry. Lawson regarded Rooke's view that gas was too high quality a fuel to burn in power stations as a 'mystical doctrine', and accused the BGC of refusing to supply to customers of whom Rooke disapproved. The 'Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act' of 1983 enabled oil companies that produced gas as a by-product to supply large customers using the BGC pipeline network. However, Rooke's opposition prevented the sale of the 900 BGC gas showrooms, proposed in 1981. 
After the 1983 general election, when the Conservatives were returned to power with the promise to accelerate privatization, the government turned to privatization of the BGC. Lawson, now chancellor of the exchequer, wanted to break the corporation up into separate regional companies. Rooke could see no case for structural change, and progress was slow. Peter Walker, the new energy secretary, was more sympathetic to Rooke's view that the company should be kept intact. Realizing what a formidable opponent she faced, and anxious to complete the privatization of gas during the life of the parliament, the prime minister agreed to the privatization of the British Gas Corporation as a whole. The 'Gas Act' was passed in July 1986, and British Gas was floated in December 1986 as a regulated monopoly. After the successful 'Tell Sid' campaign to attract small investors, the offer was more than twice oversubscribed, with 4.5 million buying shares in the new company, netting the government $7.7 billion. Rooke remained chairman until his retirement in 1989. Successive subsequent regulatory measures resulted in 1997 in the break-up of British Gas plc into two new companies, Centrica/British Gas and Transco (later National Grid UK), and the opening of the market to competition. 
Rooke, described by Peter Walker as 'the best nationalised industry chairman I met' (Walker, 192), spent his whole career in the gas industry, and played a large part in the switch from manufactured gas to cheap natural gas from the North Sea and the development of a national gas distribution network. Throughout his struggle against privatization he was driven by the conviction that a nationalized gas industry best served the needs of the consumers. He was knighted in 1977, and was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1997. Elected to the Fellowship of Engineering (later the Royal Academy of Engineering) in 1977, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1978 and was awarded the society's Rumford medal in 1986. Described by Nigel Lawson as 'a large, craggy overbearing man' (Lawson, 213), he had a direct and sometimes abrasive manner, and a powerful intellect. He had a strong commitment to engineering education, serving on many boards and advisory committees: he was chairman of the Council for National Academic Awards from 1978 to 1983. As chairman of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851, from 1987 to 1991, he overhauled the commission's award structure with the aim of focusing the awards on the needs of British industry. After his retirement from British Gas he devoted a lot of time and energy to raising the status of the engineering profession, helping to establish both the Fellowship of Engineering and the Worshipful Company of Engineers, which he served as president. He was chancellor of Loughborough University from 1989 to 2003, where a bronze bust (2004) by David Williams-Ellis was unveiled outside the new building named after him. He served as president of the Royal Academy of Engineering from 1986 to 1991 and was awarded its Prince Philip Medal in 1992. Two medals were named after him: the Rooke medal for the public promotion of engineering, awarded by the Royal Academy of Engineering, and the Sir Denis Rooke medal, a lifetime achievement award given by the Institution of Gas Engineers and Managers. Rooke loved listening to music and opera, and was a keen wildflower photographer. He died of cancer on 2 September 2008 in Greenwich and Bexley Cottage Hospice, 185 Bostall Hill, Abbey Wood, London, and was survived by his wife and daughter. A memorial service was held in Southwark Cathedral on 26 November 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99767


Sandberg, Alexander Christer Edward (1923-2008), civil and structural engineer, was born on 31 July 1923 at 3 Cadogan Place, Chelsea, London, the son of Oscar Fridolf Alexander Sandberg (1878/9-1940), civil engineer, and his wife, Audrey Maude Edward, 'nee' Furber (1899-1980). He was born into a Swedish rail engineering dynasty that was established in the 1860s after his grandfather, Christer Peter Sandberg, emigrated to England. The firm flourished for two generations by providing international consultancy services during the golden age of railway engineering. 
Sandberg, usually known as Alec, progressed from Charterhouse School in 1940 to City and Guilds Engineering College, South Kensington, later part of Imperial College, London. In the early part of the Second World War he volunteered to work as an air raid warden and was subsequently involved in firefighting and ambulance driving. Although initially granted deferment from the armed forces for education he eventually joined the Royal Engineers in 1943 and a year later was sent to Burma, where he brought to bear his extensive knowledge of railways to assist in the reconstruction of its rail industry after the war. 
In 1950 Sandberg joined the family firm at a time when its lucrative rail consultancy work had virtually ceased. Appointed senior partner in 1955, he remodelled the firm into a specialist materials testing organization, working closely and profitably with the Ministry of Transport on motorway contracts. On 19 October 1957, at St Michael's Church, Chester Square, Pimlico, London, he married Aline Isobel Duncan ('b'. 1929), daughter of William Edmonstone Duncan, army officer. They had three sons, Michael, Christopher, and Neil. 
Under Sandberg's leadership the practice expanded to a staff of 400 with specialists in specific materials. The firm was able to play a leading role in the aftermath of the box-girder bridge difficulties (caused by the collapse of three bridges in 1970-71) and was able to advise design consultants for the Milford Haven (later Cleddau), Severn, Wye, Erskine, and Humber bridges. Expertise in testing for steel corrosion in reinforced or pre-stressed concrete was also developed about this time. In tandem with this development were additional contracts on suspension bridges, ports, railways, and other civil engineering projects in Hong Kong, China, Thailand, Bahrain, and Dubai. In particular he helped to resolve a dispute between designer and contractor over the quality of concrete used in the Tsing Ma bridge in Hong Kong. He was also much in demand as an expert witness in fraud cases centring around the alleged use of poor-quality concrete. 
Sandberg's forward-looking approach ensured that the firm was always abreast of developments like the property boom of the late 1980s, which included the vast reconstruction of the old dock areas of Canary Wharf and the explosion of refurbishment schemes. He was involved in the restoration of Windsor Castle after the fire of 20 November 1992, Nelson's Column, Eros in Piccadilly, and the Albert Memorial in Hyde Park. 
Sandberg was a founder member of the executive committee of the British group of the International Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering, and helped organize various Henderson symposia at Cambridge University, where his extensive overseas connections helped to recruit knowledgeable engineers from outside the UK to the meetings. He chaired the organizing committees of the colloquia on liability (1984) and rehabilitation and renovation (1987). He was subsequently appointed a member of honour in recognition of his achievements for the committee. In 1998 he was appointed OBE for his services to civil engineering. He was influential as a member and sometime chairman of the organization known colloquially as the French Civils. This was a group of Francophile British engineers who were affiliated to the Conseil National des Ingenieurs et des Scientifiques de France. A man with an irrepressible sense of humour, it is reported that on one occasion he had gone ahead to make arrangements for a visit of the group to France. He arranged for the coach driver to pick him up from the side of the road, posing as a Breton onion seller, complete with striped shirt, onions, and false moustache. 
It was a characteristic of Sandberg that his jokes were usually at his own expense -- rarely did he offend any of his associates or even his opponents. However, those who might be encouraged to take advantage of his easy-going manner could be surprised by his acute sense of business and the depth of his engineering knowledge. Behind his smile was a profound knowledge of his subject, whether it was engineering, contract bridge, or things of the heart. His calm and sensitive humour defused many a tense meeting where tempers were in danger of becoming frayed. Above all, he had the gift of making engineering seem fun. He died at his home, 16 Thames Quay, Chelsea Harbour, London, on 1 August 2008 after a long period of relatively poor health. He was survived by his wife, Aline, and their three sons. His well-attended memorial service was held at St Michael's Church, Chester Square, London, on 2 October 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99776


Thoday, John Marion (1916-2008), radiobiologist and geneticist, was born on 30 August 1916 at 5 Lyme Park, Chinley, Derbyshire, the third of four sons of David Thoday (1883-1964), botanist, and his wife, Mary Gladys, 'nee' Sykes (1884-1943), also a botanist. From the ages of two to six he was brought up in South Africa, where his father was professor of botany at the University of Cape Town; the family then settled in Bangor on his father's appointment as professor of botany at the University College of North Wales. He was educated at Bootham School, York, and then (much influenced by both his parents) read botany at Bangor, where his father was still head of department. In 1939 he graduated with an upper-second-class degree and began research into the effects of neutrons on chromosomes for a PhD at Trinity College, Cambridge, supervised by David Catcheside. His research was interrupted by the Second World War, and from 1941 to 1946 he worked as a photographic intelligence officer in the RAF, in Britain, North Africa, and Italy; he was promoted squadron leader in 1944. He eventually completed his Cambridge PhD in 1948. 
On demobilization in 1946 Thoday found work as a cytologist and radiobiologist at the Mont Vernon Hospital and Radium Institute, at Northwood, Middlesex. His work there with John Read on the biological effects of radiation was highly significant, leading to ground-breaking papers showing, first, that the radiotherapeutic effect of X-rays on tissue growth was largely due to chromosome breakage, and, second, that X-rays are far more effective at causing chromosome breakage in the presence of oxygen. 
In 1947 Thoday was appointed assistant lecturer in cytogenetics at the University of Sheffield. There he introduced teaching of genetics to students of botany and zoology, and in 1954, appointed a senior lecturer, founded and led the university's new department of genetics. By this time his interests had switched from radiobiology to quantitative and evolutionary genetics, and in 1953 he published in the 'Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology' a highly influential theoretical paper, 'Components of Fitness', which underscored the importance of genetic flexibility for evolutionary potential. While at Sheffield he served the university in a number of ways, including as sub-warden of Crewe Hall, secretary of the non-professorial staff association, and secretary then president of the University Philosophical Society. He also, on 4 July 1950, married Doris Joan Rich ('b'. 1923), a sociologist, and daughter of Samuel Rich, draper; they had a daughter, Antonia ('b'. 1954), and a son, Jonathan ('b'. 1961). 
In 1959 Thoday returned to Cambridge as the Arthur Balfour professor of genetics (succeeding the eminent geneticist R. A. Fisher), head of the department of genetics, and fellow of Emmanuel College. Within a few years he had succeeded where his predecessors had failed, in having genetics taught in part one of the natural sciences tripos. He also oversaw two moves of his department, first from its cramped quarters in Storeys Way to a much more spacious site on Milton Road, and then in 1976, following the move of the Cavendish Laboratory, to the central Downing site. 
At Cambridge Thoday continued the work he had started at Sheffield on the mechanisms of genetic variance and evolutionary change, illustrating the ways in which individual species adapt and respond to their environments. Perhaps his most significant work, in collaboration with J. B. Gibson, was on the common fruit fly, 'Drosophila melanogaster'. Thoday and Gibson selected two groups from a single culture of 'Drosophila', differentiated by high and low bristle numbers, finding that, despite the two groups being allowed to interbreed freely, they continued to show significant genetic divergence in subsequent generations when placed in distinctively different environments, albeit within a short distance from each other. This work confirmed the hypothesis of 'disruptive selection' first noticed by Charles Darwin among the finch populations of the Galapagos Islands (with the emergence of two different populations of finches, one with long beaks adapted to retrieving large seeds, and another with small beaks adapted to retrieving small seeds). The accepted wisdom at the time suggested that animal and plant populations could only exhibit sustained genetic differences when they were geographically separated, whereas Thoday's and Gibson's work suggested that species could adapt selectively to different 'niches' within a single locality. Hence genetic separation was not a prerequisite for genetic divergence; indeed, genetic divergence could result from localized environmental factors and could lead in time to the development of separate species. 
A gregarious, ebullient man who enjoyed controversy and the cut-and-thrust of debate, Thoday was also an excellent supervisor and much-loved head of department, who interested himself in his students' research and loved nothing better than to play darts and discuss research problems over a lunchtime pint. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1965, and served as president of the Genetical Society in 1975-8. He retired in 1983 (becoming an emeritus professor at Cambridge and a life fellow of Emmanuel College), but from 1982 to 1988 was active as the chairman of the UK National Committee for Biology. He was devoted to his college, presenting it with two chimeric trees, one a hawthorn core with a layer of medlar, and the other a laburnum core with a layer of creeping broom. A humanist -- 'since I was about sixteen I have found religion makes no sense', he said (John Thoday website, 'funeral service') -- he described his political views as those of an 'old-fashioned liberal' ('The Guardian', 3 Oct 2008). In line with his research, he had no truck with either extreme in the nature versus nurture debate, emphasizing the creative interplay of inheritance and environment. He remained in Cambridge in retirement, and died at his home, 7 Clarkson Road, on 25 August 2008, following a stroke. He was survived by his wife, Doris, an emeritus fellow of Lucy Cavendish College, and their two children. His funeral was held on 16 September and a memorial service was held in Emmanuel College chapel on 22 November 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99778


Thomas, Marjorie Gwendolen (1923-2008), singer, was born on 5 June 1923 at 144 Hastings Street, Sunderland, the daughter of Alfred Evan Thomas, marine engine draughtsman, and his wife, Christina, 'nee' Neish. She moved to Oldham, Lancashire, with her parents at the age of two. Although born in the north-east of England, and brought up on the other side of the Pennines, she was of Welsh and Scottish descent. Her parents were amateur musicians and it was with her mother that she had her first piano lessons before transferring to William Walton's brother Noel. After attending Hulme and Manchester grammar schools for girls, she won a scholarship to study piano at the Royal Manchester College of Music in 1940. But at the beginning of her second term she transferred to singing and was taught by Elsie Thurston, later the teacher of Elisabeth Harewood. After graduating in 1944, she taught at Stockport High School for Girls, where one of her singing students was Joan Bakewell. 
Thomas quickly made an impact in Manchester and soon came to the attention of John Barbirolli, the permanent conductor of the city's Halle Orchestra. A passionate Elgarian, Barbirolli was always on the lookout for young singers who could do justice to Elgar's music. After auditioning for him in 1944, Thomas was engaged to sing Elgar's 'Sea Pictures' at Manchester's Albert Hall under his baton that November. In December 1945 she was invited by Barbirolli's arch-nemesis Sir Thomas Beecham to sing the role of Konchakovna for a broadcast performance of Alexander Borodin's 'Prince Igor' for the BBC. It was during those sessions at the corporation's Maida Vale studios that she met the sound engineer Edwin Robert James Gower (1902-1982), the son of Robert Gower, mechanical engineer, whom she married (following his divorce from Anne, 'nee' Gold) on 5 June 1947. 
Impressed by her performance in Borodin's opera, Beecham asked Thomas to sing a group of songs at his London Delius festival at the Central Hall, Westminster, in 1946, and to sing the contralto part for the second of his three 'Messiah' recordings, which he documented for Columbia in 1947. The next year, she gave birth to her only child, Eileen, before taking a year off singing. Her absence from the concert platform did not harm her career, and in 1950 (retaining her maiden name for professional purposes) she sang the role of Nancy in Benjamin Britten's 'Albert Herring' at the Cheltenham festival and the part of Dryade in Richard Strauss's 'Ariadne auf Naxos' at the Glyndebourne festival, which she revived for the company in 1953, the same year that she sang in Sidney Gilliat's and Frank Launder's film 'The Story of Gilbert and Sullivan', starring Robert Morley and Maurice Evans. 
In 1951 Thomas sang for Sir Malcolm Sargent for the first time. Captivated by her luminous vocal timbre, he engaged her immediately and went on to become her most decisive influence. He regularly used her for performances with the Royal and Huddersfield choral societies, and considered her his ideal interpreter for his orchestration of Brahms's 'Four Serious Songs'. In 1954 he chose her for the part of the Angel for his critically acclaimed EMI recording of 'The Dream of Gerontius' with the Huddersfield Choral Society and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra. She then went on to record with Sargent Handel's 'Messiah' (twice), Mendelssohn's 'Elijah', Vaughan Williams's 'Serenade to Music', and 'The Gondoliers', 'Iolanthe', 'The Mikado', 'The Yeoman of the Guard', 'HMS Pinafore', 'The Pirates of Penzance', and 'Patience' by Gilbert and Sullivan. Of Sargent, she said that 'his interpretations always had such elasticity. He was always prepared to give soloists a great deal of freedom in interpretation and one never felt rushed or dragged back' (Aldous, 54-5), qualities that she considered essential in any conductor. 
In 1953 Thomas sang the roles of the Rhinemaiden Flosshilde and the Valkyrie Rossweisse for Rudolf Kempe's much-praised reading of Wagner's 'Der Ring des Nibelungen' at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden. There, she later sang the part of Magdalene in 'Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg' under Rafael Kubelik, with whom she recorded Mahler's symphony no. 3 with the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra for Deutsche Grammophon in 1967. In 1954 she took part in the English Opera Group's staging of 'The Beggar's Opera' at Sadler's Wells, and the following year she sang at EMI's first stereo session for Bach's cantata no. 6 with the Bach Choir under Reginald Jacques. In 1960 Benjamin Britten invited her to sing Hermia in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' at Aldeburgh, the Holland Festival, and Covent Garden, and in 1963 she represented Britain in a performance of Bach's B minor mass at the Vatican with other international artists to mark the accession of Pope Paul VI. Six years later she sang for the investiture of the prince of Wales at Caernarfon. 
In December 1973 Thomas left the concert hall and the opera house. Fittingly, the last work that she sang publicly was Handel's 'Messiah' with the Huddersfield Choral Society, a performance later described as 'unlikely to be forgotten by those present' ('The Times', 9 Oct 2008). After returning to her alma mater in Manchester as a singing teacher, she was invited by Sir Thomas Armstrong to succeeded Astra Desmond as professor of singing at the Royal Academy of Music, London, where she was later appointed its first head of vocal studies in 1984. She retired from teaching in 1990 but took up a number of hobbies, including gardening, knitting, tapestry, and lace-making. She lived latterly at 121 Coleraine Road, Greenwich, and died in London on 12 September 2008, survived by her daughter. 
Marjorie Thomas was one of Britain's most distinguished twentieth-century singers. At the peak of her career, she worked with many of the world's leading conductors and was often their first choice when engaging contraltos and mezzo-sopranos. Her velvety tone meant that she was ideally suited to oratorio singing and was renowned for her interpretations of the Angel in Elgar's 'Dream of Gerontius' and the alto part in Handel's 'Messiah'. Like her predecessors, Dame Clara Butt and Kathleen Ferrier, she was a role model for many young singers and was celebrated by audiences on both sides of the Atlantic. 


@@@@@


doc= 99787


Wright, Richard William (1943-2008), keyboard player, was born on 28 July 1943 at Brookdale Nursing Home, Hatch End, Middlesex, the son of Robert Charles Wright, a research chemist at Unigate Dairies, and his wife, Daisy, 'nee' Hughes. The family lived in Pinner, Middlesex, where Wright grew up with his two sisters. He was educated at Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School, then a direct grant school in Cricklewood, north-west London. He showed an early aptitude for music, especially jazz, and played a number of instruments including the piano, trumpet, trombone, and guitar. On leaving school he went to the Regent Street Polytechnic to study architecture and met there Roger Waters and Nick Mason. They initially formed a rhythm and blues band, Sigma 6, with Waters on bass, Mason on drums, and Wright on keyboards, and were sometimes joined by a female vocalist, Juliette Sylvia Veronica Cecilia Gale ('b'. 1945), daughter of Harold Gale, motor mechanic. Wright later married her on 7 August 1969. 
Sigma 6 renamed themselves the Architectural Abdabs (also known as the Screaming Abdabs) and went through various changes of personnel, though the trio of Wright, Mason, and Waters remained constant. In 1964 Wright left the Regent Street Polytechnic and enrolled at the London College of Music. In the following year the band was joined by one of Waters's neighbours, Syd Barrett, then a student at the Camberwell School of Art. The resulting quartet first took the name the Tea Set and then the Pink Floyd Sound after the two bluesmen, Pink Anderson and Floyd Council, but Pink Floyd it soon became. They signed for the record company EMI in February 1967. 
Under Barrett's influence Pink Floyd became known around London's new 'underground' scene for their experimental music, innovative use of film, and dramatic light shows. They produced quirky and eccentric songs such as 'Arnold Layne' and 'See Emily Play', their first two singles written by Barrett. Barrett largely wrote their first album, 'The Piper at the Gates of Dawn', released in 1967, as well. But he was increasingly dependent on drugs and went into a mental decline. He was replaced in the following year by a new lead guitarist, David Gilmour. Wright played on Barrett's two single albums released in 1970, 'The Madcap Laughs' and 'Barrett'. 
Pink Floyd's second album, 'A Saucerful of Secrets', released in July 1968, was less whimsical. The extended title track to the album was in the distinctively dreamy and ethereal style that defined the group's music at this stage, arguably their most creative period. Wright's instrumental versatility, training in different styles -- from blues and jazz to classical and avant-garde -- and virtuosity on keyboards and newly emerging synthesizers was a great advantage to a band experimenting with new styles of music, sometimes dubbed 'psychedelic' or 'progressive', and new musical and recording technologies. He was also able to sing lead vocals. Pink Floyd scored three films in this period, itself an innovation in the world of pop music: 'More' (1969), a film by the French director Barbet Schroeder, about heroin addiction; Michelangelo Antonioni's trance-like 'Zabriskie Point' (1970), about the American counter-culture in the 1960s; and Schroeder's 'La Vallee' (1972), about an encounter with the Mapuga tribe in New Guinea, the music for which became the album 'Obscured by Clouds'. 
Before this in 1969 Pink Floyd had released perhaps the most demanding of all their albums, 'Ummagumma'. A double album, one record was of live performances and the other gave half a side to each of the members of the band for studio compositions. Wright's piece entitled 'Sysyphus -- Parts 1-4' was influenced by the music of Karlheinz Stockhausen. In the following year Pink Floyd released their most successful album to date, 'Atom Heart Mother', which was premiered at the Bath Festival and required a full orchestra and choir. Arguably it was on their next album, 'Meddle' (1971), that Wright and the other members of the group made their most notable contribution in co-writing the celebrated piece 'Echoes', which took up the whole of the second side. This was the apotheosis of the Pink Floyd sound. If earlier pieces such as 'Interstellar Overdrive' and 'Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun' had tried to capture the sense of flight and space in deliberately futuristic compositions, 'Echoes' was oceanic and subterranean. Developing from the sound of a sonar, it induced in the listener a sense of floating and drifting before building through a slow crescendo to a sudden, multi-layered electronic climax. The band played 'Echoes' in their 1974 film 'Pink Floyd at Pompeii'. 
A year earlier Pink Floyd had released their most commercially successful album, 'The Dark Side of the Moon', which sold 20 million copies around the world, and was a fixture in the British album chart for six years and in the American chart for more than fourteen. In its focus on money, the rat race, madness -- the dark sides of modern life, in short -- it marked a new phase as the band moved towards the composition of so-called 'concept albums'. Wright wrote or co-wrote a number of the most notable tracks including 'The Great Gig in the Sky', 'Breathe', and 'Us and Them'. His piano-playing was important to the album's most immediately accessible song, 'Money', but as an instrumentalist it was his use of synthesizers on the instrumental 'Any Colour You Like' which was most memorable. Here the many strands and textures of the melody envelop the listener, laying a basis for a powerful guitar solo from Gilmour. 

'Dark Side of the Moon' looked back to the electronic experimentation of the early Pink Floyd sound and forward to a more popular and accessible style favoured by Roger Waters that would ultimately divide the band. Three more albums followed in the later 1970s: 'Wish You Were Here' (1975), which was a tribute to Barrett that included the memorable song 'Shine On You Crazy Diamond'; 'Animals' (1977); and 'The Wall' (1979), a double album which explored modern alienation. By the time of its release, however, Waters and Wright had argued and Wright had left the band. Ostensibly over Wright's cocaine addiction and his late return from a holiday, the division also had personal and artistic roots. Wright played on as a salaried musician, however, which was not to his disadvantage: the vast spectacles that the band provided at each venue when they went on tour with 'The Wall' were so expensive to mount that the three remaining members of Pink Floyd were saddled with a considerable financial loss. 
Eventually the tensions between Wright and Waters were so uncontainable that Wright decided to leave altogether. The last appearance of the classic Pink Floyd line-up was at Earl's Court, London, in July 1981. In 1985 Waters himself split with Mason and Gilmour, allowing Wright to rejoin them in a reconstituted Pink Floyd in 1987. He contributed to the album 'A Momentary Lapse of Reason' in that year and became a full member of the band again in the following year. Two final albums followed: one, in 1992, was the improbable soundtrack to 'La Carrera Panamerica', the Mexican classic car race; the other, in which Wright was very prominent, was the highly successful 'The Division Bell' (1995), for which he co-wrote five songs and provided the lead vocals on 'Wearing the Inside Out'. The four band members came together for a 'Live 8' concert in Hyde Park in July 2005 but this was an unrepeatable event: Wright, for one, did not favour any further collaboration as a group, though he continued to work with Gilmour, contributing to his album 'On an Island' in 2006 and touring with Gilmour in that year. 
Wright released an unsuccessful solo album himself in 1978 under the unpromising title of 'Wet Dream'. From 1983 to 1985 he worked with Dave Harris, who had been a member of the post-punk, new-romantic group Fashion, in a duo called Zee. But their album 'Identity' failed to establish one, or to find an audience. In 1996 he released 'Broken China', a collaboration with Sinead O'Connor and the lyricist Anthony Moore on songs about depression. 
Wright's marriage to Juliette Gale, with whom he had a son and a daughter, James and Gala, was dissolved in 1982. He married his second wife, Franka, a Greek fashion designer, in 1984; they divorced in 1994. On 16 June 1995 he married Mildred Irene (Millie) Hobbs, a writer, and daughter of Carlton David Hobbs, insurance broker. They had a son, Ben, but were later divorced. Wright, who had homes in France and the British Virgin Islands, died of cancer on 15 September 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99789


Zarnecki, Jerzy (1915-2008), art historian, was born on 12 September 1915 at Stara Osota, near Kiev, Ukraine, the third of five children of Zygmunt Zarnecki, civil engineer, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Wolszczan. His father was a convert from Judaism, his mother Catholic. His parents moved to Poland at the Russian revolution and Zarnecki grew up in Rataje, a small village beside the Vistula, where he attended the mathematical gymnasium. He then went on to Cracow University where he obtained his MA degree in 1938 and became junior assistant in the Art History Institute. His career was cut short at the beginning of the Second World War, during which he served in the Polish army in France, where he was taken prisoner in 1940. His escape with the help of forged documents in 1942, his adventures in occupied southern France, internment in Spain, and escape to England make a dramatic narrative. His war service was recognized by the award of the Polish cross of valour and the Croix de Guerre. While still in the Polish army in the UK, taking shelter during an air raid at Regent's Park tube station in 1944, he met Anne Leslie Frith (1923-2009), daughter of John Leslie Frith, actor, whom he married on 22 March the following year and who remained his lifelong support. They had one son and one daughter. 
After the war Zarnecki undertook a PhD degree at the Courtauld Institute under the inspiring supervision of Fritz Saxl, director of the Warburg Institute. Completed in 1950, his dissertation was on the regional schools in English sculpture in the twelfth century, and it set the course of his academic career. In 1945 he had obtained his first employment at the Courtauld as assistant in the Conway Library, the unrivalled photographic archive of medieval art and architecture, and scholars in this field owed much to his photographic campaigns abroad. After ten years as Conway librarian, he joined the teaching staff with the rank of reader in 1959, became deputy director in 1961, and professor in 1963. It was a period of expansion for the institute under Anthony Blunt's directorship and it was Zarnecki who carried the main administrative burden. His diplomatic and managerial skills were much admired and it was widely thought that he would become director when Blunt retired in 1974. But he felt that he wanted to return to more teaching and research and declined to apply. His achievements as scholar and deputy director received recognition from the 1960s: most notably, he was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1968, made a CBE in 1970, and received several honorary doctorates. He was Slade professor of fine art at Oxford in 1960-1 and received the gold medal of the Society of Antiquaries in 1986. His generous help to Polish students and scholars was recognized by the award of several Polish distinctions. 
Zarnecki published a considerable body of work, which was both authoritative and accessible. His two volumes 'English Romanesque Sculpture, 1066-1140' (1951) and 'Later English Romanesque Sculpture, 1140-1210' (1953) are deceptively modest in length and format. They were the first to propose a widely accepted structure of dates and sequence of the main monuments. These general books were followed by detailed studies of 'English Romanesque Lead Sculpture' (1957), 'Early Sculpture at Ely Cathedral' (1958), and 'Romanesque Sculpture at Lincoln Cathedral' (1963; expanded edn, 1988) as well as numerous innovative articles collected in his two-volume 'Studies in Romanesque Sculpture' (1979-92). Of his major publications only 'Gislebertus, Sculptor of Autun' (1961) concentrated on a continental monument. The eleventh century saw the revival of monumental architectural sculpture and most of the surviving sculpture of the period forms an integral part of ecclesiastical buildings. Accordingly, a study of the history of the architectural setting was Zarnecki's first concern, followed by a close analysis of the sculpture itself. Comparisons, particularly with English illuminated manuscripts and continental sculpture, were adduced to fix sources of inspiration, dates, and sequences of development. If stylistic analysis was the main concern, his expertise also covered questions of material, patronage, and iconography. One of his most valued early studies demonstrated that the coronation of the Virgin, an image best known from thirteenth-century French sculpture and mosaics in Roman churches, in fact had its earliest development in England, as seen in a capital of about 1130 from Reading Abbey. 
Shortly after his retirement in 1982 Zarnecki achieved a particular triumph with the Arts Council's magnificent exhibition 'English Romanesque Art' at the Hayward Gallery in 1984. His was the inspiration behind the exhibition, which for the first time brought the subject to a really wide audience. Indeed, although his reputation was that of a specialist, his ability to cover large fields for a more general public was demonstrated as early as 1945 by his brief introduction, 'Polish Art', and more fully with his 'Art and the Medieval World' (1975). His achievements were matched by the warmth of his personality. Immediately striking was the old-world continental charm that remained with him to the end. But the charm was matched by a deep-seated kindness, concern for others, and gift for friendship. He died of broncho-pneumonia at Barnet General Hospital, London, on 8 September 2008, and was buried on 22 September at Golders Green crematorium. His wife died nine months later. They were survived by their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99791


Lumsden, Sir Peter Stark (1829-1918), army officer, was born in Mathura, India, on 9 November 1829, the fourth son in the family of six sons and five daughters of Colonel Thomas Lumsden (1789-1874), Bengal artillery, of Belhelvie Lodge, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Hay (died 11 October 1873), youngest daughter of John Burnett of Elrick, Aberdeenshire. His eldest brother was Sir Henry Burnett (Harry) Lumsden (1821-1896), an officer in the Indian army; his youngest brother, Hugh David Lumsden (1844-1928), became a land surveyor and railway builder in Canada. 
Following an education at the military college of the East India Company at Addiscombe, Lumsden was commissioned into the Bengal infantry on 10 December 1847. Between 1852 and 1856 he saw action on the north-west frontier of India, where he was mentioned in dispatches and received a campaign medal and clasp. In 1857, at the outbreak of the Indian mutiny (in which his younger brother William Henry Lumsden, a lieutenant in the 68th native infantry, was killed in action), he was part of a diplomatic mission to Afghanistan with his eldest brother, but returned to India in May 1858 to take part in the final operations against the mutineers, particularly the pursuit of Tantia Topi, under the command of Sir Hugh Rose. Again, he was mentioned in dispatches and decorated. In 1860 he was quartermaster-general to Sir Robert Napier's second division, which fought in China, and he distinguished himself at Sinho, Tangku (Tanggu), and the Taku (Dagu) forts, and took part in the advance on Peking (Beijing). He was promoted brevet-major in 1863, and awarded a campaign medal with two clasps. On 30 October 1862, at Rawalpindi, he married Mary Margaret (1832/3-1922), daughter of John Marriott of Beechley, Lancashire. 
In 1865 Lumsden took part in the brief campaign against Bhutan and was promoted lieutenant-colonel in August 1866. He then turned to staff work. He served as quartermaster-general in India between 1868 and 1873. He was made a full colonel in March 1870 and became aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria. In 1872 he was appointed resident to Hyderabad, and CB the following year. He was created CSI, served as adjutant-general of India (1874-9), and became the chief of staff of India in September 1879, having been knighted in July. He was also extremely enterprising: when Sir Frederick Roberts led his column on Kandahar during the Second Afghan War (1878-80) he was approached by a foul-smelling fakir, an 'extraordinary looking creature', who claimed to have obtained valuable intelligence on the Afghan forces. Roberts did not realize the fakir was Lumsden, who had been on his own personal reconnaissance in an elaborate disguise with 'decoration of peculiar sanctity... dirt, wig and all'. He was also known for his great physical fitness: recovering from scarlet fever, he was alerted to the presence nearby of a man who was drowning. He asked the crowd if someone would volunteer to rescue the man since he himself was quite ill, but, when no one stepped forward, he plunged in, and, with extraordinary effort, pulled the man to safety. 
Lumsden was promoted major-general in 1881, and in 1883 became a member of the Council of India, where he was thought of as someone with a 'sturdy independence' of mind. In the 1880s the tsarist empire was advancing south through central Asia and closing rapidly on the border of Afghanistan. Britain had pledged itself to 'protect' Afghanistan as part of its buffer zone in the defence of India. However, the ambiguity of the northern Afghan frontier line and the overlapping claims of the Afghans and the Russians caused the British government to accept a Russian offer that the borders of Russian Turkestan and Afghanistan should be settled on the spot by commissioners appointed by each power. In July 1884 Lumsden was selected to lead the British commission in preference to General Roberts, who was thought to be too much the champion of the 'forward policy' in defence of India. It was not a modest organization, consisting of almost 2000 troops and logistical staff. Lumsden's remit was set out by Earl Granville, the foreign secretary, in a Foreign Office dispatch of 25 August 1884, which stated that the government 'in no way desire to control your action... [we] rely on your discretion and judgement' ('The Times', 18 May 1885). 
Lumsden set out from London in September 1884, and was joined in Herat in November by the portion of the British commission from India commanded by Sir West Ridgeway. Throughout the winter the Russians procrastinated about negotiations as they advanced their forces, and Lumsden was frustrated by the lack of progress. Communications with London were difficult, and he complained that he got precious little direction or information from the British government, other than Reuters reports to the Indian press. He believed the Afghans were Britain's allies, and the Russians were already in occupation of lands south of the frontier line agreed in 1873, and so he encouraged the Afghans to defend themselves at Panjdeh, while warning the Russians that any advance would be resisted. When it became obvious the Russians would attack, Lumsden withdrew the bulk of his commission, leaving just two British officers as observers with the Afghans, but he had already exceeded his brief of simply demarcating a border. The Russians overran the Afghan force at Pandjeh (30 March 1885), bringing Britain and Russia to the brink of war. Initially the British government backed the Afghans against Russian aggression, but privately Gladstone criticized Lumsden as a 'dunderhead' who had 'wanted war' (Gladstone to Granville, 18 April 1885, Lumsden memorandum, 17 June 1885, FO). Parliamentary blue books of diplomatic correspondence concerning his mission were published in May 1885, when he was recalled to Britain. His meeting with the Liberal foreign secretary was frosty, though on his arrival in London (5 June 1885) he was greeted by enthusiastic crowds. 
Gladstone's government fell days after Lumsden's return, and when the Conservatives came to power they appointed him GCB (3 July 1885) to signal their appreciation of an officer who had been left in an impossible position. Ridgeway having succeeded him in October 1885 as commissioner for the delimitation of the Afghan frontier, Lumsden remained at the India Office in London, and was promoted lieutenant-general in 1887 and general in 1890. He retired from the Council of India in 1893. As an authority on northern Afghanistan he addressed the Royal Geographical Society in 1885, and on the publication of the autobiography of the amir of Afghanistan, wrote at length to defend the record of the Afghan boundary commission ('The Times', 8 Dec 1900). In 1899 he published, with G. R. Elsmie, a biography of his late elder brother entitled 'Lumsden of the Guides'. 
In retirement Lumsden settled in Scotland, serving as a JP and deputy lieutenant for Aberdeen and Banff, and enjoying 'the pursuits of a country gentleman' ('The Times', 12 Nov 1918). He died at his home, Buchromb, Dufftown, Banffshire, on 9 November 1918. Physically brave and single-minded, Lumsden was a key figure in the Panjdeh incident. He was frustrated that he was denied the government's confidence, but, despite the criticisms of Gladstone and Granville, he managed to avoid embroiling British personnel in a dispute that could easily have led to war. 


@@@@@


doc= 99792


Horsfall, Thomas Coglan (1841-1932), philanthropist, was born in Manchester on 23 May 1841, the only son among the four children of William Horsfall (1806-1871), a Manchester cotton mill owner and latterly vice-chairman of the Manchester and County Bank, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Coglan. His maternal grandfather, Thomas Coglan (died 1841), a Unitarian and Liberal, was a native of Dublin who moved to Liverpool and established a prosperous stocks and share brokering business. His paternal grandfather, George Horsfall (died 1846), a descendant of Yorkshire woollen industry cardmakers, ran Horsfall & Son in Halifax. 
In the 1840s and 1850s Horsfall's family moved from Moss Side and Chorlton upon Medlock, via Rusholme, to Dunham Massey near Altrincham, a trajectory that reflected their increasing wealth and rising status. Horsfall was educated at small private schools in Manchester and Bowdon, the last being that of the young John Meiklejohn, later a leading educationist, who became a lifelong friend and influence. Horsfall went into almost silent partnership in a patent card manufacturing business in the cotton industry with his brother-in-law, Spencer H. Bickham, and his father's former manager, James Naylor, first at Bridgewater Street and by 1873, with Bickham, at Wellington Mill, Pendleton. On 3 January 1878 he married Frances Emma (died 1927), the daughter of Henry Reeves, formerly of the Indian Civil Service; they had a son and three daughters. 
A fluent reader (but not speaker) of French and German, Horsfall travelled extensively on the continent, a habit he had formed from his parents. In 1864 he sailed to Australia. He nurtured an early love of the Lake District through his association in later life with Hardwicke Rawnsley, one of the founders of the National Trust, and John Ruskin, the art and social critic, the most important intellectual influence on his life. The two met, and fruitfully corresponded, though Ruskin never shared Horsfall's faith in urban reform. Horsfall was the most prominent member of the first Ruskin society (Society of the Rose) established in Manchester in 1878. 
Never enjoying robust health, Horsfall took a back seat in the business partnership and formally retired in 1886. Although he lived outside Manchester, at Alderley Edge in the 1880s and from 1889 for over thirty years in Swanscoe Hall, near Macclesfield, his main interests were focused on improving the civic life of Manchester. He was involved in almost every social reform movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, at different times collaborating with the Manchester civic activists Charles Rowley and T. R. Marr. He was honorary secretary of the Association of Working Men's Clubs in Manchester, he campaigned for smoke abatement through the Noxious Vapours Association, for improved dwellings for Manchester's workers, for open space, and for recreational Sundays, and he was an active member of the Manchester and Salford Sanitary Association (founded in 1852). 
An Anglican and a Liberal, and from 1886 a Liberal Unionist, Horsfall was a member of Manchester's Church Reform Union, and wrote pamphlets arguing, in an essentially Ruskinian spirit, that it was the Christian duty of the church to take the lead in providing for the poor. His unique contribution to Manchester life came in the shape of his Art Museum, founded in 1877, but permanently established in the impoverished East End district of Ancoats from 1886. A popular and educational art museum inspired by Ruskin's St George's Museum in Sheffield, its influence was extended by Horsfall to local schoolchildren. He obtained an amendment to the education code, after a meeting of the School Managers' Conference in 1894, that for the first time permitted schoolchildren to visit museums, art galleries, historic buildings, and botanical gardens in school hours as part of their education. His conviction was that through an exposure to, and the appreciation of, beauty in art working people could be saved from the dangers of the pub and the vulgarities of the music hall. The Art Museum's activities were extended to encompass evening classes, musical concerts, poetry recitals, and amateur dramatics. The Art Museum had close affinities with the work of Toynbee Hall in London's Whitechapel, whose founders, the Barnetts, were counted among Horsfall's personal friends. In 1896 Horsfall's museum was amalgamated with the Manchester University settlement, of which he served as president for over twenty years. His contribution to Manchester's civic life was recognized in 1902 when he was made an honorary MA of the Victoria University. 
From the early twentieth century Horsfall, who had grown frustrated by the haphazard nature of voluntary schemes for improvement, became significant nationally as the leading British exponent of German approaches to town planning. His admiration of German culture stemmed from a close early attachment to his uncle by marriage Tobias Theodores (1808-1886), a scholar of Prussian extraction who was professor of oriental and modern languages at Owens College and warden of the Reform synagogue at Manchester. Horsfall advanced the merits of mandatory municipal controls, physical discipline, compulsory military training, continuation classes, and the sharing of civic space by all classes. Increasingly linking urban division to the deteriorating health and character of the British poor, his promotion of German solutions to the achievement of the ideal city drew the attention of influential figures to the merits of town planning, among them Raymond Unwin. Horsfall wrote in 'The Improvement of the Dwellings and Surroundings of the People' (1904): 'The German towns contain a much larger proportion of tall, well-developed men and women than do the English towns, and in no large German towns is it possible to find such masses of undersized, ill-developed and sickly-looking people as are to be found in the poorer districts of London, Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham and all other large British towns. (p. 161)' During the First World War, which claimed his son, (Henry) Frank, and a son-in-law, Horsfall became isolated from the German friends and ideas that had inspired him. By 1919 the level of his personal philanthropy had grown to include 187 donations and subscriptions to different charities and institutions, and he particularly advocated musical education. Old age, reduced circumstances, increasing deafness, and general debility brought about his retirement from public life and his settlement from 1921 or 1922 in Ridgeways, a recently built house in Wellingtonia Avenue, Finchampstead, Berkshire, where his wife died in 1927. Horsfall died on 31 January 1932 at Toutley Hall, Winnersh, Berkshire, the home of the eldest of his three daughters. He and his wife were buried at nearby St James's Church, Finchampstead, where their grave is marked by a mounted stone cross. 
Horsfall felt frustrated in his final years that he had not achieved the extent of reform in civic life that he had sought, his advocacy of compulsion essentially going against the grain of British culture. Inspired partly by William Morris (whom he met and with whom he corresponded), but particularly by Ruskin, Horsfall pioneered a range of social improvements in Manchester, most of them centred on his Art Museum. More generally he helped to inspire and influence British educational reformers and the founding town planners of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 99794


Calder, Angus Lindsay Ritchie (1942-2008), historian and literary critic, was born at Cedar Court Nursing Home, Sutton, Surrey, on 5 February 1942, the second son and third of the five children of Peter Ritchie Calder, later Baron Ritchie-Calder (1906-1982), journalist and author, and his wife, Mabel Jane Forbes, 'nee' McKail (1906-2001). Educated at Wallington county grammar school and King's College, Cambridge, where he read English literature, he was active in student politics and, like his father, a socialist and supporter of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. On 1 October 1963 he married Jennifer Rachel (Jenni) Daiches ('b'. 1941), historian and literary scholar, and daughter of the literary historian David Daiches. They lived at first in London, where Calder completed a PhD thesis on the wartime Common Wealth Party under the supervision of Asa Briggs at the University of Sussex. He was also at work on 'The People's War: Britain, 1939-1945' (1969), a prodigiously researched narrative that challenged conventional accounts of unity and solidarity on the home front. 
Published to widespread acclaim, 'The People's War' would have guaranteed Calder a full-time academic career if he had wanted one. He opted instead for the life of a freelance, living off the proceeds of literary work and occasional teaching jobs. After three years (1968-71) during which he and Jenni taught at the University of Nairobi, they set up home in Edinburgh with their children, a boy and two girls. In 1979 Calder was appointed staff tutor in arts at the Open University in Scotland, a role well suited to his romantic socialist convictions. An inspirational tutor and lecturer, he journeyed far and wide meeting tutors and students, but took early retirement in 1993 with the title of reader in cultural studies. 'It seems clear to me', he wrote in 2003, 'that every child should be encouraged to deviate as far as possible from careerist norms' ('Gods, Mongrels and Demons', 4). 
In 1971 Calder embarked on another 'magnum opus', a one-volume history of the British empire. It soon expanded into a proposal for three volumes, of which the first, 'Revolutionary Empire: the Rise of the English-speaking Empires from the 15th Century to the 1780s', was published in 1981. A dazzling blend of stupendous research, narrative art, and provocative argument, enriched by his own travels to parts of the former empire, it was probably his most important book, but the response was appreciative rather than enthusiastic: imperial topics lacked the emotional resonance of the home front. Having twice climbed an academic Everest, Calder may perhaps have lacked the stamina for another ascent. At any rate the second and third volumes never appeared and his writing increasingly took the form of essays and shorter works. 
History was only ever one component of Calder's literary life. A prominent literary critic, editor, and commentator, he wrote a history of Russian fiction from Pushkin to Chekhov, a study of Byron and Scotland, and luminous introductions to classics by Sir Walter Scott, Charles Dickens, and Evelyn Waugh. An enthusiast for the post-colonial literature of Africa and the Caribbean, he co-edited the 'Journal of Commonwealth Literature' from 1981 to 1987. The Scottish strands in his work, always present, multiplied in response to the cultural debates stimulated by the rise of nationalism. He co-edited three volumes of the uncollected writings of Hugh MacDiarmid and published two collections of essays on the myths and realities of Scottishness: 'Revolving Culture: Notes from the Scottish Republic' (1994) and 'Scotlands of the Mind' (2002). Politically he described himself as a 'socialist home ruler' ('Revolving Culture', vii). 
Calder was contemptuous of Thatcherite values but generous in the range of his sympathy for individuals, which transcended ideology. Rebels, romantics, and oddballs all commanded his interest and admiration. Intellectually he towered above most of his contemporaries but his modesty was genuine. In his own estimation he probably never matched up to the exacting standards he set himself. Nor was he entirely confident of his identity as a Scot or his credentials as a man of the people. In 'The Myth of the Blitz' (1990) he revised 'The People's War' by deconstructing what he saw as an English national myth of 1940. In a sense the book was an apology for his English upbringing and accent and relatively privileged background. 'All your life', wrote his friend Joy Hendry, 'you longed to wrench the shining spoon of privilege from your mouth... to know the sweat and strain of workers in the fields and factories and to sing the songs in their hearts' (Berengarten and Calder, 51). 
Calder suffered bouts of depression which he relieved with alcohol, cigarettes, and the camaraderie of the pub. His growing dependence on drink contributed to the break-up of his first marriage in 1982. On 19 December 1986 he married Catherine Janet (Kate) Kyle, 'nee' Young ('b'. 1949), a schoolteacher, and daughter of William Young, a scientific and technical officer in the Ministry of Defence. They had one son. Eventually, however, his second marriage also broke up and Calder opted for a bohemian existence in a city centre flat whence he could sally forth to the theatres, bookshops, and howffs of Tollcross. Sadly his descent into alcoholism continued and plunged him into predicaments from which he had to be rescued by long-suffering friends, but something of his old creativity remained. 
Ever since Cambridge Calder had written and published occasional verse, and he was one of the prime movers in the establishment of the Scottish Poetry Library in 1984. Poetry was his spiritual home: in the company of his fellow 'makars', with a bottle of malt whisky to hand, he was halfway to paradise. The publication in 1997 of a collection of his poems, 'Waking in Waikato', marked a late flowering in the course of which he published another four volumes of verse. 'Horace in Tollcross' (2000), an updating of the 'Odes' of Horace, gave enduring expression to his caustic wit, his most tender feelings, and his reaffirmation of life in the shadow of his approaching death. In 2007 he suffered a loss of short-term memory and in 2008 he was diagnosed with lung cancer and transferred to the Elsie Inglis Nursing Home in Spring Gardens, Edinburgh. 'It's been a helter-skelter existence', he told one of his visitors, 'and mainly my own fault' (private information). He died in the nursing home on 5 June 2008 and was survived by his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99795


Caminer, David Tresman (1915-2008), computing systems engineer, was born David Solomon Treisman on 26 June 1915 in Hackney, London, the only son of Henry Jacob (Jack) Treisman (1892-1918), tailor, and his wife, Rachel (Raie), 'nee' Simmons (1891-1982), milliner. Following his mother's remarriage, to Felix Caminer in 1921, his name was altered to David Tresman Caminer. His mother subsequently gave birth to a daughter, Adele. The Treisman family had arrived in London in the late nineteenth century as refugees from anti-Semitic pogroms in Lithuania. Having married Raie in 1914, Jack Treisman was called up to serve as a soldier and was killed in the trenches in the final year of the First World War. 
Caminer spent his childhood in Fulham, south-west London. He attended Sloane School, but was so engaged with socialism and anti-fascism that he gave little thought to his future career. He failed the scholarship examination for Cambridge University through lack of preparation, which caused him some regret at the time. His parents arranged for an interview with the catering company J. Lyons & Co, best known for its 250-branch national teashop chain and Corner House restaurants in London. In 1936 he began as a trainee in management accounts at the Cadby Hall headquarters in Hammersmith, work that suited his fine, analytical mind. He was called up on the outbreak of the Second World War and served in an infantry regiment, the Green Howards. In 1943 he lost his right leg at the battle of Mareth in Tunisia. Invalided out of the army, he returned to Lyons in 1944 and assumed responsibility for the systems research office, which had been set up in the 1930s to increase the efficiency of accounting and other clerical operations. On 22 July the following year, at Wembley town hall, he married Joyce Jacqueline (Jackie) Lewis ('b'. 1922), daughter of Leonard Lewis, company director. They settled in Richmond and had two daughters and a son; Jackie later became a schoolteacher. 
In 1947, led by its chief accountant, John Simmons, Lyons began to think about using a computer to carry out clerical work. From 1949 its own engineers built the Lyons electronic office (LEO), based on the Cambridge EDSAC (electronic delay storage automatic calculator). Caminer's office assessed the systems supporting the Lyons businesses and drew up specifications to convert them from manual to computer operation. He insisted that a system should be meticulously analysed through flow charts before a job was programmed; every program was checked and rechecked long before it reached the computer. 'David... saw immediately that the computer could do more than copy what was being done in offices by clerks', wrote one of his colleagues; 'With proper design, the computer could be used to support management activities and improve the way the company was run' ('The Guardian', 11 July 2008). From November 1951 LEO ran a weekly costing of the materials that went into the bread and cakes at Lyons' twelve bakeries. It was the first computerized, regularly scheduled office job in the world. Gradually Lyons brought its payroll onto the computer, together with an ordering and distribution system for the teashops. Caminer and his team took note of everything from the multiple written orders submitted by teashop manageresses to the pre-dawn loading of the vans in the yard at Cadby Hall, and came up with a system that incorporated daily 'online' updates by telephone. 
In 1954 Lyons established a computer manufacturing subsidiary, Leo Computers Ltd, to sell machines and expertise to other companies. Caminer led the systems side of the business, joining the board as head of marketing in 1959. The Leo team designed each system to meet the needs of its user. While this led to many satisfied customers, the level of available investment never kept pace with the costs. In 1963 Leo Computers was merged with the computer interests of English Electric and in 1968 absorbed into International Computers Ltd (ICL). In the following decade Caminer supervised the successful development and installation of the computer and communications network for the European Community. 
Caminer was one of the first to recognize that computers were not just tools for scientists, but part of a technological revolution that would change all our lives. On retiring in 1980 he was appointed OBE 'for services to British commercial interests in Luxembourg'. In his retirement he co-edited 'LEO: the Incredible Story of the World's First Business Computer' (1998) and organized a conference at London's Guildhall in 2001 to mark fifty years of business computing. In his address to the conference he observed that had the Leo pioneers' concern for error-free programming and the user's perspective survived into the modern era, many expensive failures might have been avoided. He received an honorary doctorate from Middlesex University in 2006. 
To his colleagues Caminer was a man driven by the demands of his work, but he led a very full life outside Cadby Hall. He was proud of his Jewish heritage; he retained a passionate belief in social justice, and chaired his local branch of the Labour Party. Having visited South Africa on business in the early 1960s, he became a staunch campaigner against apartheid and invited Desmond Tutu to visit Richmond. There he arranged for local schoolchildren to greet their visitor with what was then the African liberation anthem, 'Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika'. Although his injury put an end to his active involvement in sport, he was a supporter of Chelsea Football Club and a member of the MCC, and also followed rugby and athletics. He and his wife loved travel, theatre, and music, especially opera. Poor health clouded his final years as his kidneys failed but, indomitable as ever, he submitted to twice-weekly dialysis and lobbied successfully for a new unit for kidney patients in his area. He died of end-stage kidney failure at his home, 9 Parkgate Gardens, East Sheen, Richmond upon Thames, on 19 June 2008, and was cremated at Golders Green on 24 June 2008. He was survived by his wife, Jackie, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99798


Cary, Tristram Ogilvie (1925-2008), composer, was born at 12 Parks Road, Oxford, on 14 May 1925, the third of the four sons of (Arthur) Joyce Lunel Cary (1888-1957), author, and his wife, Gertrude Margaret, 'nee' Ogilvie (1891-1949). His eldest brother was Sir (Arthur Lucius) Michael Cary (1917-1976), civil servant. The family home was at 12 Parks Road, Oxford. His early interest in music was encouraged by his mother and he was already composing and playing the piano as a pupil at the Dragon School in Oxford. He attended Westminster School, London, where he was a king's scholar. His developing interest in technology and engineering saw him go up to Christ Church, Oxford, as an exhibitioner to study science. His studies were interrupted in 1943 when aged seventeen he volunteered, joining the Royal Navy where after further technical training he became involved in the development and testing of specialized ship-borne radar. It was at this point that his two passions, music and technology, started to come together. He saw the potential of the tape recorder, being developed in Germany, as a tool for manipulating natural sounds, and also the possibility of using pure electronic tone as a musical source. 
On demobilization in 1946, Cary returned to Oxford and then enrolled at Trinity College of Music in London, where he studied composition. Always practical and imaginative, he constructed his first rudimentary electronic music studio using redundant military equipment, a 78 rpm disc cutter, and a very basic tape recorder. All this came with him when, on 7 July 1951, he married Doris Enid (Dorse) Jukes ('b'. 1922), artist, and daughter of Joseph William Jukes, and moved to a house in Nevern Road, Earls Court. They had three children, John ('b'. 1952), Robert ('b'. 1955), and Charlotte ('b'. 1960). 
Cary's early compositions were not solely in the rarefied world of electronics. He wrote a series of chamber works; 'Partita' for piano was given its premiere at the Wigmore Hall in 1949. As with many new graduates he supplemented his income by taking teaching jobs. It was at this time that he was approached by the film director Alexander Mackendrick who asked him to write the incidental music for 'The Ladykillers' (1955). This was a turning point in his career as it led to more film commissions and to work in the theatre, television, and radio. The financial rewards that came with his success enabled him to buy a cottage in Fressingfield, Suffolk, where he moved in 1963 and where he constructed a new studio. As a professional composer with a family to support he now had to find a balance between working on commissions for the media and writing music for concert performance. He was not alone among composers in finding this balance sometimes difficult to achieve. 
Cary continued to create electronic music, gradually improving the equipment in his studio. 'Solfeggio' for tape (1959) was the first of many concert pieces to be performed in this medium. He began to have opportunities to introduce electronic music into many of his scores for the media, notably in 'Dr Who' (1963) for BBC Television, and the film 'Quatermass and the Pit' (1967). This helped to bring electronic music to the notice of a wider public but the natural conservatism of the average listener often led to controversy. Over the next few years he created several concert pieces scored for conventional instruments playing alongside tapes such as 'Narcissus' (1968), for flute and two tape recorders. 
In 1967 Cary founded the electronic music studio at the Royal College of Music. His search for new ways to create electronic music led, in 1969, to a collaboration with the composer Peter Zinovieff and the inventor David Cockerell. Together they created the EMS line of synthesizers, the VCS3 being the best known (used, for instance, by Pink Floyd on their album of 1973, 'The Dark Side of the Moon'). It was his affinity with the EMS Synthi 100 that led to his first visit to Australia when, in 1973, Melbourne University invited him to spend a term working as visiting composer in their newly opened electronic music studio. He then joined the music department of Adelaide University, where he was to stay for twelve years. This move to academic life in Australia was a significant milestone in his life. He was able to free himself from the financial and professional pressures that until then had dogged him despite his successes. In 1986 he became a full-time composer once again; he took Australian citizenship and in 1991 received the medal of the Order of Australia for his services to Australian music. His first marriage had been dissolved in 1978 and in the early 1980s he began a relationship with Jane Delin; they married in 2003. He died in Adelaide on 24 April 2008 of cancer. A memorial plaque at the Royal College of Music describes him as 'The Father of British Electronic Music'. 


@@@@@


doc= 99800


Chadwick, Henry (1920-2008), theologian and church historian, was born on 23 June 1920 at St Andrews, Oaklands Road, Bromley, Kent, the third of four sons and the fourth of six children of John Chadwick, barrister, and his wife, Edith Mary, 'nee' Horrocks, a gifted musician. The four sons all became men of distinction: Sir John Chadwick (1911-1987) as a diplomat, (William) Owen Chadwick ('b'. 1916) as a church historian (he was appointed KBE in 1982 but, like Henry himself, was an ordained clergyman and so did not use the title), and Martin Chadwick (1927-1998) as a churchman. 
Henry Chadwick was a king's scholar at Eton College (1933-8), from where he won a music scholarship to Magdalene College, Cambridge. He was said to have been sent into the organ loft at Eton to study with the school's famous teacher, Henry Ley, because his Greek was considered weak. However, throughout his long career his patristic Greek and Latin left nothing to be desired. In Cambridge his reputation as a virtuoso keyboard player was quickly established. In his very first term Boris Ord of King's College, whom Chadwick described as then the greatest influence on him, summoned him one evening to entertain his dinner guests with Chabrier's arrangement of his 'Espana' for two pianos. Chadwick had to read his extremely difficult part at sight. Patrick Hadley, professor of music, turned the pages for him, at every turn thumping him in the back, shouting 'Bravo!' (Darlington, 2). He retained his musical brilliance into old age, and saw music as giving to his whole life a vital sense of elevation, 'a ladder of ascent' as he called it in a sermon preached in the chapel of King's College, Cambridge, in 1991 (ibid., 3). In 1995 he gave a lecture at Oxford of astonishing range and insight on the power of music. 
After obtaining the MusB in 1941 Chadwick turned to the study of theology, mainly because as a committed evangelical Christian he felt a vocation to the church's ministry. One of the relatively hidden aspects of his personality was his pastoral gift, as would be revealed by his many letters of encouragement and compassion to diverse individuals. Studying at Ridley Hall, Cambridge, he was ordained deacon in 1943 and priest in 1944. He held a harrowing curacy in south Croydon (1943-5), which suffered much German bombing. On 24 August 1945, at Holy Trinity Church, Brompton, he married Margaret Elizabeth (Peggy) Brownrigg, a talented singer who sometimes maintained that she had married her accompanist. The daughter of William Pemell Brownrigg, she was later a secondary school teacher. The marriage was a long and happy one; to each of their three daughters (Priscilla, Hilary, and Juliet) Chadwick dedicated one of his books. His wife was always a vital support to Chadwick, watcher over his well-being, co-host in his generous hospitality, proof-reader of his books, and insister on clarity in his sermons and scholarly writings. Chadwick was a prodigious accumulator of books, but he could not always find them. Peggy usually could. 
After a few months as assistant master at Wellington College, Chadwick was from 1946 to 1958 fellow and chaplain of Queens' College, Cambridge. His lectures there showed him to be a born communicator; each would end with a cliff-hanger -- some exciting question or problem for the following week. Published in 1953, his monumental work on Origen's 'Contra Celsum' placed him at once in the front rank of patristic scholars. This work was remarkable for its fine translation and 'succinct introduction and notes, which reveal a great deal about the engagement between the Christian apologist and the Greek philosophical heritage' ('SBL Forum'). Chadwick always loved footnotes and excelled in the art of composing them. Other early works included 'Alexandrian Christianity' (with J. E. L. Oulton, 1954), 'Lessing's Theological Writings' (1956), and 'The Sentences of Sextus' (1959). Chadwick was also editor of the important 'Journal of Theological Studies' from 1954 to 1985, and contributed many of its most distinguished book reviews. 
Early in 1959 Chadwick became regius professor of divinity at Oxford and a canon of Christ Church. In 1966 appeared a book of massive erudition and clear judgement, 'Early Christian Thought and the Classical Tradition', on how, in the second and third centuries, Christianity defined itself and gained credibility in its own eyes by its relation to Greek philosophy. Thus the book followed up his interest in 'Contra Celsum'. With a mastery of Platonism and neo-Platonism, it related the kind of paradox in which Chadwick delighted: the harsher the words about Greek philosophy of Justin, Clement, and Origen became, the more deeply impregnated with Platonism was their actual theology. Earlier, in 1961, he had given a paper at a major classical conference in Oxford on the same subject. Its preparation was to him 'a nightmare': 'I sat up working at the wretched thing each night and somehow it wouldn't go' (letter to Peggy Chadwick, 11 Aug 1961, priv. coll.). However effortless the end product looked, Chadwick's scholarship always involved struggle. The paper was in fact a success, and Arnaldo Momigliano, as chairman, said that it marked a change of emphasis in classical studies that for the first time their conference was addressed by a professor of divinity. In 1967 Chadwick's brilliant and much reprinted survey, 'The Early Church', was published in the 'Pelican History of the Church'. 
In 1969 Chadwick became dean of Christ Church, Oxford. As such he was both the head of a college and the dean of a cathedral, a demanding position. Emollient, ready to see all sides of an argument, reluctant to say no, he could hardly feel entirely comfortable in the role. His days were filled with often none-too-calm meetings, and with committees and administration, which by no means always played to his gifts, let alone to his inclinations. He felt for Augustine, who 'wanted to be a monk rather than a busy town pastor constantly beset by unreasonable people' (Chadwick, 'Augustine', 1986, 58). To his (eminently reasonable) colleague Peter Oppenheimer, who once offered him a cup of coffee after lunch, he replied soulfully, 'Ah! My dear Peter, it might keep me awake during Hebdomadal Council!' (private information). But if it came to a great occasion in the college or the university, whether at the lectern or in the pulpit of the cathedral, he displayed a clarity of utterance and dignity of bearing which, together with his pre-eminent scholarship, were the pride of his colleagues. He thought that he would never be able to write a book while dean, but by rising exceptionally early, and working on it for three hours before the morning office in the cathedral, he wrote a highly original one on the Spaniard 'Priscillian of Avila' (1976), defending with verve Priscillian's orthodoxy against his enemies. He relished conflict of this kind in a past age, as much as he hated it around him. 
During his deanship fell the greatest part of Chadwick's work in the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission (ARCIC), of which he was a member from 1969 to 1981 and again from 1983 to 1990, and on which he was the leading figure. Here his emollience became a positive virtue, and his scholarship was massively deployed. In the ARCIC statement 'Salvation and the Church' (1976), for instance, a range of the writings of Augustine of Hippo, as of the early Anglican divines on whom Chadwick was if anything even more learned at the time, served to point up possible theological resolutions of much that seemed to divide Anglicans and Roman Catholics. The hand of Chadwick can be seen, not exclusively, but in large measure here. He was at pains to show, as in his later book on Boethius, how linguistic usage rather than substance could be theologically divisive. His brilliant footnote on transubstantiation in the ARCIC 'Agreement on the Eucharist' (1971, ed. Julian Charley) was a case in point. 
Chadwick well knew that the resolution of theological difficulties would not in itself lead to Christian unity. There were also intractable problems of authority and ecclesiology. In his view progress here depended on the continuation within the Roman Communion of the Second Vatican Council's emphasis on the collegiality of all bishops as well as on the Roman primacy. In 1969 he brought Cardinal Leo Suenens to Oxford to lecture on collegiality. This attitude of Chadwick's went back a long way. In his Oxford inaugural lecture of 1959, 'The circle and the ellipse', he argued that from very early on the church was conceived to have not one centre but two, Jerusalem and Rome, and thus the local churches were not united with each other by a circular line centred on one church, but by an elliptical line centred on two. This idea was pregnant with consequences for his later thinking about primacy and episcopal collegiality. The retreat from collegiality in Rome, which he traced back to Pope Paul VI, was the first cause of disappointment in his ecumenical hopes which Chadwick would come to feel deeply. Notwithstanding his disappointment, however, the degree of unity in 2000 was vastly greater than in 1950, and he had played a significant role in that change. 
Early in 1982 Chadwick went to Rome as Archbishop Runcie's emissary, to discuss directly with Pope John Paul II in particular the form of service at Canterbury during the pope's forthcoming visit to England. Afterwards he wrote of his impression that Anglicans had come 'to seem a bore to the top administrators of the Roman Catholic Church' (Carpenter, 'Robert Runcie', 241). But he personally was held in great respect by the pope, who presented him with a splendid embroidered stole, a mark of specifically priestly honour, which at his funeral lay on his coffin. 
From 1979 to 1983 Chadwick was regius professor of divinity at Cambridge. In 1981 his book on Boethius was published. This was a subject peculiarly congenial to him. Boethius was a deeply Platonist thinker, ever searching after the One that bound the whole cosmos together, and Chadwick's book integrated into a coherence all the intellectual aspects, including music, of this early sixth-century Italian nobleman. During the 1980s Chadwick's interest in Augustine was always deepening, stimulated by his work in ARCIC, as well as by his friendship with Peter Brown and others. His 'Augustine' (1986) was intended as a short introduction, but it represented the distillation of great learning and insight. It also represented a large investment of his own personality; for, always compatibly with critical scholarship, he seemed often to identify himself with Augustine's faith and humanity. Even more arresting was a book on Augustine which had been abandoned for the one published in 1986; it was discovered after his death by Peggy and published posthumously as 'Augustine of Hippo: a Life' (2009). In his foreword Peter Brown wrote that no one else could seize with greater clarity and firmness the nerve centres of entire systems of thought, without ever freezing them into static structures. Besides its profundity this book contained some fine examples of Chadwick's characteristic wit, such as his description of Augustine's biographer Possidius as 'an honest uninventive man, gasping with astonishment in the presence of personal greatness' ('Augustine of Hippo', 4). As regius professor in Cambridge he was a fellow of Magdalene College, where the many fond memories of him included his own delight when he returned some books to the college library late and with profuse apologies, to be answered by the kindly assistant, 'don't worry dear, I'm a slow reader myself' (private information). 
Chadwick came out of retirement in 1987 to become, for six years, an eirenic master of Peterhouse, Cambridge. There he worked on his two last books, 'The Church in Ancient Society: from Galilee to Gregory the Great' (2001), a summation of his life's scholarship; and the much shorter but even more remarkable 'East and West: the Making of a Rift in the Church' (2003), about what he called 'the greatest Christian split of all' ('East and West', 1). The epilogue of the latter book harked back to his long ecumenical experience, when he observed that the characteristic of those against ecumenism always was, in effect, their refusal to bring themselves out of the past into the present. This book had a hero in Photius, the ninth-century patriarch of Constantinople. Photius was an urbane churchman, and a great collector and reviewer of books. For one glorious moment it looked as if he and Pope John VIII had resolved all the then disputes between Rome and Constantinople. The pope sent him a pallium and other vestments, but after his death all was to end in disappointment. 
In 1960 Chadwick was elected a fellow of the British Academy and thereafter he was showered with many honorary doctorates and fellowships. He was an honorary or corresponding member of learned societies in America, France, Germany, and Belgium. He was made a KBE in 1989 (but as an ordained priest did not use the title 'Sir'), and in 1993 was elected to the German Order Pour le Merite, an order of truly world-class scholars and scientists. This election reflected not only his personal distinction, but also his study of German theology and his sympathetic friendships with German theologians immediately following the Second World War and subsequently. In the memorial address about Chadwick, delivered for the order by his fellow theologian Eberhard Jungel, Jungel called him a great builder of bridges ('pontes'), bridges between different kinds of people, and between the early Church and our own present; truly a 'pontifex', who even sought to build bridges to the Roman 'pontifex maximus'. For all his Olympian presence, his tall form and slight stoop, his fine forehead and piercing eyes, his sing-song diction, he was so courteous, so compassionate, so good a listener, and so engaged with people, as to be also a most loveable person. He lived latterly in St John Street, Oxford, and died on 17 June 2008 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, of pneumonia. He was survived by his wife, Peggy, and their three daughters. Memorial services were held at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, on 27 September 2008, and at Great St Mary's, Cambridge, on 22 November 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99808


Clarke, Sir Arthur Charles (1917-2008), science and science fiction writer, was born on 16 December 1917 at 4 Blenheim Terrace, Minehead, Somerset, the eldest of the four children of Charles Wright Clarke (1888-1931) and his wife, (Mary) Nora Jessie, 'nee' Willis (1892-1980). His father was a Post Office telegraphist then serving as a second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers; his mother also worked as a telegraphist. Following the war, after a first unsuccessful attempt at farming, a career decided upon because of lung injuries Clarke's father had received, the family took up a smallholding at Ballifants, near Bishop's Lydeard, Somerset, in 1924. There Clarke and his younger siblings, Fred ('b'. 1921), Mary ('b'. 1923), and Michael ('b'. 1928), grew up. 
As a schoolboy, Clarke developed a passionate interest in science, which his family and school (Huish Grammar School, Taunton) encouraged. His brother Fred recalled, in an article published in the journal 'Foundation' to celebrate Clarke's seventieth birthday, experiments with rockets, wireless, and photography. In a collection of contributions from the 'Huish Magazine' published in 1996 Clarke's own contributions included spoofs and skits written under the spell of the science fiction magazines he was already reading at the time, while he was teased as 'Professor Larke' and 'Clericus' (one of his pseudonyms) in essays by others. His later contributions were clearly influenced by the effect upon him of Olaf Stapledon's epic future-history 'Last and First Men' (1930), which he was several times to remark had changed his life, and the discovery of the British Interplanetary Society, which Clarke joined in 1934 shortly after its formation. He was later to serve the society, established to argue the case for space exploration by a young Wallasey engineer, P. E. Cleator, as chairman in 1946-7 and again in 1950-53. 
On leaving school to join the civil service Clarke's early life was dominated by these interests. He attended the first science fiction convention in Leeds in January 1937, and his first work of fiction, 'Travel by Wire', was published in 'Amateur Science Stories', a fanzine published in that year by the newly founded Science Fiction Association. Much of his early writing appeared in similar organs produced by the small but active group of science fiction devotees of the time, such as 'Novae Terrae', or as part of the overlapping activity of the British Interplanetary Society. His enthusiasm for both was satirized by his friend and fellow writer William Temple, with whom he shared a London flat at 88 Gray's Inn Road (the title of Temple's later book of reminiscences) until 1939. His affectionate nickname 'Ego' reflected the focus and ambition that he brought to his scientific and literary projects (his regular newsletters to friends and fans in later life were 'Egograms'). Clarke was already working on a novel, which appeared as 'Against the Fall of Night' in 'Startling Stories' in 1948, was published in book form in 1953, and extensively revised as 'The City and the Stars' in 1956. His first professional fiction sales, 'Loophole' and 'Rescue Party', appeared in 'Astounding' in April and May 1946. 
Volunteering for RAF service in 1941, Clarke became a technical officer working on radar systems until his demobilization in 1946, when he began a degree course at King's College, London, graduating with first-class honours in mathematics and physics. Before then, however, he had published what was perhaps his most prophetic work: the essay 'Extra-terrestrial relays' in the technical journal 'Wireless World' (1945). Here he suggested using rocket technology to place a system of satellites in geosynchronous orbit around the earth, from which signals could be bounced to blanket the earth with a communications network. Apart from the fact that Clarke envisaged manned satellites, this is essentially the system used today. While this was by no means the first suggestion of the idea -- and Clarke was himself at pains later to point out that others were thinking similar thoughts at the time -- Clarke's essay was the first in print at a crucial time. Rocket missiles had been used in war against Britain, designed by the space enthusiast Wernher von Braun, and many of Clarke's engineer friends in the British Interplanetary Society were developing new technologies. Suddenly the 'oddball' ideas of the pre-war rocket societies were ripe with promise. Clarke's first book, 'Interplanetary Flight' (1950), its successor, 'The Exploration of Space' (1951), and a novel he had written in 1947, 'Prelude to Space' (1951), were visionary propaganda for the forthcoming space age. 
The 'bright renaissance' following the achievement of lunar travel in 'Prelude to Space' and the ambiguous ending of the influential short story 'Sentinel of Eternity' (better known as 'The Sentinel'), published in the same year, expressed a feeling that somewhere in the universe was the end to a sense of loneliness, and that space travel was a means to that end. 'Sentinel' ended with the triggering of a kind of signal device left on the moon by an alien race. The narrator contemplates the result: will it be a welcome or a threat? Clarke's most influential novel, 'Childhood's End' (1953), along with stories like 'The Nine Billion Names of God' (1953) or 'The Star' (1955), explored some of the more transcendental versions of these anxieties. Although Clarke's reputation was built upon his exercises in futurology, enthusiasm for technology, and an interpretation of his fiction as 'hard science fiction', these stories undermined the comfort that the gadgets of hard science fiction tended to offer readers, and accepted the possibility of unease. The utopia of 'Childhood's End' which humanity has to accept under the rule of alien Overlords is a false paradise. It is merely a step towards the end of humanity as we know it and sublimation into a new trans-species identity, a step that the Overlords themselves are poignantly eternally barred from making. 
These books and others brought Clarke success, with his reputation among the British science fiction readership assured. (At this point he was a regular attendee at meetings of the London science fiction circle at the White Horse pub, later The Globe.) His gifts for clear and visionary explanation of factual science gave him a wider audience among the general public, dramatically increasing sales in the USA thanks to the choice of 'The Exploration of Space' as a Book of the Month Club selection. On 15 June 1953, in New York, he married Marilyn Torgenson ('nee' Mayfield), a 22-year-old American divorcee with a young son, and they returned to Britain just before the publication of his breakthrough novel, 'Childhood's End'. The marriage was not a success, and the couple separated after a matter of months, although the formal divorce was not until 1964. Following another of his interests, diving, in 1954 Clarke joined a friend, Mike Wilson, on an expedition to the Australian Great Barrier Reef. On the way they stopped at Ceylon, where they returned in 1956, eventually to establish a diving business with a Ceylonese partner, Hector Ekanayake. Clarke was to make Ceylon (renamed Sri Lanka in 1972) his home for the rest of his life. His companion Leslie Ekanayake, Hector's brother, died in a motorcycle accident in 1977. 
His growing reputation, and the space race that had erupted with the successful launch of the Russian sputnik satellite in 1957, made Clarke increasingly in demand for lectures, fiction, and non-fiction. He was awarded the UNESCO Kalinga prize for science writing in 1961. His collection of speculative essays, 'Profiles of the Future', was published in 1962, to be reissued and revised (with wry comments about what he had got 'wrong') several times thereafter. In the same year he contracted polio, which was to result in the post-polio syndrome with which he was diagnosed in 1988. He was to spend his last years wheelchair-bound. 
In 1964 Clarke was contacted by Stanley Kubrick, who had expressed an interest in making a science fiction film. The result was '2001: a Space Odyssey' (1968), partly based upon 'The Sentinel' but also echoing the transcendental elements of 'Childhood's End'. The film showed Kubrick's obsessive detail and Clarke's visionary realism at work in sometimes uneasy partnership. Clarke's own novelization differed in significant respects from the film. In the end he wrote several sequels, '2010: Odyssey Two' (1982), '2061: Odyssey Three' (1987), and '3001: the Final Odyssey' (1997). Various sequences in Kubrick's film -- a bone used as a weapon hurled into the air in triumph and seguing into a spaceship, the spacecraft docking to the tune of Strauss's 'Blue Danube' waltz, and especially the chilly rebellion of the sentient computer HAL 9000 which jeopardizes the mission, were especially striking. It was almost inevitable that Clarke was among the science fiction writers asked to commentate on the Apollo 11 moon landing in July 1969, and asked to speak at the UNESCO space communications conference later that year. 'The Lost Worlds of 2001' (1970) added more background to the film. 
By this time Clarke was perhaps the best-known science fiction writer in the world and one of the few with genuine best-seller status. Subsequent novels received the science fiction field's highest awards. 'Rendezvous with Rama' (1972) brought its author British Science Fiction Association, Nebula, Hugo, Campbell and 'Locus' magazine awards. Also winning the Hugo and Nebula awards, 'The Fountains of Paradise' (1979) was set in a version of his adopted home, Sri Lanka, and featured yet another mammoth technological idea, the 'space elevator', based upon ideas suggested by the Russian scientist Yuri Artsutanov. The 'elevator' consisted of a cable lowered from a satellite in geostationary orbit which when secured at a fixed point on the earth's surface could transport material from the earth's surface to orbit. 
With these awards for Clarke's fiction came a growing reputation as a commentator upon science and technology which resulted in numerous accolades and appointments, among them the Bradford Washburn award from the Boston Museum of Science (1977). In 1979 he was appointed chancellor of Moratuwa University in Sri Lanka, where he served until 2002. In 1982 he received the Marconi fellowship award, which was used to fund an Arthur C. Clarke Centre for Modern Technologies in Sri Lanka. In the same year he addressed the UN committee on disarmament. In 1987 he received the Charles A. Lindbergh award for many years of significant contributions towards balancing technology and nature, and in 1989 he became the first chancellor of the International Space University in France, which offered advanced courses in space studies. In 1995 his pioneering visions of space exploration resulted in his being awarded the NASA distinguished public service medal. He was kept in public view with the television series 'Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious World' (1980), in which he looked at unexplained phenomena. The combination of scepticism and fascination with which current enthusiasm for the 'unexplained' was treated attracted a large audience and it was followed by two other similar series in 1985 and 1994. 
In addition Clarke was a patron of the Science Fiction Foundation and president of the British Science Fiction Association, to whose publications he would respond with encouraging comments and anecdotes. In 1986 he funded the Arthur C. Clarke award for the best science fiction novel of the year published in the UK. He received honorary DLitt degrees from Bath (1988), Liverpool (1995), conferred, appropriately, by satellite link, and Baptist University, Hong Kong (1996). He was awarded Sri Lanka's highest civil honour, Sri Lankabhimanya ('pride of Sri Lanka'), in 2005. 
Many of Clarke's later novels were collaborations with other writers in, for example, inferior sequels to 'Rendezvous with Rama', although the solo 'The Ghost From the Grand Banks' (1990) was well received. With 'The Light of Other Days' (2000) and the 'Time Odyssey' trilogy (2003-7) he teamed up with Stephen Baxter. In Baxter, a writer strongly influenced by Clarke but whose own cosmological speculations and sense of time and history made him very much his own man, Clarke seemed to have a collaborator who understood his fiction and shared his sense of vision. 
Clarke 'retired' several times, and several novels were proclaimed as his 'last' book, but he kept on writing to the end, although '3001: the Final Odyssey' was probably his last unaided work. Perhaps his last true novel, and certainly one of his finest, was 'The Songs of Distant Earth' (1986), in which Thalassa, an idyllic, utopian colony is visited by a ship from a destroyed earth 'en route' to its destination to terraform a new world. The starship's crew have to decide whether to stay, and possibly disrupt the Thalassan idyll, or continue, shattering the bonds of contact that have developed. In this book Clarke revisited the tension between transcendence and the physical, and the ambiguous utopianism, found in earlier fiction. The melancholy in 'Songs' may be in part an echo of the numinous in previous works, in which Clarke, a lifelong atheist, nevertheless imagined godlike parental aliens. He was widely reported to have quipped, 'I don't believe in God, but I'm very interested in her'. 
Having been appointed CBE in 1989, Clarke was awarded a knighthood for services to literature in 1998, although he was not formally knighted until 26 May 2000, as previous plans had been postponed following unfounded allegations of sexual impropriety in a tabloid newspaper. While Clarke was as reticent about his private sexuality as he was about including sex in his novels (it was perhaps after the introduction of a gay character in 'Imperial Earth' (1975) that reporters would ask Clarke if he was gay, invariably to be told, 'merely mildly cheerful'), his orientation was no secret to his friends and admirers. 
Clarke's ninetieth birthday was marked by an address in which he noted the rapid change in space and communications technologies and presented as his 'three wishes' evidence of extraterrestrial life, the replacement of coal and oil with clean energy sources, and a lasting peace in his adopted country, Sri Lanka. His final novel, 'The Last Theorem' (2008), was written in collaboration with the American author Frederik Pohl, one of his few surviving peers. Clarke died in Colombo, following breathing difficulties, on 19 March 2008. He was buried in the General Cemetery, Colombo, on 22 March, in accordance with his wishes that 'no religious rites of any kind... should be associated with my funeral'. 
Arthur C. Clarke was the poet of a particular vision which saw space travel as a challenge willingly to be met. It is a dream itself, of course, with its own contradictions. The 1950s fantasy that Britain would play a major role in the forthcoming age of space was a simple fantasy, but this was not quite so clear-cut at the time as it became with hindsight: for many it offered a possible shape for a new post-empire Britain. British science fiction writers of local disaster and catastrophe such as John Wyndham and John Christopher showed more clearly the social anxiety of the 1950s, and later writers such as J. G. Ballard dismissed altogether stories of 'outer space' as irrelevant to the exploration of a psychological 'inner space' in which science fiction was a literary tool rather than a means of propaganda or reuse of stale cliches. Clarke's early novels and stories, though, showed the dream of mid-century science fiction: that history does not have to be the way it is, and that humanity can take control of its destiny. His non-fiction and science writing, harnessed to a visionary internationalism, emphasized this mould. What became noted as his 'three laws' (expounded in the revised version of his 'Profiles of the Future', 1973) expressed the often playful working of his imagination as applied to all aspects of his writing: (1) When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost certainly right. When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong. (2) The only way of discovering the limits of the possible is to venture a little way past them into the impossible. (3) Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. 
Clarke's reputation will remain attached to a vision of the future that assumed, years before it happened, that space travel was both possible and desirable. Much of his fiction can be seen as speculations of the space age by someone who was trying both to make it happen, and to explain to a wide audience why it was so important that it should indeed happen. While firmly committed to the project of knowing and understanding the universe, Clarke's writing did not unquestioningly assume the project's success. He was occasionally seduced by the visionary rather than the practical implications of science, as with his enthusiasm for cold fusion, and a rather too easy assumption that global communications and space exploration would link nations and promote peace and understanding. He was, however, much more than a propagandist. His science writing was both informative and genuinely inspirational: he was, simply, a great communicator curious about the world and passionate in sharing that curiosity. His best fiction (which includes much of his early work) echoed a sense of personal and cosmic loneliness which evoked a sense of awe at the thought of the immensity and potential of the universe. As the critic John Clute wrote in an obituary of Clarke, 'He spoke for the highest hopes of the 20th century' ('The Independent', 20 March 2008). 


@@@@@


doc= 99812


Coldstream, (John) Nicolas (1927-2008), archaeologist and historian, was born on 30 March 1927 in Lahore, India, the only son of Sir John Coldstream (1877-1954), a member of the Indian Civil Service then serving as a judge at the High Court in Lahore, later chief minister of Kapurthala state, and his wife, Phyllis Mary, 'nee' Hambly (1896-1972). The family returned to England in 1939, settling in St John's Wood, and in 1952 took up residence at 180 Ebury Street, the eponymous house of what was later to be christened 'Mozart Terrace'. 
Coldstream attended St Cyprian's School, Eastbourne, then became a king's scholar at Eton College. Before progressing to King's College, Cambridge, he did his national service in the canal zone and Palestine with the Highland light infantry. He graduated from Cambridge with a double first in the classics tripos in 1951. He then taught classics at Shrewsbury School for four years before commencing a more archaeological career with a post in the Greek and Roman department of the British Museum in 1956. He had already visited Cyprus during his military service, and Greece then became another focus of his interest when he took up the MacMillan scholarship at the British School of Archaeology in Athens in 1957. There he commenced work on the material that was to become his own, the pottery of the Geometric period of Greek culture, 'c'.1000-700 BC. 
In 1960 Coldstream gained a post in the University of London, where he spent the rest of his career, initially at Bedford College, as a lecturer in Greek, rising to a personal chair in Aegean archaeology in 1975; he then transferred to the Yates chair of classical archaeology at University College in 1983, during a period of considerable turbulence in the area of classical studies both in the country and in the university. He remained in post there until retirement, becoming emeritus professor in 1992 and honorary fellow in 1993. On 4 July 1970, at Oxford register office, he married a historian of medieval art and architecture, and fellow university lecturer, (Imogen) Nicola Carr ('b'. 1942), daughter of Charles Francis Carr, factory inspector. There were no children of the marriage. 
As an excavator Coldstream worked at Motya on Sicily, at the port site of Kastri on Kythera (with George Huxley), and on various occasions at Knossos, in particular in the sanctuary of Demeter, on the hillside south of the palace. All such work was promptly published and gave clear evidence of his mastery of areas well beyond the narrower range of his acknowledged speciality. His publications amounted in all to some 140, many of them highly influential. Among his more general works, 'Greek Geometric Pottery' (1968, second edition 2008) was an indispensable tool for those working in the field, and 'Geometric Greece' (1977, second edition 2003) placed the pottery and other artefacts in the fuller setting of the period, so poorly provided with other sources. 
Coldstream's wish was to write history, and is exemplified in the many articles he wrote devoted to the relationships between the Greek world, Cyprus, and the 'biblical' Near East during the earlier first millennium BC. In this area in particular he was at pains to stress the importance of considering all the evidence, not the individual piece which might point in a different direction. Plus or minus a decade or two, his chronological scheme for this period came to be widely accepted. With respect to Greeks further west, his study of a well-known Greek amphora of the eighth century from Kourion on Cyprus was one catalyst in a reassessment of their role; his 'new address' for the piece, as a work from the island of Euboea, connected with further historical, and ever increasing archaeological sources, to confirm the role of the Euboeans in travelling beyond Greek frontiers in the tenth to eighth centuries BC, first to the east, Cyprus and Phoenicia, and then west, to Italy. 
Coldstream's work at Knossos was dedicated to the millennium or so after the fall of the Palace of Minos. His studies of the pottery of the early Iron Age, summarized well in his contribution to the 'Knossos Pottery Handbook: the Iron Age' (2001), included treatment of much material excavated since 1950, notably a number of pots with precocious figured scenes, a group often neglected in broader studies of Greek art of the period -- though not his own -- which concentrated on the dour scenes of battle and funerals on the burial vases made in Athens. 
Coldstream's teaching was always careful and clear. The theoretical aspects of 'modern' archaeology were of no interest, although he was happy to embrace scientific evidence where relevant; his second-best subject at school was mathematics. The efficacy of such teaching and the general acknowledgement of the quality of his work were reflected in the large number of postgraduate students he attracted; successful students at that, for there were few who did not succeed in gaining employment in or around the profession, from Atlanta to the Dead Sea. Two publications illustrate this well: a Festschrift, 'Klados' (1995), composed largely of articles by former students, some twenty-five in all, and the writing up of a tomb group from Cyprus housed in the Institute of Archaeology, written, under guidance, by the group of students taking his MA course in Cypriot archaeology and published in the 'Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies' for 1991-3. The course was the only such one in Britain at the time, encouraged and materially nurtured by another, contemporary, fellow of University College, Vassos Karageorghis, director of Cypriot antiquities. 
Coldstream was Geddes Harrower visiting professor at Aberdeen in 1983 and visiting fellow at the Australian Institute of Archaeology in Melbourne in 1989. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1964 and a fellow of the British Academy in 1977. He was an honorary or corresponding member of archaeological institutes in Germany, Greece, and the USA. In 2003 the British Academy awarded him the Kenyon medal for classical studies. When the tenth International Conference of Classical Archaeology was held in London in 1978, he stepped into the breach when the original chairman of the organizing committee withdrew, not only pulling irons from the fire but even making a profit. He kept up lasting connections with the British School at Athens; he edited its 'Annual' between 1968 and 1973, and was chairman of its managing committee from 1987 to 1991. 
Nicola Coldstream's professional status as a historian of medieval architecture happily fitted in with Nicolas Coldstream's own interest in travel. His other main interest was music, fittingly for the occupier of the house where Mozart composed a few early pieces. He played the piano with the University College chamber orchestra from his joining the college until the end. The Kreutzer sonata was in rehearsal when he fell ill, and he died of heart failure at his home, 180 Mozart Terrace, Ebury Street, on 21 March 2008. He was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium. Memorial meetings were held at the British School at Athens on 29 March 2008 (originally planned as a symposium to mark his eightieth birthday) and at St Mary's, Bourne Street, on 17 April. He was survived by his wife, Nicola. 


@@@@@


doc= 99813


Cole, Michael (1928-2008), scientist and inventor, was born on 18 October 1928 at 27 Welbeck Street, Marylebone, London, the oldest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Captain Awdry Valentine Connor (Henry) Cole (formerly Witkowsky), and his second wife, Marguerite Eleanor Mary Agnes, 'nee' Gooch, daughter of Charles Edwin Gooch, of Wivenhoe Park, Colchester, Essex. His father, born and educated in India, was descended from a Polish Jewish family which had emigrated to Chicago in 1848. Having amassed a fortune at a very young age by selling insurance in India, he came to England in 1906, was commissioned in the British army, and (by then a captain in the 7th North Staffordshire regiment) was wounded in 1916 at Gallipoli. 
Cole grew up in Cannes, where his parents had started a fashionable tennis club, and in the late 1930s the family moved to Salcombe, Devon, where Cole's father was occupied in ship salvage, and later in farming. Cole was educated at Eton College, and after national service in the Royal West African Frontier Force in the Gold Coast, where he arrested Kwame Nkrumah, wrongly suspected of being responsible for the riots of 1948, he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1948 to read natural sciences. He graduated with an upper second in 1951, and after completing a PhD in metallurgy, awarded in 1955, he won a King George VI fellowship and spent 1954-5 at the University of Chicago. He returned to Cambridge as a research fellow at the Cavendish Laboratory. On 26 November 1960 he married Susan Mary Fellowes ('b'. 1936), daughter of William Albemarle Fellowes, land agent, of Sandringham, Norfolk; they had two daughters and two sons. 
Cole did not want to become an academic, and in 1957 he founded Metals Research, in a loft over a garage in King Street, Cambridge, and began work on the processes required for growing and preparing samples of single metal crystals, then beginning to be in great demand in solid state physics laboratories, especially in the aircraft, space, weapons, and semi-conductor industries. Single metal crystals allowed the structure of the metals to be studied in its purest form, but were difficult and expensive to produce. Over the next few years Cole developed both the processes for crystal growing, and a range of innovative equipment, including specialized furnaces and a spark erosion machine, the Servomet, which could cut and shape crystals without damaging their structure. In 1960 he was joined by his brother David to manage the business side of the company, leaving him free to concentrate on technical matters and product development. With the invention of the Quantimet Image Analysing Computer, which used a television camera, a microscope, and a computer to analyse the appearance of surfaces and images, and was developed by Colin Fisher, later technical director of Metals Research, into a highly versatile and powerful instrument with applications in a wide range of industries, the company grew rapidly. In 1965 Metals Research was able to buy Moat House, Melbourn, a country house outside Cambridge, and build a new laboratory and workshops in its grounds. In 1969 Cole introduced the Quantimet 720, which used a digital image analysis system, and the workforce grew to some 500 by the early 1970s. Subsidiary companies were established in France, Germany, the United States, and Russia, and about three-quarters of production was exported. Metals Research won three queen's awards for Industry. In 1975, looking to expand further and exploring the possibility of acquiring another company, and with support from the Labour government and the National Enterprise Board, Metals Research made a reverse takeover of Scientific and Medical Instruments Ltd, part of the former Cambridge Instrument Company, founded by Horace Darwin, son of Charles Darwin, a century earlier. The new company, Cambridge Analysing Instruments Ltd, despite receiving a queen's award in 1976, ran into difficulties from falling sales levels in the difficult financial climate of the late 1970s, especially after the change of government in 1979, and in 1979 Cole resigned. 
In 1982 Cole bought Genevac, a company that made laboratory vacuum pumps, with the intention of improving its products. This led to the invention of a vapour vacuum pump, based on the principle of 'lift', which worked according to the 'Cole vacuum principle'. This could pump corrosive acids and solvent vapours quickly, without the need for regular maintenance, whereas a normal pump would disintegrate. Sales of the new pump were slow in taking off, and as the cost of the development of the pump escalated, and despite successive refinancing, Genevac was forced into liquidation, following the breakdown of a proposed collaboration with an American company. Cole was left deeply in debt, and lost both his house and his pension. At this point his brother bought the defunct company from the receiver, and with the help of his wife and his son Harry, Cole resumed work on the development and sale of his pump. Later, in 1994, he invented an evaporator for use in the pharmaceutical research industry which could process hundreds of samples simultaneously and evaporate many times faster than previous evaporators without overheating the thermolabile samples, leaving a purer substance. This was a huge success, and Cole opened an office in New York, increased the workforce to 150, and achieved a turnover of $15 million. After winning his fifth queen's award in 2000, Cole sold the company to an American instrument company, after a bidding war between two instrument groups. 
After the sale of Genevac, Cole started a new research company to explore ways of cultivating cep (or porcini) mushrooms ('Boletus edulis') commercially, something that people all over the world had been working on, unsuccessfully, for years. Although he failed to find a solution, he came to the conclusion that the explanation lay with electricity, and that there was a correlation between the charged air caused by thunderstorms, and the growth of ceps. To test this hypothesis he experimented with a metal tree with platinum roots, planted in his garden. At the end of his life Cole became interested in climate change, reaching the conclusion that there was little scientific basis for the view that manmade carbon dioxide caused global warming, and that the predictive computer models used were based on false assumptions. Cole was mentioned in the debate on climate change in the House of Lords on 21 May 2009. 
As an inventor, Michael Cole was a genius, and his confidence and determination kept him going. Even when facing enormous financial difficulties, over and over again he refused to accept that something was impossible, and thought of a way to do it. Metals Research was one of the first high technology companies in the country, and Cole was a key figure in the industrial renaissance in Cambridge in the 1960s. A big man and a bon viveur, he enjoyed flying, sailing, and skiing, was passionate about music, and was also a keen gardener and a fine bridge player. He and his brother bought Osea Island, off the Essex coast, and used to fly their families there for their holidays. He also often flew to France and back for lunch in his favourite restaurant in Le Touquet. He died on 6 April 2008 at his home, Moor Farm, Friston, Saxmundham, Suffolk, of cancer, and was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99815


Colledge, (Magdalena) Cecilia (1920-2008), figure skater, was born at 36 Belsize Grove, Hampstead, London, on 28 November 1920, the younger child of Lionel Colledge (1883-1948), an ear, nose, and throat specialist, and his wife, Margaret Mary (1884-1966), daughter of Admiral John Brackenbury. Her elder brother, Maule, a flight lieutenant in the Royal Air Force, was shot down over Germany in 1943. 
Cecilia and her mother attended the 1928 world figure skating championships, held in London, where Sonja Henie won the second of ten consecutive world titles. Cecilia was entranced by Henie's balletic skating and remarked, 'I should like to skate like that' (Hines, 'Figure Skating', 110). Encouraged by Gertrude Vinson, the mother of the American skater Maribel Vinson, Cecilia's mother arranged lessons for her. She was taught initially by the British ice dancers Eva Keats and Eric van der Weyden, a husband and wife couple who wrote an important book on skating and who invented four compulsory dances later employed in international competition. Mother and daughter went to Norway, the home of Henie, for coaching, but during a visit to see her brother, who attended school in Zuoz, Switzerland, they met Jacques Gerschwiler, one of three members of an important Swiss coaching family. Gerschwiler became Cecilia's coach, living initially in the Colledges' home, and remained her coach throughout her competitive career. 
In 1932 both the Olympic winter games and the world figure skating championships were held in North America for the first time, the Olympics at Lake Placid, New York, on 4-15 February and the world championships at Montreal, Quebec, on 19-20 February. Fifteen ladies competed at Lake Placid, fourteen at Montreal, the largest number at that time for a world championship. Among them were four from Great Britain: Megan Taylor, Colledge, Mollie Phillips, and Joan Dix. They were placed seventh to tenth in that order at both competitions. For all of them these were their first international competitions. All except Phillips were aged eleven. Colledge was the youngest at eleven years and eighty-three days, a record for ladies at the world championships that still stood at the time of her death. Taylor was thirty-four days older. 
Colledge and Taylor provided one of figure skating's great rivalries. At many competitions only one of them competed, but from 1931 to 1939 they competed against each other sixteen times, each beating the other eight times. On only four occasions were those placements not first and second. Six national competitions resulted in three titles each. At the Olympic trials in 1931 and the Olympic winter games in 1932 Taylor beat Colledge. At four European championships, Colledge beat Taylor every time, winning three titles (in 1937, 1938, and 1939). At the world championships Taylor was placed ahead of Colledge in 1932 and 1933, Colledge won the world title in 1937, the year after Henie's retirement from amateur competitions, and Taylor won in 1938. Their rivalry reached its peak in 1939. Colledge won her third consecutive European title with Taylor a close second, but Taylor was the reigning world champion. The anticipated showdown at the world championships did not occur. An injury kept Colledge out of the competition; Taylor easily won her second world title. It was the last competition before the Second World War, and neither skater competed internationally after the war, although Colledge won a sixth British title in 1946. 
Colledge and Taylor were the most prominent skaters during a golden age for ladies' skating in Great Britain. Not since Madge Syers in 1906 and 1907 had there been a British world champion and there had been only a handful of medallists. After this remarkable period only Jeannette Altwegg claimed European, world, and Olympic titles for Britain (all in 1951-2) during Colledge's lifetime. Colledge's cumulative record included six national titles, three European titles, and one world title. 
After turning professional in 1946 Colledge skated in several shows, first an ice review at the Stoll Theatre in London, and later in shows at Brighton and at the Roxy Theater in New York. She moved to the United States in 1951 and taught skating for one season in Lake Placid, the site of her first Olympic effort nineteen years earlier. She then moved to Boston, where she taught at the Skating Club of Boston for forty-three years, retiring in 1995. Many of her students competed nationally and internationally, among them Lorraine Hanlon, and the ice dancers Sidney Foster and Franklin Nelson, and Judy Lamar and Ronald Ludington. 
Colledge's place in figure skating history was sealed by a remarkable competitive record followed by her career as a respected coach, but also by several skating firsts. Most important was the parallel spin, later known as the camel spin, an invention of Colledge and her coach, Jacques Gerschwiler. Colledge was also the first skater to do a layback spin, later included in most ladies' programmes. In jumping Colledge was the first female competitor to do a two-revolution jump in competition, a double Salchow (included in her programme at the 1936 European championships). She also invented the one-foot Axel Paulsen jump, in which the landing is on an inside edge and on the same foot as the takeoff. Colledge was thus the inventor of more standard jumps and spins in figure skating than any other skater. She was a balanced skater with strong compulsory figures, which at that time accounted for 60 per cent of the score. Commenting on the elimination of compulsory figures from competition in 1990 she echoed the opinion of many coaches: 'I really liked figures and I think it's a terrible shame that they removed [them]. I think it has reduced the quality of skating' (Stevenson, 55). 
Colledge was elected to the world figure skating hall of fame in 1980 and on her retirement from coaching in 1995 was named an honorary member of the Skating Club of Boston. Having lived latterly in Lexington, Massachusetts, USA, she died in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on 12 April 2008. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 99819


Cook, Beryl Frances (1926-2008), painter, was born at Helmsley, Pooley Green Road, Egham, Surrey, on 10 September 1926, the third of four daughters of Adrian Stephen Barton Lansley, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Ella, 'nee' Farmer-Francis, an office worker. Her parents separated four years later, and Beryl's mother moved to Reading with her four daughters. When Beryl was ten a boy called John Victor Cook moved in next door (his father, Victor Harry Cook, was a tax officer with the Inland Revenue), and was soon her childhood sweetheart. She went to Kendrick Girls' School, but excelled at nothing, including art, and left when she was fourteen to train as a typist. In 1944 the family moved to London where she took a variety of jobs including performing as a chorus girl in a production of 'The Gypsy Princess' and working as a model for Goldberg's fashion showroom in Bond Street. She was attracted to the limelight but didn't make a career on the boards or catwalk. In 1947 she moved with her mother and sisters to Hampton to help run a tea room. She met up again with John Cook, who was now an officer in the merchant navy, and they married on 2 October 1948. Their son, John, was born in 1950. They lived briefly in Leigh-on-Sea in Essex and then, in 1955, took a tenancy together of the White Horse pub in Stoke by Nayland in Suffolk, in the heart of Constable country. They kept pigs and chickens but, as Beryl quipped later, 'it may have been healthy, but we hated the life' ('The Independent', 30 May 2008). A year later they moved to Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia, where Beryl worked as a bookkeeper in an insurance office, while John worked in car sales. It was there that her life suddenly switched gear. 
Most art grows out of art -- the natural flowering of a childhood talent, encouraged by parents or at school, or born in an atmosphere of art. Beryl Cook's art, apparently, came out of nowhere. When they were still in Salisbury in 1960 she and John gave their ten-year-old son a child's oil painting set. He painted a typical child's picture with a strip of sky at the top and a band of grass at the bottom with a little house standing on it. Beryl commented that there was nothing in the middle. Young John replied, reasonably enough, that there 'was' nothing in the middle. 'I'll paint you a picture with something in the middle', Beryl replied, and she painted two large, naked breasts with a woman's face above them with big eyes glancing furiously right, as if to say 'what are you looking at?'. She had no idea how to paint a waist, so she painted in a broad black band, as if the woman were leaning over a shellacked fence. Her husband immediately dubbed it 'The Hangover', and this bright gem of a painting hung in her house ever after. She later said that she felt as if she had been kicked in the stomach when she saw what she had done. She had no idea where it came from, and had at first no idea what to do with the creative power she had found within herself (personal knowledge). 
It not until about five years later, when she and her family had moved back to live in East Looe in Cornwall, that Beryl Cook began to see scenes around her, particularly in their local pub, which she thought she would like to paint. There are hints of Stanley Spencer and Edward Burra as well as Picasso, Manet, and Matisse in her very early attempts, but what is remarkable is how rapidly she developed her instantly recognizable style; she soon became famous for her 'fat ladies'. But it is not only the ladies in her paintings that are fat: everything is fat, the cigarettes and wine glasses, the shoes (she loved painting shoes), the fur coats, the ice creams and Cornish pasties, the hairdos, and the dustbins. She never painted nails on her fingers, not because she couldn't but because such finicky details would have distracted from their fullness. The only details on her ballooned features were the lines of mouths and the angles of glances. These were crucial and take one to the heart of the start of each picture. They spring from direct observations of unguarded moments when someone reveals their true feelings, relaxes with a fag, dances with joy, or surreptitiously eyes up a sailor, moments that make us, the viewers, smile, and sometimes laugh out loud, as we recognize these feelings in ourselves. 
In 1968 the Cooks bought a bed and breakfast in Plymouth, and soon the walls were covered with her paintings. If guests commented on them she pretended that they were by her son, or husband. But in 1975 Bernard Samuels, the director of the Plymouth Art Centre, heard about this boarding house full of paintings, and went to see it. He immediately offered Beryl Cook an exhibition. The show drew crowds, many sales, priced between $40 and $60, and attention from local and then national media. In 1976 her painting of the knowingly smiling barmaid of their local pub, the Lockyer Tavern, starred on the cover of the 'Sunday Times' colour magazine. The London art dealer Lionel Levy saw it and invited her to show in his Portal Gallery. She subsequently held eighteen hugely successful exhibitions there. Her paintings began to be reproduced as greetings cards which were sold around the world. The first of eleven books of her art, 'Beryl Cook: the Works', was published by John Murray in 1978, and in the following year Melvyn Bragg featured her on his 'South Bank Show' on ITV. 
As she became more and more successful Beryl Cook's horizons widened. She travelled to New York, flying out on Concorde and sailing back on the 'QE2', searched out tango dancers in Buenos Aires, and followed in the footsteps of the painter Edward Burra in Marseilles, all the while making tiny sketches in her handbag, occasionally pretending to snap John so that she could photograph a background detail. She became Britain's most genuinely popular living painter in the 1980s. 
Cook's popularity to a large extent excluded her from the established contemporary art world that lauded avant-garde work that offended public taste. A few critics liked her work, such as Edward Lucie-Smith, but curators were much derided when they bought her work for public collections. Modern art was supposed to be angst-ridden, the critics claimed, so Beryl Cook's paintings couldn't be modern or, as one eminent gallery director once announced, even art. They are, and gloriously so, each image a memorable insight into contemporary life. The warmth in them is palpable. Cook said, 'I can see things that horrify me and upset me, but I don't want to paint them. If I thought that by painting something very meaningful it would change things then perhaps I would want to, I don't know. But I don't believe that. Instead I think people are getting dulled by the amount of horror. I only paint when I'm excited by something, and what excites me is the joy, the animation, the pleasure in life' (press cutting, 1985, Beryl Cook archive). She was appointed OBE in 1996. Typically she couldn't face going to Buckingham Palace to receive it. She died of cancer, painting almost until the last, in Plymouth, on 28 May 2008. She was survived by her husband and their son. 


@@@@@


doc= 99821


Corbet, Philip Steven (1929-2008), entomologist, was born on 21 May 1929 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaya, the eldest child in the family of three boys and one girl of (Alexander) Steven Corbet (1896-1948), a soil microbiologist at the Rubber Research Institute in Kuala Lumpur, and his wife, Irene, 'nee' Trewavas. His two brothers died in infancy. His father's love of natural history, and of entomology in particular (he was an authority on the butterflies of Malaya), was a strong influence on his two surviving children, who both became distinguished professional entomologists. The family returned to England in 1932, but during the Second World War Philip moved with his mother and sister to New Zealand, where he attended Nelson Boys' College, set in a rural province in the north of the South Island. Meanwhile his father was appointed to the staff of the British Museum (Natural History), to work on the butterfly collections, where he rose to become deputy keeper of entomology. His sister-in-law, Ethelwyn Trewavas, an authority on African lake fish, was also on the staff of the museum. When the war ended the family were reunited and lived in Reading, but Corbet's father died of a heart attack soon after, following a butterfly-collecting trip in Hampshire. 
Corbet completed his schooling after spending a year as a boarder at Dauntsey's School, Wiltshire (1945-6), where he had his first formal lessons in biology. He took a place at Reading University to read zoology (1946-50), where he took a first-class honours degree and received the Colin Morley prize for zoology. From 1950 to 1953 he studied the seasonal regulation in dragonflies at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, under the supervision of V. B. Wigglesworth, for his PhD thesis. This work confirmed his love for dragonflies and led to the publication in 1960 of the seminal book 'Dragonflies' in the 'New Naturalists' series, which he co-wrote with Cynthia Longfield and Norman Moore. This and a second book, 'A Biology of Dragonflies' (1962), established Corbet's reputation as the world's leading authority on dragonflies and a master of scientific synthesis. 
Corbet's first professional appointment, from 1954 to 1957, was as invertebrate zoologist at the east Africa high commission laboratories in Jinja, Uganda, where he studied the ecology and feeding strategies of fish in Lake Victoria. From 1957 to 1962 he was transferred to the East African Virus Research Institute at Entebbe, Uganda, to work on the behaviour and ecology of mosquitoes and the discovery of the mosquito vector of o'nyong-nyong fever, which at the time affected over two million people in Uganda and Kenya. 
When Uganda achieved independence in 1962 Corbet took a post at the Entomology Research Institute in Ottawa, where he investigated the breeding strategies of mosquitoes in the Canadian high Arctic. He was also instrumental in identifying and eliminating the nuisance caused by biting flies on the St Lawrence River before Expo 1967 in Montreal. In 1967 he was appointed director of the Canada Agriculture Research Institute at Belleville, Ontario, where the focus of his work was on developing methods of pest management that reduced the use of synthetic organic pesticides. During this period he crystallized his ideas on the role of human populations in destablizing ecosystems and precipitating pest outbreaks. Thereafter he took every opportunity to call for national policies on sustainable development. 
These convictions led Corbet to accept posts first as professor and chairman of the biology department at the University of Waterloo, Ontario, in 1971, and then, in 1974, as professor and director of the Joint Centre for Environmental Sciences at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand, where he was able to pursue his ideas on integrated holistic environmental studies. In New Zealand he had the opportunity to present an ecological perspective on various influential forums by serving on the Environmental Council, the government fact-finding group on nuclear energy, the Demographic Society, and the Club of Rome. By 1978 he considered that the job as director of the Joint Centre had become too political and insufficiently scientific so he resigned to take a chair in the department of zoology at the University of Canterbury. Soon afterwards he was awarded a Commonwealth visiting professorship in the department of applied biology at the University of Cambridge. 
Corbet was married three times. He married his first wife, Hildegard Gertrud Keller, a teacher who later became a psychiatrist, in Germany on 9 February 1957. They were divorced in 1979. On 15 October 1980, in New Zealand, he married his Swedish second wife, Laila Kristin Kjellstrom, who held various jobs and was latterly a member of a counselling service. The birth of their daughter, Katarina Alexandra, prompted them in 1980 to return to Britain, where Corbet took the foundation chair in zoology in the department of biological sciences at the University of Dundee. There he was head of department from 1983 to 1986. His second marriage having also ended in divorce, on 31 December 1987 he married Mary Elizabeth Canvin ('b'. 1933), a medical practitioner, in Edinburgh. While at Dundee he served on the Nature Conservancy Council committee for Scotland and chaired the science committee of the Scottish Wildlife Trust. He also brought his considerable scientific and organizational powers to help shape the British Dragonfly Society, which was formed in 1983 and of which he was elected first president, a post he held until 1992. He retired from the University of Dundee as professor emeritus of zoology in 1990 and then spent six years as honorary professor in the department of zoology at Edinburgh University. It was during this period that he was able to complete the highly regarded and comprehensive 'Dragonflies: Behaviour and Ecology of Odonata' (1999), which included 830 pages and 4000 references. For this definitive synthesis on dragonflies he was awarded the Neill medal for natural history by the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 2002. 
In 1997 Corbet left Scotland and moved to Crean Mill, near St Buryan in the far west of Cornwall, close to the home of his sister and where, his third marriage having also ended in divorce, he met Sarah Jewell, who became his close partner. There he was able to enjoy dragonflies in the mill's garden, which had a stream and large ponds. While living in Cornwall he served on the council and executive of the Cornwall Wildlife Trust and completed his last major project, a new book on 'Dragonflies' (co-written with S. J. Brooks) in the 'New Naturalist' series, published a few months after his death. 
Corbet was awarded doctorates or honorary doctorates by the universities of Reading (1962), Cambridge (1976), Edinburgh (2003), and Dundee (2005). He was elected a fellow of the Institute of Biology (1967), the Entomological Society of Canada (1977), of which he was president (1971-2) and from which he received the gold medal for outstanding achievement (1974), the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (1985), the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1987), and the Royal Society of Arts (1991). From 2001 to 2003 he was president of the Worldwide Dragonfly Association. 
Corbet was courteous, thoughtful, and quietly spoken. He was incisive, and had a powerful personality and strongly held convictions, valuable assets on the various bodies on which he served. He also had a thorough grasp of the English language and a prodigious memory, which served him well when synthesizing facts on the world's dragonflies. He died at the Royal Cornwall Hospital, Treliske, on 13 February 2008, after suffering a heart attack in the post office at Crean. He was survived by Sarah Jewell and by his daughter, Katarina. 


@@@@@


doc= 99822


Witherington, (Cecile) Pearl (1914-2008), special operations officer, was born in Paris on 24 June 1914, the eldest of the four daughters of Wallace Seckham Witherington (1879-1932), the last surviving male member of an old Northumbrian fighting family, and his wife, Gertrude, nee Hearn. She also had four brothers, all of whom died in infancy. Her family were gentry in reduced circumstances -- her father drank heavily -- and lived in Paris to save money. She was brought up there, becoming bilingual in French and English. Once she remembered coming home from school and finding the family's furniture in the street, because the apartment's rent was so long overdue. She later described her father (on her marriage certificate) as an architect, but it is doubtful that he ever practised. (His father, Walter Seckham Witherington, was an architect who designed, among other buildings, Carlyle Mansions in Chelsea.) When her parents separated, she and her sisters stayed with their mother. She went to elementary school in Paris, and learned to type. 
When the Second World War broke out in September 1939 Pearl Witherington went to the British embassy, where the family was known, and volunteered for war work; she became an extra cipher clerk for the air attache. Early in June 1940 she found the embassy closed -- no one had remembered to tell her that the other staff had fled to Tours. She then realized the Germans were approaching Paris and took her mother and sisters down to Marseilles, crossing the demarcation line into unoccupied France illegally -- her first clandestine operation. 
The family was repatriated to England, and the air ministry found Pearl a post as personal assistant to a senior staff officer. She decided that this was no way for a Witherington to make war. She heard of the Special Operations Executive and volunteered for its independent French section. She learned guerilla and sabotage skills, proved herself the best shot of her intake, was commissioned into the Women's Auxiliary Air Force, and parachuted into France on the night of 22-3 September 1943. She was initially courier to Maurice Southgate's enormous Stationer circuit, which covered much of central France, and for over seven months travelled incessantly, by train, bicycle, or on foot, carrying arms and messages, disguised as Genevieve Touzalin, a cosmetics saleswoman. Though frequently passing through police and security controls, she was never arrested, despite many close shaves. The circuit was preparing groups of saboteurs who would make the Germans' rear areas unavailable to them after the impending invasion, and executed some useful coups, including blowing up a big Michelin tyre factory at Montlucon. 
On 1 May 1944 Southgate fell into a Gestapo trap, which Witherington avoided. She then settled down to run a smaller circuit of her own, codenamed Wrestler, in the Sologne. Though a woman, at a time when women had no votes in France, and a foreigner, she accumulated a private army nearly 3000 strong, armed with hand weapons parachuted to her from England. The Germans heard of her, and offered a million francs for her capture; no one who knew her betrayed her. Henri Charles Willy Cornioley (1910-1999), a French pharmaceutical chemist to whom she had become engaged before the outbreak of war, joined her 'en maquis' and fought beside her. (Neither family had approved the engagement: his because she was a protestant, hers because they did not think him a gentleman.) Her circuit brought rail traffic across the Sologne almost to a standstill after the Normandy landings, and ambushed road convoys heading for the front. It also helped to corral and force the surrender of a body of 18,000 German troops trying to retreat from south-western France back into the Reich. The region was overrun by the United States army late in August. She took Henri back to England with her, and they were married in Kensington register office on 26 October 1944. They had one daughter, Claire. 
After the liberation of France, Pearl Cornioley was sent to the USA on a propaganda mission. This was not a great success because this small, correct, uniformed woman had none of the glamour an American audience expected of a secret agent. Her superiors sent her a civil MBE; she sent it back, saying she had done nothing civil. The air ministry secured her a military MBE, and she was advanced to CBE in 2004. The French also appointed her to the legion d'honneur. In 1946 she returned to Paris, to a small flat she and Henri bought in the rue Pergolese. She ran the secretarial side of the World Bank for many years. When she retired, and Henri's health began to fail, she sold the flat and moved with him to a 'maison de retraite' at Chateauvieux, on the edge of Wrestler's former fighting area. She masterminded the erection of a memorial to F section's dead at Valencay (Indre), inaugurated by the queen mother in 1991 on the fiftieth anniversary of F section's first parachute drop, not far away. In 1996, in collaboration with a French journalist, Herve Larroque, she published her autobiography, 'Pauline'. She was a woman of unusual strength of character, courage, and directness of speech. Henri died at Chateauvieux in 1999; she died there on 24 February 2008. She was survived by her daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 99823


Cosgrove, Denis Edmund (1948-2008), geographer, was born on 3 May 1948 at 16 Kenilworth Road, Liverpool, the second of the six children of Peter Cyril Cosgrove (1910-1980), bank clerk, later bank manager, and his wife, Gwendoline Brenda, 'nee' Mackrill ('b'. 1922). He was raised in a lower middle-class, devoutly Catholic, household, his father being of Irish descent. He was educated at St Francis Xavier's College, a prominent Jesuit secondary school which his father had also attended. As an academic high flyer he was initially obliged to give up the study of geography in favour of Latin and Greek, but later selected the subject for study at a higher level. The first member of his family to attend any university, he won an open scholarship to read geography at St Catherine's College, Oxford (1966-9), and completed a masters degree at the University of Toronto (1969-70). 
Cosgrove's return to Oxford in 1970 was inspired by personal commitment as much as academic ambition: Isobel Thubron ('b'. 1943), whom he married in New York on 25 September 1970, had recently been appointed to the post of demonstrator in the university's school of geography. She was the daughter of Samuel Thubron, financial director of Clarke Chapman Engineering. They had two daughters, Emily and Isla. After their marriage Cosgrove registered for a postgraduate degree and was eventually awarded a DPhil in 1976, though by then he was well established as an academic. His first professional employment, in 1971-2, was as a researcher in the built environment research group of the Polytechnic of Central London, where his job was to assist in the development of computer planning models. In 1972 he was appointed as lecturer in human geography at Oxford Polytechnic, where he flourished as a teacher and administrator, rising to principal lecturer and chair of the geography section. 
In 1980 he moved to the recently established department of geography at Loughborough University as lecturer, becoming reader in 1983. There he helped to create an influential new school of cultural geography, oriented towards historical studies of landscape iconography. Having previously held visiting professorships at the University of Toronto, the University of Texas at Austin, and the University of Oregon, he was now set on widening his horizons further. In 1994 he was appointed to a chair in human geography at Royal Holloway, University of London. There he established a new masters programme in cultural geography and became dean of the graduate school, as well as being founder editor (also in 1994) of 'Ecumene' (subsequently renamed 'Cultural Geographies'). In 2000 he was appointed to the newly endowed Alexander Von Humboldt chair of geography in the University of California, Los Angeles. Meanwhile, his first marriage having ended in divorce, on 2 December 1989 he married Carmen Patricia Mills ('b'. 1964), daughter of Richard Aldous Mills, geologist. They had one son, Leon. 
One of Cosgrove's principal achievements as a scholar was to develop a compelling rationale for geography as a humanities discipline at a time when the subject was dominated by models drawn from the physical and social sciences. In his view geographical enquiry was equally concerned with the technical, material, and imaginative engagement between people and places. Early in his career he was drawn to the works of Ruskin, and Renaissance ideas of landscape as reflected in sixteenth-century Vicenza and the Veneto. These concerns were reflected in a series of influential books, including 'Social Formation and Symbolic Landscape' (1984), 'The Palladian Landscape' (1993), and 'The Iconography of Landscape' (1988, co-edited with Stephen Daniels). His later writings on mapping drew him to fruitful collaborations with scholars and artists in England and North America. Throughout his career he maintained an enduring interest in the relationships between geography and cosmography, resulting in his 'magnum opus' on imaginative geographies of the globe, 'Apollo's Eye: a Cartographic Genealogy of the Earth in the Western Imagination' (2001). His publications had a significant impact well beyond his chosen discipline, notably within architecture and the visual arts, and were widely translated. In 1988 he won the Back award of the Royal Geographical Society for contributions to human geography, and in 2008 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Talinn, Estonia. 
Cosgrove's academic outlook was inspired by a strong sense of the connections between scholarship, pedagogy, and ethics. He was a humane scholar who made possible a more expansive vision of geography as a creative discipline, an inspiring teacher who changed the way his students thought about the world and their place within it, and a trusted colleague and mentor, whose convivial and generous approach to life inspired many of those who knew him. He died on 21 March 2008 at his home in West Hollywood, Los Angeles, California, having been diagnosed with stomach cancer in 2006. Memorial meetings were held in May 2008 at the UCLA Fowler Museum, Los Angeles, and at the Royal Geographical Society, London. His ashes were scattered, according to his wishes, at two of his favourite places: Malibu, Los Angeles, and Parliament Hill, London. He was survived by his wife, Carmen, and his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99825


Court, Hazel Marjorie (1926-2008), actress, was born Margery Hazel Court at 134 Heathfield Road, Handsworth, Birmingham, on 10 February 1926, the younger daughter of George William Court, a stores clerk, and former professional cricketer with Durham County Cricket Club, and his wife, Mary Magdalene (Madge), 'nee' Blockley. When she was ten months old the family went to live at Eastern Road, Wylde Green, where her father worked for the United Yeast Company. His brief was to create a sports ground and club for the company's workers. By her own account Hazel enjoyed an idyllic childhood, entering fully into the seasonal delights of her environment. From a very early age she was drawn to acting, loved dressing up and performing in church shows, and was powerfully attracted to the great movie stars of the period, acting out their roles after leaving the cinema. The Second World War intervened when she was a teenager, and when her elder sister Audrey's husband was killed she went to live with her in Ealing. By happy chance Audrey showed the producer Norman Loudon and the director Anthony Asquith a photograph of the eighteen-year-old Hazel, which led to her first film role -- a one-line assignment in Ealing's valentine to the music-hall heyday, 'Champagne Charlie' (1944). It also led to an affair of several years with Loudon, who was more than twice her age. In the early 1940s she had some stage experience with the Birmingham Alexander Theatre, appearing in 'School for Scandal', and studied acting at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art. 
In the immediate post-war period Court appeared mainly in modest movies made with largely domestic consumption in mind, but she made the most of the limited opportunities they offered her. She had the female lead opposite the popular comedians Flanagan and Allen in 'Dreaming' (1945), a farce that gave her the chance to appear in several guises and a bizarre range of costumes. Her pert prettiness and shapeliness ensured a steady stream of films, with 'Holiday Camp' (1947) perhaps the highlight from this period. In this hymn to post-war egalitarianism she played sympathetically a young war widow with a baby who finds romance at the eponymous venue. She had supporting roles to such 1940s stars as Sally Gray in the romance 'Carnival' (1946), Phyllis Calvert in the feebly feminist 'The Root of All Evil' (1947), Greta Gynt in the thriller 'Dear Murderer' (1947), and Jean Kent in 'Bond Street' (1948). In the latter she was the bride whose wedding dress gives rise to a multi-storied plot, but a demure Court could hardly compete with Kent in full cry as a tough prostitute. Court had leads in the minor period comedy 'Meet Me at Dawn' (1947), in the dim thriller 'My Sister and I' (1948), and in the surprisingly robust 'film noir' 'Forbidden' (1949), in which her purposeful heroine takes the sexual initiative in ways uncommon among her more genteel compeers. However, busy and often effective as she was in the 1940s, she never quite took her place with the major female stars of the decade, perhaps as a result of starting a little later than they had. 
Court's co-star in 'My Sister and I' was another Rank hopeful, (James Patrick) Dermot Walsh (1924-2002), whom she married on 2 July 1949 and with whom she had a daughter, Sally. They appeared together in three above-average B movies: the semi-supernatural thriller 'Ghost Ship' (1952), the oddly suburban 'Counterspy' (1953), and 'A Woman of Mystery' (1958), a Danziger Productions mystery in which she played a tediously subservient girlfriend. There were several other B movies in the often-anodyne 1950s, including two trim thrillers, 'Behind the Headlines' and 'The Narrowing Circle' (both 1956), in which she enjoyably sparred with the Canadian actor Paul Carpenter. The 1954 release 'Devil Girl from Mars' became a camp classic among the cheeseparing science-fiction films of the decade, but Court's role was inevitably overshadowed by the showier types involved, especially Patricia Laffan, the titular visitor in search of virile male earthlings. 
Hammer Studio's first venture into Technicolor horror revealed Court in all her red-haired, green-eyed, ample-bosomed glory as she was exposed to the danger of 'The Curse of Frankenstein' (1957), which launched the studio's hugely profitable horror cycle and her career as Hammer's 'scream queen'. At roughly the same time she came to wider notice in the television series 'Dick and the Duchess' (1957-8), opposite the American actor Patrick O'Neal. The rest of her career reflected her success in both horror and television. She made three well-regarded period shockers for the American director Roger Corman, 'The Premature Burial' (1962), 'The Raven' (1963; co-starring Vincent Price, Boris Karloff, and Peter Lorre), and 'The Masque of the Red Death' (1964), all derived from Edgar Allan Poe. She was also a frequent guest star on American television from the late 1950s, including appearances in 'Alfred Hitchcock Presents', one episode of which was directed by the former actor Don Taylor (1920-1998), whom she married on 25 March 1964, having divorced Dermot Walsh the previous year. 
Apart from an uncredited cameo in 'The Final Conflict' (1981), directed by Taylor, Hazel Court retired from acting in the early 1970s, and took up painting and sculpture, for which she trained in Italy. She settled permanently in the USA on her second marriage, which produced two further children, Courtney and Jonathan. After Taylor's death in December 1998 she went to live in their cabin at Lake Tahoe, California, in the High Sierras, where she died on 15 April 2008. Her autobiography, 'Hazel Court: Horror Queen', was published a week after her death. It is a somewhat fulsome account but, in refusing to dish dirt on colleagues, she emerges as a likeable enthusiast. She was survived by her three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99826


Cowgill, (George) Bryan (1927-2008), television producer and executive, was born on 27 May 1927 at 19 Cowper Avenue, Clitheroe, Lancashire, the son of John Clifford Cowgill (1899-1969), printer and stationer, and later proprietor of the Clitheroe 'Advertiser and Times', and his wife, Ada Gertrude, 'nee' Hartley (1902-1999). He had one brother. He attended Clitheroe grammar school from 1938 to 1942 and left at the age of fifteen with few formal qualifications. His grandfather's connections in the regional newspaper industry helped him secure his first job as a copy boy with the 'Lancashire Evening Post' in Preston. 
In 1943 Cowgill enlisted in the Royal Navy's Y scheme, introduced to allow boys aged sixteen and seventeen to pursue a career in the navy. He was selected for officer training in the Royal Marines king's squad, and at eighteen became the youngest officer in the 3rd Royal Marine commandos. He reached the rank of lieutenant, and in 1945 was billeted to a small fishing village, Tai O, on the island of Lantau, near Hong Kong. On demobilization in 1947 he returned to work at the family-run newspaper, where he became editor. On 16 October 1951 he married Doreen Thompson, a 23-year-old shop assistant, and daughter of Harold Thompson, transport manager. They had two daughters. 
Cowgill could have built a career in the family business, but in 1954 he responded to an advertisement for the job of 'stage manager' in the BBC's television outside broadcast department, based at Lime Grove, London. The following year he started work as a 'floor manager', the very same day (22 September) that the BBC's competitor, Associated-Rediffusion, began broadcasting in London. He quickly learned the grammar of live television production and within months was a production assistant on the outside broadcast series 'Saturday Night Out', which introduced the BBC's 'roving eye' camera. In the same year, he directed his first television programme, 'Dancing Club', featuring Victor Sylvester and his orchestra. From then on he regularly directed outside broadcasts, including sport. 
In 1957 the BBC's director of outside broadcasting (television), Peter Dimmock, asked Cowgill to produce 'Sportsview', the BBC's popular midweek sports magazine programme. The slick, fast-paced programme, edited by Paul Fox, mixed live studio interviews with filmed highlights from sport, and demanded disciplined direction. Cowgill excelled in the role, later admitting that his naval background helped him to call the shots with a commanding voice. It was in this role that he earned the nickname Ginger, partly because of his red hair, but more because of his reputation as a loud, fiery taskmaster, a tag he claimed did not reflect his 'true character' ('Mr Action Replay', 25). 
After directing the coverage of athletics during the 1958 Commonwealth games in Cardiff, Cowgill and Fox approached Dimmock with an idea for 'Grandstand', which became the BBC's flagship sports programme until its demise in 2007. As head of BBC television sport from 1963, Cowgill was involved in a number of ground-breaking initiatives. In 1964 alone these included a deal with the Football League that led to the launch of 'Match of the Day' on BBC2, satellite coverage from the Olympic games in Tokyo, and forty-over Sunday league cricket. Cowgill won three BAFTA, including one for the coverage of the 1966 world cup finals, in which 'action replay' technology (a phrase introduced by Cowgill) was used for the first time in Britain. Throughout the 1960s 'Grandstand' became synonymous with the BBC's coverage of sport, and so did Cowgill's working relationship with its presenter David Coleman. On 10 November 1966, Coleman was Cowgill's best man when, his first marriage having ended in divorce, he married Jennifer Elizabeth (Jenny) Baker ('b'. 1939), a BBC television secretary, and daughter of Sidney James Abbott Baker, an insurance official. They had two sons. 
With the arrival of colour television in 1967, Cowgill drove the BBC's negotiations with the All England Tennis Club to abolish the amateur-professional distinction, and in 1968 Wimbledon became an open championship. From 1972 he was head of the Television Outside Broadcast Group, and two years later he succeeded Paul Fox as controller of BBC1. It was a role he relished and from 1974 to 1977 his scheduling strategy transformed the performance of the channel, with series including 'Porridge', 'The Good Life', 'All Creatures Great and Small', 'Mastermind', and 'Jim'll Fix It'. 
In 1977 Cowgill was invited to become director of news and current affairs, with a place on the BBC's board of management. However, the job entailed a reduction in salary, so when an offer came to become managing director of Thames Television he left the BBC and doubled his salary. In 1979, and again in 1984, he was embroiled in a battle with the engineering unions, and infamously locked out members of the Association of Cinematograph, Television and Allied Technicians from the Thames building. In spite of the disputes he led Thames to eight years of commercial success and critical acclaim, in the process enticing his friends Eric Morecambe and Ernie Wise to flit from the BBC to ITV. However, his tenure ended abruptly in 1985 when he broke a concordat with the BBC and poached the rights to the American soap 'Dallas'. Cowgill's former colleague Sir Paul Fox later assessed the 'Dallas' affair as a 'monumental misjudgement'. The International Broadcasting Authority forced Thames to relinquish the rights and Cowgill smartly offered his resignation. This effectively ended his professional career, save for a brief period with the sports agent Mark McCormack's IMG, and consultancy with British Satellite Broadcasting, which was establishing a sports channel. He retired to Stratford upon Avon, and published his autobiography, 'Mr Action Replay', in 2006. He died of a heart attack on 14 July 2008, and was survived by his wife, Jenny, and his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99827


Cox, (Charles) Brian (1928-2008), poet, literary critic, and educationist, was born on 5 September 1928 at 142 Humberston Road, Grimsby, Lincolnshire, the second son of Hedley Ernest Cox, coal exporter's clerk, and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Thompson, lady's maid. Attendance at Nunsthorpe elementary school laid principles of academic rigour and coherent ethics that stayed with him throughout his life. He took from his family's Methodism an almost secular sense of kindness. The importance of family and community was reinforced by his mother's death when he was aged ten; he remained thereafter close to his father and older brother. Much of his poetry expressed a sense of human vulnerability and love. His subsequent education built on that foundation, but was in itself less fulfilling. He transferred at the age of eleven to Wintringham secondary school, and thence to Pembroke College, Cambridge, on an open scholarship gained in 1946 but deferred to 1949 for army service. He graduated with a first in English literature in 1952, and then took an MLitt for a thesis on Henry James in 1954. His experience of academic study throughout these fifteen years was worthy but, as he later wrote, somewhat unconnected to his real pleasure in reading and writing. 
Nevertheless several experiences at Cambridge had a permanent impact on Cox. He properly met his future wife, Jean Willmer (though they been acquainted at secondary school), who was a schoolteacher; they married at the Memorial Mission Hall in Grimsby on 7 August 1954, and their partnership he later described as 'completely happy' ('Great Betrayal', 85). He formed a lasting, close friendship with A. E. (Tony) Dyson, a fellow student of literature. While a postgraduate student he taught on two days each week for the Workers' Educational Association, resuming an involvement in adult education that had started when he had been recruited into the Royal Army Education Corps and confirming his belief that great literature ought to be made available to everyone. 
Cox was appointed in 1954 to a post as assistant lecturer in English at Hull University, staying until 1966. His colleagues included Richard Hoggart, Malcolm Bradbury, and Barbara Everett, and he became friends also with the university librarian, Philip Larkin; it was a politically diverse group, but all were committed to the wide dissemination of high literary standards. Cox's most lasting contribution to that end came in 1959 when, with Dyson, he founded 'Critical Quarterly', aiming to provide informed debate about literature to an educated public. It was highly successful, achieving over 5000 subscribers, among whom were English teachers in more than half the grammar schools of Britain. The journal ran summer schools for teachers and senior school students. It held poetry competitions which encouraged the work of several of the new voices of the 1960s including Sylvia Plath, Ted Hughes, R. S. Thomas, Thom Gunn, and Larkin, who remained a strong supporter of the journal and a source of advice. It also led to two volumes by Cox and Dyson, 'Modern Poetry' (1963) and 'Practical Criticism of Poetry' (1965). 
The journal always had educational aims, but this became more overt and controversial when it published a series of five 'Black Papers' on education from 1969 to 1977. These collections, edited by Cox and Dyson, provided platforms for polemical protest against student militancy in universities, comprehensive secondary schooling, and 'child-centred' methods of teaching. Cox remained ambivalent about the achievement of the 'Black Papers' for the rest of his life. On the one hand he believed that they had shifted the terms of debate, ensuring the acceptance that 'standards of excellence must be maintained' ('Black Papers on Education', 1971, 33). On the other he deeply regretted being labelled as right-wing, especially by critics on the left who seemed not to have read what he wrote. 
Cox insisted that he was a liberal, both in the sense of respecting diversity and equal rights, and also in his belief in human reason and the importance of liberal education for all. His textbook with Dyson on the practical criticism of poetry had established -- well before these controversies -- that the engaged academic ought to support schoolteachers constructively. His greatest contribution to education policy was to chair (in 1988-9) the official working group that created the English national curriculum for schools in England and Wales, publishing a report that sought high standards and knowledge of a literary canon alongside free expression -- drama, creative writing, discussion, and reading for pleasure. The report was also well informed by research on how children become literate, and showed a respect for dialect and for bilingualism alongside an insistence on the importance of standard linguistic forms. The price of this balance was that the resulting curriculum was gradually eroded by the mechanistic preferences of both Conservative and Labour governments from the mid-1990s onwards. 
Cox, who was appointed CBE in 1990, was widely acknowledged to be an extraordinarily courteous man with a firm commitment to public service, a belief in teaching as a powerful force for good, and loyalty to what he called early in his career the 'ideals of progress, liberty, tolerance and reason' (C. B. Cox, 'The Free Spirit', 1963, 161). The tragedy for his optimism was that he lived at a time when faith in such ideals was widely contemned. 
Cox's poems were published in 'Two-Headed Monster' (1985), 'Collected Poems' (1993), 'Emeritus' (2001), and 'My Eightieth Year to Heaven' (2007). Among his other works were a study of Joseph Conrad (1974) and an edited collection of profiles of African writers (2 vols, 1996). He lived latterly at 20 Park Gates Drive, Cheadle Hume, near Stockport, and died there on 24 April 2008, of cancer of the prostate. He was survived by his wife, Jean, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99828


Cox, Sir Geoffrey Sandford (1910-2008), journalist and broadcasting executive, was born on 7 April 1910 at Palmerston North, New Zealand, the youngest of three sons of Charles William Sandford Cox (1873-1965), bank manager, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' MacGregor (1875-1960). From Southlands High School in Invercargill he went to Otago University to read history and thence, as a Rhodes scholar, to Oriel College, Oxford, where he opted for philosophy, politics, and economics. More relevant to his immediate future was his travel in Europe during the vacations and, challenged by a German fellow scholar to see the Nazi way of life for himself, he spent three weeks under canvas with the 'Arbeitsdienst', the military-style youth labour service. An account he wrote of this adventure was picked up by the 'New York Times' and in Britain by 'The Spectator', and brought him to the attention of Fleet Street. 
After graduating from Oxford with a second-class degree in 1934 -- and on 25 May 1935 marrying a young woman he had met there, Cecily Barbara Talbot Turner (1912-1993), daughter of Alexander Forrest Turner, artist -- he was taken on by the 'News Chronicle', a liberal newspaper with a tradition of forthright reporting. In Spain, where civil war broke out in 1936, its celebrated foreign correspondent Arthur Koestler had been imprisoned for criticizing General Franco. The veteran Vernon Bartlett was about to be sent in his stead when it was decided not to risk losing another of the paper's eminences. Despite his recent marriage Cox was considered more expendable, with the added advantage that his New Zealand passport might confuse suspicious fascists. In the event his coverage was confined to the beleaguered capital, and gave him the material for a book, 'The Defence of Madrid' (1937), that brought him a rival Fleet Street offer, this time from the all-powerful 'Daily Express', as a foreign correspondent. Based in Vienna, then Paris, but sooner or later pursuing every lurch towards world war, he covered the 'Anschluss' of Austria into the German Reich, the Munich crisis, the Russo-Finnish winter war, the blitzkrieg through the low countries, and so to the fall of France, from where he escaped on the last P & O steamer to leave Bordeaux. 
Deciding it was time to fight in the war rather than report it, in 1940 Cox joined a New Zealand infantry brigade that had been switched to Britain when an immediate invasion was feared, but now that Mussolini's declaration of war had extended the conflict to the Mediterranean, was returning to its original destination, the Middle East. Cox served in Greece, Crete, and the western desert as an intelligence officer and was mentioned in dispatches. At this point his native country decided it should have a voice in the deliberations of the wartime alliances. Cox was plucked from the army and sent to the newly established New Zealand legation in Washington as first secretary and charge d'affaires. His superior there was still a minister in the New Zealand government and had to spend much time back home. It fell to Cox, aged thirty-two, to debate and eventually sign historic treaties, on one occasion immediately ahead of the Soviet Union's formidable ambassador to the United States, Andrei Gromyko. Then in 1944 he was able to rejoin what was now the 2nd New Zealand division for the final slog of the Italian campaign, from Monte Cassino to Trieste, which enclave staged the first of the many vengeful small wars that flared up once the big war ended, and gave Cox another subject for a book. 
Spurning a diplomatic or military career, in 1945 Cox went back to the 'News Chronicle' as a lobby correspondent but was soon making his name as a commentator on international as well as domestic affairs. When the 'Chronicle' made him an assistant editor in 1954 he determined on an executive career in newspapers. Two years later he was offered the deputy editorship. His letter of acceptance was in his pocket, ready to be delivered, when he heard the snatch of gossip which -- once more -- tempted him to change course. Aidan Crawley, who had successfully set up Independent Television's news service, ITN, when commercial television went on the air in 1955, was sick of the cost-cutting and general interference now emanating from hard-hit programme contractors, and was resigning in protest. Cox stalled on the 'Chronicle' offer and applied for the ITN job. He was summoned to lunch by Captain Tom Brownrigg, the brusque former naval officer who was general manager of Associated-Rediffusion, the main London contractor, and also chairman of ITN. They had been reluctant allies, they now discovered, when in 1941 German airborne forces were landing on Crete and the navy was dispatched to take off British and New Zealand troops. 'Would have left you there if I'd had my way', Brownrigg grunted. 'We had already lost half the Mediterranean Fleet. It was madness to risk losing more ships' ('See it Happen', 21-22). 
Nevertheless Brownrigg gave Cox the post of editor, ITN. It was a daunting challenge. Crawley's great innovation had been to replace the impersonal newsreaders of BBC television with 'newscasters,' as he termed them, who would be involved in the writing and delivery of each item, and who might even turn to interview a witness to the story or a specialist in its subject. The public's favourite was the athlete Christopher Chataway. Only now did Cox learn that he too was quitting. There happened to be an approach from the then little-known Ludovic Kennedy, whose Sunday afternoon arts programme had just been axed, while young Robin Day was showing promise. Cox, whose knack of picking the right people for the right job would distinguish his whole career, pushed them both to the forefront. 
On a visit to the United States Cox had been impressed by the authority of such news moguls as Charles Collingwood and Ed Murrow, and even more by their live transmission of events and debates and hearings as they took place, notably Murrow's showing-up of Senator McCarthy. 'See it happen' became his watchword (and in due course the title of his memoir). When President Kennedy arrived in London in 1961 his namesake Ludovic collared him in the street for an on-air interview. Another time viewers were abruptly switched to cameras deep under the Alps for the moment when engineers driving a new road tunnel from both ends met in the middle. All this enterprise was still confined within fifteen-minute bulletins out of peak viewing hours. Cox's goal was a full half-hour timed to harvest all the main news of the day. In 1967 he was finally able to launch 'News at Ten', the first half-hour, peak-time news programme or British television. 
Cox (who was made a CBE in 1959 and knighted in 1966) was a member of a consortium bidding for one of the last programme contracts, Yorkshire TV. When in 1968 they succeeded he became its deputy chairman and had to leave ITN. In 1971 Yorkshire Television took over Tyne Tees Television, and Cox become chairman of the latter. In 1977, however, he returned to his old haunts as chairman of UPITN, an international agency formed by ITN and United Press. He was also chairman of LBC Radio from 1978 to 1981. 
Cox finally retired in 1981 to enjoy country walks and fishing in local waters, though he also served as an independent director of 'The Observer' for another eight years. He and Cecily had had two sons, Peter and Patrick, and twin daughters, Rosamond and Evelyn. Their home from 1976 was in Coln St Dennis, Gloucestershire. Cox, who survived his wife by fifteen years, died on 2 April 2008, at Moreton Hill Farm Care Centre, Standish, Gloucestershire, of cancer. He was cremated at Cheltenham crematorium on 11 April and his ashes, along with his wife's, rest in the burial annexe of St James the Great Church in Coln St Dennis. They were survived by their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99837


Cushing, David Henry (1920-2008), marine ecologist, was born on 14 March 1920 at 10 Prudhoe Street, Alnwick, Northumberland, the son of William Ewart Wittrick Cushing (1891-1980), schoolmaster, and his wife, Isobel, 'nee' Batchelder (1892-1988). He attended Duke's School, Alnwick, and the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne. In 1938 he went as a Horsley scholar to Balliol College, Oxford, to complete a war-shortened degree in zoology. (In 1950 he completed his DPhil thesis on the vertical migration of zooplankton under Sir Alister Hardy.) In April 1941 he was commissioned, from the officer cadet training unit, into the Royal Artillery. He served in various anti-aircraft regiments, ending in 1945 with service with the 1st Royal Fusiliers and the 8th Indian division. On 29 April 1943, at St Barnabas's Church, Dulwich, he married Diana Romola Camilla Antona-Traversi ('b'. 1919), daughter of Hugo Antona-Traversi, a translator for the BBC; they had one daughter, Camilla. 
In 1946 Michael Graham persuaded Cushing to join an expanding team of oceanographers and fisheries scientists at the government's Fisheries Laboratory in Lowestoft (later the Centre for Environment, Fisheries, and Aquaculture Science). He remained at Lowestoft for the rest of his career, eventually becoming deputy director and head of the fish population dynamics division from 1974 to his retirement in 1980. 
Cushing's early work was immediately innovative. The new technologies developed in the war years allowed him to investigate acoustic means of mapping the movements of fish and zooplankton, and 'calibrate' the returned signal strength to estimate the abundance of fish stocks. He was also interested in how production was regulated in the sea -- whether it was determined primarily by a bottom-up nutrient input or a top-down predation. In 1954 he followed a North Sea plankton patch with thirteen research cruises over three months, and mathematically modelled the processes and results to show the different roles of nutrients and predators. The use of observation and modelling was to be used throughout his career; but events took an abrupt change. 
The East Anglian herring fishery, off Lowestoft and Yarmouth, was without equal, and for hundreds of years fed Europe. In 1955 it failed. Cushing was called in as part of the team at Lowestoft to solve the herring crisis. It had a profound effect on the direction of his, and future, science, and on his view of science serving society. Only in 1977 was the fishery closed, by which time a 5 million tonne breeding stock had fallen to 50,000 tonnes. A fishery, a market, and a culture was lost. Cushing considered that the failure was as much one of science as of management. Managers needed better science based on fuller understanding and not just empiricism. 
Out of this crisis came some outstanding science. Cushing demonstrated that the failure was due to reduced 'recruitment' (young fish) caused by a diminished parent stock. The science of the relationships between stock and recruitment was born. It is this relationship that determines the sustainability of fish stocks, and failures of recruitment due to fishing Cushing termed 'recruitment overfishing'. Fish stocks are also very variable, due to extreme fluctuations in the numbers of recruits from year to year or over longer periods. Both the form of the stock-recruit relationships and the causes of this variability lie in the very early life history of the fish, as larvae. Cushing explained the variability in his 'match-mismatch' hypothesis, wherein good recruitments follow the coincidence of larval production with the production of larval food determined by weather or climate. 
Cushing produced ten books, including 'The Arctic Cod' (1966), 'Fisheries Biology' (1968), 'Marine Ecology and Fisheries' (1975), 'Climate and Fisheries' (1982), and 'The Provident Sea' (1988). His last book was 'Towards the Science of Recruitment' (1996). His global recognition can be appreciated from his various awards: the Rosenstiel gold medal (1980), the Albert medal for oceanography (1984), and the Ecology Institute prize (1993). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1977. Approaching retirement, he instigated the 'Journal of Plankton Research' and remained as editor until 2001. His last scientific paper, published in this journal in 2000, was written with his close colleagues Joe Horwood and Tim Wyatt. It was on stock and recruitment. The journal instituted an annual David Cushing prize for the best publication by a young scientist. 
Cushing enjoyed art and wine, spending many summers touring southern Europe. He died at the James Paget Hospital, Gorleston, Norfolk, on 14 March 2008, after suffering a stroke; he was survived by his wife and daughter. He had been driven by the need for the understanding and application of marine ecology in the management of fisheries. He was an iconoclast whose influence was truly global. In Cushing's Festschrift Robert Dickson's use of Samuel Johnson's quotation was not out of place: 'The true genius is a mind of large general powers, accidentally determined to some particular direction'. 


@@@@@


doc= 99840


Dalton, Sir Howard (1944-2008), microbiologist, was born at Woodside Nursing Home, Epsom Road, Sutton, Surrey, on 8 February 1944, the son of Leslie Alfred Dalton, lorry driver, and his wife, Florence Gertrude, 'nee' Evans. At the time of his birth registration his parents lived at 121B Manor Drive North, New Malden, Surrey. From a young age it was clear that he was a very bright boy with an inquiring mind and a scientific bent, and there were many escapades with cocktails of chemicals which marked his early interest in science. His family were extremely proud of his attending Raynes Park grammar school after passing his eleven plus examinations and he subsequently seized the opportunity to study at Queen Elizabeth College, University of London. After graduating in 1965 with a BSc in microbiology he began research with John Postgate at the world-renowned unit of nitrogen fixation at the University of Sussex, which led to his DPhil in 1968. During this time he published a number of important scientific papers in the field of microbial physiology which explained how the soil bacterium 'Azotobacter' protects its nitrogenase enzyme from damage by oxygen. 
In 1968 Dalton moved to the USA and worked for two years as a postdoctoral fellow on the biochemistry of nitrogenase in the anaerobic bacterium 'Clostridium' in the laboratory of Len Mortensen at Purdue University, Indiana. It was while he was in the USA that he met his future wife, Kira Rostislavavna De Armitt, 'nee' Rozdestvensky, five years his junior, the Russian-American daughter of Rostislav Sergevich Rozdestvensky, a college professor; she was later an employment counsellor and management consultant. They married at Lewes register office on 5 October 1971 after her divorce. While in the USA, Dalton successfully avoided the possibility of being drafted to Vietnam by his ordination, achieved through a correspondence course, into the Universal Life Church. This subsequently became a running joke, with friends frequently referring to him as the Reverend Howard Dalton, despite his being a lifelong atheist. 
In 1970 Dalton returned to the University of Sussex to work with Bob Bray in the department of chemistry, where he developed his interest in spectroscopy techniques to study two molybdenum-containing enzymes, nitrate reductase from 'Aspergillus nidulans' and xanthine dehydrogenase from 'Veillonella alcalescens'. The following year he accepted the offer of a lectureship in microbiology at the department of biological sciences, newly established by Roger Whittenbury, at the University of Warwick. Dalton and his wife, Kira, settled in the village of Radford Semele, near Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, at the start of what would become a long and highly successful tenure at the University of Warwick. He and Kira had a son and a daughter, in addition to the two sons of her earlier marriage. 
During his time at Warwick, Dalton established a large research group, pioneering work on two fascinating enzymes catalysing the oxidation of methane by bacteria. These remarkable enzymes, called methane monooxygenases, convert methane into methanol. Dalton and his colleagues were able to purify and characterize these enzymes at the biochemical and molecular level. This work firmly established much of the subsequent knowledge of their structure and catalytic mechanisms. Dalton was also perceptive enough to realize that these enzymes had remarkable co-oxidation properties, which stimulated a long-standing interest in biocatalysis, biotransformations, and 'green chemistry', using microbial oxygenases. He became a consultant for the New Jersey company Celanese and joined the scientific advisory board for the spin-out biotechnology company Celgene (formed in 1986 immediately prior to the merger of Celanese with the American Hoechst Corporation), which gave him considerable insight into the chemical and industrial aspects of microbiology, which he used to good effect in his biotransformation research. 
Dalton's research at Warwick gave him a high international reputation, yielded many seminal publications in a career generating well over 250 scientific papers, and opened up whole new research fields in the microbiology of one-carbon compounds. He was awarded a personal professorship at Warwick in 1983 and became chair of the department of biological sciences from 1999 to 2002. As his scientific career flourished he was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1993, appointed president of the Society for General Microbiology from 1997 to 2000 and of the Marine Biological Association from 2007, awarded the Leeuwenhoek medal lecture at the Royal Society in 2000, and knighted in the new year's honours list in 2007. 
Dalton was seconded to become chief scientific adviser to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) in 2002, a role in which he sought to instil scientific rigour into policy-making decisions. He led the scientific advisory team generating the UK contingency plan for dealing with avian influenza virus, and was instrumental in raising the profile of climate change as a significant threat, delivering lectures on this and other topics such as biofuels and genetically modified crops at many national and international meetings. He was able to observe at first hand the effects of global warming in Antarctica during a two-week visit to the British Antarctic Survey in 2006 and his great skills as a communicator were evident from his highly entertaining blog in which he described his visit. 
Dalton was a down-to-earth, self-effacing man, outgoing, witty, and very popular with all of his colleagues. He was extremely generous with his time and an inspirational mentor for well over a hundred PhD students and postdoctoral researchers, many of whom went on to very successful careers in academia and industry. His penetrating questions and insightful comments at national and international scientific meetings always made for lively and stimulating debate, and colleagues found that discussing science with him was always rewarding. 
Dalton had an immense zest for science and life in general. His extensive knowledge of Japanese garden design resulted in the creation of two fine gardens on the University of Warwick campus. He was a keen sportsman and played with distinction in the Rowington village cricket side (once, though exceptionally, taking eight for fifteen). A lifelong Spurs supporter, he was in his early days at Warwick a regular member of the biological sciences football team, aptly named 'Biohazard', which in the 1970s played a memorable friendly match against the Saudi Arabia national team. He also had a great passion for real tennis and was a member of Leamington Real Tennis Club where his competitive spirit, guile, and ability won him many tournaments. It was there, while playing in a friendly doubles tournament, that he suffered a heart attack on 12 January 2008; he was declared dead at Warwick Hospital later the same day. He had just returned from a month in the Gambia assisting his wife, Kira, in her extensive humanitarian work, setting up new medical centres and schools there. He was survived by her, their two children, and his two stepsons. 


@@@@@


doc= 99852


Dobree, Georgina (1930-2008), clarinettist, was born on 8 January 1930 at 74 Sutherland Avenue, Maida Vale, London, the only child of Bonamy Dobree (1891-1974), literary scholar, and his wife, Gladys May Mabel (Valentine), 'nee' Brooke-Pechell (1894-1974), artist, author, and poet. She was brought up first at Mendham Priory, Harleston, Norfolk, and then from 1936 at Earls Colne, Essex. From an early age she studied violin and piano and when the Second World War broke out was evacuated to the United States to stay with friends of her parents. She attended the Peabody Conservatory in Baltimore, where she discarded her violin studies and began playing the clarinet, having found one by chance in the home of the people she was staying with, and discovering an immediate affinity for the instrument. 
After returning to London at the end of the war Dobree spent three years at the Royal Academy of Music (1946-8), studying piano under Harold Craxton and clarinet under George Anderson. In 1949 she won a scholarship offered by the French government to study in Paris with Gaston Hamelin, principal clarinettist in the Orchestre Nationale. In the 1951 Hoveringham Festival she played in association with the Griller quartet, led by the violinist Sidney Griller. The following year she made her first broadcast from this festival for the BBC Third Programme. During the summer she travelled to Darmstadt and won the Kranichsteiner music prize for new music, returning to London in the autumn to take part in a series of lectures and recitals on twelve-tone music at Morley College, London's contemporary music hub in this era. Her concerts in London during the 1950s featured regular recitals for the Society for the Promotion of New Music and appearances with the McNaughton New Music Group. At Thea King's invitation she joined the Portia Wind Ensemble and later on created the Chantry Ensemble with the flautist William Bennett, who was succeeded by Patricia Lynden, and with the pianist Alexander Kelly. Elisabeth Lutyens dedicated her Fantasie Trio op. 55 (1963) to the ensemble. Among the many other works written for her was Gordon Jacob's Miniature Suite for clarinet and viola. Alexander Kelly was to remain her most regular pianist and in 1973 they gave a series of concerts in Leighton House, Holland Park, to celebrate twenty-one years of this partnership. 
Dobree was always aware of the Huguenot origins of her father, which perhaps explains her affinity with French music. She felt very much at home with the French style of clarinet playing and with French instruments but was also able to adapt to the more contemporary German sound. From 1953 to 1964 she appeared regularly in the Darmstadt Festival, where she performed the music of and worked with composers such as Peter Maxwell Davies, Olivier Messiaen, Luciano Berio, Karlheinz Stockhausen, and Pierre Boulez. 
Dobree started playing the basset horn in 1952 and it began to make an appearance in her programmes in 1957, when she performed the sonata for piano and basset horn by Franz Danzi and, with Thea King, the Mendelssohn Konzertstucke op. 114. She recorded the Mendelssohn piece for Hyperion with Thea King and also edited this music in the 1990s. Meanwhile her performing career continued with such momentum and vitality through the 1950s and 1960s that it would be easy to overlook her other activities and achievements. Her contributions in researching, editing, and performing early repertoire for clarinets and basset horn can reasonably be said to have begun with Johann Melchior Molter's concertos for D clarinet, recorded for EMI in 1968. From making this recording the idea came to form her own record company, Chantry Records, which continued until 1985. Eight vinyl recordings were reissued on compact disc by Clarinet Classics in 1995. 
From the late 1960s Dobree also became increasingly in demand as a teacher and began this aspect of her career as clarinet tutor at the Watford School of Music. She was subsequently professor of clarinet at the Royal Academy of Music, London, from 1967 until 1986. Editorial commissions came from publishers such as Schott, Musica Rara, Oxford University Press, and Chester Music. Alongside the Chantry record label, she had her own publishing company, Chantry Publications, which was transferred to Emerson Edition in 1999. In that year she also completed one of her last editions, a collection of four French clarinet works published by Kevin Mayhew and consisting of clarinet and piano sonata no. 12 by Jean Xavier Lefevre, 'Premiere Rhapsodie' and 'Petite Piece' by Claude Debussy, and the sonata op. 167 by Camille Saint-Saens. She also continued to extend the contemporary repertoire for the basset horn in the 1990s, commissioning new works from a number of British and eastern European composers including Paul Drayton, David Gow, Sarah Rodgers, Petr Pokorny, Jaroslav Rybar, Karel Janovicky, Marta Jirackova, Alois Pinos, and Iris Szeghova. 
Georgina Dobree was notable not only for the mastery of the instruments that she played but also for her initiation of new and discovery of old works that enriched the repertoire for clarinet and basset horn players and listeners. She was a meticulous musicologist, dedicated to the furthering of scholarly information about the instruments she loved, as well as a fine musician and in great demand as a teacher. She was an indefatigable ambassador for the clarinet and basset horn in both Europe and the USA, and her home in north London was a magnetic hub, often becoming the base for visiting instrumentalists and composers. There were regular parties for colleagues and friends to meet the foreign visitors, and to enjoy her legendary hospitality. Latterly she suffered from Alzheimer's disease and moved to a nursing home in Hitchin, Hertfordshire. In early April 2008 she suffered a fractured left femur and underwent surgery; she died of a chest infection at the Lister Hospital, Stevenage, on 27 April 2008. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 99858


Tynan, Kenneth Peacock (1927-1980), theatre critic, was born on 2 April 1927 at the Glenhurst Nursing Home, 319 Shaftmoor Lane, Hall Green, Birmingham, the only son of Sir Peter Peacock (1872-1948), merchant and former mayor of Warrington, and (Letitia) Rose Tynan (1888-1961). The couple had lived as husband and wife in Birmingham, where Sir Peter was known as Mr Tynan, since 1921. He continued to maintain in some style the wife and family he had left behind in Warrington. Tynan was not told of any of this until his father's death, when he was much upset, not so much by the secret itself as that it had been kept from him. At King Edward's School, Birmingham, he had begun to acquire the enthusiasms that would shape his life. He loved music-hall, theatre, and the cinema, and could not rest until he had set down his account of any film or play or, in particular, any performance that impressed him. He acted in and directed school productions, and lured the eminent critic James Agate to come and see the result. In his last year he won a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he embarked upon a systematic campaign to outshine or outrage all contemporaries as undergraduate journalist, actor, impresario, party-giver, and (despite a stammer) debater. If Oxford had turned him into a show-off, he said later, at least it had turned him into a professional show-off. At the same time he was amassing enough serious and enthusiastic consideration of the theatre to provide him with his first book, 'He that Plays the King' (1950), and a wider reputation. 
After a spell as a repertory theatre director Tynan seized the chance to become a professional theatre critic. Invited by Alec Guinness to take the part of the Player King in Guinness's luckless production of 'Hamlet' for the Festival of Britain, Tynan became the target of especially scornful remarks from the 'Evening Standard''s reviewer, A. Beverley Baxter. He replied with a letter to the editor so droll that according to legend he was immediately hired in Baxter's place. In fact some weeks elapsed, and he had in any case been chipping in notices to 'The Spectator', but no doubt his flair for attracting attention played its part. With the 'Evening Standard' (1952-3) and to a lesser extent with the 'Daily Sketch' (1953-4) Tynan established himself as a funny and scathing writer on the theatre, if still one who wanted from it heroics, illusions, and sad stories of the death of kings. It was only after he was invited to join 'The Observer' in 1954 that he started to apply to drama the political convictions which he was in the process of acquiring, with characteristic intemperance, about this time. 'I doubt that I could love anyone who did not wish to see it' ('The Observer', 13 May 1956), he affirmed in a review of John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger', inspired as much by the play's tirades against respectability and authority as by its theatrical virtues. He went on to embrace socialism, nuclear disarmament, and the didactic drama of Bertolt Brecht. 
His new-found beliefs did not prevent Tynan from remaining a socializer as well as a socialist. He had married on 25 January 1951 Elaine Rita Brimberg, the writer Elaine Dundy ['see below']. Their Mayfair flat became a salon for celebrities passing through London, particularly from the United States. Tynan was fascinated by the outsize stars of Hollywood and Broadway. It was inevitable that he would be lured to America himself, as theatre critic of the 'New Yorker', though without severing his 'Observer' connection. In the end he stayed only two years before returning to London in 1960. 
Tynan was never sure that he wanted to remain a writer, much less a critic. He leapt at every chance to work in a production capacity as well. He was script editor for Ealing Films in its last years (1955-7); produced two programmes for Associated Television on the Stanislavskian method (1958) and dissent in America (1960); and edited the arts magazine 'Tempo' for ABC Television (England) (1961-2). In 1963 he seized the opportunity to abandon his critic's seat altogether. The National Theatre was finally being set up with Sir Laurence Olivier as its first director. Tynan wrote to him proposing that he should be its dramaturg, or literary manager. Olivier agreed. Tynan threw himself into the task with energy and confidence. He disinterred forgotten classics, edited texts, and directly inspired such new works as Tom Stoppard's 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead' and Peter Shaffer's 'Black Comedy'. These first seasons are generally regarded as having given the National's repertoire its stamp, but among the hits were one or two misfires, including a Brecht, which Tynan's critics could cite when in 1968 he clashed with the governors of the theatre over his determination to introduce 'Soldiers', by the German playwright Rolf Hochhuth. The play alleged 'inter alia' that Sir Winston Churchill had ordered the death of the wartime Polish leader General Sikorski. As a former colleague of Churchill's, the National's chairman, Viscount Chandos, was adamant that the production should not go ahead. Tynan responded by mounting the play himself in the commercial theatre. This did not endear him to the board, but his eventual departure in 1973 was chiefly prompted by Olivier's retirement that year and the choice of Peter Hall, whom Tynan loathed, as his successor. 
Meanwhile came the exploit which prompted mixed feelings among Tynan's friends and admirers, the revue 'Oh! Calcutta!' which he devised and produced first in New York, in 1969, and then in London. He had embraced the sexual 'liberation' of the era with the same enthusiasm as he brought to its political concomitant, listing his recreations in 'Who's Who' as sex and eating and in 1965 earning himself a footnote in the annals as the first Briton to say the word 'fuck' on television. 'Oh! Calcutta!''s mix of nudity and seedy humour might have been designed to shock the bourgeoisie; ironically (if inevitably) it was a success everywhere, and although Tynan complained that his royalty was only 1 per cent of the gross takings, this was enough to support, for a few years at least, an increasingly lavish lifestyle. 
After some blissful years and the birth of a daughter, Tracy, Tynan's first marriage had run into trouble when he began to demand Dundy's submission to what he called 'spanking'. Though initially encouraging of her literary efforts, he also became acutely envious of her success. They finally divorced in 1964. Tynan married secondly, on 30 June 1967, Kathleen Jeanette Gates (1937-1995), daughter of Matthew Halton, writer and formerly a war correspondent for the BBC and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. She was herself a journalist and writer. They had a daughter, Roxana, and a son, Matthew. They acquired a London house in Kensington, and somewhat late in life Tynan learned to drive and bought himself a Jaguar. Understandably, the second Mrs Tynan proved no keener than the first to share in sado-masochistic practices which only the publication of his diaries in 2001 made fully plain. Tynan took a mistress who did, and to whom he was eventually more faithful than to either wife. The marriage nevertheless jogged on, not without spells of happiness. 
Tynan ventured into film production with the 1971 version of 'Macbeth' directed by Roman Polanski and collaborated on a follow-up to 'Oh! Calcutta!' called 'Carte blanche'. But the last decade of his life was increasingly one of restless travels, unfulfilled projects, and bouts of activity alternating with periods of idleness or illness. Emphysema, first diagnosed in 1965, was steadily destroying his lungs. He now regretted the way his career had turned out and wished that he had stuck to working in the theatre or films instead of following the lonely trade of the writer. Yet it was journalism -- prompted, often, by the need to raise a quick advance -- that gave him a last solid achievement. Mainly for American magazines, he wrote a series of lengthy reflective profiles of actors and entertainers which, published in book form as 'Show People' (1979), confirm Tynan's forte as a writer -- his ability to conjure up time and place, people and performances, whether he is defining the extraordinary allure of Louise Brooks or conveying exactly what it was like to experience Donald Wolfit and Frederick Valk (two of his heroes) in a barnstorming wartime production of 'Othello'. 
Tynan had published two collections of theatre reviews but disappointingly few original books, despite becoming a youthful FRSL in 1956. A long-planned memoir of his Oxford days materialized only in the form of his contribution to the television series 'One Pair of Eyes' in 1968. Towards the end he was researching an autobiography, but it was not to be realized. To lessen the ravages of his illness he was now living in California. He died there at St John's Hospital, Los Angeles, on 26 July 1980 from emphysema. His remains were cremated at Rosedale, Culver City, California, on 30 July and his ashes were interred at the St Cross cemetery, Oxford, England, on 17 September that year. 
Tynan was tall, slender, always elegant. In youth his habit of baring his teeth as he strove to overcome the stammer, coupled with flaring nostrils and a rather skull-like head, gave him the look of a startled rocking-horse. He matured into a relaxed and attractive human being, full of unexpected subsidiary enthusiasms (cricket, word games, bull-fighting). His conversation, as Tom Stoppard put it, always had the jingle of loose change about it. When he died it seemed that for all his aberrations he had inspired considerable affection in those who knew him. Whether or not he left any permanent mark on the theatre can never be finally settled -- fashions come and go; some of those he promoted, such as Brechtian drama, were already out of favour by the time he died, doubtless due to rise again one day. All that may be said with confidence is that Tynan brought excitement, authority, and glamour to the business of writing about the theatre. 
Tynan's first wife, Elaine Dundy (1921-2008), novelist and biographer, was born on 2 August 1921 in Manhattan, one of three daughters of Samuel M. Brimberg, a Jewish garment manufacturer who later turned to the manufacture of office equipment. Her father was violent and it was an unhappy childhood. She was educated at Mills College in Oakland, California, Sweet Briar College in Virginia, and then, after wartime service in the Army Signals Corps based in Arlington, Virginia, at the Jarvis Theatre School, Washington, DC, where she adopted the stage (and eventually pen) name, Elaine Dundy. Moving to Europe, she spent a year in Paris before arriving in London, scraping a living in both cities by taking small parts in plays. She married Tynan three months after meeting him, attracted by his romantic and larger-than-life character, and did her best to cope with his mercurial temperament. She originally wrote 'The Dud Avocado' (1958), a comic novel about a young American woman in Paris, subtitled 'The Vie Amoureuse of Sally Jay in Paris', because she thought it would please him, but the overnight success of the book instead filled him with envy. Eventually his violent temper and infidelities became unbearable; she started drinking heavily, and finally left him after suffering a broken nose and two black eyes. From 1964 to the 1980s she divided her time between New York and London (where she kept a house in Mayfair). She wrote two more novels, 'The Old Man and Me' (1964) and 'The Injured Party' (1974), but neither enjoyed the success of 'The Dud Avocado'. She also, after a period of rehabilitation for drink and drug addictions, wrote a biography of the actor Peter Finch, also well known for his hell-raising (1980); 'Elvis and Gladys' (1985), about Elvis Presley's relationship with his mother; 'Ferriday, Louisiana' (1991), a study of a small town in America which claimed to have produced more famous people per square mile than anywhere else in America; and an autobiography, 'Life Itself!' (2001), which several critics slated for its relentless name-dropping. She had meanwhile moved to Los Angeles in the 1980s, and died there on 1 May 2008 following a heart attack. She was survived by her daughter, Tracy, a costume designer and film director. 


@@@@@


doc= 99859


Dunlop, William Joseph (1952-2000), racing motorcyclist, was born on 25 February 1952 in Ballymoney, co. Antrim, the eldest son and second of the seven children of William Dunlop, motor mechanic, and his wife, May, 'nee' Barkley. He attended Ballymoney high school, but 'didn't bother much with education' ('The Independent'). As a youth he had an ambition to join the army, but that changed when, at sixteen, he bought his first motorcycle, a 250 cc BSA. From then he financed his passion for motorcycling by working in various jobs, including as a diesel fitter, lorry driver, steel erector, and roofer, and latterly as the publican of the Railway inn in Ballymoney. On 22 September 1972 he married his childhood sweetheart, Linda Robinson. They had three daughters and two sons. 
Motorcycle racing in Ireland evolved differently from that on the UK mainland. Since the middle of the twentieth century motorcycle racing on the mainland had been conducted almost exclusively on purpose-built tracks whose safety had been continuously improved. This was known as 'short circuit' racing, as opposed to road racing, in which public roads were closed off to create a temporary circuit. Although there were short circuits there, Ireland had a long tradition of road racing, especially in the north. In road racing there was very little protection for riders, who raced at immense speed on bumpy back roads, on the limit of control, past trees, walls, telegraph poles, traffic islands, and houses. Deaths and serious injuries were regrettably common. 
Joey Dunlop raced successfully on the short circuits, but it was in road racing that he shone. He began racing in 1969, on a 192 cc Triumph Tiger Cub which he had bought for $50, fired with enthusiasm after seeing the local rider Mervyn Robinson racing. Robinson became Dunlop's brother-in-law, and along with Frank Kennedy they formed a triumvirate of Irish road racers known as the 'Armoy armada'. Dunlop came close to quitting motorcycle racing when Robinson was killed in a racing accident in 1980. Kennedy also predeceased Dunlop in a racing accident. Dunlop was seriously injured in crashes in 1989 and 1998, and his brother Robert ['see below'] was seriously injured in a racing accident in 1994 (and eventually killed in another). 
It was not until 1976 that Dunlop became a regular winner in Irish events. His road racing experience stood him in good stead when he entered the tourist trophy (TT) races on the Isle of Man. The TT circuit is a public road circuit, 37.73 miles long and tremendously fast. After 1976 the Manx course was deemed too dangerous for use in the motorcycle grand prix world championship, and it was thought that this would spell the end of the TT races. In fact they became the focal point of a week-long festival of motorcycling, attracting 40,000 or more riders to the island every year, and in a series of heroic rides Dunlop won their hearts. He won the jubilee TT in 1977, the first of twenty-six TT races he won in the years until his death. The next most prolific TT winner, Mike Hailwood, reckoned almost universally to be one of the most talented motorcycle racers ever, won fourteen. Among many other successes, Dunlop won the North-West 200 thirteen times and the Ulster grand prix twenty-four times: these were the most prestigious of the Irish road races. Altogether he won more than 160 road races in Britain and Ireland, and numerous others elsewhere. In 1982 he won the first of five consecutive motorcycle formula 1 world championships. 
It was not the number of his wins which endeared Dunlop to racing fans, but his modesty and his evident love of the sport. He was a shy man of few words, and he rarely gave interviews, although he was always happy to spend time with the fans. He never accepted the trappings of fame, and he shunned the limelight. He always worked on his own machine, even when it was the latest high-tech equipment from the Honda factory (whose motorbikes he raced from 1983). The fans knew he was one of their own, and perhaps it was this which led to his nickname: Yer Maun. In 2000, at the age of forty-eight and against men many years his junior, he won three of the most prestigious TT races. It was a prodigious feat. His average speed for the 175 mile formula 1 race was 121 m.p.h. 
Dunlop was appointed MBE in 1985 for his services to motorcycling, and OBE in 1995 in recognition of his singlehanded van trips, twice to Bosnia and once each to Albania and Romania, to distribute food and other aid he had collected for the needy. For this latter work he became all the more respected by the people of Ireland, and by motorcycling fans all over the world. He once polled more than 60 per cent of the votes cast in an Irish sportsman of the year competition. In 1993 he was given the freedom of Ballymoney. 
It was Dunlop's love of the sport which kept him racing into his forty-ninth year, and which in the summer of 2000 led him to Tallinn, Estonia. He drove alone with his bikes in the back of a van to race on the road circuit there. He had won two races and on 2 July was leading a third when he crashed and was killed instantly. Five days later 50,000 people attended his funeral at Garryduff Presbyterian Church, which was broadcast live on Irish national television, and at which government ministers from London, Belfast, and Dublin were present. It was a state funeral in all but name. He was survived by his wife, Linda, and their five children. 
Dunlop's younger brother, (Stephen) Robert Dunlop (1960-2008), racing motorcyclist, was born on 25 November 1960 at the Robinson Hospital, Ballymoney. He made his road race debut in 1979, in the Temple 100, and his professional debut at Aghadowey in 1981. In 1985 he won the first of eight victories in the Cookstown 100 race; he would also win a record fifteen North West 200 races. In 1983 he won the newcomers' 350 cc Manx grand prix, and went on to win the 125 cc Isle of Man TT race three years in succession, from 1989 to 1991 (and in the latter year also won the junior TT). He finished second in that race in 1992 and 1993, but the following year a serious accident in the formula 1 TT, when the back wheel of his 750 cc Honda collapsed, almost killed him; he remained out of competition for the next two years, and was left with a shortened leg which required extensive operations. He nevertheless resumed racing in 1996. In 1998 he won the 125 cc TT race (his fifth TT victory), and in 2000 and 2002 achieved third place in the same event; in 2004 he came second. He again retired from racing in 2004-6, while undergoing further operations on his leg, but in 2006 he returned to win the 125 cc North West 200. During practice for the 250 cc race at the North West 200 on 15 May 2008 he was flung from his bike when it seized at over 150 m.p.h. He died later that day from injuries sustained in the accident. He was survived by his wife, Louise, whom he had married around 1984, and by their three sons, two of whom had themselves become racing motorcyclists. (Michael went on to win the North West 200 250 cc race in which his father had been killed in practice, dedicating his victory to his father's memory. Michael subsequently became a TT winner himself.) 


@@@@@


doc= 99861


Dunwoody, Gwyneth Patricia (1930-2008), politician, was born at 25 Rosaville Road, Fulham, London, on 12 December 1930, the elder child and only daughter of Morgan Walter Phillips (1902-1963), political organizer, and his wife, Norah Mary ['see 'Phillips, Norah Mary, Baroness Phillips (1910-1992)], schoolteacher and politician, and daughter of William Lusher. Her father had been a coalminer in south Wales and subsequently an official in the West Fulham Labour Party. He rose through the party's organization to become national secretary in 1944. Her convent-educated mother worked as a teacher and became an extremely active life peer in 1964. 
Educated at Fulham County Secondary School and the Convent of Notre Dame, Gwyneth Phillips left school at sixteen and worked as a local journalist, an actress in repertory, and at Radio Hilversum in the Netherlands. Her most significant education was within the culture of the Labour Party, not least the convivial political evenings at the Phillipses' home. There she met a medical student, John Elliott Orr Dunwoody (1929-2006), son of William Orr Dunwoody, medical practitioner. They married at the Roman Catholic Church of the Most Holy Trinity, Brook Green, Hammersmith, on 29 May 1954 and had a daughter and two sons. From 1956 the family lived in Totnes, Devon, where she became a rare Labour presence on the local council in 1960. 
Both Gwyneth Dunwoody and her husband had parliamentary ambitions. In the 1964 election she was narrowly defeated in Exeter but became the city's first Labour member in the March 1966 landslide. Her husband joined her, successful in the marginal Cornish seat of Falmouth and Camborne. She became a junior minister at the Board of Trade in 1967; late in 1969 her husband went to the Department of Health and Social Security. They were the first husband and wife team to hold ministerial office. However, in June 1970 each lost both office and seat. They responded to defeat in contrasting ways. John Dunwoody became a family doctor in south London. Gwyneth Dunwoody returned to the Commons in February 1974 as MP for Crewe. Their marriage was dissolved in 1975. 
Dunwoody's return to the Commons did not mean a return to ministerial office. A critic of the European Economic Community, she served as a nominated member of the European parliament from 1975 until the introduction of direct elections in 1979. Greater influence came with the ideological disputes and personal antipathies that engulfed the Labour Party after its 1979 election defeat. Dunwoody became thoroughly involved in the tough loyalist response to the left's growing influence. She was a member of the loyalist slate for elections to the party's national executive committee in 1981 and became a member of the executive's women's section. This bloc of politically reliable women was thoroughly hostile to the agenda of the left and Dunwoody's opposition was expressed in notably robust terms. The major unions, and therefore a largely male electorate, had the preponderant role in determining the membership of the women's section. Successful candidates were rarely sympathetic to the increasing demands of Labour women for institutional and procedural reforms to end the marginalization of women within the party. Dunwoody aroused anger among women delegates at the 1982 conference when she spoke for the national executive committee in opposition to their proposals. 
Dunwoody became more significant within the parliamentary party as defections weakened the resources of the right. Michael Foot as leader from November 1980 was desperate to reconcile the contending factions. He gave Dunwoody responsibility for leading the opposition attack on the Thatcher government's health policies. In 1981 she was elected to the shadow cabinet. Elevation did not assuage her reservations about Foot's leadership. By August 1982 she was complaining to him that she and her fellow loyalists felt taken for granted. Foot's resignation as leader after the heavy electoral defeat in June 1983 meant contests for leader and deputy leader. She was a late and hopeless entrant to the latter contest. Her vote was derisory (amounting to around 1.3 per cent of the weighted ballots). Under Kinnock she retained her front bench position with responsibility for transport but her standing declined. She lost her shadow cabinet position in 1985 and by 1989 diminishing union support meant her removal from the national executive committee. The initiative within the party was shifting to a younger generation. Her personal circumstances deteriorated; financial problems led to her acceptance of a retainer from the Fur Trading Association. Her response to critics was a blunt insistence that she needed the money. At one point her house was repossessed. Even her electoral position had become perilous. Secure Crewe had become highly marginal Crewe and Nantwich; she survived in 1983 and 1987, but with small majorities. 
Dunwoody's renaissance came as an effective critic of misgovernment, most notably from 1997 as chair of the select committee on the environment, transport, and regional affairs. She presided with authoritative rigour over hearings, not least on the problematic legacies of rail privatization. New Labour ministers became apprehensive about her ability to probe their vulnerabilities. In mid-2001 the Blair government clumsily attempted to remove her and another committee chair. The strategy failed spectacularly as Labour backbenchers revolted. She became a powerful symbol of resistance to New Labour's intolerance of dissent. Her opinions like her dress sense were emphatically 'off message' (she was described as looking 'as if she had not so much dressed but rolled herself up in the bedroom carpet' ('Daily Telegraph', 19 April 2008)). She was Eurosceptic, opposed to electoral reform, dismissive of changes in the Commons' working hours, and voted against the equalization of the age of consent for homosexuals. She was president of Labour Friends of Israel from 1988 to 1993. Her effectiveness was enhanced because this one-time paragon of party discipline personified the ethos of the party's old right that was insensitively dismissed by New Labour zealots. She was named 'Battle-axe of the Year' in 2002 by 'The Oldie' magazine. A further redrawing of constituency boundaries in 1997 proved beneficial and she remained MP for Crewe and Nantwich until her death. She died in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 17 April 2008 of sepsis and bronchopneumonia a week after heart surgery. She was survived by her three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99878


Fournier, Robert Charles Privett (1915-2008), potter, was born on 16 March 1915 at 5 Mount Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, the son of Alphonse Robert William Fournier (1884-1954), a woodworking engineer who helped to build aircraft in the First World War and later motor cars, and his wife, Helen Maude, 'nee' Privett (1890-1965), who became a Labour alderman. It was a happy childhood. At grammar school Fournier did well in art and also composed poetry, which astonished his teacher who refused to believe he had written it. In Fulham he became a member of an amateur dramatics company where, in addition to acting, he painted the scenery. Keen to live in the country, he moved to Hertfordshire with his then partner, Sylvia, but their plans to settle were thwarted when they bought a piece of land from a con man and lost all their money. For a time he and Sylvia worked as farm labourers, horrifying their neighbours by living together in a shed. 
Having refused to enlist following the introduction of conscription in the Second World War, Fournier was arrested and imprisoned in Wormwood Scrubs prison, where, as the bombs fell on London, he helped to write and produce the prisoners' magazine. The death of his only brother, Victor, a navigator in the Royal Air Force, in a plane crash over Wales, served to confirm his pacifist beliefs. Intent on pursuing a career in art he modelled animals seen in London Zoo. Enthralled by clay, on his release from prison he attended evening classes at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London, coming under the watchful eye of Dora Billington, an outstanding teacher and potter. Far from following the established approach that was based on an aesthetic of quietude advocated by Bernard Leach, she encouraged a more eclectic, challenging view that included Mediterranean and industrial wares. Finding it difficult to afford the fees, Fournier took a job as a technician at the school, becoming Billington's assistant. 
In 1946 Fournier set up Ducketts Wood Pottery in Hertfordshire where he produced slipware, tin-glaze, and later mosaics. In 1948 he established the pottery department at Goldsmiths' College, London. There he met Sheila Lord (1930-2000), one of his students, a divorced schoolteacher, and daughter of Robert Cook, railway clerk. They married on 22 July 1961. For a time they had a studio in Greenwich before moving to Castle Hill in Kent in 1965, where they produced tableware as well as making individual pieces. Aware of the growing educational interest in ceramics, Fournier issued 500 colour slides of historical ceramics, then a revolutionary educational aid much used by schools and individual potters. In 1971 they settled in the beautiful village of Lacock in Wiltshire, leasing, on a peppercorn rent, an old workhouse owned by the National Trust, carrying out much needed extensive renovation. 
At Lacock Fournier consolidated his ceramics, producing what became his signature pieces, a range of 'pebble' pots that were based on natural form. With a sure understanding of the organic structures of stones, rocks, and plants, he translated these into clay through the use of simple, hand-built or moulded dish shapes or tall flattened bottles. These were decorated with areas of unglazed clay and poured textured white glaze, and dotted with small patches of rich, saturated colour. He was particularly renowned for producing a vibrant turquoise blue. The pots were successfully shown at galleries in Britain, Germany, and France. 
In addition to potting, Fournier pursued his interest in writing. A book on building electric kilns with clear instructions and much practical advice dispelled the mystique around constructing simple but efficient structures. As an inveterate compiler of information relevant to studio pottery he was assiduous in scouring available technical texts, bringing it together and presenting it in dictionary form. Titles included 'The Illustrated Dictionary of Practical Pottery' (1952), 'The Illustrated Dictionary of Pottery Form' (1981), and 'The Illustrated Dictionary of Pottery Decoration' (1986). Later he collaborated with Eric Yates-Owen on 'British Studio Potters' Marks' (1999), a thoroughly researched and comprehensive survey of the stamps and marks used by studio potters in Britain. Ever curious about the history and diversity of studio ceramics, he collaborated with John Anderson to make films of Rosemary and Denise Wren, Ladi Kwali, and David Leach. He also filmed Isaac Button, one of the last surviving makers of traditional terracotta garden pots. In line with his interest in film, as a founder member and council member of the Craftsmen Potters Association he arranged three successful film festivals showing potters' films from round the world. These were exhilarating events in introducing diversity and thought into what was often seen as the narrow world of studio pottery. He also organized the Craftsmen Potters Association archive at Aberystwyth University. 
In 1987 the Fourniers retired from potting and settled in a more convenient if less exciting semi-detached property in Market Lavington, near Devizes. Visits to ancient sites in Crete and other Mediterranean islands enabled them to pursue their interest in early ceramics, while, as ardent wine buffs, they enjoyed wine tastings. Following Sheila's death in 2000 Robert Fournier continued to write, completing several novels and starting a memoir, which remained unfinished. He did, however, record his life story for the British Library National Sound Archive. 
Slightly built and with a mischievous look, Robert Fournier was an amusing and wry companion, his success as a writer often overshadowing his fine and inventive work as a potter. By their very nature some potters are lifelong rebels, often selecting their profession because of its quirky, 'alternative' lifestyle. Such is the case with Fournier. He was a lifelong pacifist and atheist, whose decision to become a potter was, in part, a refusal to compete in what he saw as an increasingly consumer-led society. He died in Market Lavington on 19 January 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99879


Frankel, William (1917-2008), barrister and newspaper editor, was born Woolf Frankel at 1A Eastman Court, Whitechapel, London, on 3 February 1917, the second of three sons of Isaac Frankel, a street trader and synagogue beadle, and his wife, Hannah (Anna), 'nee' Lacker. His parents had arrived from the Galician area of Poland a few years before his birth. Isaac Frankel changed his surname on arrival in London to that of his mother's maiden name, having been advised that his own, Kiesel, sounded 'very foreign' (Frankel, 1). The Frankel family lived in impoverished conditions at a variety of addresses in London dictated primarily by Isaac's chequered work career. Living in an Orthodox Jewish milieu (an upbringing that flavoured and influenced his life), Frankel attended a succession of East End schools. But, at the age of eleven, the unconventionality that was to be his hallmark showed itself when, after matriculation, he enrolled in the Polytechnic Secondary School in Regent Street. However, that institution failed to inspire any career ambition and he turned, in his sixth-form year, to the Davenant Foundation School, hoping it might provide him with the background in classics needed for admission to Jews' College, the training establishment for the Jewish ministry. But that school, too, bored young Frankel, and he left. 
Frankel's first paid job after school, with an East End scrap merchant, did not last long. Nor did the next, as a warehouseman with a company importing Japanese goods. He was happier, but still without ambition, when, aged twenty, having moved through a couple of office posts with Orthodox Jewish organizations, he was appointed secretary of the Mizrachi Federation of Great Britain and Ireland, a leading religious Zionist organization. On 16 April 1939, less than five months before the outbreak of the Second World War, he married, in a ceremony at the prestigious Great Synagogue in the City, Gertrude Freda Reed ('b'. 1916), daughter of Louis Reed, a travelling salesman -- and exhausted their savings with a wedding party at the Ritz Hotel. They had two children, Anne and John. Having moved to Cambridge in 1940 to escape the Blitz, Frankel and the Mizrachi Federation agreed to part company. Taking advantage of the wartime installation of the London School of Economics in Cambridge, and with the help of his wife's occasional earnings, fees from teaching Hebrew to local Jewish children, and sporadic family handouts, Frankel (who had been rejected as unfit for military service) enrolled in its law school. He graduated LLB with upper second-class honours. He later repaid what he felt was his debt to Cambridge by becoming a major fund-raiser for the university's Centre for Modern Hebrew Studies. 
Back in London Frankel was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1944 while working for a year as assistant secretary to the foreign affairs committee of the Board of Deputies, the representative body of Anglo-Jewry. It was through this appointment that he established what was to be a life-long connection with the American Jewish Committee (a major Jewish advocacy group operating worldwide), whose London representative he became on a part-time basis, an engagement that, despite his membership of the Middle Temple and well-regarded chambers, gave him more satisfaction than his time at the bar. It was at an American Jewish Committee dinner that he first met the managing director (later chairman) of the 'Jewish Chronicle', David Kessler, who a few years later offered him the job of general manager at the paper, the world's oldest Jewish weekly newspaper (established 1841), which he took up in 1955. It was a surprise to Frankel and the staff of the 'Jewish Chronicle' when, three years later, Kessler asked him to become editor. 
At the time Frankel became editor of the 'Jewish Chronicle' it was a worthy and respected communal journal, but he swore to make of it 'a stimulant for and accurate mirror of Jewish life' (Frankel, 122). He largely succeeded in his purpose, opening its columns to the best young Jewish writers of the day, vastly expanding the newspaper's foreign coverage, and bringing from Glasgow a young columnist, Chaim Bermant, whose weekly commentary on world Jewish affairs was to become for many years the most read column in the paper. Frankel, whose association with American Jewry had exposed him to new thinking about the nature and practice of the Jewish religion, was not averse to controversy in his columns, frequently challenging the authority of the established Orthodox rabbinate. One episode, which earned him both condemnation from the Jewish religious establishment and national recognition as a campaigning editor, was his support for Rabbi Louis Jacobs during the so-called Jacobs affair, beginning in 1961. Jacobs, a major young scholar, seen by some as a future chief rabbi, was barred by the chief rabbi, Israel Brodie, from taking up the post of moral tutor at Jews' College because of writings in which he rejected the divine origin of the 'Torah', the main part of the Hebrew 'Bible'. Frankel put his personal and his newspaper's prestige totally behind Jacobs and was to the fore in the founding in 1964 of a new synagogue movement in Britain, Masorti, headed by Jacobs. Reflecting half a century later, Frankel wrote: 'I readily concede I may have been too passionate in my pro-Jacobs advocacy in the 'JC'' (ibid., 171). 
Frankel's first marriage ended in divorce in 1971, and on 16 December 1973 he married Claire Neuman of Baltimore, Maryland, who had three daughters from her former marriage. Four years later, in 1977, on his sixtieth birthday, Frankel (who had been made CBE in 1970) retired from the editorship of the 'Jewish Chronicle', though he maintained his connection, serving as chairman from 1991 to 1994. His years after giving up the editorial chair were among the most active of his life; they included service as a special adviser to 'The Times' (1977-81), president of the Mental Health Review appeal tribunal (1978-89), and chairman of the Social Security appeal tribunal (1979-89), as well as an officer of a number of national and international Jewish organizations and a member of the governing bodies of various educational institutions. He took great delight in writing a weekly column for 'The Statesman' of India, an association which lasted for over twenty years, and from 1982 to 1992 he edited an annual 'Survey of Jewish Affairs' for the Institute of Jewish Affairs (later the Institute for Jewish Policy Research, of which he was a vice-president). He and his wife established a pattern of living at their home in Washington, DC, during the winter months and spending the summer at their apartment in Montagu Square, Marylebone, London (he was a regular at Lords during the cricket season). He published his memoirs, 'Tea with Einstein and Other Memories', in 2006, the title being taken from the occasion he visited the great scientist at home in Princeton in 1947; he had earlier published 'Friday Nights' (1973), an anthology of 'Jewish Chronicle' pieces, and 'Israel Observed: an Anatomy of the State' (1980). In his final years, he developed Parkinson's disease. It was while walking in Washington on 18 April 2008 that he fell and suffered a cerebral haemorrhage from which he died. He was buried in London on 24 April 2008. A memorial service was held at the (Masorti) New London Synagogue, St John's Wood, on 12 June 2008. He was survived by his second wife, Claire, and his son, John, his daughter, Anne, having died in 1989 (a source of much grief in his later years). 


@@@@@


doc= 99880


Fraser, George Macdonald (1925-2008), journalist, novelist, and screen-writer, was born on 2 April 1925 at 48 London Road, Carlisle, Cumberland, the son of William Fraser, medical doctor, and his wife, Annie Struth, 'nee' Donaldson, nurse. His original aim, during his schooldays at Carlisle Grammar School and later at Glasgow Academy, was to read medicine at university. But he was an indifferent student and in 1943, feeling that he would never amass the qualifications necessary to enter the University of Glasgow's medical school, he enlisted in the Border regiment and was sent to India. 'Quartered Safe Out Here' (1992), his memoir of the Burma campaign, recounted his wartime experiences in some detail. Among other exploits he was hung upside down by his heels while strafed by Japanese sniper fire as he foraged for water, and promoted to lance-corporal on four occasions but three times returned to the ranks for minor infringements of army discipline. One of these involved losing a tea urn. Subsequently he was given a commission in the Gordon Highlanders and served with the regiment in the Middle East and north Africa. This period of his life offered material for the semi-autobiographical 'McAuslan' stories, collected in 'The General Danced at Dawn' (1970), 'McAuslan in the Rough' (1974), and 'The Sheikh and the Dustbin' (1988). 
After returning to Carlisle on demobilization in 1947 Fraser embarked on a career in journalism. This began with a post on the 'Carlisle Journal', then took him to Canada, where he worked on the 'Regina Leader-Post', and finally to Glasgow, where he moved with his family in 1953. On 16 April 1949 he had married Kathleen Margarette Hetherington, a reporter on a rival Carlisle paper, and daughter of George Hetherington, baker. They had three children. By the mid-1960s, however, Fraser had become disillusioned. Passed over for ultimate preferment on the leading Scottish newspaper, the 'Glasgow Herald', when it came under new ownership (he served as deputy editor between 1964 and 1969 and at one point rose to the position of acting editor) he determined, as he put it to his wife, 'to write us out of this' (private information). 
Fraser's literary imagination had been stirred by pre-teenage exposure to sanguinary historical fiction, notably Raphael Sabatini's 'Captain Blood', which he read at the age of ten. This undoubtedly informed his first novel, 'Flashman' (1969), supposedly one among a trunk-full of manuscripts discovered at a sale in Leicestershire, but in fact deriving from Fraser's own historical research. The distinguishing mark of the twelve-volume 'Flashman' series, which found the villain of Thomas Hughes's morality tale 'Tom Brown's Schooldays' purposefully yet pusillanimously at large at the upper levels of Victorian society, was its relish of historical detail. While its animating force was merely an inspired invention the world in which Flashman moved was sharply and convincingly laid out. To the comparatively rare spectacle of an unreal person intervening in a real world Fraser added a further refinement. Unlike the conventional heroes of historical fiction Harry Paget Flashman was a coward, a bully, and a satyromaniacal philanderer. The honours and decorations with which he was routinely showered (these included the Victoria Cross, a knighthood, and the thanks of parliament) were invariably the result of grotesque accidents. This worm's eye view of history gave the novels a significant internal dynamic. Knowing that Flashman was a self-advertised moral absence, the reader believed everything he said, on the grounds that he had no reason to dissemble. All this produced an acute, but often bitterly humorous, critique of the Victorian imperial project, in which the folly and mismanagement of some of its military endeavours was never allowed to disguise Fraser's transparent admiration for some of the personalities on display. 
Although turned down by nearly every publisher in London, until its eventual acceptance by the firm of Herbert Jenkins, 'Flashman', which followed its anti-hero ingloriously through the First Afghan War of 1841-2, was an instant success, inspiring in P. G. Wodehouse what he called 'that-watcher-of-the-skies-when-a-new-planet-stuff' (book cover). Charlie Chaplin was also a fan. In later instalments Flashman starred in a reworking of Anthony Hope's Ruritanian romance of 1894, 'The Prisoner of Zenda' ('Royal Flash', 1970), mistakenly stormed the Russian guns at Balaklava ('Flashman at the Charge', 1973), sailed a war canoe with Rajah Brooke in Borneo ('Flashman's Lady', 1977), was the solitary survivor of Custer's last stand at the battle of Little Big Horn ('Flashman and the Redskins', 1982), and assisted the US abolitionist John Brown at Harper's Ferry ('Flashman and the Angel of the Lord', 1994). Among a riot of encounters with celebrated nineteenth-century personalities he became the intimate of Queen Victoria, Ulysses S. Grant, Bismarck, Palmerston, and Queen Ranavalona, the deranged and lustful monarch of 1840s Madagascar. The vigour of Fraser's prose led to comparisons with Robert Louis Stevenson and the tough-minded eighteenth-century Scottish novelist Tobias Smollett. A small part of his vast international fan-base -- mostly Americans -- believed that the books were genuine historical documents. 
Meanwhile, from the early 1970s, and on the back of the Flashman series' success, Fraser pursued a yet more lucrative career as a Hollywood screen-writer. His credits included 'The Three Musketeers' (1973) and its sequel, 'The Four Musketeers' (1974), 'Royal Flash' (adapted from his novel, and starring Malcolm McDowell and Britt Ekland, 1975), 'The Prince and the Pauper' (1977), the James Bond vehicle 'Octopussy' (1983), and 'Red Sonja' (1985), featuring the young Arnold Schwarzenegger. As his Hollywood memoir, 'The Light's On at Signpost' (2002), made clear, he came from a generation for whom the novelty of cinema never waned: the shaky transit of an ageing Gregory Peck across a restaurant foyer always had him delightedly turning his head. Fraser's other novels included 'Mr American' (1980), 'The Pyrates' (1983), 'The Candlemass Road' (1993), and 'Black Ajax' (1997), a spirited re-imagining of the career of the black Regency-era prize-fighter Tom Molineaux. He also wrote a history of the Anglo-Scottish border reivers, 'The Steel Bonnets' (1971). 
In personal dealings Fraser combined an occasionally rugged reserve with an extreme courtesy. He was devoted to his wife, Kathleen, to whom all the Flashman books were dedicated, to his sons, Simon and Nicholas, and to his daughter, Caro, herself a successful novelist, and doted on his grandchildren (who by the time of his death numbered eight). As he grew older, living in the tax exile's seclusion of the Isle of Man, his political and social views became steadily more hard-line. 'The Light's On at Signpost' was interspersed by periodic teeth-gnashings on the subject of law and order, and on 'New Labour' and other abominations. Exposure to a typical Fraser audience, which tended to magnify and in some cases to distort these opinions, could occasionally unnerve the more literary of his admirers. A younger friend who conducted an interview with him at the National Army Museum, where the crowd consisted largely of serving soldiers, confessed that the experience made him feel 'vaguely homosexual and left-wing' (private information). 
Apart from an OBE (1999) for services to literature and a belated fellowship of the Royal Society of Literature (1998) Fraser received little formal recognition for his work, the 1973 'Playboy' editorial award notwithstanding. He did not seem cast down by this neglect. A final novel, 'The Reavers' (2007), appeared shortly before his death, of cancer, at Nobles Hospital in Strang on the Isle of Man on 2 January 2008. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99886


Goobey, Alastair Ross (1945-2008), pension fund manager, was born at 29 The Avenue, Wanstead, Essex, on 6 December 1945, the son of George Henry Ross Goobey (1911-1999), pension fund manager, and his wife, Gladys Edith, 'nee' Menzies ('b'. 1911). He was brought up in Clevedon, near Bristol, and educated at Marlborough College and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied economics. A keen student actor, he met Sarah Georgina Mary Stille ('b'. 1949) in a production of 'Hamlet'; she was a secretary, the daughter of Cedric Ernest Stille, a flower bulb importer. They married on 26 July 1969 and had a son and a daughter. 
Ross Goobey's father, the in-house investment manager of Imperial Tobacco Company's pension fund from 1947 to 1975, was a legendary figure in fund management as the pioneer of the 'cult of the equity', the shift from government bonds to equities in the 1950s. Ross Goobey junior joined the merchant bank Kleinwort Benson, a leading City merchant bank, as a graduate trainee in 1968. Subsequently he worked for Hume Holdings (1972-7), Courtaulds pension fund (1977-81) as investment manager, and the investment boutique Geoffrey Morley and Partners (1981-7) as a director. From 1987 to 1993 he held the relatively prominent post of chief investment strategist at the leading City stockbroker James Capel & Co. 
Ross Goobey became a high-profile financial figure as chief executive of Hermes Pensions Management, manager of the Post Office and British Telecom staff pension fund, from 1993 to 2001. Hermes was one of Britain's biggest institutional investors with sizeable holdings in many quoted companies. They provided Ross Goobey with an opportunity to pursue better corporate governance through institutional shareholder activism. Soon after his appointment he wrote to all the chairmen of FTSE 100 companies informing them that Hermes opposed three-year rolling contracts for chief executives, which ensured huge pay-offs regardless of performance. He was an early proponent of the separation of the roles of chairman and chief executive and of greater corporate transparency, and took a dim view of directors remaining beyond normal retirement age. Hermes even opposed the re-election of Ross Goobey's septuagenarian father as chairman of a quoted property company. His ideas were taken up by official inquiries into corporate governance and incorporated into the 'Combined Code' of 2003. 'It's quite difficult to argue with some of the things we suggest', he observed to the 'Financial Times' in 2002, 'such as the principle that we're not against people being paid well but please can they earn it first' ('Financial Times', 9 Jan 2002). He was a founder and from 2002 chairman of the International Corporate Governance Network, which brought together shareholder activist investors from across the world. 'The big change is that companies are now listening to shareholders', he said. 'When we started this, they didn't even talk to shareholders' ('Financial Times', 19 July 2001). 
Like his father, Ross Goobey developed pension fund investment in new directions, especially commercial property, being 'one of the most forceful advocates of property as a financial asset' ('Financial Times', 10 Nov 1994). From 1995 to 2004 he was president of the Investment Property Forum, a body that promoted commercial property to institutional investors. He wrote a monthly column in the 'Estates Gazette' and was author of 'Bricks & Mortals' (1992), an account of the 1980s property boom and bust. His other book, 'The Money Moguls' (1986), was a study of the investment management industry. He created the Hermes Focus Funds that invested actively in underperforming companies and helped to turn them round, and after retiring as chief executive of Hermes Pensions Management Ltd he continued as chairman of Hermes Focus Asset Management Ltd. He was much in demand as an adviser. He played a key role in the development of the investment strategy of the Wellcome Trust, the world's largest medical charity, of which he was a governor from 2002. He was a member of the council of Lloyd's (1997-2003) and on the European advisory board of Morgan Stanley, where he was a senior adviser from 2002. Directorships included Scottish Life (1978-86), Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society (1989-91 and 1992-7), TR Property Investment Trust (1994-2004), and John Wainwright & Co. (1997-2008). From 2002 until his death he was a senior adviser at Morgan Stanley. 
A free-market Conservative, Ross Goobey unsuccessfully contested the safe Labour seat of Leicester West in the general election of 1979. This brought him to the notice of Nigel Lawson, leading to stints as special adviser to chancellors Nigel Lawson in 1986-7 and Norman Lamont in 1991-2. He later observed that he was 'jolly glad' he had not become a politician ('The Times', 5 Feb 2008). His Whitehall experience led to several senior official appointments, including the Goode committee on pensions law (1992-3), the Middleton committee on film industry finance (1995-6), and the chairmanship of the private finance initiative panel (1996-7). He was appointed CBE in 2000 for services to pensions; many City colleagues felt that he deserved a higher honour, particularly for his role in improving corporate governance. 
Ross Goobey became known beyond the City through newspaper articles and as a panellist on seven series of BBC Radio 4's light-hearted business quiz, 'The Board Game'. Interviewed on the 'Today' programme in March 2003, during a stock market downturn, he correctly called the bottom and famously exhorted listeners to 'fill your boots' with equities ('The Independent', 6 Feb 2008). He was, in his own phrase, 'a card-carrying capitalist' who admired successful entrepreneurship, though, observed an obituarist, 'he certainly had a puritanical streak, emphasized by an appearance that had something of the 19th-century Nonconformist preacher' ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Feb 2008). He disclosed his own pay package, never claimed his lunch expenses, and turned down opportunities of more lucrative employment. 'I just think I missed out on the greed gene', he remarked ('The Times', 5 Feb 2008). Nigel Lawson recalled in his memoirs that Ross Goobey 'never could resist a joke' (Lawson, 658). 
Ross Goobey's recreations included club cricket, supporting Arsenal, and music. He played the piano and the clarinet, notably at the wedding of Clive James. Charitable and voluntary contributions included membership of the boards or investment committees of the Royal Academy of Music, the National Gallery, the National Opera Studio Foundation, and the Royal Opera House. CancerBACUP, the cancer information charity, was an active interest in acknowledgement of the help provided after his diagnosis of blood cancer in 1997. He was successfully treated, but died at his home, 22 Alwyne Road, Islington, from a recurrence, on 2 February 2008. He was survived by his wife, Sarah, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99894


Gray, (Thomas) Cecil (1913-2008), anaesthetist, was born on 11 March 1913 at the Clock public house, 31 London Road, Liverpool, of which his father Thomas Gray was the landlord. His mother, Ethel Gray, 'nee' Unwin, had been married before, to the Macclesfield silk manufacturer Ernest Abraham, and widowed with three children. Cecil Gray was the only child of her second marriage. A devout Roman Catholic, she arranged his school education accordingly. This began in 1920 at a residential convent primary school at Bath, and continued from 1923 until 1931 at Ampleforth College, the Benedictine public school in north Yorkshire, where he developed interests in science, acting, and music, and a calling to be a monk. Owing to 'petty transgressions', however, he lasted only two months as a novice at Ampleforth Abbey and then turned to medical studies at Liverpool University where he trained from 1931 to 1937. On 18 September 1937 he married Marjorie Kathleen Hely (1909-1978), daughter of Herbert William Byrne Hely, dental surgeon. They had a son and a daughter. 
After graduating Gray went into general practice. As an assistant GP in central Liverpool he began giving dental anaesthetics, as GPs did, which is where his interest in anaesthesia began. His medical training in giving anaesthetics had been 'abysmal', consistent with the low status of a speciality still largely the province of part-time GP-anaesthetists giving ether for major surgery. After buying his own general practice at Wallasey in 1939 he volunteered to assist the most distinguished Liverpool GP-anaesthetist, Robert J. Minnitt, the inventor of the 'gas and air' analgesia apparatus that was transforming British midwifery. By employing a practice assistant Gray was eventually assisting Minnitt two days a week at Liverpool's Northern Hospital and in 1942 gained the recently introduced diploma in anaesthetics. By then he had sold his bomb-blasted practice to take a half-time post as anaesthetist at Liverpool's Sefton Hospital and assist several local surgeons in private practice, among them Charles Wells, whom he later described as the finest surgeon he ever encountered, and who was to become a major ally. 
Soon Gray was working sixty-hour weeks and feeling fit for military service, for which he had been turned down in 1940 owing to the asthma he suffered. On re-applying, he was called up to the Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) in September 1942 and trained at Oxford for service with one of the mobile neurosurgery units designed by Oxford's leading neurosurgeon, Hugh Cairns. As a captain in the RAMC Gray was shipped with his unit to north Africa in December 1942 and served in the Tunisia campaign from February to May 1943, but not long afterwards severe bronchopneumonia ended his military service. 
Soon after returning to hospital practice in Liverpool early in 1944 Gray began the research collaboration with his local colleague John Halton that laid the foundations of subsequent anaesthetic practice. Through Halton's connections with the nearby Burtonwood US Air Force base they had early knowledge of the pioneering use of curare in North America, before wartime medical journals had spread the story of how this muscle relaxant was being used as a supplement to general anaesthesia. Formerly, deep general anaesthesia had been the sole means of producing adequate relaxation of musculature during major surgery. Intrigued, Gray and Halton acquired through Halton's Burtonwood connections trial supplies of intocostrin, the purified curare being produced in the USA. Used as recommended, it produced the supplementary muscle relaxation of which they had heard, but by the time supplies ran out they were committed to further exploration of its potential. Fortune favoured them when Gray remembered d-tubocurarine chloride being used in physiology experiments at Liverpool University, from where hundreds of ampoules of this curare-related compound were acquired. Using the contents of the first of these, Gray had the breakthrough moment that led to revolutionary improvements in the use of general anaesthetics. Unsure of how much d-tubocurarine chloride to use, he dissolved the contents of an ampoule (possibly 100mg) in a pint bottle of sterile saline solution ready for dripping into a patient undergoing a cholecystectomy at Liverpool's Northern Hospital. With the patient anaesthetized with pentathol and the surgeon James Rawlinson opening the abdomen, this dripping-in began and was followed by a sudden dramatic loss of muscle tension which left surgeon and anaesthetist shocked. Once Gray had begun assisting the patient's breathing, which had dropped, the operation progressed with remarkable ease and far lighter anaesthetic, which had considerable advantages. 
Gray had stumbled on the benefits of using muscle relaxant less sparingly than ever risked before and soon he and Halton, in their different hospitals, were using concentrations that produced major skeletal muscle paralysis. This meant taking over the patient's breathing by manual, air-bag ventilation, but the rewards were unprecedented muscle relaxation and the need for only light anaesthesia throughout major surgery. Gray concentrated on abdominal surgery cases in Liverpool and Halton on thoracic cases at Clatterbridge Hospital on the Wirral. They met almost weekly to discuss outcomes and refinements of their technique over a pint or two at Liverpool's historic Ye Cracke public house. Within months they had progressed to using the reversal agent prostigmine to terminate the paralysis they induced, Gray meanwhile testing for risks to the heart of their new procedure, which his laboratory animal experiments at Liverpool University showed as negligible. In just over a thousand surgical operations in 1945-6 Gray and Halton refined their procedure and validated its revolutionary effectiveness, the details of which they presented in a paper to the anaesthetics section of the Royal Society of Medicine in London in May 1946, which was justly titled 'D-tubocurarine chloride -- a milestone in anaesthesia?' Its publication in the society's 'Proceedings' sent reverberations through the world of anaesthetics and was the beginning of modern general anaesthesia. Although cautiously slow, its uptake by a conservative clinical speciality led to rapid advances in surgery. 
Gray (known as T. Cecil Gray) received an MD degree from Liverpool University in 1947 for a thesis on his investigations of 1944-6 and in the same year was appointed head of the university's new department of anaesthetics, as reader in anaesthesia. In his first year in this appointment he created the country's first day-release course for young clinicians who were preparing for the diploma in anaesthetics. By the mid-1950s his fine teaching, leadership, and skill in the appointment of staff had secured a reputation for his department that drew postgraduate students from around the world to learn the 'Liverpool technique'. The first lecturer he appointed was Gordon Jackson Rees, who under Gray's direction pioneered paediatric anaesthetics in Britain and became his closest ally. Gray became professor of anaesthesia in Liverpool in 1959 and remained as head of the department until his retirement in 1976. From 1970 to 1976 he served also as Liverpool's dean of medicine. His research influence continued into the 1970s as a co-author of papers on the clinical monitoring of neuromuscular block by muscle relaxants. The train-of-four twitch technique of monitoring that his team devised was soon adopted by anaesthetists worldwide. 
On a national level Gray made profound contributions to the development of anaesthetics as a speciality, both as a foundation member from 1948 to 1969 of the board of the faculty of anaesthetists of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, of which he was the dean from 1964 to 1967, and from 1948 to 1976 as a member of the council of the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland, of which he was the president from 1956 to 1959. Between 1948 and 1964 his editorial skills lifted the status of the 'British Journal of Anaesthesia'. He also edited major textbooks, including 'Modern Trends in Anaesthesia' (1958) and 'General Anaesthesia' (1959), both of which went through several editions. Internationally he lectured widely on the Liverpool technique and refinements to it and in 1961 was the first anaesthetist recipient of the Sir Arthur Simms travelling fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. 
For his contributions to anaesthetics Gray was appointed a CBE in 1976, which many in the field thought an inadequate recognition of his achievements. His devoted contributions to the Roman Catholic Church were honoured in 1982 when he became a knight commander of the Order of St Gregory the Great. Following the death of his first wife, on 24 August 1979 he married Pamela Mary Corning ('b'. 1942/3), hospital secretary, and daughter of Charles Frederick Corning, engineer; they had one son. Gray died at his home in Ravenmeols Lane, Formby, Liverpool, on 5 January 2008, of gastrointestinal bleeding. He was survived by his wife, Pamela, and his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99901


Griffiths, Philip Jones (1936-2008), photojournalist, was born on 18 February 1936 at Monfa, Hylas Lane, Rhuddlan, Flintshire, the oldest of three sons of Joseph Griffiths (1903-1962), a railway master fitter who worked at Llandudno Junction, and his wife, Lizzie (Catherine) Jones (died 1973), a district nurse. His younger brothers were Penri Jones Griffiths ('b'. 1938) and Gareth Jones Griffiths ('b'. 1944). He spoke Welsh as his first language. He attended Rhuddlan county primary school until passing the eleven-plus examination and moving up the valley to St Asaph's Grammar School. For a short time his grandfather Henry Griffiths moved the village general store into the front room of the family home from where he traded until he was suddenly struck blind. 
As a teenager Griffiths became a conscientious objector and a member of the Peace Pledge Union. His commitment to pacifism, together with his Welsh-bred partisan empathy for the underdog, became fixed ideals generating an emotive force visible in much of his work. While still at school he worked as a trainee pharmacist at Boots the chemists in Rhyl. The Rhyl Camera Club was situated upstairs, and it was there that he became exposed to the work of Henri Cartier-Bresson and nurtured his passion for photography. He began to explore north Wales on his motorbike, documenting the plight of Welsh villagers displaced by flooding. At home the back yard was turned into a chemistry laboratory and the bathroom was converted into a darkroom, complete with an enlarger that swung up on a sprung shelf. Prints, such as his portraits of the theatre director Sam Wanamaker, were dried on a line in the kitchen. He never lost his boyish fascination with the technical aspects of his craft: processing, printing, cameras, and optics. As a teenager he saved up for camera equipment by photographing group portraits of convalescing Derbyshire miners at Pengwern Hall, a short ride from Rhuddlan. 
After moving to Liverpool to study pharmacy Griffiths photographed the nascent arts scene in the city, accompanying the poet Adrian Henri, an old school friend from St Asaph's, and photographing the Beatles' first concert at the Liverpool Empire. He completed his studies in Sunderland then moved to London, where he worked in the pharmacy at St Mary Abbot's Hospital, Kensington, and as the night manager of Boots in Piccadilly, often managing the needs of drug addicts. By day he photographed Soho life and bunked in a brothel near Leicester Square with his brother Penri. His support for pacifism led him to photograph the first and subsequent Aldermaston marches. His first break came when the influential editor of 'Photography' magazine named the aspiring Welshman as one of the five best photographers of 1960. This led to a job with 'The Observer' in 1961. A year later his reputation as an international photojournalist blossomed with his scoop on the 'regroupement' programme during the Algerian War. When the 'Sunday Times' and 'Sunday Telegraph' colour magazines were launched in 1962 and 1964 he went on to freelance for them on assignments in Mongolia and Ethiopia. 
In 1966 Griffiths joined Magnum Photos as an associate, and in the same year set out to report on the Vietnam War, a five-year odyssey that was to become the defining juncture of his career. He lambasted the stupidity of war, yet at the same time photographed with intimate tenderness its victims on both sides of the conflict, resulting in some of the finest war photographs of the twentieth century. 'Vietnam Inc.', a classic in the history of photojournalism, was finally published in 1971, with most of the printing, text, and design having been prepared with his partner, Heather Holden, in London and New York. 'Vietnam Inc.' -- its moving photographs and accompanying polemic -- helped turn public opinion against the war in south-east Asia, although by 1971 there was already widespread disaffection. Following the critical success of the book Griffiths sought to build on the impact that it had made. During the 1970s he went on to photograph Cambodia, the Yom Kippur War, the conflict in Northern Ireland, and Rhodesia where, in the most frightening incident of his life, he had a hood placed over his head and was taken out to be shot. 
In 1980 Griffiths was elected president of Magnum Photos for a five-year term during which, he claimed, he 'dragged Magnum kicking and screaming into the twentieth century' (private information). He moved to 36th Street in New York and in 1981 began a ten-year relationship with the photographer Donna Ferrato. His later books included 'Dark Odyssey' (1996), 'Agent Orange: Collateral Damage in Vietnam' (2004), 'Vietnam at Peace' (2005), 'Recollections' (2008), and a new edition of 'Vietnam Inc.' (2006). 
Griffiths was courageous, charismatic, disarmingly funny, and caring -- especially about the plight of the disempowered. He was also stubborn and unforgiving. He had entrenched opinions on a wide range of things he abhorred such as smoking, military power, and perceived disloyalty. He was 'the spirit of contradiction' but at the same time gave to photojournalism its moral soul. He died at his home in 195A Goldhawk Road, Shepherd's Bush, London, on 19 March 2008 of colon cancer. He was survived by his two daughters, Katherine Holden and Fenella Ferrato (both born in 1982). 


@@@@@


doc= 99907


Hall, Clifford Samuel (1925-2008), singer and guitarist, was born of Jamaican parents in Oriente Province, Cuba, on 11 September 1925. His father, Arthur Bertram Hall, was a plantation worker. As a child he studied at both Spanish and English schools, but following the death of his mother, and his father's subsequent remarriage (together with the outbreak of the Second World War), he relocated with his father to Jamaica. Arthur Hall could not afford further education for his son, so Cliff, at the age of fourteen, became an agricultural worker. 
During the Second World War the RAF recruited many West Indian servicemen and, after lying about his age, Hall joined the RAF and came to Britain for basic training as a mechanic in November 1942. He was based in Hartlebury in Worcestershire for most of the war, but his job involved travelling across Britain delivering and installing aircraft parts. Prior to demobilization he studied for an electrical engineering qualification in Leeds. There he met a Scottish factory worker, Janet Greer Massie (1922-1985), and they were married on 10 November 1947 at Leeds register office. They had a daughter, Lynn (1949-2007), and two sons, Clifford junior ('b'. 1951) and Robert ('b'. 1962). 
Hall later recalled that he 'always enjoyed listening to the sound of guitar music; I liked to listen to country and western music on the American Forces Network radio station, so I bought a cheap guitar in Leeds and learned to strum along to the radio and the odd record Janet and I had, just to amuse myself. (personal knowledge)' In 1953 he was working as an electrician in Leeds when he was subcontracted to the atomic site at Capenhurst, outside Chester. There he met Tony Davis, who invited him to hear his jazz group in Liverpool; Hall was soon playing along on bongos. These jazz jam sessions led to the formation in September 1958 of the Spinners folk group: Cliff Hall, Tony Davis, Mick Groves, Hughie Jones, and Jacqui McDonald were the original members. Jones was the only Liverpudlian in the group, but the group was often referred to as 'the Liverpool Spinners', in part to distinguish them from the American Motown group of the same name. From their beginnings in the basement of Samson and Barlow's restaurant in London Road, Liverpool, the Spinners came to specialize in folk, maritime, and 'folk revival' material, although Hall, like Tony Davis, always had a penchant for a wider variety of music genres, and he added many Caribbean songs to the Spinners' repertoire. They were, therefore, an eclectic combination, which did not always go down well in certain 'purist' folk circles. However, by the late 1950s and early 1960s their cheerful and entertaining performances had built the group a steady following in Liverpool, and they opened one of Liverpool's first folk clubs, which soon found a home at Gregson's Well public house in Low Hill. Hall was by this time an accomplished guitarist, and also added occasional harmonica to the Spinners' sound. 
When Jacqui McDonald left the Spinners in 1962 she was not replaced, and the musical balance within the group changed. In contrast to the more raucous sea songs sung by the whole group McDonald had sung the quieter songs, so Hall, with his gentle baritone, took on the key role of providing contrast and grain. His quiet, textured voice gave the Spinners a different, more commercial, sound with 'a unique and captivating flavour' (Stuckey, foreword). However, while his voice changed the Spinners' sound, his very membership raised their profile, for the group was undoubtedly the first multiracial singing group to enjoy major success in the UK. While by the 1960s the folk revival was regarded by its protagonists as creating a kind of musical space for everyman, it largely consisted of white music played in white environments. Indeed, it was very unusual in the early 1960s for a folk group to include a black member. This fact brought some racist comments during the Spinners' early days, for jibes concerning their so-called 'lack of authenticity' were usually directed at the Caribbean material. (Similarly, black Liverpudlian attitudes to the group could also be mixed, some regarding Hall as a rather less than authentic representation of Liverpool's black community.) Racism also reared its head by the time the group had commenced recording in 1962: when the Spinners came to release their first album, 'Quayside Songs Old and New', that year, EMI (who owned the HMV label) was uncomfortable about promoting a multiracial group. Instead of a photograph of the group, a cartoon adorned the LP cover, and all the members appeared to be white. However, the group's second album, 'The Spinners' (1963), issued by Fontana, sported a photograph of the four musicians round a spinning wheel. 
Regular weekends in London spent consulting the archives in the English Folk Dance and Song Society's Vaughan Williams Library together with singing at The Troubadour and other folk clubs in the capital expanded the Spinners' repertoire and live reputation. But invitations to sing at folk events around the country placed strain on their day jobs. The Spinners turned fully professional in 1963. Encouraged by Michael Flanders and Donald Swann, they hired St George's Hall in Liverpool and quickly sold out a concert. The following year they booked the city's Philharmonic Hall: recordings of the concert were released on two subsequent LPs, 'Folk at the Phil!' (1964) and 'More Folk at the Phil!' (1965). Turning professional meant that they looked to concert halls rather than folk clubs for their gigs. This further alienated the purists, but also meant that they achieved a reputation far beyond the rather closeted folk circles, especially after they embraced the ever expanding medium of television. They had already appeared in episodes of the Associated-Rediffusion series 'Looking About' in 1961 and ABC's 'Hullabaloo!' in 1963. Several further guest appearances were followed by seven series of 'The Spinners' for the BBC, broadcast between 1970 and 1981, and by regular Christmas broadcasts until 1985. They also sang the theme to the film 'Funeral in Berlin' (1967), starring Michael Caine. Meanwhile, they continued to produce new LPs on a regular basis, one of them entitled 'Not Quite Folk' (1969). 
In 1965 fellow Fontana artists Wayne Fontana and the Mindbenders 'borrowed' Cliff Hall to add his deep voice to the word 'love' in the recording of 'Game of Love', which reached number one in the American singles chart and number two in the UK. This was the nearest any Spinner came to singles success of their own. Like many of their folk-based contemporaries, the Spinners did not to any great extent flirt with singles releases; however, the group became synonymous with contemporary songs such as 'Dirty Old Town' (by Ewan MacColl), 'In My Liverpool Home' (by Pete McGovern), 'Black and White' (by Earl Robinson), and 'The Family of Man' (by Karl Dallas). 'Black and White' was thought to be a nod towards Hall's race. The Liverpool historian Ray Costello later commented: 'Some felt that this song was overly sentimental, as it played upon black and white children sharing a blissfully idyllic school-life, but such was the appeal of this well-loved group and their genial style, that they managed to carry it off with some success. (Costello, 76)' Indeed, Hall's very presence in a 'white folk group' helped to shape the discourse surrounding not only the Liverpool black community (of which he was not ostensibly a member), but also music, race, representation through genre, and black realization. 
Like his fellow Spinners, Hall was awarded the gold badge of the English Folk Dance and Song Society. The group supported many charities and humanitarian causes, and raised money for Mother Teresa through War on Want, as well as for Queen's Park School, Lincoln, a school for young people with learning difficulties where Hall was on the board of governors. The group disbanded in 1988, although there were several reunions, including when the group led the community singing at the all-Merseyside FA cup final in 1989. Following a knee operation Hall convalesced in Australia, where he met a Spinners' fan, Dorothy, who was a nurse from Birkenhead. By this time he had been widowed twice; he stayed in Australia and they were soon married. He died in Adelaide on 26 June 2008 and was survived by Dorothy, as well as by the two sons of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 99915


Harling, (Henry) Robert (1910-2008), typographic designer, novelist, and magazine editor, was born on 27 March 1910 at 27 Thorpedale Road, Islington, London, the elder son of Henry Robert Harling (1876-1954), taxi driver and former regular soldier, and his wife, Adelaide Lavinia, 'nee' Thomas (1876-1949). He and his younger brother, Arthur Stanley ('b'. 1912), were brought up by their parents in north London. Harling later gave a characteristically unreliable account of his upbringing in his semi-autobiographical novel 'Amateur Sailor', published in 1944 under the pseudonym Nicholas Drew, in which he claimed that his parents died young and he was brought up in Brighton by a so-called 'aunt', a family friend, and her dairyman husband. It would have delighted him that this romanticized account appeared as fact in his obituaries. 
Harling, known in the family as Robbie, attended Dame Alice Owen's School in Highbury. He showed a precocious interest in the design of print and lettering and this became the ruling passion of his life. He enrolled as a student of typography at the Central School of Arts and Crafts at some point during an unsettled and somewhat frenzied early period in which he also worked for the 'Daily Mail', gained experience at the Lund Humphries printing works in Bradford and the Kynoch Press in Birmingham, and made use of a family legacy to open a bookshop selling first editions and poetry in Lamb's Conduit Street, London. His outlook was already that of the sophisticated metropolitan. 
In 1932 Harling entered the then burgeoning world of modern advertising, taking a job as designer at Stuart's, an agency well known for its illustrated booklets for Fortnum and Mason. Four years later he moved to Everett Jones and Delamere, the agency financed by the young Lord Delamere, as a freelance designer. His promotion to creative director allowed him to commission work from his favourite artists, Edward Bawden, Rex Whistler, and Eric Ravilious. His redesign of the cover for 'Wisden's Cricketers' Almanack' in 1938, with its Ravilious engraving of Victorian cricketers, is regarded as a typographic classic of its time. The cover used Harling's own Victorian-style typeface Playbill, developed in 1938 with the Sheffield typefounders Stephenson Blake for whom he also designed Chisel (1935), Tea Chest (1939), and Keyboard (1951). 
Harling was quick on the uptake and able to predict, and indeed to stimulate, the coming resurgence of interest in Victoriana. Two books on the Victorian period -- 'The London Miscellany' (1937) and 'Home, a Victorian Vignette' (1938) -- reinforced his reputation as an authority on period design and decoration. But he was notably eclectic in tastes, his authority also encompassing the continental modern. In 1935 he organized an exhibition of Rudolph Koch's Klingspor types at Lund Humphries's office in London. This was followed by an exhibition on Jan Tschichold; Harling wrote the first article about the Swiss typographer to appear in Britain. It was published in 'Printing' magazine in 1936 with the typically Harlingesque heading, 'What is this 'functional' typography? The work of Jan Tschichold. The man is different!'. At this period he also made friends with the great English type designer Eric Gill, visiting him at Pigotts. Harling's later book, 'The Letter Forms and Type Designs of Eric Gill' (1976), was recognized as the most authoritative study of this aspect of Gill's work. 
Harling's breadth of knowledge and enormous range of contacts, as well as his sheer energy and zest for life, made him a natural magazine editor. In November 1936 the first issue of 'Typography' appeared. This was an innovative periodical conceived by Harling with his slightly older friend James Shand and published by Shand's family firm, the Shenval Press. The magazine was original in its coverage of lettering of all kinds, not just fine book printing. The first issue contained an article on Kardomah tea labels; the second an analysis of train ticket typography. Harling's early championing of typographic ephemera anticipated 1960s pop culture. Eight issues were published before 'Typography' ended with the outbreak of the Second World War. 
Harling's war was eventful. Always a keen sailor, he volunteered for the Royal Navy and, before he had finished training, assisted in the evacuation of British forces from Dunkirk in May 1940. He described the episode in 'Amateur Sailor', a book praised by John Masefield as the best of all eyewitness accounts of Dunkirk. As a sub-lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve he served as navigator of a corvette on convoy duty in the western approaches, an experience he recounted in a further vivid personal narrative, 'The Steep Atlantick Stream' (1946). His close friendship with the writer Ian Fleming began in 1939 when Fleming, already working in intelligence, commissioned him to redesign the Admiralty's weekly intelligence report. In 1941 Fleming, now assistant to the director of naval intelligence, recruited Harling first to the inter-services topographical division, to work on gathering and publishing information on potential enemy targets, and later as a member of Fleming's own 30 assault unit, referred to by Harling as 'Fleming's secret army', operating in the front line at the end of the war to capture enemy code books, wireless equipment, and so on, before these could be destroyed. Harling became the unit's expert on mines and minefields. 
Harling had been present when, in 1944, Fleming stated his intention to write 'the spy novel to end all spy novels'. The result was James Bond, a fictional character who bore a distinct resemblance to Harling in his sardonic elegance of manner and cool sexual expertise. In 1945, when Fleming was foreign manager at the 'Sunday Times', Harling was appointed consultant designer to the paper, remaining blissfully happy in the part-time post for the next forty years. He was also for a while the architecture critic for the 'Sunday Times'. The journalistic world of power politics fascinated him and when he too began writing fiction Fleet Street provided him with a potent theme. His first novel, 'The Paper Palace' (1951), was a thriller about a reporter sent out by a corrupt editor on the trail of a dead man. It gave an acute and chilling picture of English journalism at that period as did his later book, 'The Hollow Sunday' (1967). Of his other five novels the most successful was 'The Endless Colonnade' (1958), a suspense novel about a physician in Italy being pursued by killers. Harling loved Italy and would revisit Venice year after year. 
After the war Harling resumed his typographical enthusiasms. He and James Shand inaugurated a new graphic design periodical, 'Alphabet & Image', eight issues of which appeared between 1946 and 1948. This was followed by 'Image', ostensibly a quarterly concentrating on the visual arts. Eight volumes were published between 1948 and summer 1952. Under Harling's brilliantly entrepreneurial editorship the journal published work by such important post-war artists as John Minton, Leonard Rosomon, Blair Hughes-Stanton, and Edward Ardizzone. In 1948, again with Shand, he set up the Art and Tecnics publishing firm, commissioning a series of exceptionally elegant and expert books on architecture, including John Summerson on Sir John Soane and Hugh Casson on Victorian buildings. In 1957 he started the last of his many varied but interconnected lives as editor of 'House & Garden' magazine, published by Conde Nast and based at Vogue House in Hanover Square. He liked the ambience of what he called 'the glossies', relishing their absurdities and making the most of his many opportunities to encourage young illustrators and designers. He was an autocratic, effective, imaginative editor, adored by his largely female staff, who extended the potential of a magazine previously limited to decoration into architecture and social commentary, inventing the journalistic 'lifestyle' feature. He edited 'House & Garden' until 1993. 
Harling married first, on 25 October 1930, Mary Adelaide Homer (1910-2002), drapery saleswoman, and daughter of William Thomas Homer, cartage contractor (and a friend of Harling's father). After their divorce (in 1942 she married the advertising agent Sydney Righyni) she was quickly edited out of his life; later friends remained unaware of her existence. He then married, on 3 April 1945, a psychiatrist's beautiful assistant, Phoebe Pauline Helen Konstam, formerly Kohnstamm (1911-2006). His own version of their meeting was that he had picked her up in Leicester Square. It was apparently a very happy marriage, surviving Harling's many liaisons -- some long-lasting, some less so -- elsewhere. They had three children (two sons and a daughter), two of whom became journalists, the third a painter. The family lived in an exquisite house, Glebe House at Godstone in Surrey, an eighteenth-century pink-washed gothick vicarage, which Harling reconfigured by removing the top storey. When the planning authorities objected he was able to present the evidence to prove that he had simply returned the building to the architect's original intention. 
Harling was a lean, handsome, raffish man who cut a figure of considerable glamour in drab London in the 1950s, wearing well-cut Edwardian-style suits and a fedora. His friend the artist Lucian Freud, noting Harling's drainpipe trousers, enquired how he managed to make quick getaways. He was loyal and affectionate to selected friends but not generally gregarious. He showed a characteristic ruthlessness in divesting himself of his family at an early stage. Ruari McLean described him as 'exceptionally non-boring. One probably never knew much about him; but one never forgot him'. He died of cancer on 1 July 2008 at Glebe House, and was survived by his three children. He was cremated at Surrey and Sussex crematorium on 10 July 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99920


Hart, Frederick Leslie (1914-2008), automotive engineer, was born on 12 September 1914 at 25 Pendlestone Road, Walthamstow, Essex, the son of John Octavius Hart (1870-1942), a stock keeper for a provisions dealer, and his wife, Rosina Florence, 'nee' Callow (1873-1955). He was educated at Walthamstow grammar school. After leaving he worked in the City of London before becoming a landscape architect, meanwhile studying for his engineering qualifications at evening classes. It was not until 1940 that he entered the car industry, joining the Ford motor company as a draughtsman. Initially he was employed in designing armoured military vehicles as part of Ford's contribution to Britain's war effort. On 18 September 1943, at the parish church of St Saviour, Walthamstow, he married Margaret Lydia Bennett ('b'. 1922), daughter of George Henry Bennett, seaman. They had a son, John. 
After the war Hart was engaged in designing light motor cars for Ford and by 1957 had achieved the rank of executive engineer. His rise within the company was a reflection of his remarkable talents as an engineer. The first vehicle in whose development he played a central part was the Ford Anglia 105E, a small family car, in 1959. The Anglia was a 'notchback', meaning that its rear window leant back from its base. Following the success of the Anglia, Hart was enlisted in 1960 to play a major role in the development of the Ford Cortina, which became one of the company's best selling cars for two decades. The impetus for this vehicle was to a degree born out of the rivalry between Ford Britain and Ford Germany. Essentially the Cortina project was a riposte to the news that Ford Germany was working on a new, mid-range, front-wheel drive family saloon. British products were normally rear-wheel drives, but Ford Britain then embarked on designing and constructing a rival front-wheel drive car that would be produced at the same time as the German car. The German project was already one year into its development cycle, meaning that the British operation had to be completed in two years if a simultaneous launch was to be achieved. 
The Cortina project was led by Ford's project manager, Terry Beckett, with Hart as executive engineer. The British team worked fast, and hard, and its efforts bore fruit in September 1962 when the launch target was met. The Cortina subsequently went through five generations with over 4.2 million cars being sold between 1962 and 1982, when production finally ceased. A notable feature of the Cortina which was incorporated into the 1964 variant was the innovatory aeroflow heating and ventilation system, offering flow-through ventilation to eliminate stuffiness and increase the accuracy of temperature control, thus standing in sharp contrast to previous heating systems. Hart was heavily involved in this revolutionary system and in advocating its introduction. 
Hart was promoted to chief engineer of Ford Britain's car division in 1963. His team was responsible for developing the Corsair, a larger variant of the Cortina, but the Corsair never obtained the Cortina's near-iconic status in the motoring world. Hart was also closely involved in the development and launch in 1966 of the top-of-the-range mark 1V Zephyr and Zodiac models. Both were equipped with independent suspension for both their front and rear wheels, unlike their predecessors. 
In 1969 GKN Sankey recruited Hart to become technical director at its Telford base in the west midlands. His expertise was required in the development of a 'proper' (four-wheeled) car for the disabled to replace the existing unstable three-wheeled invalid carriage that was commonly used throughout Britain. Hart's design was much more practical, but also costly, and despite its winning a 1978 Design Council commendation the Labour government refused to back its commercial development and the project withered. Hart retired from GKN Sankey the following year. 
Hart was a highly practical man, whose son later recalled his father making for him toys that were a distinct improvement on those they had seen in department stores. In retirement Hart pursued his hobbies of bowls and gardening. He died of bronchopneumonia at his home, Lugano, 3 Powell Road, Buckhurst Hill, Essex, on 15 April 2008 and was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 99924


Hayward, Douglas Frederick Cornelius (1934-2008), tailor, was born on 5 October 1934 at 12 Church Walk, Kensington, London, the younger son of Noel Westmacott Hayward (1897-1968), electrical engineer, and his wife, Winifred Elliott, 'nee' Thurston (1905-1984). He came from a working-class background (his father worked in the boiler room at the BBC before cycling to a London transport depot to wash buses; his mother worked in a munitions factory during the Second World War) and grew up in Hayes, Middlesex. He won a scholarship to Southall grammar school. He was a talented footballer and took a trial for Middlesex county football team but was unsuccessful. After leaving school at fifteen he was apprenticed to a tailor in Shepherd's Bush Green, west London. Following his apprenticeship he did two years' national service in the Royal Navy. 
On his return to civilian life Hayward rejoined his former employer, whose premises were located close to Shepherd's Bush Theatre and the BBC studio at Lime Grove, giving Hayward his first contact with actors, who later formed his core clientele. On 4 October 1958, at the parish church in Ickenham, Middlesex, he married Diana Mary Smith, a twenty-year-old secretary, and daughter of Robert Scott Smith, accountant. Through his sister-in-law Melissa Smith (the actress Melissa Stribling), who was married to the film director Basil Dearden, Hayward attracted new clients, retaining their business when he went into partnership with Dimitrio Major, a tailor in Fulham Road, west London, with a similar clientele. The firm of Major Hayward offered skilfully cut, well-made suits whose flattering, fluid shapes suited the lifestyles of its young customers. Determined to work in the West End, Hayward left to set up his own business in Pall Mall in 1963. Clients such as the actor Terence Stamp followed him and in 1967 he upgraded his premises to a four-floor property at 95 Mount Street, Mayfair, where he lived on the first floor. As well as bespoke tailoring, the shop offered a range of shirts, sweaters, ties, and dressing gowns, known as 'Hayward Classics', luggage, hand-made shoes, and wrist watches. His customers, who were mostly young and successful, came from the worlds of art, media, sport, and business. He offered them, and their wives and girlfriends, a relaxed and convivial alternative to the class-conscious formality of Savile Row. In spite of his alternative approach to the business of bespoke tailor, his skills were highly rated by his fellow tailors. In 1965 he was the only non-establishment tailor to be recommended by the society magazine 'Queen' in its 'Society Index'. 
During the 1960s Hayward helped to redefine the classic man's suit. As a tailor and not, he emphasized, a fashion designer, his aim was to create a suit that made its wearer appear, and feel, slim, relaxed, and comfortable. He described his customers as looking 'a mixture of smart but scruffy in suits that are beautifully made' (Ross, 125). The suits he created for films brought his aesthetic to a wider audience. He dressed Terence Stamp in 'Modesty Blaise' (1966), Michael Caine in 'The Italian Job' (1969), and Roger Moore in 'For Your Eyes Only' (1981) and 'A View to Kill' (1985). Many of his clients became lifelong friends, including Caine and the photographers Patrick Lichfield, with whom he set up Burke's dining club in Clifford Street, Mayfair, in 1969, and Terry O'Neill, who was a regular member of Hayward's amateur football team, the Mount Street Marchers' Social Club. His first marriage having been dissolved, on 31 December 1970, at Westminster register office, Hayward married Glenys Marjorie Evans, 'nee' Roberts, a 31-year-old journalist (as Glenys Roberts) and daughter of Stanley Roberts, bank manager. Their daughter Polly was born in 1970. The marriage was dissolved in 1978 and Hayward subsequently had a relationship with the journalist Janet Street-Porter ('b'. 1946). 
According to Audie Charles, Hayward's office manager from 1967, his 'knack was to give a man a suit he could put on and forget about, knowing he looked good. He didn't want anyone to say, there goes a Hayward suit; he wanted you to know the man looked good but you weren't sure why. (Ross, 126)' He was also admired for his personal qualities and John Le Carre drew on his character and appearance when creating Henry Pendel for his novel 'The Tailor of Panama' (1996). Hayward valued his privacy and independence but was a discreet and attentive listener whom many called upon for advice. He was also an amusing raconteur, bon viveur, and womanizer. In later life he moved seamlessly between his working-class roots and high society, singing Cole Porter duets with Princess Margaret in Mustique and organizing down-to-earth parties of the kind he had enjoyed as a child. 
Hayward's success and personal popularity attracted customers from a wide social spectrum, with businessmen predominating towards the end of his career. He advised Ralph Lauren on his Purple Label menswear line, which was launched in 1994, and lectured on tailoring at the Royal College of Art. In 2006 his daughter Polly took over her father's business because of his failing health. He nevertheless continued to live at 95 Mount Street (and also had a country property near Henley). He died on 26 April 2008 at Meadbank Hospice, 12 Parkgate Road, Battersea, London, from bronchopneumonia and vascular dementia. Although an agnostic he received the last rites from a Roman Catholic priest. The company Douglas Hayward went into administration in 2009, and was purchased by a newly formed company, Mount Street Tailors. 


@@@@@


doc= 99925


Heath, Roy Aubrey Kelvin (1926-2008), novelist, was born on 13 August 1926 in Georgetown, British Guiana, the second son and youngest of the four children of Melrose Arthur Heath (died 1928), head teacher of a primary school, and his wife, Jessie de Weever (died 1991), music teacher. His father died before Heath's second birthday, leaving his mother to bring him up with his two sisters, Avis and Lynette, his elder brother, Sonny, being cared for by his maternal grandfather. They lived in the coastal village of Agricola until Heath was eight, when they moved back to Georgetown. Although living in a working-class area of the city in straitened circumstances the mother maintained the family's respectability, and believed strongly in the importance of her children's education. Heath himself became fascinated by the seething variety of human life in the close-packed community, and by the folklore and storytelling that were to influence his own later writing. While still attending Georgetown Central High School, he made surreptitious excursions to the city's billiard saloons and low-life dives. 
Heath left school at sixteen for a career in the civil service, becoming a clerk in the treasury in 1944. In 1950 he arrived in Britain to further his education, from 1952 reading modern languages, part-time, at London University, while a clerk at Allen and Hanbury's factory in London. He gained a BA in French in 1956. On 10 January 1953 he had married Emilia (formerly Aemilia) Oberli, then an au pair to the Jewish arts benefactor George Rapp, who became Heath's patron. They had two sons and a daughter. From 1959 he taught at primary schools for the inner London education authority, and from 1968 French and German at Christ's College grammar school, Finchley. He was later to study law, being called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1964, and to the Guyana bar in 1973, but never practised as a lawyer. 
Guyana's achievement of independence in 1966 prompted Heath's ambition to chronicle the social history of his homeland in the twentieth century. Beginning in 1972 he contributed short fiction to periodicals, to the Guyanese literary annual 'Firebird', and to the BBC. His first novel, 'A Man Come Home', followed in 1974. Its haunting narrative inspired by folk myth and its Guyanese setting heralded a distinctive talent confirmed by 'The Murderer' (1978), a dark, intense tragedy set among the alleys and canals of Georgetown, which won that year's 'Guardian' fiction prize. Seven novels followed, focusing on different aspects of Guyanese life and culture, all receiving high critical praise, as well as an autobiography of his early life, 'Shadows Round the Moon' (1990). 
Heath's Georgetown trilogy, 'From the Heat of the Day' (1979), 'One Generation' (1980), and 'Genetha' (1981), reissued as 'The Armstrong Trilogy' in 1994, chronicled the epic of a Guyanese middle-class family. The tragic protagonist in 'Orealla' (1984) was poised between the frustrations of Georgetown society and the allure of a vanishing village culture. 'The Shadow Bride' (1988), which he considered his finest work, re-created the life of the 'deracine' east Indian immigrants, with the conflicts between social idealism and individual passions accentuated by the country's divisions and corruption. Village life was the setting of 'Kwaku' (1982), a picaresque novel of an incompetent fake healer, whose story was given a political turn in Heath's last novel, 'The Ministry of Hope' (1997), in which Kwaku moved to Georgetown and ironically found himself becoming successful in a world of endemic fraud and corruption. 
Proficient in French and German, Heath was conversant with contemporary European literature and ideas. He had a great love of classical music. At the heart of his work lay a fascination with psychology and the dark workings of the psyche. He was influenced in particular by Freud, and by Jung, whose theories of the archetypes and the collective unconscious shaped both the content and method of his writing. But if his interests were cosmopolitan, he remained resolutely and, as he put it, 'intensely Guyanese' ('The Independent', 27 June 2008). For him psychology was inseparable from anthropology and history. The personal traumas central to his fiction were set in the context of Guyana's history of slavery, colonialism, and post-colonialism; the fragmentation of cultures imported from Africa, Asia, and Europe; and the powerful, distinctive presences of the country's towns and landscapes. 
Heath refused British nationality, and eschewed publicity as a writer. He kept contacts with the immigrant working classes, teaching some of them English in adult evening classes. Until his mother's death he made regular return visits to Guyana. His one play, 'Inez Combray', won the Guyana Theatre Guild prize when produced in Georgetown in 1972. He gave the prestigious Edgar Mittelholzer lectures, 'Art and History', in 1984, and received the Guyana literature prize in 1989. Towards the end of his life he became increasingly debilitated by Parkinson's disease. Yet he never lost his interest in life. 'Perhaps the greatest truth', he wrote, 'is the elusiveness of truth' ('Shadows Round the Moon', 124). He died on 14 May 2008 at Northwick Park Hospital, Harrow, London, of multiple causes, leaving behind a unique body of writing distinguished by its deep human insight and haunting evocation of place. He was survived by his wife, Emilia, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99930


Higgs, Sir Derek Alan (1944-2008), banker, was born on 3 April 1944 at 19 Sherbourne Road, Acocks Green, Birmingham, the only son of Alan Edward Higgs (1912-1979) and his wife, Freda Gwendoline, 'nee' Hope (1914-1984). At the time of his birth his father was employed as the branch manager of a building society, but an entrepreneurial flair led him into the building business, where he profited considerably from the rebuilding of Coventry after the immense damage done to the city during the Second World War. The young Derek and his sister Marilyn enjoyed a comfortable childhood in the west midlands. He was sent to the private Solihull School and went on to read economics at Bristol University, and graduated in 1965. But although he received a somewhat privileged upbringing and education, his father had always made it clear to him and his sister that they would not inherit his wealth, since he believed that inherited wealth took away pride and self-motivation. When Alan Higgs died his $25 million estate was used to set up the Alan Edward Higgs Charity, the objectives of which were to benefit disadvantaged children and fund other socially progressive projects in the Coventry area. Derek and Marilyn Higgs became trustees of the charity. 
From university Higgs went to work for the accountancy firm Price Waterhouse, but after four years decided that merchant banking would be a more interesting career. Answering an advertisement that declared 'no experience necessary', in 1969 he joined the blue-blooded Baring Brothers as a corporate finance executive. On 30 May the following year he married an economist, Julia Mary Arguile ('b'. 1945), daughter of Robert Thomas Arguile, civil engineer. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Higgs soon realized that family connections rather than merit paved the way to the top at Barings, and he sought a place to work where skill and commitment mattered more than birthright. This led him, in 1972, to join S. G. Warburg & Co. The bank was already running rings around some of its more establishment competitors, and the culture was entirely suited to both Higgs's nature and his meritocratic instincts. His attention to detail, affable nature, and keen intelligence brought swift promotion, and he soon established himself as one of the most notable deal-makers and trusted advisers in the City of London. He guided many of Warburg's clients through the boom years of corporate finance in the 1980s, where he was the key banker in such high-profile deals as Burton group's contested takeover of Debenhams. By 1986, still in his early forties, he was made head of corporate finance at the bank, a position he held until, in 1994, he was appointed chairman. 
One deal, however, eluded Higgs. In 1994 he was one of a number of investment bankers who recognized that their banks needed to increase their capital base if they were to prosper as truly global businesses. He set about negotiating a merger with the American bank Morgan Stanley. After weeks of negotiations, without making public its reasons, Morgan Stanley backed out of the deal. The failure of the merger caused significant damage to Warburg's reputation, from which the bank never fully recovered. In 1995 Warburg was acquired by Swiss Bank Corporation, its standing as the doyen of the investment banking business lost for ever. 
After this debacle Higgs resigned to become a director of the Prudential and chairman of its fund management business, a position he held for four years, until 2000. He then joined the boards of several companies as a non-executive director. They included British Land, Egg plc, and Allied Irish Banks. He was also in 2001 appointed senior adviser in the United Kingdom to UBS Warburg (as Warburg's had been renamed, following the merger of the Swiss Bank Corporation and the Union Bank of Switzerland in 1998), and subsequently to UBS Investment Bank (as it was once again renamed, in 2003), thus re-establishing a relationship with the firm with which he had spent the greater part of his working life. 
It was for his work as head of a government inquiry into the role and effectiveness of non-executive directors in 2002-3 that Higgs came to widest notice, and for which he was given a knighthood in 2004. His report into what had become known as 'corporate governance' unearthed compelling evidence of the ineffectiveness of many existing governance arrangements and proved controversial, mostly because he recommended the separation of the roles of chairman and chief executive, and other measures to strengthen the powers of non-executive directors. By the time of his death, however, most of his recommendations were seen as good practice and generally accepted and adhered to. 
After the publication of his report Higgs became chairman of the Alliance and Leicester Bank in 2005. In his latter years he was also pro-chancellor of Bristol University (from 2002), a director of various bodies, including the Financial Reporting Council (1996-2004), the City Arts Trust (1995-2001), and the Scott Trust (from 2008), and the owner of 'The Guardian' newspaper, of which he was a lifelong reader. He was also a supporter of Coventry City Football Club, of which he was a director (from 1996 to 2008), and for whose Ricoh Arena he persuaded his father's trust to provide crucial funding. He attended his last Coventry City match two days before suffering a fatal heart attack in London on 28 April 2008. He was declared dead at Charing Cross Hospital the same day, and was survived by his wife, Julia, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99931


Higman, Graham (1917-2008), mathematician, was born at 18 Lee Street, Louth, Lincolnshire, on 19 January 1917, the second of three sons of Joseph Higman (1876-1954), Methodist minister, and his wife, Susan Mary Ethel, 'nee' Ellis (1885-1951). His grandfather William Higman (1830-1907) was also a Methodist minister, and president of the United Methodist Conference in 1890. 
Higman was educated at Sutton Secondary School, Plymouth, and at Balliol College, Oxford, where his undergraduate tutor and later (after he had taken firsts in both his mathematical moderations and his finals) his DPhil research supervisor was J. H. C. (Henry) Whitehead. Although Whitehead was best known as a topologist the work that Higman did developed into pure algebra, and his later famous, and famously unpublished, thesis was written on the subject of units in group-rings. During the Second World War as a conscientious objector he worked first as a lecturer at a technical college in Essex, and then as a meteorologist. On 29 July 1941 he married Ivah May Treleaven (1917-1981), a secondary school teacher, and daughter of a Methodist minister; his father, Joseph Higman, and her father, Woodman Treleaven, officiated at the marriage at the Methodist Chapel in Keswick. They had five sons and one daughter. 
After the war Higman was recruited as a lecturer at Manchester University by the great department-builder M. H. A. (Max) Newman. There he met many like-minded colleagues, in particular B. H. Neumann, with whom and with whose wife Hanna he wrote a much-cited paper about infinite groups. This was the paper that introduced the Higman-Neumann-Neumann (HNN) extension, and used it to spectacular effect to solve a number of open problems in what was then still the infant theory of infinite groups. At Manchester he also got to know Alan Turing, whose ideas about logic and computability he later used in a beautiful way to identify the finitely generated subgroups of finitely presentable groups (groups that can be described using finitely many generators and finitely many relations between those generators). His result was later widely known as Higman's embedding theorem. 
In 1955 Higman returned to Oxford as reader in pure mathematics and tutor at Balliol in succession to Henry Whitehead, who had been elected to the Waynflete chair of pure mathematics. In 1958 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and on Whitehead's death in 1960 he was again elected his successor and moved from Balliol to a fellowship of Magdalen: 'brewed in Balliol, matured in Magdalen', as Whitehead said of himself, and Jack de Wet, tutor at Balliol, extended to Higman. He supervised innumerable research students, gave innumerable lectures on algebra, and introduced mathematical logic into the Oxford curriculum. He was a demanding lecturer in the classical style (with rapid delivery, small writing on the blackboard, his back to the audience, and fluent and elegantly grammatical sentence construction), who, however, ensured that the content of what he had to say was always of such importance that for those who learned how to understand his lectures there were great mathematical riches to be gained. He was awarded the London Mathematical Society's Berwick prize (1962) and De Morgan medal (1974), and the Royal Society's Sylvester medal (1979). 
Higman was one of a trio of three great British group-theorists. They inhabited the London-Oxford-Cambridge triangle, albeit at different times: William Burnside (1852-1927) worked in London (at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich), Philip Hall (1904-1984) in Cambridge, and Higman in Oxford. There is a direct connection in that one of Higman's most influential papers about finite groups was written jointly with Hall on the so-called Burnside problem. Not only did their contribution make a major step forward in the study of the problem but also, serendipitously, the techniques of the Hall-Higman paper turned out to be of very great importance in the study of finite groups and, in particular, in the search for finite simple groups. 
Higman had a long and successful life. He was a complex character. As a colleague he was capable of treating mathematicians less able than himself with disdain or with direct and hurtful comments on their work. As a supervisor of research students he was frightening until the student discovered that, when bearded in his den and asked direct questions, he would treat the student with great respect and provide detailed advice tailored to the ability of the student. Although himself quite a difficult man to have an easy friendship with, he was a great success in his work for the Samaritans; he was also a great success in the congenial post-seminar meetings in the pub, where his astonishing grasp of ornithology, his deep love of poetry (especially that of Yeats and R. S. Thomas), and his gift for solving devilish crosswords emerged perhaps against his will. He owned neither a radio nor a television. 
Higman remained true to his Methodist roots. He was admitted a local preacher in 1936 and served the Methodist community for sixty-five years, giving his last address in 2001. He was not always well understood by his congregation. In the 1960s his mathematical research students, many of whom called him Uncle Graham in a friendly way (but never in his earshot), had a story that he had preached a Christmas day sermon in one of the villages near Oxford and had omitted to make any mention of the Christmas story. His address at the memorial service for Ivah was, however, a model for what such sermons should be. He survived her for another twenty-seven years, continuing to live in Oxford, though latterly at the Albany nursing home in Headington, following the onset of Parkinson's disease. He died of aspiration pneumonia at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 8 April 2008. 


@@@@@


doc= 99934


Hill, Sir John McGregor (1921-2008), nuclear physicist and public servant, was born on 21 February 1921 at Westminster Nursing Home, 50 Liverpool Road, Chester, the son of John Campbell Hill (1888-1982), a science teacher at Chester College of Scottish background who later became a schools inspector, and his wife, Margaret Elizabeth, 'nee' Park (1893-1984). The family moved to Richmond upon Thames in Surrey and he was educated at Richmond county grammar school and King's College, London, where he gained a first in physics. In 1941 he joined the Royal Air Force and spent the rest of the Second World War working in radar development, ending with the rank of flight-lieutenant. On demobilization in 1946 he returned to academic physics at the Cavendish laboratory and St John's College in Cambridge. After gaining a PhD in 1948 for work on radioactive substances with short half-lives, he became a lecturer in physics at the University of London. Meanwhile, on 25 October 1947, at All Saints' Church, Cambridge, he married Nora Eileen Hellett ('b'. 1927), a nurse at Addenbrookes Hospital, and daughter of Henry John Hellett. They had two sons and a daughter. 
In the late 1940s the Labour government led by Clement Attlee initiated the development of nuclear weapons, with Christopher Hinton in charge of fissile materials. Technologically complex factories were required, the largest being the reactors (or 'piles') at Windscale, Cumberland, which would produce plutonium. Expertise in relevant fields was in desperately short supply and in 1950 Hill was recruited as a member of Hinton's team overseeing the completion of Windscale, working partly on site and partly at Risley in Lancashire. The targets were met and plutonium was delivered in time for Britain's first nuclear test in October 1952. 
Starting in 1953, Hill, working with J. C. C. Stewart, produced a series of important reports on the future of the industrial side of the nuclear project, and in particular its costs and efficiency. It was the beginning of an involvement with nuclear energy strategy which dominated the rest of his life. He also participated in the design of Calder Hall, the more advanced reactors built next to the Windscale site which were celebrated in 1956 as the first in the world to deliver nuclear-generated electricity to a civil supply system. In that year Britain's nuclear project reached a peak in public esteem, appearing to be a leader in a field of remarkable promise, but the descent soon began. In October 1957 fire in one of the Windscale reactors caused a release of radioactive contamination into the atmosphere, which in turn made necessary the dumping of milk from Cumberland dairy herds. It was the world's worst reactor accident and remained so for another twenty-two years, and there was considerable public alarm. Hill, by now deputy director of technical policy at Risley, was closely involved in the aftermath. Sir William Penney conducted a swift official inquiry but the government statement which followed, though it calmed external concerns, left staff at Windscale and Risley unsatisfied and aggrieved. Hill was asked to review the evidence on the key early stages of the accident and his report in January 1958 blamed faulty instrumentation more than human error. His account was given considerable credit in the official history of the accident, published in 1992. 
Hill was by now a rising star. A slight man of medium height, quick-moving and active, he combined a certain modesty with a confidence founded on deep scientific knowledge. He was an exceptional committee chairman with a gift for getting disparate people to work together, and was known for always asking incisive questions. Hinton, a difficult man to please, rated him highly for his judgement and willingness to show the courage of his convictions. Hill soon became manager of the production group, overseeing the full range of factories supporting the industry as well as Windscale (which had been renamed Sellafield after the accident), Calder Hall, and a further reactor site at Chapelcross. He would later say this was the job he most enjoyed, but he did not stay long. In 1964 he became a member of the UK Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) and three years later he succeeded Penney as chairman, a post he held until retirement in 1981. 
Hill's vision, which altered little, was of a strong British nuclear industry supplying a substantial proportion of the country's electricity needs well beyond the time when North Sea oil ran out. At its heart would be fast-breeder reactors with uniquely efficient fuel consumption, producing relatively little waste. Prototypes were in development at Dounreay in Caithness. This vision, he argued, promised a balanced, sustainable, economical, and independent energy future, as well as one with strong export potential. The state had an essential enabling role to play in delivering it, with UKAEA conducting the research and development. Though Hill made his case eloquently and persistently, and from a position of authority, it was not to be. 
The 1970s were exceptionally difficult years for the country and the nuclear industry, in which successive governments found it impossible to make strategic choices. They had to weigh factors such as the oil price shock of 1973, the discovery and landing of North Sea oil, turbulence in the coal industry, and spells of economic difficulty that brought declines in electricity consumption and demands for government stimulus. At the same time public distaste for matters nuclear was growing, encouraged by Sir Brian Flowers's report of 1976, on 'Nuclear Power and the Environment' (which emphasized the risks and uncertainties of nuclear energy and called for a halt to further reactors until the problem of disposing the waste safely could be solved), and the Three Mile Island accident in the USA in 1979. Worse still, the British nuclear industry seemed unable to fulfil the promise of cheap energy that in earlier years had dazzled politicians and public alike. 
The first-generation civil reactors, known as Magnox stations, though safe and often described as workhorses, proved expensive and troublesome to operate, and UKAEA's successor design, the advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR), soon ran into problems. These difficulties were not of UKAEA's making but flowed in large measure from a government policy of entrusting plant construction to a number of weak and ill-equipped private industry consortia. Hill declared that this policy did 'more damage to the British nuclear industry than any other decision... more damage than all the other decisions put together' ('New Scientist', 17 July 1975). Besides the AGR the UKAEA also offered another design, the steam-generating heavy water reactor, as a possible technology to fill the gap until fast-breeder reactors became available, but neither attracted the principal customer, the Central Electricity Generating Board, which preferred the pressurized water reactor made by the American Westinghouse corporation. Ministers, buffeted by events and under pressure from vested interests, could not choose, and meanwhile UKAEA's long-term case was undermined as the fast-breeder reactor began to take on mirage-like properties (always seeming to need a few more years in development). 
Through it all, Hill (who was knighted in 1969) remained a patient and persistent advocate for the UKAEA. Though he was sometimes at odds with ministers, notably the Labour energy secretary, Tony Benn, it is a measure of his standing that he was twice reappointed UKAEA chairman and that his fourteen-year tenure was unusually long in a public service post at such a high level at this time. His talents, however, were sometimes less obvious to the public. He was uncomfortable on television and for years maintained a brisk, almost dismissive tone about nuclear anxieties that could be seen as condescending. In 1977 he made international headlines by describing as 'science fiction' claims (later largely vindicated) by the Soviet exile Zhores Medvedev about a nuclear waste accident in Russia in 1957. Hill later explained that his remark had related to the alleged scientific causes, rather than the fact, of the explosion, but the damage was done. By the end of the 1970s, facing an increasingly informed and sophisticated anti-nuclear lobby, he had recognized the need to give higher priority to winning public trust. 
From 1971, alongside his role at UKAEA, Hill was chairman of British Nuclear Fuels Ltd, a state-owned corporation created from his old northern production group, with Sellafield at its heart. His hope was to build a global business in nuclear fuel reprocessing, but again he was defeated by the combination of changing public attitudes, technical difficulties, rising costs, and political hesitation. Dogged by questions about health risks at Sellafield and about the prospects for safe disposal of nuclear waste, he was dismayed to find his reassuring arguments undermined by accidents and mistakes at the site. Nor was his firm conviction that future generations would solve the long-term storage problem enough to win that argument. 
Hill retired from UKAEA on reaching sixty, but remained chairman of British Nuclear Fuels for a further two years, and of Amersham International plc, the former radiochemical centre which produced radioactive materials for industry, from its inception in 1975 until 1988. From 1984 to 1992 he was president of the British Nuclear Forum. His vision for the British nuclear energy industry may not have been realized (the fast-breeder programme was shut down in 1994), but some of his warnings were by the end of his life judged by some to be prescient. As early as the 1970s he argued that the long-term danger to the environment from burning fossil fuels was being underestimated, and he repeatedly stressed the need to have viable alternative energy sources available when British oil and gas supplies began to run out. 
Though regarded as an approachable man by his colleagues, Hill liked to keep his private life private. He enjoyed gardening, the occasional glass of malt whisky, and golf. He served as captain and president of the Royal Mid-Surrey Golf Club in Richmond (he lived latterly at Dominic House, Sudbrook Lane, Petersham) and in his UKAEA days he used to say that one of the tests of his management ability and his powers of delegation was whether, once in a while, he could be spared to play eighteen holes on a Friday afternoon. He died on 14 January 2008 at the Royal Star and Garter Home, Richmond upon Thames, of a chest infection and Alzheimer's disease. He was survived by his wife, Nora, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99941


Hoddinott, Alun (1929-2008), composer, was born on 11 August 1929 at 3 The Avenue, Gilfach, near Bargoed, at the head of the Rhymney valley in Glamorgan, the son of Thomas Ivor Hoddinott (1899-1974), elementary school teacher, and his wife, Gertrude, 'nee' Jones (1901-1966). His father was a teacher in Bargoed but moved to a post in Penlle'r-gaer, near Swansea, where Hoddinott grew up and received his early education. By all accounts his was not a very musical family but his innate gift soon showed through so that by the age of four he was already taking violin lessons and exhibiting a fine command of that instrument, along with the viola, which he later played with equal virtuosity as a first-generation member (from 1946) of the National Youth Orchestra of Wales. These talents had been nurtured at Gowerton grammar school, where he also displayed a very marked aptitude for composition and an evident will to make this the main focus of his efforts rather than pursuing a career as a performing musician. 
That decision set the course of his later years at Gowerton and led to the award of a composition scholarship at University College, Cardiff, where he graduated in 1949. His time there had witnessed the production of numerous apprentice scores, among them some large-scale orchestral, concertante, choral, and chamber works. A good number of these were performed locally and some received national broadcast premieres. However, Hoddinott later withdrew most of them and re-assigned their opus numbers, feeling that these were indeed apprentice pieces and not representative of his mature style. It was during this period also that he developed the capacity for sheer hard work under pressure -- often in response to specific commissions or demands of circumstance -- that added to his later (not entirely welcome) reputation for working to very tight deadlines. 
The one notable exception to Hoddinott's veto on those early works was his 1949 clarinet concerto, written and given its first (BBC studio) performance during his third year as a student at Cardiff. A revised version of this piece enjoyed wider success and critical acclaim at its first concert performance at the Cheltenham festival five years later, with Gervase de Peyer as soloist and the Halle Orchestra conducted by Sir John Barbirolli. Still Hoddinott thought himself in need of further expert guidance and therefore, on completing his undergraduate studies, took a series of private lessons with the Australian composer and pianist Arthur Benjamin. At the same time he continued to establish his institutional and academic home base in Cardiff, having been appointed first to a post at the Welsh College of Music and Drama in 1951 and then, in 1959, to a lectureship at University College, where he remained until his retirement (and the conferment of emeritus status) in 1987. 
Hoddinott's marriage on 2 April 1953 to (Beti) Rhiannon Huws ('b'. 1928), a schoolteacher (daughter of Llewellyn Caradog Huws, minister of Carmel Independent Chapel, Gwauncaegurwen) and Welsh speaker, was undoubtedly the single most important event in his personal life and another clear mark of Hoddinott's attachment to the formative culture of his youth. This was despite the fact (a source of friction at times) that he never came out as a Welsh nationalist composer and was apt to make a fairly polemical point of not subscribing to any strongly nationalist -- folk-based or other -- version of the Welsh musical renaissance. Indeed he later accepted a commission for Prince Charles's investiture as prince of Wales in 1969 and produced a brief fanfare for the marriage in 2005 of Charles and Camilla Parker-Bowles. On the other hand his music often took inspiration from Anglo-Welsh and Welsh-language sources, whether by way of texts to be set or material for treatment in dramatic or extended song-cycle form. Later he was often highly vocal in his criticism of funding agencies and cultural bodies, Welsh National Opera among them, that he saw as failing in their important (if not primary) task of promoting native Welsh music. 
From the late 1950s Hoddinott's music began to lose something of the jaunty high spirits, jazzy inflections, and at times hard-edged neo-classicism that had marked his earlier style. Thereafter that style was increasingly displaced by elements of the sombre, predominantly dark-hued (some called it Celtic) character that typified his music of the next four decades, and which found its first expression in his orchestral piece 'Nocturne' of 1955. Not that he ever lost touch completely with the temperamental sources of that previous, more extrovert manner, retaining as he did a craftsman's pride in creating various 'occasional' works of a none the less inventive and technically resourceful kind. Like his close friend Alan Rawsthorne, Hoddinott combined an impressive versatility of style, language, and technique with a genuine capacity to produce music of a powerful and sometimes emotionally disturbing character. 
This duality became something of a hallmark and continued to characterize his music throughout the long period of Hoddinott's tenure in Cardiff. Academically that period was punctuated by his promotion from lecturer to reader (in 1965) and then to professor and head of department in 1967, a sequence of advancements due in large part to his now well-established reputation as one of the most significant British composers of his generation. His university teaching was never a sinecure but continued to occupy a large part of his working day, so that much of his composing was done at night or during what time he could take off from an otherwise demanding workaday routine. 
Despite this Hoddinott remained highly productive and diversified his output across the whole range of genres including symphonies, concertos, choral works, chamber music, piano sonatas, and operas. Though sensitive to any imputation of over-facility he was a fluent and highly professional composer who saw no sense in the romantic idea that the artist must choose between authentic self-expression or responding to commissions from soloists, orchestras, or funding bodies. The recording companies Argo, Lyrita, and Nimbus played a major role in promulgating Hoddinott's music from the mid-1960s on, as did the various festivals and annual events -- chief among them the Cardiff festival of music, co-founded in 1967 by Hoddinott with his friend the pianist John Ogdon -- where his own compositions often received a first performance. Through its offshoot, the Cardiff festival of twentieth-century music, which he launched in 1976, Hoddinott sought to acquaint audiences with developments across a wide range of present-day 'conservative' and 'modernist' idioms, as well as steering a middle course between the claims of nationalist and cosmopolitan allegiance. His more than twenty concertos -- inventively scored for a range of solo instruments and orchestral forces -- likewise reflect his capacity to work within broadly traditional forms while putting them to new and imaginative ends. 
In the best-known works of his 'middle' period, from the early 1960s to the late 1970s, Hoddinott's music combines an exploration of complex formal devices (such as double palindromes and occasional twelve-note rows) with a continuing adherence to tonality, albeit often deployed in adventurous and ear-stretching ways. Like Bartok -- undoubtedly a strong influence, along with others as varied as Hindemith, Stravinsky, Sibelius, and (most revealingly in this connection) Berg -- Hoddinott put tonality to use not only as a source of vivid local contrasts but also as a means of sustaining long-range structural coherence. Nowhere is this more evident than in the cycle of ten symphonies -- in many ways his crowning achievement -- where Hoddinott progressively refined and extended his techniques for integrating long-breathed, arching melodic lines with tightly organized thematic and motivic development. The best-known, nos. 3, 4, and 5, were products of Hoddinott's intensely creative middle years and exhibit his keen sense of formal proportion, along with his sharp ear for subtle shifts of harmonic and rhythmic emphasis. 
Hoddinott composed over six hundred works ranging across every major musical genre -- among them, not least, six operas of a diverse and often decidedly heterodox character. As the work of a Cardiff-based (as well as more broadly Welsh) composer, Hoddinott's music, in conjunction with his other activities, academic, scholarly, performance-related, and administrative, did much to establish the existence of a distinctive musical culture in south Wales, possessed of a genuine national character but none the less open to wider sources of inspiration. These aspects of Hoddinott's achievement and legacy were recognized by, among many other honours, appointment as CBE in 1983 and the Glyndwr award for outstanding contribution to the arts in Wales in 1997. A further accolade in 2008 was the naming of the Hoddinott Hall, an extension to the Millennium Centre in Cardiff Bay, the home base for the BBC National Orchestra of Wales. Hoddinott underwent a heart-valve operation in November 2007. He died of multi-organ failure at Morriston Hospital, Swansea, on 11 March 2008, and was survived by his wife, Rhiannon, and their son, Ceri. 


@@@@@


doc= 99942


Holme, Richard Gordon, Baron Holme of Cheltenham (1936-2008), politician and businessman, was born on 27 May 1936 at 19 Bolingbroke Drive, Battersea, London, the only son of Jack Richard Holme, a detective constable in the Metropolitan Police, and his wife, Edna May, 'nee' Eggleton. His father, a lieutenant in the intelligence corps, was killed in action in 1940. As a son of a freemason, Holme boarded at the Royal Masonic School in Bushey, Hertfordshire. His national service was spent with the 10th Gurkha rifles in Malaya between 1954 and 1956. At St John's College, Oxford, he read jurisprudence, and joined the Liberals in 1959. On 4 July 1958, while still a student, he had married Kathleen Mary (Kay) Powell ('b'. 1938), daughter of Vincent Tom Powell, surgeon. They had two daughters followed by twin sons. 
Holme had a varied and successful business career. After graduating with a second-class degree in 1959 he took marketing posts with Lever Brothers and then Cavenham Foods. He then moved into publishing, a lifelong interest, becoming a director first at Penguin Books and then at the British Printing Corporation's books division, of which he become chief executive in 1969. In the same year he moved to San Diego, California, as vice-president of a publishing company. In 1974 he decided to return to Britain, having accumulated enough money to concentrate on seeking a seat and advancing the Liberal cause. He fought Braintree in the general election of October that year. He had already fought East Grinstead for the Liberals in the general election of 1964 and in a by-election the following year. 
Holme was a distinctive Liberal activist, becoming a day-by-day unpaid key adviser to the party leaders, David Steel then Paddy Ashdown. He had more influence than perhaps any other Liberal front-bench spokesman and was almost a permanent part of the party power structure. He had been vice-chairman of the Liberal executive in 1966 and became president of the party in 1980-81. He worked patiently for the party to exercise influence rather than be a debating society. He had joined the party when Jo Grimond was leader in the 1950s and had held out the hope of a centre-left realignment. This was a guiding theme in Holme's political life. In large part because of his role as a 'fixer', broker, and spin doctor, he was often distrusted by some party activists, who were suspicious of the leadership's attempts to work more closely with Labour and feared that such tactics would compromise Liberal principles. He usually had to prompt Steel to overcome his natural caution but had to urge patience on the more headstrong Ashdown. It was Holme who drafted the Konigswinter compact in 1981 between the leaders of the Social Democratic Party and the Liberals, an initiative that led to the formation of the alliance and eventually, in 1988, the Liberal Democrat Party. 
Not becoming an MP was a disappointment to Holme. He had good prospects as the Liberal and then the Liberal Democrat candidate in the general elections of 1983 and 1987 at Cheltenham. After his narrow failure in 1987 he decided after five attempts to retire from the fray. Ironically, a Liberal Democrat candidate won the seat in 1992. Having been appointed CBE in 1983, he became a life peer, as Baron Holme of Cheltenham, in 1990, and between 1992 and 1999 he was the party's Northern Ireland spokesman. 
Having managed the Liberal Democrat general election campaign in 1997, which brought a third party its largest number of MPs since the 1920s, and having taken part in the pre-election coalition talks with Tony Blair, Holme was one of the five-strong Liberal Democrat team that sat on the Liberal Democrat-Labour joint cabinet committee between 1997 and 1999. He had long been an advocate of wide-ranging constitutional reform. Indeed he established his own think-tank, the Centre for Constitutional Reform, in 1985. He was able to see many of his hopes for constitutional reform fulfilled in the first years of the Blair government. When Ashdown resigned the party leadership in 1999, to be succeeded by Charles Kennedy, Holme thought it wise to step back from his leadership-counselling role. 
Holme had an enormous range of contacts in business and in politics and was widely trusted and respected for his judgement. His political activities spanned the political divide, although they were always progressive in direction. He played an important role in founding the Green Alliance (though his post as a director of Rio Tinto Zinc between 1985 and 1988 upset some of his 'green' friends), and Charter 88. He served as chairman of the Hansard Society between 2001 and 2007 and held a number of visiting academic appointments, including that of chancellor of Greenwich University from 1988. He wrote a number of books and pamphlets, including 'No Dole for the Young' (1975), 'A Democracy Which Works' (1978), and 'The People's Kingdom' (1987), and he was a joint editor of '1688-1988: Time for a New Constitution' (1988). He was deputy chairman of the Independent Television Commission and then became chairman of the Broadcasting Standards Commission, from which he resigned in 2000 after tabloid revelations about an extramarital affair. 
Holme was immediately recognizable with his military moustache, tall and erect bearing, good looks, elegant attire, and warmth. Many eagerly sought his company because of his charm, quick mind, and enthusiasm for new ideas. Despite being diagnosed with terminal brain cancer early in 2007 he carried on with some of his activities. These included the chairmanship of GlobeScan, a market research company specializing in environmental issues, and of the House of Lords constitutional committee until his term ended in October of that year. He died on 4 May 2008 at his home, Hazards, Lurgashall, Sussex, and was survived by his wife and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99950


Hunt, John Joseph Benedict, Baron Hunt of Tanworth (1919-2008), civil servant, was born at Northcote, Queens Road, Minehead, Somerset, on 23 October 1919, the elder son of Lieutenant (later Major) Arthur Lionel Hunt (died 1959), an officer in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Daphne Winifred, fifth of the six daughters of Captain Henry Ashton-Case. His only sibling, his younger brother, Ronald Francis, died in infancy. His mother's family home was at Beckford Hall, Warwickshire, where the private chapel had been a centre for parish Roman Catholics for over 200 years, and which in 1936 was acquired by the Salesian order as a novitiate. 
At the age of nine Hunt was sent to Avisford Roman Catholic preparatory school, near Arundel, whence he passed, four years later, to the strict tutelage of the Benedictines at Downside School. He won the school history prize and was president of the debating society. He also played in the school cricket, hockey, rugby, and squash teams. In 1938 he went as an open exhibitioner to read history at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where, after two years, he was awarded a second-class war degree. His extra-curricular activities included college cricket and hockey and membership of the committees of the Cambridge Union Society and the Footlights Club. 
In common with many undergraduates Hunt joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve on the outbreak of the Second World War and immediately after leaving Cambridge he was deployed on convoy escorts in the western approaches, earning exemplary appraisals for his organization and application. He qualified as a signals officer and in 1944 was transferred to Far Eastern sea duties serving in HMS 'Taff' under Lieutenant-Commander Michael Impey, who judged him more suited to a staff job than front-line command. Nevertheless, Hunt's front-line experience included seagoing command at the age of twenty-four and taking the surrender of a Japanese garrison, receiving the general's samurai sword of command. He was released from the Royal Navy in March 1946. Meanwhile, on 16 August 1941, at the Roman Catholic chapel in Hale House (his parents' home) in Churt, Surrey, he married Magdalen Mary Lister Robinson (1921-1971), younger daughter of Roy Lister Robinson, later Baron Robinson, forester. They had three children: Michael ('b'. 1942), Charlotte ('b'. 1947), and Martin ('b'. 1962). 
In February 1946 Hunt joined the Dominions Office as a temporary administrative assistant and in April that year he took the administrative grade examination. At first put on a reserve list for successful candidates, by the end of the year he had been offered a permanent position in his first-choice department, the Dominions Office. It was not long before his organizing skills brought an appointment as private secretary to an up-and-coming parliamentary under-secretary, Patrick Gordon-Walker. The appointment proved seminal in that it gave Hunt an early experience of ministerial work (the partition of India and the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir were dominant issues). Hunt also benefited from Gordon-Walker's advice to aim for pivotal postings in the central machine of government. On leaving Gordon-Walker's private office Hunt went as second secretary to the British high commission in Colombo, Ceylon, where he was promoted principal, before returning in 1951 to join the teaching staff of the Imperial Defence College for two years. 
It was during a subsequent posting, as first secretary in the British high commission in Ottawa, that Hunt's adaptability in getting things done was spotted by the cabinet secretary, Sir Norman Brook. As a result, in 1956 Hunt found himself in the cabinet office for the first time, as private secretary to Brook. Brook was the secretary of the Egypt committee and one of the few civil servants privy to Anthony Eden's thoughts during the Suez crisis. Nevertheless, Hunt maintained in later life that Brook kept things so close to his chest that his private secretary knew little of what was happening. 
After a further short spell in London with the Commonwealth Relations Office, in April 1960 Hunt was back again in the cabinet office, as secretary to the joint intelligence committee. When he left in May 1962 the committee recorded their 'warmest thanks for the magnificent work Mr Hunt had done which had extended well beyond what was normally regarded as the scope of the Secretary, and upon which [the chairman, Sir Hugh Stephenson] had greatly relied' (JIC minutes, 10 May 1962, TNA: PRO, CAB 159/37). Thereafter he spent six years (1962-7) on mainstream economic work at the Treasury. 
From 1968 to 1971, as a deputy secretary, Hunt served as first civil service commissioner, responsible for the integrity of fair and open competition for appointment to the civil service. He took particular objection to the Fulton committee's damning judgement on civil service recruitment, believing it to be prejudice without a sound basis of evidence. He defended the civil service commission against the committee's strictures and sought the backing of Sir William Armstrong, the head of the home civil service, asking him to intervene to attempt to redress the balance of view. During this same period he was influential in reducing the archaic class barriers that inhibited the effective use of all civil servants, whatever their social origins. From 1971 to 1972 he was a third secretary in the Treasury, where his duties included chairmanship of the committee charged with running programme analysis and review. He later described this initiative (intended to ensure that departments presented clear statements of objectives before any resources were allocated) as a system which 'created a great deal of work but not much in the way of results' (Plowden, 67), but it convinced him of the need for central initiatives to handle cross-cutting issues, driven by a departmentally neutral body like the cabinet office or the new Central Policy Review Staff (also established in 1971). 
In 1971 Magdalen, Hunt's wife of thirty years, died, leaving Hunt to bring up their younger son (then aged nine). He was remarried two years later, at the Carmelite church in Kensington on 15 September 1973, to Madeleine Frances Charles (1919-2007), the widow of Sir John Charles, a former chief medical officer, daughter of Sir William Errington Hume, cardiologist, and sister of Basil Hume (later cardinal and archbishop of Westminster). He became stepfather to her son and daughter. 
Hunt succeeded Sir Burke Trend as cabinet secretary in October 1973 and remained in post until the end of 1979, serving four prime ministers (Edward Heath, Harold Wilson, James Callaghan, and Margaret Thatcher). It is not known whom Trend had favoured as his successor, nor if he offered advice on the matter. But early in 1972 William Armstrong had commended Hunt to Heath as outstanding among his contemporaries and marked out by 'his personal qualities of drive, energy and leadership. He combines a strong and stable personality with the ability to get on with other people both inside the Service and in public life generally' (W. Armstrong to R. Armstrong, 2 March 1972, cabinet office papers). The result was a further posting (1972-3) as second permanent secretary in the cabinet office and heir apparent to Trend, during which time his managerial drive helped establish two new bodies: a European unit to support ministers in managing the United Kingdom's new membership of the European Communities; and a civil contingencies unit to replace the Home Office emergencies organization, with which Heath had been dissatisfied during the 1972 miners' strike. 
The 1970s were years of domestic economic decline, poor industrial relations (known as 'the English disease'), and precarious governments. Internationally it was a time of upheaval in the Middle East and in world economic power as oil price rises triggered recession in the West. In 1976 the government of James Callaghan was forced to seek funds from the International Monetary Fund as the markets lost confidence in sterling, resulting in a public expenditure crisis that threatened to split the cabinet irrevocably. Hunt's great contribution was that he so managed the flow of cabinet business and the advice on handling cabinet members that cabinet government never ceased to function. During the nine cabinet meetings on the loan Hunt passed manuscript notes to Callaghan with advice on handling the participants and keeping the discussion in play to the point where collective responsibility could prevail. At the same time he was working with Sir Kenneth Berrill of the Central Policy Review Staff to prepare a most sensitive doomsday scenario, of which only four copies were made; and he went to Germany on a secret mission for the prime minister to solicit the help of the federal government in securing the necessary financial support to calm the markets. 
Internationally Hunt created the 'sherpa' role as the prime minister's personal representative preparing for the biannual economic summits of Western leaders. He maintained a strong relationship with successive American national security advisers, patiently engaging in the diplomacy around the 1974 defence review and later helping Callaghan secure the agreement of Jimmy Carter to supply Trident missiles to upgrade the Polaris deterrent. He worked successfully behind the scenes to preserve the intelligence 'special relationship' between the two countries, while domestically he revived and revitalized oversight of the intelligence agencies on behalf of the prime minister, notably in the aftermath of the United States Watergate scandal. 
Constitutionally there were important innovations. The general election of February 1974 produced a hung parliament; this outcome had been foreseen and plans developed accordingly -- mainly by Heath's principal private secretary, Robert Armstrong, but with contributions from Hunt on precedents. The incoming Harold Wilson created a policy unit under Bernard Donoughue to work exclusively for him. It was not universally welcomed by permanent secretaries but Hunt wisely set out to implement Wilson's intentions, negotiating a protocol with Donoughue covering the relationship between the new unit and civil servants which smoothed the way forward. A further innovation was preservation of collective responsibility through the cabinet's 'agreement to differ' over the 1975 referendum on whether to remain a member of the European Community, the work being driven by the European unit in the cabinet office, which was led by Sir Patrick Nairne and reported to Hunt. The fourth innovation was the establishment of a constitution unit in the cabinet office to handle the Callaghan government's proposals for devolution of powers to Scotland and Wales. Hunt was himself sceptical of the ideas, being one of the first to point up the 'West Lothian' problem that Scottish and Welsh MPs would continue to have powers to vote on issues that would only concern England (whereas English MPs would lose their powers over similar matters affecting Scotland or Wales). 
There were also defeats. Neither Hunt nor ministers were quite ready for the ruthless and single-minded pursuit of its shareholders' interests by the Chrysler Corporation when it sought $32 million of UK government aid and threatened to close its UK operations (which employed 26,000) by the spring of 1976. On another occasion Callaghan took some delight in reading out a letter from Cardinal Hume stressing a moral imperative not to sell armed vehicles to El Salvador -- which Hunt had briefed in favour of doing. But the greatest defeat was when Harold Wilson put Hunt forward to prevent the publication of Richard Crossman's diaries, which drove a coach and horses through the then conventional interpretation in Whitehall of cabinet confidentiality. Hunt himself undoubtedly thought that publication would be wrong but he was also the front man for ministers and struggled to convince the lord chief justice, Lord Widgery, of the government's case. Public opinion was shifting towards greater openness about government actions in its name and government was lagging behind. The case to prevent publication was lost, leading to new rules of behaviour about ministerial memoirs, including a fifteen-year moratorium before revealing cabinet discussions. 
Contemporaries spoke with reverence of Hunt's skill at chairing meetings. A fellow permanent secretary described it as knowing where he wanted to get to -- and getting there. He captured the essence of his approach in a short guide, 'The dos and don'ts of chairmanship', published in the civil service journal, 'Management Services in Government', in 1977. He was made a CB in 1968, knighted KCB in 1973, and promoted GCB in 1977. He was made a life peer, as Baron Hunt of Tanworth, in 1980. 
In retirement Hunt was greatly in demand. His directorships included the Prudential Corporation (of which he was chairman from 1985 to 1990), IBM (UK) Ltd, and the UK arm of the Banque Nationale de Paris (of which he was chairman from 1980 to 1997). In 1982 a committee under his leadership produced an influential and notably liberal report supporting the widespread expansion of cable broadcasting. He was chairman of the House of Lords subcommittee on European trade and industry in 1992-5 when it investigated fraud in the European Union; the subcommittee's report, published in 1994, estimated the cost of such fraud at $5 billion a year. Other chairmanships included the Disasters Emergency Committee (1981-9), the Ditchley Foundation (1983-91), and the European Policy Forum (1992-8). But perhaps the achievement he was most proud of was his chairmanship (from 1984 to 1996) of the trust that published 'The Tablet', and his oversight of the financial rescue of that publication. 
The dominant influence in Hunt's life was his Roman Catholic faith. In later life he carried with him a prayer by Cardinal Newman which begins: 'God has created me to do Him some definite service'. To colleagues he was unfailingly courteous and often kind, though at first sight he could appear forbidding and unapproachable. He was supremely able to compartmentalize the formidable array of issues crossing his desk. He had the gift of making younger colleagues feel that there was no one else he would rather be speaking to at the time. By contrast, some senior colleagues never felt that they got close to him, but as one of them said, 'He made the Cabinet Office into a real Department' (private information). 
Hunt died on 17 July 2008 at his home, 8 Wool Road, Wimbledon, of cancer. A requiem mass was held in Westminster Cathedral on 29 October. He was survived by his two sons and his two stepchildren, his daughter having predeceased him in 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 99951


Hunter, George Kirkpatrick (1920-2008), literary scholar, was born at 77 Cuthbertson Street, Govanhill, a tenement district of Glasgow, on 7 October 1920, the only child of Samuel George Hunter, a journeyman electrician, and his wife, Mary Scott, 'nee' Currie. He developed both his love of books and his prodigious memory early. At elementary school in Cupar, Fife, given the run of the minister's library, he devoured the works of Sir Walter Scott from 'Waverley' to 'Woodstock'. On holidays in Moniaive, when his grandfather, the village schoolmaster, rashly challenged him to a wager designed to keep the over-talkative lad quiet, he flummoxed the old man and pocketed a schoolboy-sized fortune by learning psalms off by heart at sixpence each. Winning a bursary to Allen Glen's School, a science- and engineering-focused selective secondary school where his education was grounded (also) in the classics, he proceeded to Glasgow University in 1936 to read English literature. The importance of philosophy in the syllabus there gave him a breadth of reading unknown to most English humanities undergraduates, and shaped his understanding of what should constitute a university education. 
Pre-empting call-up, and instead of starting his final year at university (though still having earned a university degree), Hunter joined the Royal Navy in 1939 and, assigned to convoy duties aboard HMS 'Ulster Queen' in the Baltic, taught himself basic Russian so that he could serve as an interpreter. Later he trained as a code breaker in Japanese at Bletchley Park and was posted to Ceylon in 1944. He was reassigned, after Japan's surrender in August 1945, to Hong Kong as interpreter for a war crimes tribunal. 
On demobilization in 1946 Hunter enrolled at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was awarded a DPhil in 1950 for a thesis whose title -- 'A comparison of the use of the sententia, considered as a typical rhetorical ornament, in the tragedies of Seneca, and in those of Gascoigne, Kyd, Heywood, Jonson, Marston, Dekker, Webster and Greville' -- could serve as an epitome of his work in Renaissance studies, signalling its attention to the classical tradition's survival in early modernity, to language, rhetoric, cultural inheritance, comparativism, and, always, aesthetic effect, what the writing meant to the reader. Indeed the title signalled something more: that for Hunter no Elizabethan writer would be 'obscure', would forgo his attention. It was at Oxford that he met Shelagh Kathleen Edmunds ('b'. 1924), later a distinguished Victorianist (daughter of Christopher Montague Edmunds, principal of Birmingham School of Music); they married at the parish church in Solihull, Warwickshire, on 16 December 1950. Theirs was a partnership based as much on intellectual as domestic productivity, hers the editorial eye that had to be satisfied before anything he wrote was finished. They had three children, Mary, Andrew, and Ruth, who remembered lives full of books and conversation, and a father, passionate about football, theatre, family sing-songs, and games, who regularly trounced them at Scrabble by putting vowel-less Anglo-Saxonisms on the board. 
Hunter had in 1948, even before completing his DPhil thesis, been appointed an assistant lecturer at University College, Hull; this was converted to a full lectureship in 1950. Appointments followed at Reading (1955-8), where he worked alongside Frank Kermode and J. B. Trapp developing a programme of comparative Renaissance studies in the English department, and at Liverpool (1958-64), where Kenneth Muir was collecting a group of brilliant Shakespeareans. Hunter's first major publication, a superb 'All's Well That Ends Well' (1959) for 'Arden Shakespeare', distinguished him as a meticulous editor, interested in the play's textual problems, but equally theatre-savvy, paying shrewd attention to what interested him as much: its performance possibilities. In 1962 appeared 'John Lyly: the Humanist as Courtier'. Wry, witty, immensely learned, and positioning itself 'as part of the unceasing tug-of-war by which opinion comes to feel like understanding' (foreword, viii), this book effected a radical paradigm shift, establishing humanism (not, as C. S. Lewis had argued, medieval anti-secularism) as the defining Renaissance habit of mind. 
In 1964 Hunter was among those pioneering academics recruited to the government's policy of expanding opportunity with the founding of seven new universities. Offered a professorship at the University of Warwick and free rein to develop the curriculum, he created a department of English and comparative literary studies that was socially diverse and based on an innovative programme that saw the European epic (from Homer to Milton) as its foundation and Shakespeare (taught as a jobbing playwright, writing for performance) as its climax. He head-hunted the brightest and best: among them Bernard Bergonzi, Claude Rawson (with whom he edited the 'Modern Language Review'), William Righter, and Germaine Greer. On a bulldozer-scarred campus under construction that looked more like Wilfred Owen's Somme than Blake's New Jerusalem, he built a department on intellectual excitement: engaged not just in reading literature but in imagining what a university could be. 
Hunter crossed the Atlantic in 1976, leaving Warwick for Yale, as a professor of English. Landing there in the middle of the 'deconstruction wars', this once-radical humanist found himself cast, ironically, as a reactionary in battles between 'tradition' and 'theory'. Disenchanted with the academic posturing of both sides, in 1985 he accepted the chairmanship of the PhD programme in Renaissance studies, an appointment he found challenging and rewarding. Given more time for writing, he brought to completion the 'Oxford History of English Literature', a series begun in 1935, producing the final volume, 'English Drama, 1586-1642' (1997). At Yale, Hunter was appointed Emily Sanford professor of English in 1987, and elected a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1978) and a corresponding fellow of the British Academy (1988). He nevertheless remained thoroughly unpretentious, and unimpressed by status and honours; on the occasion of Shakespeare's quatercentenary in 1964 his seven-year-old son Andrew had recorded in his school diary that 'This morning my Mum and Dad had an invitation to tea with the Queen. They are not going as Dad says it will be ded boring' (Rawson, 2). 
Hunter's brilliance as a teacher and a scholar was an ability to ask disarmingly simple questions, such as wondering what the theatrical purpose of Othello's blackness might have been, that, answered, conducted students on astonishing journeys through history and myth, across maps, looking at etymology, demographics, visual and print culture, Elizabethan playhouse practice, all brought to focus on close readings of the text. His essays, collected in 'Dramatic Identities and Cultural Tradition' (1978), demonstrate a mind scaled to Falstaff's girth. Properly combative, suffering no fool gladly, Hunter disdained academic cant and pretence (though the acerbity of his wit cutting some young Turk down to size was mollified by the voice, the burr of the Glasgow accent that never abandoned him). He taught students that the values and humanity that are expressed in great literature are worth fighting for. 
Hunter retired in 1991, and (having lived since 1976 in New Haven) in 2007, with his wife, Shelagh, moved to Topsham, Maine, where he died after complications arising from Alzheimer's on 10 April 2008. He was cremated at Gracelawn Memorial Park, Auburn, Maine. Memorial services were held on 12 May 2008 at St Martins-in-the-Field Church, Finham, Coventry, and on 13 September 2008 at Davenport College, Yale University. His wife and their three children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 99956


Margaret Christian Jay (1913-2008), local government politician, was born on 28 January 1913 at 2 Anson Road, Rusholme, Manchester, the eldest of three daughters of (James Clerk) Maxwell Garnett (1880-1958), principal of the Municipal School of Technology, Manchester, later general secretary of the League of Nations Union, and his wife, Margaret Lucy, 'nee' Poulton (1887-1965). When she was seven her parents moved to Hampstead, where she would live for the rest of her life. She was educated at Malvern Girls' College, St Paul's Girls' School, and Somerville College, Oxford, where she took a diploma in economics in 1933, before marrying Douglas Jay, who had tutored her for her Oxford entrance examinations. She married him despite his warning her that he regarded monogamy as a sin. She shared his political commitment, and served as a Labour member of London county council (LCC) for Hackney from 1938 to 1949, and then for Battersea from 1952 to 1964, continuing as a member of the Greater London council until 1967. She chaired the schools and arts and leisure committees, and was noted for her advocacy for the poor and marginalized. She and Audrey Callaghan formed a particularly effective partnership on the LCC children's committee. Among the causes she was associated with were the alleviation of homelessness, the welfare of children in homes and in hospitals, the provision of play facilities, and the rights of patients in psychiatric hospitals. She was devoted to Hampstead, and from 1968 to 1989 served as a singularly successful chairman of the Heath and Old Hampstead Society, campaigning against transport planners' and property developers' designs on Hampstead Heath, estate agents' signs in Old Hampstead, the encroachment of supermarket and fast food chains, and lap dancing clubs. She was dubbed 'the uncrowned Queen of Hampstead' by the local paper ('Camden New Journal', 30 Jan 2003). She enjoyed passing on her campaigning skills to younger generations, and her position as matriarch of a talented and ever-expanding family. More pro-European than her former husband, she joined the Social Democratic Party in 1983, but rejoined the Labour Party when Gordon Brown became prime minister in 2007. She died in Hampstead on 21 January 2008, and was survived by her four children with Douglas Jay: Peter ('b'. 1937), an economist, diplomat, and broadcaster, Martin ('b'. 1939), a yacht designer, and Catherine and Helen ('b'. 1945), the celebrated 'Jay twins' of the swinging sixties. 


@@@@@


doc= 99957


Jennett, (William) Bryan (1926-2008), neurosurgeon, was born on 1 March 1926 at Finglas, Waldegrave Road, Twickenham, the only son of Robert William Jennett (1884/5-1956), a civil servant of Irish descent in the Ministry of Labour, and his Scottish wife, Jessie Pate, 'nee' Loudon (1892-1975). Through his mother he was related to at least fifteen medical practitioners. He had two sisters, Jean ('b'. 1923) and Sheena ('b'. 1929). He was educated at King's College, Wimbledon, and King George V School, Southport. At Liverpool medical school he was the top graduate of his year, in 1949, and was president of the British Medical Students' Association. He married his classmate Sheila Mary Pope ('b'. 1926) at Liverpool South register office on 15 September 1950 followed the next day by a service at Liverpool Anglican Cathedral. She was the daughter of Robert Herbert Pope, professional tenor and tea merchant, and went on to have a distinguished career as a respiratory physiologist. They had three sons, Peter, Martin, and John, and a daughter, Hilary. 
Jennett's neurosurgical training and his abiding interest in head injuries began when he was house surgeon to Sir Hugh Cairns in Oxford and then, during national service, surgical specialist at the Royal Army Medical Corps hospital in Wheatley. Training posts followed in Cardiff and Manchester. He gained the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons of England in 1952, and in 1961 he gave a Hunterian lecture there on post-traumatic epilepsy. A Rockefeller fellowship in 1958/9 with the neurophysiologist Horace Magoun at the University of California, Los Angeles, produced the work on experimental brain compression for which he was awarded an MD by the University of Liverpool in 1960. 
In 1963 Jennett was appointed to a combined NHS and university consultant neurosurgical post in the West of Scotland unit at Killearn Hospital and then became the first holder of the chair of neurosurgery at the University of Glasgow, from 1967 to 1991. He found a supportive, multidisciplinary collaborative environment in the Institute of Neurological Sciences, developed by J. Sloan Robertson, and in the university under the leadership of Sir Charles Illingworth. He was able to express his commitment to applying laboratory and clinical research to the care of patients and his philosophy of bringing scientists from other fields to apply their expertise to the solution of neurosurgical problems. The understanding gained in the 1960s and 1970s of relationships between brain blood flow and intracranial pressure changed the practice of neuroanaesthesia and advanced the treatment of patients with acute brain damage. During this time he co-directed with A. Murray Harper the Medical Research Council's cerebral circulation research group. 
In the 1970s, in order to support rational decision-making, Jennett's focus turned to assembling information on the prognosis of severe injury. He addressed the social, ethical, and philosophical issues arising in the care of very severely brain damaged people and, in 1972, along with Fred Plum, a leading American neurologist, he first described the 'persistent vegetative state' in an article in 'The Lancet'. He later contributed influentially to the debate that clarified legal aspects of the management and decisions about limitation of treatment of such people. The Glasgow coma scale, described with Graham Teasdale in 1974, and the Glasgow outcome scale, described with Michael Bond in 1975, established an international common language to assess brain damage, and over the next thirty-five years the papers in which they were presented, again published in 'The Lancet', became the two most frequently cited neurosurgical publications. International collaborative studies of prognosis and treatment followed, unique in their scale and continuity, which became the foundation of a critical search for improved treatments. Identification of risk factors for complications after mild injuries led to neurosurgeons under his leadership developing the first national guidelines for head injury care. Meanwhile the outstanding department that he created in Glasgow attracted trainees from many countries whom he inspired and supported enthusiastically and generously throughout their careers. Through them he advanced the academic approach to neurosurgery throughout the world. 
Jennett (known to friends and colleagues as 'B.J.') was an outstanding communicator: lucid, rational, and convincing. He wrote almost 300 papers, the last in December 2007, and the clarity of his writing produced several influential books: 'Epilepsy after Head Injuries' (1962, revised edn, 1975), 'Introduction to Neurosurgery' (1964, running to five editions by 1994), 'Management of Head Injuries' (with Graham Teasdale, 1981), 'High Technology Medicine: Benefits and Burdens' (1984, revised edn, 1986), and 'The Vegetative State: Medical Facts, Ethical and Legal Dilemmas' (2002). In 1980, in the face of great public controversy and concern caused by a 'Panorama' documentary questioning the criteria used to establish brain death in potential organ donors, he courageously led a robust, effective defence both of the concept of brain death and of the criteria and codes of practice used to identify it; this proved pivotal in sustaining and then increasing the number of organs available for transplantation. 
Between 1981 and 1986 Jennett served as dean of medicine at Glasgow University. His expanding breadth of interest and interactions with economists and policy makers led to his intellect and instinct for rigorous analysis being increasingly applied to issues across medicine and its interface with society. Ahead of his time, these included influential reports on the appropriate use of high-cost technology and the organization, with Barbara Stocking of the King's Fund, of a novel series of consensus conferences on clinical practice. He held many leadership roles in professional and public bodies including presidency of the neurology section of the Royal Society of Medicine (1986-7), the International Society for Technology Assessment in Health Care (1987-9), and Headway, the national head injury patients' group (1988-95). On retirement in 1991 he was appointed CBE and in 1993 he was awarded an honorary DSc by St Andrews University. In September 2007 he was the first recipient of the medal of the Society of British Neurological Surgeons. 
Jennett's main recreation after settling in Scotland was sailing, a pastime shared with his wife, Sheila, and all his family. He died at his home, 3/3 Lauderdale Mansions, 47 Novar Drive, Glasgow, on 26 January 2008 from complications of multiple myeloma, diagnosed in 2002. He was survived by his wife and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99961


Johnston, (David) Russell Russell-, Baron Russell-Johnston (1932-2008), politician, was born David Russell Johnston on 28 July 1932 at 39 Palmerston Place, Edinburgh, the son of David Knox Johnston, a customs and excise officer, and his wife, (Georgina) Margaret Gerrie, 'nee' Russell. At the time of his birth his parents lived at Lews, Portree, Isle of Skye. He was brought up on Skye and was educated at Carbost public school and Portree high school. He then went to Edinburgh University, where he refounded the Liberal Club, became its president, and quickly earned a reputation as an excellent debater, winning the coveted 'Observer' mace in 1961. After national service in the intelligence corps in 1958-9 he trained as a history teacher at Moray House College of Education, and briefly taught at Liberton secondary school near Edinburgh before becoming a paid research assistant for the Scottish Liberals in 1963. A year later he stood successfully for Inverness at the first attempt, a seat he held continuously until his retirement in 1997. On 5 August 1967, at St Andrew's Cathedral, Inverness, he married Joan Graham Menzies, a 23-year-old bank clerk and daughter of Donald Menzies, railway clerk. They had three sons. 
Johnston (always known as Russell Johnston) was a passionate advocate of Scottish home rule, long before that cause became fashionable: in 1966 he introduced a private member's bill advocating a devolved Scotland, and he worked closely with John Smith in the late 1970s during the Liberal-Labour pact in an effort to establish a Scottish assembly. Although that project fell by the wayside, he also played a key role with Willie Ross, the secretary of state for Scotland, in setting up the Highlands and Islands Development Board (a body he had called for in a pamphlet published in 1964), which, with the support of European structural funds, contributed greatly to the economic development of the region. 
Throughout his career Johnston remained a powerful advocate of Liberalism. Young Liberals were inspired to join the party by his pamphlet 'To Be a Liberal' (1972). His closing speeches to Scottish Liberal Party conferences enthralled his audience, but his tendency to speak his mind occasionally landed him in trouble. After two visits to Greece in 1968 to inspect the conditions in which political prisoners were held he raised the ire of the Labour left by describing the colonels in the military government as 'officers and gentlemen' ('Daily Telegraph', 29 July 2008). In 1970 he became the chairman of the Scottish Liberal Party, and its leader from 1974 to 1988, sparking a modest revival in the fortunes of the party north of the border. He was a keen supporter of the merger between the Liberals and the Social Democratic Party, and became deputy leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats from 1988 to 1989 and deputy leader of the Liberal Democrats from 1988 to 1992, serving as the Scottish Liberal Democrat president from 1988 to 1994. 
Johnston's greatest passion, however, was furthering the cause of European integration. He was an unashamed European federalist, once remarking: 'I would much prefer to be ruled by a gentleman named Helmut Schmidt than one named Anthony Wedgwood Benn' ('Daily Telegraph', 29 July 2008). He had the honour of being the first British Liberal member of the nominated European Assembly, and, wearing his kilt and sporran, made his maiden speech in French when he took his seat in 1973. He was devastated to lose twice to Winnie Ewing in 1979 and 1984 in the Highlands and Islands constituency, in the direct elections to the European parliament. He sought consolation as a member of the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe, to which he increasingly devoted nearly all his attention. Critics at home in Scotland were heard to remark, 'Where's Russell? Russell's in Brussels' (although in fact the Council of Europe met in Strasbourg). The neglect of his constituency nearly cost him his Westminster seat, now renamed Inverness, Nairn, and Lochaber, in 1992, when he squeaked home by 458 votes after three recounts, just ahead of the other three main Scottish parties, all four polling over 20 per cent of the vote. Thereafter he spent nearly all his time in Europe, becoming president of the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe from 1999 to 2002, a post he regarded as the pinnacle of his career, boasting to a friend that he was 'president of an assembly representing 830 million people' ('The Herald', 12 Aug 2008). During his presidency he spoke out against ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, and championed the cause of human rights and internationalism across Europe. 
Having been raised on the Isle of Skye as a bilingual Gaelic and English speaker, Johnston developed an interest in shinty, serving as vice-chief of the Camanachd Association, the sport's governing body. He was also a great lover of whisky, once remarking to his fellow Liberal Democrat MPs during a tour of the highlands, 'Isn't it time this meeting finished, so we can all go for a 'toot'?' ('The Independent', 30 July 2008). One of his personal traits was to send postcards to all his friends during his frequent trips to Europe and beyond. He was knighted in 1985, and, on becoming a life peer in 1997, he changed his name by deed poll to Russell-Johnston. Perhaps fittingly, he died on the continent, in his favourite hotel in Paris on 27 July 2008, succumbing to the effects of bone marrow cancer. He was cremated in Paris on 4 August 2008, and was survived by his wife and three sons, Graham, David, and Andrew. 


@@@@@


doc= 99962


Jones, Sir (John) Derek Alun- (1933-2008), industrialist, was born John Derek Jones on 6 June 1933 at 88 Loraine Mansions, Widdenham Road, Islington, London, the only son of Thomas Alun Jones, later Thomas Alun-Jones (died 1951), solicitor and managing clerk, and his wife, Madge Beatrice, 'nee' Edwards (died 1986). He was educated at Lancing College, Sussex, and St Edmund Hall, Oxford. In 1955 he graduated with a third-class degree in jurisprudence, and in 1958 he passed his bar examinations. It was in the business world, however, that he decided to apply his skills, joining Philips Electrical in 1957 and then H. C. Stephens Ltd in 1959 as company secretary, thus initiating a career lasting sixteen years in the oil-related sector. On 16 July 1960 he married Gillian Palmer ('b'. 1937), a receptionist, and daughter of Ian Hamilton Palmer, businessman. They had a son, Jeremy ('b'. 1961), and a daughter, Casella ('b'. 1963), followed by triplets, Nicholas, Sophie, and Emma ('b'. 1968). 
In 1960 Alun-Jones moved to Expandite Ltd, where he was appointed managing director when Expandite was acquired by Castrol in 1966. In turn, Castrol was acquired by Burmah Oil, providing him with an opportunity to join Burmah Industrial Products as managing director from 1971 to 1974. In the latter year he secured a seat on the main board of Burmah Oil, just at the point when it was experiencing severe financial difficulties, largely caused by the tanker division's inability to cope with the spillover from the 1973 oil price crisis. He was consequently deeply involved in handling not only the consequences of multiple mergers, but also the challenges associated with monitoring performance across divisionalized business organizations. It was experience that would stand him in good stead in the next phase of his business career. 
At the same time that Burmah Oil, like many other British firms, was struggling in the economically difficult mid-1970s, Ferranti Ltd was experiencing a severe liquidity crisis. Although this family-owned electronics firm had become a major player in various defence markets, especially avionics and naval computer systems, the chairman and managing director, Sebastian de Ferranti, had refused to stem the losses made in the power transformers division, creating acute financial problems in 1974. Given Ferranti's major role in various military aircraft and Royal Navy projects, as well as being a major employer in some depressed parts of Lancashire, the incumbent Labour government used its newly created National Enterprise Board (NEB) to bail out the ailing firm. In return for $15 million, however, not only did the NEB take a 65 per cent stake in Ferranti Ltd, but Sebastian de Ferranti was obliged to stand down as chief executive (though he was able to retain his position as chairman). 
On taking over as managing director of Ferranti in 1975, Alun-Jones immediately set about reorganizing the firm's financial and decision-making structures, bringing his previous experience to bear in making Ferranti Ltd much more profitable. Even though the working relationship with Sebastian de Ferranti proved difficult, eventually resulting in the former owner's resignation in 1982, to be replaced as non-executive chairman by his brother, Basil de Ferranti, by 1978 Ferranti had been refloated on the London stock exchange. When in 1980 the NEB sold its holding in Ferranti to a large number of financial institutions, the latter's willingness to buy shares in the company reflected the trust they placed in the management skills of Alun-Jones and the team he had by then assembled. 
Having secured its independence of government, Alun-Jones successfully sustained his aim of building Ferranti into a highly profitable defence contractor, using the slogan 'Creating wealth from technology' to depict his core strategy. Ferranti shareholders certainly benefited from their investment, with dividend payments and share values increasing significantly up to 1987. This precipitated strong rumours that Ferranti would be targeted by a predator, given its profitability and strong product range. Alun-Jones's reputation was also significantly enhanced, leading to board appointments at Royal Insurance (1981-96), Throgmorton Trust (1978-84), Reed International (1984-90), Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds (1986-8), and Consolidated Gold Fields (1988-9). He was also chairman of governors (1986-99) at his old school, Lancing College, and a fellow of its owners, the Woodard Corporation (1986-2003). In 1987 he was knighted for services to British business. 
An essential component in Alun-Jones's strategy for Ferranti was creating a stronger presence in the world's largest defence market, the USA, resulting in a host of acquisitions of American firms between 1978 and 1987. The largest of these purchases, however, International Signal and Control Inc. (ISC), of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, proved to be calamitous. This merger, in 1987, resulted in Alun-Jones's appointment as executive chairman, Basil de Ferranti having been elevated to company president, while ISC's majority owner, James Guerin, became deputy chairman. Unbeknown to not only the Ferranti board, but also a small army of advisers and auditors, Guerin had built hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of phoney missile contracts into the accounts. It also transpired that he had been supplying armaments to South Africa and other countries on the United Nations embargo list, acting as the CIA's agent in regions that were regarded as strategically important. When these phoney contracts and illegal transactions eventually came to light in September 1989, Ferranti shares were immediately suspended and Alun-Jones was obliged to request a massive bailout from a syndicate of twenty banks. Although he had led Ferranti into the ISC merger for all the right reasons -- to build a stronger presence in the USA, as well as forestalling a predatorial bid -- it destroyed his reputation. He was obliged to resign as chairman of Ferranti in 1990. There was considerable controversy over the $491,000 package he received on leaving Ferranti, but not only did he have two years of his contract to run, he successfully negotiated the bank rescue package and the sale of the avionics business to the General Electric Company for $300 million, keeping the firm afloat. Guerin was subsequently sentenced to a fifteen-year prison term in the USA, for fraud and money-laundering. 
Alun-Jones effectively retired in 1990, having given up all his other directorships to concentrate on helping to look after an increasing number of grandchildren, play golf, and fish. (In 1993 there was again controversy when it emerged that he had bought Ferranti's fishing rights on the River Test at a knock-down price.) He lived for much of his married life at The Willows, Effingham Common, Leatherhead, Surrey. He died on 19 January 2008, of bronchopneumonia, at the Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford. He was buried in Effingham, and a memorial service was held at Chelsea Old Church, London, on 24 April 2008. He was survived by his wife, Gillian, and their five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99963


Jones, Sir John Henry Harvey- (1924-2008), industrialist, was born at 2 Queensdown Road, Hackney, Middlesex, on 16 April 1924, the son of Mervyn Stockton Harvey-Jones (1893/4-1968) and his wife, Eileen Margaret, 'nee' Wilson (1894/5-1963). His father had served in the Indian army during the First World War, leaving with the rank of captain. At the time of his son's birth he was working for a bank in London, but he was later appointed tutor and guardian to the maharaja of Dhar, a state within the central India agency. Harvey-Jones spent his early childhood in India, returning to England at the age of six. He was educated at Tormore preparatory school at Deal in Kent, an unhappy period which ended in 1937 when he went to the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth. This was the starting point for a naval career which lasted until he joined Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) in 1956. Appointed a midshipman in 1941, he served at first on HMS 'Diomede', which was engaged in patrol duties in the North America and West Indies station, and later joined the submarine service, in which he remained for the rest of the Second World War. After the war he went to Cambridge University to learn Russian and later served as an interpreter and liaison officer in naval intelligence, principally in Germany; he rose to the rank of lieutenant-commander and was appointed MBE in 1952. On 26 July 1947 he married Mary Evelyn Atcheson ('b'. 1921), daughter of Francis Felix Bignell, 'gentleman'. (She had changed her name by deed poll before her marriage.) They had one daughter, Gaby. 
Harvey-Jones's decision to leave the navy was taken mainly for family reasons. His daughter had contracted polio, and since the treatment was likely to be difficult and lengthy he needed a job where he could be sure of getting home in the evenings. Two of his navy colleagues had recently started work at ICI, and their enthusiasm for the company encouraged him to join them. In 1956 he was taken on as a work study officer at the Wilton works near Middlesbrough, the newest of ICI's complex of factories on Teesside. 
ICI was the giant of the British chemical industry, and it was expanding rapidly, especially in petrochemicals, plastics, and fibres, with much of the new investment going into the Teesside factories. It was also beginning to embrace modern management techniques, a process that accelerated after the appointment of Sir Paul Chambers as chairman in 1960. Chambers, who had held senior posts in the Inland Revenue, was the first non-scientist to head ICI. Among his innovations was to bring in McKinsey, the American management consulting firm, to advise on changes in the organization of the company. 
As a work study officer Harvey-Jones obtained a useful insight into factory management at the shop-floor level, and his contacts with shop stewards proved valuable in his subsequent dealings with trade unions. After two years in work study he was appointed supplies manager at Wilton, then sales manager, and later personnel director within the heavy organic chemicals division (later renamed the petrochemicals division), which embraced both Wilton and its sister plant at Billingham. In 1970, to his own surprise and that of colleagues, he was made chairman of the division, in preference to two deputy chairmen who had the technical qualifications that Harvey-Jones lacked and longer service in ICI. Three years later he was appointed to the ICI main board and moved to London. 
The 1970s were difficult years for ICI. The post-war boom was over, and several of the products that had driven the chemical industry's growth in the earlier post-war decades, such as plastics and fibres, had acquired the status of commodities, subject to bouts of overcapacity and falling prices. As a main board director Harvey-Jones was given oversight responsibility for the fibres division, and he presided over a drastic contraction of this business, including withdrawal from Terylene, the polyester fibre that had been a big profit earner in the 1950s and 1960s. 
While the problems in fibres were extreme, the chemical industry as a whole was entering a period of maturity, and as a junior member of the board Harvey-Jones was frustrated by ICI's sluggish response to what had become a much more competitive environment. As he wrote later, he began to feel 'that the whole way in which we operated was wrong and needed fundamental change' (Harvey-Jones, 'Getting It Together', 327). In 1974 he and two colleagues suggested some organizational reforms, aimed at enabling the board to set clearer objectives and to communicate them more effectively to the divisional heads, but their proposals won no support. As Harvey-Jones saw it, there was no vision on the board of what the company should be, and little discussion of strategy. There was an inertia about decision making at the Millbank head office, which meant that investment funds were allocated across the divisions in line with established practice instead of going to the areas that offered the best prospects of profitable growth. ICI was a 'rather self-satisfied institution' (ibid., 326), doing just well enough not to be forced to change its ways. It would take a major crisis to shatter this complacency. 
That crisis came with the severe recession of 1980-81, precipitated by the anti-inflationary policies of the new Conservative government under Margaret Thatcher. A combination of high interest rates and increasing oil production from the North Sea led to a sharp increase in the exchange rate, which had a devastating effect on the profitability of exporters such as ICI. ICI reported a loss in the third quarter of 1980 -- the first loss in its history -- and to the consternation of its investors the dividend was cut. Sir Maurice Hodgson, who had taken over the chairmanship in 1978, set in train a fierce cost-cutting drive; nearly 30,000 jobs in the UK were eliminated between 1979 and 1983. The biggest losses were in the petrochemicals and plastics division, and there were fears that some of these businesses might have to be closed. Fortunately ICI had bought a stake in the Ninian oilfield in the North Sea some years earlier, and profits from this source partially offset losses in other parts of the group. 
Harvey-Jones had been made one of ICI's three deputy chairmen in 1978 and was thus a potential successor to Hodgson. His appointment to the chairmanship in 1982 came as something of a surprise, and probably reflected the board's view that he was the most likely of the three candidates to challenge the 'status quo' and to give ICI the new sense of direction that was needed. Whereas previous chairmen had stayed in post for only three or four years, Harvey-Jones was asked to serve for a minimum of five years. 
Harvey-Jones's priorities when he took on the top job were to lighten the bureaucracy at the centre, to speed up decision making, and to strengthen the board's ability to provide strategic direction. The size of the head office staff in Millbank was cut from 1200 to 400 and two-thirds of the space was sold. The number of executive directors was reduced from sixteen to eight, and within this smaller, more collegiate board the directors were required to focus on the group as a whole, without the distraction of having special responsibility for particular divisions and overseas companies. On strategy, Harvey-Jones believed that ICI should shift away from commodity products towards higher margin and less cyclical 'effect' businesses -- that is, chemicals that sold on the basis of the effect they produced, such as paints, dyestuffs, and pharmaceuticals. While ICI already had some businesses of this type, he looked to acquisitions as a means of speeding up the transformation. Since the failure of Chambers's attempt to take over Courtaulds in 1962, there had been a lack of enthusiasm in Millbank for takeovers, especially if they were likely to be resisted by the target company. Harvey-Jones was determined to be bolder, and set up an acquisitions unit to study takeover opportunities. Three of the largest acquisitions involved American companies: Beatrice, bought for its expertise in advanced materials; Glidden, a decorative paints maker, which complemented ICI's strength in the UK through its Dulux brand: and Stauffer, which had a strong position in agricultural chemicals. These takeovers also helped to reduce ICI's dependence on its traditional markets in the UK and the Commonwealth. Some investments had been made in continental Europe and the USA during the 1970s, but most of them had taken the form of large chemical complexes similar to those that ICI operated in the UK. ICI had been seeking to compete across the board against local companies that were already well established in these markets. The new approach was more selective, aimed at sectors where ICI, through superior technology, should have a competitive advantage. 
Within the UK, Harvey-Jones was willing to pull out of businesses that had been part of ICI's heritage but no longer generated an acceptable return. This policy had been started by his predecessor -- a notable event was the sale of ICI's polythene business to British Petroleum -- and several other divestments took place during Harvey-Jones's chairmanship. Towards the end of his term of office he put forward a more radical plan, to sell all ICI's heavy chemicals businesses, which by then had been grouped together in a free-standing subsidiary, ICI Chemicals and Polymers, to one of the oil companies. Detailed discussions were held with British Petroleum and Shell, but no deal was done. Another missed opportunity was the failure to clinch what might have been an attractive acquisition in pharmaceuticals. By the 1980s ICI's pharmaceutical division had emerged after a long period of low returns as one of the company's biggest profit earners; one of its drugs was the heart disease treatment Tenormin, which became the world's most successful beta blocker. There was a strong case for expanding this division, and ICI came close to acquiring Beecham, the consumer products company that had been outstandingly successful in antibiotics. These negotiations advanced a long way, and ICI made a provisional agreement to sell Beecham's branded consumer products to Unilever. However, senior executives in the pharmaceutical division were unenthusiastic -- they preferred organic growth -- and the ICI board decided not to proceed. 
By the time of Harvey-Jones's retirement in 1987 ICI's portfolio had been partially reshaped, though not as radically as he had hoped. In terms of profits, the company was in a much healthier state than it had been five years earlier. Pre-tax profits had risen from less than $400 million to over $1 billion, an increase in the return on assets from 7 per cent to 18 per cent. A large part of the improvement reflected the recovery in the British economy, and Harvey-Jones was also the beneficiary of the painful decisions taken by Hodgson in 1980 and 1981. Nevertheless, his five years at the helm marked a break with the past, making ICI less stuffy, more agile, and more responsive to the changes that were taking place in the world chemical industry. The fact that he was a late entrant to ICI, and not a scientist or engineer, gave him a perspective on the company that was different from that of his predecessors. Although relations with his board colleagues were uneasy, his approachable style and lack of pomposity won him great affection among ICI employees, and helped to lift morale after a period in which the company had been in retreat. 
Harvey-Jones was an unusual chairman in other respects. While previous chairmen had mostly shunned the limelight, he did not hesitate to speak out on controversial policy issues. In particular, he criticized what he saw as Margaret Thatcher's indifference to the damage her policies were doing to manufacturing industry. (He thought this criticism -- and his decision to join the Social Democratic Party in the early 1980s -- might make him the only ICI chairman not to be given a knighthood; but he was given this honour in 1985.) He also attacked the City for its persistent undervaluation of industrial companies, and for what he saw as the vastly inflated salaries earned by City practitioners. He set out these views in his Dimbleby lecture in 1986, which was entitled 'Does industry matter?' 
With his long, unruly hair and his garish ties, Harvey-Jones cut an unconventional figure among Britain's business leaders, and enjoyed considerable attention in the media. After he left ICI he was asked by the BBC to participate in a series of programmes -- entitled 'Troubleshooter' (1990) -- in which he visited British companies, assessed their strengths and weaknesses, and advised them on what they should do next. This advice was presented in a trenchant style, and not much appreciated by some of the managers who were on the receiving end of Harvey-Jones's sarcasm, but it made for entertaining television. Through these programmes, which were watched by an audience of more than 3 million, Harvey-Jones became the country's best-known industrialist. With his down-to-earth, self-deprecating manner, he gave a human face to business. Such was the success of the programmes that further series were broadcast in 1991, 1992, 1995, and 2000. 
During his time at ICI, Harvey-Jones was a non-executive director at Reed International and Grand Metropolitan; the former gave him valuable experience in the handling of acquisitions, while the latter gave him an insight into a service-based business, closer to the customer than most parts of ICI. After his retirement, in addition to his television career, he served as chairman of 'The Economist' for several years, and he took on several other directorships. Outside business the two appointments that gave him most satisfaction were as chancellor of Bradford University (1986-91) and as president of the Multiple Sclerosis Research Charitable Trust (1999-2008). He also wrote several books, of which the most successful were 'Making It Happen: Reflections on Leadership' (1988) and the largely autobiographical 'Getting It Together: Memoirs of a Troubleshooter' (1991). He suffered two minor strokes in the mid-1990s and lived quietly thereafter with his wife and daughter in Hay-on-Wye. He died in Hereford County Hospital of multiple causes after a long illness, on 10 January 2008. A memorial service was held in Hereford Cathedral on 17 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 99968


Keatinge, William Richard (1931-2008), physiologist, was born on 18 May 1931 at 30 Beaufort Mansions, Chelsea, London, the only son of Sir Edgar Mayne Keatinge (1905-1998), land agent, later politician and businessman, and his wife, Katharine Lucile, 'nee' Burrell (1907-1990). His father was briefly Conservative MP for Bury St Edmunds from 1944 to 1945, and was later active in local government; he was knighted in 1960. 
Keatinge was educated at Upper Canada College, Toronto, Canada (1940-44), and at Rugby School (1944-9), from where he won a scholarship to read medicine at Pembroke College, Cambridge, and St Thomas's Hospital medical school in London. On 15 October 1955 he married (Margaret Ellen) Annette Hegarty (1932-2000), daughter of David Hegarty, civil servant. They had a son and two daughters. He completed his national service as a naval surgeon-lieutenant in Cambridge (1956-8) before becoming director of studies in medicine and junior fellow at Pembroke College, Cambridge (1958-60). He then spent a year in the Cardiovascular Research Institute, San Francisco, as a Fulbright scholar before returning to England to a Medical Research Council post at the Radcliffe Infirmary and a fellowship of Pembroke College, Oxford (1961-8). 
Keatinge joined the department of physiology at the London Hospital Medical College as reader in physiology in 1969 and was promoted to a personal chair in physiology in 1971. He was appointed head of the department of physiology in 1981. Following the merger of the college's basic medical sciences departments with that of St Bartholomew's Hospital and the move to Queen Mary and Westfield College in 1990, he became head of physiology in the joint school. He held this post until his retirement in 1996 when he became an emeritus professor at Queen Mary, University of London (as the newly integrated institution was known from 1995). 
Bill Keatinge, as he was always known, ran an active and successful research group, highly rated and supported by the Medical Research Council for many years. Among his many publications were important articles on survival in cold water and local mechanisms controlling blood vessels. His lifelong interest in the effects of heat and cold on mechanisms controlling blood vessels stemmed from his time with the navy while completing his national service. The navy had lost about 30,000 people from cold immersion in the Second World War and needed to know how to reduce deaths from cold. During the 1980s there was much concern regarding excessive deaths among the elderly in the UK during winter. In a series of experiments Keatinge showed that both cold and heat stress caused alterations in blood composition that promoted arterial thrombosis and subsequently death from strokes and heart attacks. 
Keatinge wrote many chapters in textbooks and journals and published more than 200 research papers, principally on temperature regulation and the control of blood vessels. In 1969 he published 'Survival in Cold Water: the Physiology and Treatment of Immersion, Hypothermia and of Drowning' and in 1980 'Local Mechanisms Controlling Blood Vessels'. He was elected to membership of the Physiological Society (1968), was a member of its committee (1977-81), and was a member of the editorial board of the 'Journal of Physiology' (1979-86). He was elected FRCP (1991) and was a fellow of the Cardiovascular Research Institute, San Francisco. He had numerous international collaborations, developed especially close links with Russia, and led a large EU Eurowinter project that co-ordinated research in eight European countries. After the break-up of the Soviet Union it became possible for him to extend his Eurowinter project to Siberia. He made full use of being part of a multi-faculty environment at Queen Mary and Westfield College by forging a link with the Russian department and learning to speak the language well enough to be understood on his visits to the Russian Federation. 
Keatinge served as preclinical dean at the London Hospital Medical College at a time of considerable change and uncertainty. After the move to Queen Mary and Westfield College, a new building and a new curriculum were initiated and Keatinge played a leading role in designing and implementing these changes. He was elected dean of basic medical sciences at Queen Mary and Westfield in 1991. He took up the reins of authority when student numbers were being rapidly increased and staff appointments reduced. His term as dean ended in 1994 and he left administration behind, to concentrate on research. After his formal retirement in 1996 he continued to attract grants and to pursue his research interests. He retained an office at Queen Mary and concentrated on environmental problems, including global warming and the fact that cold caused far more deaths than heat. He was frequently the expert, interviewed by the media, at times of extreme cold and during heatwaves. He also made substantial contributions to the teaching of human physiology to undergraduates and postgraduates throughout his career. 
In addition to his lifelong interest in physiology, Keatinge had interests in classical archaeology, history, and poetry. He enjoyed travel, especially dinghy sailing in the waters of the Aegean. He had an enduring love for his home in Teffont Evias, Wiltshire, and had a keen interest in forestry. After the death of his first wife, on 11 November 2005 he married Lynette Margaret Nelson, a widow six years his junior, and daughter of Phillip Anthony Browne, police officer. Although he became ill with prostate cancer he faced his illness with considerable courage and dignity. He continued to work until a few weeks before his death and completed his final projects. He died on 11 April 2008 at his home, Rose Cottage, Teffont Evias, and was buried in the churchyard at Teffont Evias on 19 April 2008. He was survived by his wife, Lynette, and the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 99969


Keenan, Brian Paschal (1941-2008), Irish republican activist, was born on 17 July 1941 in Dysert, Draperstown, co. Londonderry, the son of Henry Keenan, an accountant then serving as a warrant officer in the RAF and stationed at RAF Pocklington, Yorkshire, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' McAlea. Keenan's Roman Catholic family were from Belfast's New Lodge Road area, but evacuated to co. Derry following the Belfast blitz. The family returned to Belfast at the end of the war. At sixteen Keenan began an apprenticeship as an electronics engineer, joining the Electrical Trade Union. He later observed that 'from a young age my political outlook was shaped by my interest in trade unions' ('An Phoblacht', 27 March 2008). In 1958 he moved to England, continuing his training at a Luton firm making guided missiles. Keenan also worked for a time in partnership with his brother as a television repairman in Corby, Northamptonshire. During his time in Corby he damaged a cigarette machine, leaving his fingerprints in the process. On 19 October 1960 he married, at St Mary's Roman Catholic Church, Luton, Christine (Chrissie) Campbell, a machinist in a clothing factory, daughter of Frank Campbell, labourer. They had two sons and four daughters. They returned to Belfast in 1963. 
Keenan spent two weeks in Belfast's Crumlin Road prison in 1964, after being arrested during the Divis Street riots. He was asked to contribute a document on trade unionism to the 1966 IRA army convention but did not join the IRA until 1968. He saw 'republicanism [as] an ideology which should be firmly fixed socially and economically'. His view was that 'the enemy was capitalism and the system of exploitation', and he believed that 'the national question was always a class question' ('An Phoblacht', 27 March 2008). The 'trigger for my generation to get involved in violent confrontation with the state was not the IRA, not republican politics, nor republican ideology. The trigger was the Civil Rights movement' ('An Phoblacht', 3 April 2008). 
By August 1971 Keenan was quartermaster of the IRA's Belfast brigade. His search for armaments included visiting Libya in 1972, establishing a contact which would prove highly valuable to the IRA. He was appointed IRA quartermaster-general the following year. In mid-1974 he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment in the Republic of Ireland for membership of the IRA. He was wounded during an escape attempt on 17 March 1975 but was released that July. Sean Callaghan, a former IRA member turned police informer, later claimed that Keenan wanted the IRA to retaliate severely for increasing sectarian attacks on Catholics by loyalist paramilitaries in the south Armagh area. Keenan argued (Callaghan claimed) that the only way 'to put the nonsense out of the Prods [Protestants] was to just hit back much harder and more savagely than them' (Harnden, 134). This led to the Kingsmill massacre of 5 January 1976, in which ten Protestant workmen were murdered. The atrocity was claimed by the 'South Armagh Republican Action Force', believed to have been a cover name for the local IRA unit. In the wake of Kingsmill sectarian attacks ended locally, allegedly owing to an agreement reached by local units of the IRA and the Ulster Volunteer Force. However, the attack had been carried out without the knowledge of the IRA army council and proved highly controversial within the republican movement itself. Gerry Adams insisted that there must 'never again be another Kingsmill' (ibid.). 
By 1977 Keenan had become IRA director of operations and a supporter of Gerry Adams on the IRA army council. Together with Martin McGuinness, Keenan travelled the country speaking in support of Adams's 'long war' plan to reorganize the IRA. The IRA's English bombing campaign of the 1970s was run by Keenan. His fingerprints, on file since the incident in Corby, were found on a list of bomb parts discovered in follow-up raids after the December 1975 Balcombe Street siege. Arrested in Northern Ireland in March 1979, Keenan was sentenced to eighteen years' imprisonment on 25 June 1980, for conspiracy to cause explosions. Ironically part of this sentence was served in HMP Long Sutton, which had been constructed on the former RAF station Long Sutton, where his father had once served. Despite being in prison Keenan continued to wield influence within the IRA, supporting republican electoral participation and Adams's candidacy in the 1982 Northern Ireland assembly elections, in the face of doubts by the IRA's army council. 
Keenan was released from prison in June 1993, and by 1996 was back on the IRA army council. He was a member of the army council that authorized the Docklands bombing of 9 February 1996, which ended the first IRA ceasefire, but this was probably a tactical necessity at this point to avoid a split within the IRA. Similarly, at the IRA general army convention in October 1996 Keenan adopted an anti-Adams line, only to switch sides once he had been elected to the IRA army executive. He supported the calling of a second ceasefire during a meeting between the IRA army council and the IRA army executive on 16 July 1997. Peter Taylor, in 'Brits' (2002), interpreted anti-decommissioning speeches made by Keenan as a strategy to prevent IRA volunteers from defecting. Adams later asserted that there 'wouldn't be a peace process if it wasn't for Brian Keenan' ('The Independent', 22 May 2008). 
Once described as 'the biggest single threat to the British state' ('An Phoblacht', 3 April 2008), Keenan was a militarist, but was also highly political. The choice between the bomb or the ballot box was likely tactical and dictated by pragmatic, rather than ideological, considerations. His last years were blighted by cancer, and he resigned from the army council in 2005. He died at 52 St Patricks Park, Cullyhanna, co. Armagh, on 21 May 2008. An atheist by the end of his life, he was cremated on 24 May at Roselawn crematorium, Belfast, following a secular service. 


@@@@@


doc= 99972


Kemp, Sir (Edward) Peter (1934-2008), civil servant, was born on 10 October 1934 at Broadmead, Beech Road, Haslemere, Surrey, the elder son and eldest of three children of Thomas Kemp, company director, and his wife, Nancie, 'nee' Sargent. He was educated at Millfield School and the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, following which he entered the Royal Navy as a midshipman. With his restless energy and love of the sea he was clearly destined for a promising naval career, but this was cut short when he contracted rheumatic fever. He was invalided out of the navy and became articled as a chartered accountant. A colourful period of his life then followed with accountancy work at home and abroad, notably in Paris and in British Guiana. He married at Kensington register office on 25 November 1961 Enid van Popta, a 24-year-old secretary, and daughter of Walle Melis van Popta, psychologist. They had three sons and a daughter. 
In 1967 Kemp joined the civil service as a direct-entry principal, under a scheme designed to secure mature entrants to the administrative class of the service. It was a stiff competition and successful entrants were expected to progress to at least under-secretary level. In his relatively short civil service career Kemp far exceeded this expectation. He initially joined the finance department of the Department of Transport, where his accountancy training, capacity for hard work, and personal application saw him rise rapidly to assistant secretary. He also attracted the attention of the Treasury, and he moved there in 1973. Promoted to under-secretary in 1978 and deputy secretary in 1983, he became the Treasury's main negotiator with the civil service unions on pay and conditions of service. This was in the aftermath of the prolonged civil service strike of 1981, occasioned when the government arbitrarily scrapped the service's pay agreement which had lasted, despite vicissitudes, since 1956. Attempts to secure a new pay agreement proved to be abortive and, in the meantime, annual pay negotiations were conducted on an ad hoc basis. In these negotiations Kemp was always courteous and as fair and flexible as his rigid constraint of predetermined cash limits would allow. His atypical Treasury approach was well described in the admission he made in 2006: 'I was at the Treasury, probably doing my best not to help it too much' (Witness seminar, 2006). He was an unusual senior civil servant, far removed from the cool detachment normally associated with the typical Whitehall 'mandarin'. It is, however, a significant tribute to his skill as a negotiator that in the five-year period in which he was in charge of pay there was no serious industrial relations problem in his area of responsibility. 
In February 1988, following the publication of Sir Robin Ibbs's report on civil service efficiency, 'Improving Management in Government: the Next Steps', the government launched a radical programme designed to separate the two distinct parts of the civil service -- the administrative/policy work and the day-to-day delivery of direct public services. The idea was to create operational agencies of the latter, with a designated chief executive whose powers over the budget, including pay and staffing numbers in these essentially labour-intensive areas, would go far beyond what had traditionally been allowed. This idea was not new: the Fulton committee (1968) had recommended setting up 'accountable management units', but the intervening twenty years had seen little progress in this direction. The new initiative was christened 'Next Steps', and Kemp was the brilliant choice to be its director, with the rank of second permanent secretary in the Cabinet Office. 
On the face of things, 'Next Steps' posed immense potential difficulties by stirring up hostilities in the centre of the service and in the departments affected. At the centre the Treasury could see its powerful position under threat, while the unions, still well organized and capable of obstruction, were suspicious that this initiative was a possible precursor to the privatization or contracting-out of the services concerned. In the departments some of the permanent secretaries (but not all) were resentful at losing control of functions for which they had been traditionally responsible. Kemp's approach, a blend of enthusiastic drive, cajolery, and endless perseverance, overcame all these potential problems. In this he had the crucial support of a dominant prime minister. With the unions he worked hard to secure at least their tacit support, involving them at each stage in consultation in an open-handed and frank way that sought to allay their misgivings. In the event this approach was successful. So far as the Treasury was concerned he was less successful. As he later remarked, 'It turned out, as you would expect, that the trade unions were far easier to deal with than the Treasury' (Witness seminar, 2006). Nevertheless, after four years of unremitting hard work, and in a nautical analogy that he would have liked, a 'Next Steps' armada of large ships (such as the Benefits Agency) and some cockleshell ones (such as the QE II conference centre) was successfully launched. By the time of his death about 75 per cent of the 600,000-strong civil service would eventually be in the agencies which, notwithstanding political and economic interventions, was a notable achievement in management terms. In recognition of this Kemp was knighted KCB in 1991, having been made CB in 1988. 
Kemp's career ended abruptly in 1992, and in a surprising fashion. The reason given for his dismissal was a clash with his recently appointed minister, William Waldegrave. There were, however, other reasons, notably the enemies that he had created among some of his peer permanent secretaries in his zealous pursuit of creating agencies. He was bitterly disappointed at his cavalier treatment and had an arguable case for constructive unfair dismissal. In the event, and like the good sailor that he had trained to be, he took his departure with dignity and not too much fuss. Perhaps he was mindful that, to some extent, he was the architect of his own downfall. 
In retirement Kemp worked for the Foundation for Accountancy and Financial Management, a charity encouraging higher standards of accountancy in the former communist countries of central and eastern Europe. He also served on the Audit Commission (1993-9), did the accounts for his local church in Sydenham, and was a governor of his old school, Millfield. He died on 24 June 2008 at King's College Hospital, Denmark Hill, London, after a short illness, and was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99974


Kerr, David Allan (1945-2008), theologian and scholar of Islam, was born at Poplar Hospital, London, on 16 May 1945, the son of Wilfred Allan Kerr (1915-1991), a Congregationalist minister who cultivated an interest in international development, and his wife, Agape Jean, 'nee' Maclachlan, who was from a Scottish missionary family with a history of service in China. The background of his parents combined with the cosmopolitan character of London where he grew up sparked Kerr's interest in the world beyond the British Isles just as immigration was diversifying Britain's demographics and the rise of America and the Soviet Union was reducing Britain's global influence. 
Kerr attended Mill Hill School, a boarding institution that had historically catered to families with nonconformist backgrounds. At Mill Hill the suggestions of a teacher, augmented by his own curiosity and a touch of whim, led him to study Arabic at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London. This decision would prove pivotal. At the School of Oriental and African Studies (from 1963 to 1966) reading as well as friendships with Muslim fellow students propelled him on a quest to comprehend the implications of Islam's existence for the Christian. One book in particular unsettled his confidence in both Christianity and 'Western' culture, posing problems he would spend the rest of his life addressing: 'Islam and the West' (1960), by Norman Daniel, a Roman Catholic scholar committed to exposing the medieval Christian origins of Europe's false image of Islam. Another book, 'The Arab Awakening' (1938) by George Antonius, an Arab Christian, deflated Kerr's erstwhile pride in Britain's imperial history. These works left Kerr deeply troubled by the polemical strategies of past Christian outreach as well as the self-interested nature of imperial politics. 
In the wake of this personal intellectual awakening, Kerr left London to read theology at Mansfield College, Oxford, with the aim of ordination but with burning questions in his mind about Christian-Muslim relations. At Oxford (from 1966 to 1968) he came under the influence of two very different figures who would push him to broaden his inherited Calvinist outlook in different ways. From the revered Congregationalist biblical scholar G. B. Caird he learned to exercise caution against reading contemporary inter-faith concerns into the ancient historical world of the biblical text. Biblical exegesis alone, in the absence of serious theological and philosophical reflection, would not suffice. From the daunting and difficult Roman Catholic scholar of 'Eastern' religions R. C. Zaehner, Kerr discovered the mystical traditions of Christianity and Islam and came to appreciate their common interest in transcendence. Zaehner's singular pedagogical style also provided him with ample practice in the art of holding one's liquor amid exhausting and occasionally disturbing intellectual debate -- a lesson Kerr was only too happy to forget. 
While Kerr did not pursue formal theological or biblical studies any further after 1968, he did remain convinced that theological thinking was fundamental to every other intellectual pursuit. He took this conviction with him to St Antony's College, Oxford, where he had earned a scholarship to pursue research for a DPhil in oriental studies. At St Antony's he found an ideal supervisor in the person of Albert Hourani. Like Kerr, Hourani was an Old Millhillian who had grown up in a reformed, nonconformist household. Hourani also maintained a lively personal interest in both the theological and historical dimensions of Christian-Muslim relations. Under Hourani's guidance, Kerr explored church-state relations in twentieth-century Lebanon. The genuine interest in Arab Christianity Kerr cultivated during this period made him more sensitive than the majority of his peers to the important contributions 'non-Western' Christians could make to their 'Western' brethren on a number of issues, not least the challenge of Islam. In 1970 Kerr married Gun-Marianne Holmstrom, a Finnish nurse whom he had first met at his father's church in London. They had two children, Simeon and Anna. 
After finishing his DPhil thesis Kerr worked briefly for the BBC World Service, focusing on Arab issues. During this time he encountered the theological reflections of the bishop of Mount Lebanon, George Khodr, whose view of the Trinity would prove foundational for Kerr's approach to Islam over the next thirty years. Since Kerr, like Khodr, came to believe that the Holy Spirit worked outside the historic Christian church in religions such as Islam, he was more open to acknowledging the efficacy of Muslim faith than those Christians who built their theology on a Christological rather than a pneumatological base. 
In 1973 Kerr succeeded John B. Taylor as lecturer in Islamic studies at the Selly Oak Colleges in Birmingham. In 1976 he founded the Centre for the Study of Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations there. The new centre, under Kerr's direction until 1988, distinguished itself early on for its unique emphasis on 'study-in-dialogue' and its pioneering concern for the growing importance of Islam in Britain and Europe. Also in 1976 Kerr co-drafted the influential Chambesy statement on 'Christian mission and Islamic da'wah'. This pattern of activities would mark the rest of his career as he became more an accomplished teacher, administrator, institution builder, and practitioner than a scholar. 
With his success at Selly Oak, Kerr became a sought-after scholar-administrator, enjoying productive stints from 1988 to 1996 at Hartford Seminary in Connecticut (as director of the Duncan Black Macdonald Center for the Study of Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations and editor of the Hartford journal, 'Muslim World') and from 1996 to 2005 at the University of Edinburgh (where he was professor of world Christianity and director of the Centre for the Study of Christianity in the Non-Western World). His last appointment, a chair in missiology at Lund University in Sweden, recognized his unique grasp of the global dimensions of the Christian-Muslim encounter and his contributions to the redefinition of Christian mission. 
In the wake of the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 Kerr remained a determined advocate of peaceful dialogue between Christianity and Islam and did not mince words when fellow Christians or the British government seemed to threaten this endeavour. While at Edinburgh he was invited to a meeting with the prime minister, Tony Blair, to advise on fostering inter-faith relations, but, according to his son, 'left convinced that the government's interest did not extend beyond PR' ('The Guardian', 23 June 2008). Soon after arriving in Sweden, he was diagnosed with motor neurone disease, which progressed rapidly. A person of extraordinary commitment, he supervised and mentored his PhD students into his last days. He died on 14 April 2008 and was survived by his wife, Gun-Marianne, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 99979


Kington, Miles Beresford (1941-2008), humorist, jazz critic, and broadcaster, was born on 13 May 1941 at Down County Infirmary, Downpatrick, co. Down, the elder son of William Beresford Nairn Kington (1909-1982), a brewer then serving as a captain with the 4th Royal Welch Fusiliers, and his first wife, Jean Ann, 'nee' Sanders (1912-1973). His brother, Stuart, was two years younger. They grew up in north Wales, where their father was a director at Border Breweries, and Kington was educated at Trinity College, Glenalmond, in Scotland. Nevertheless, he saw himself very much as an Englishman (although to complicate matters further, he was actually half American, his mother being an American citizen). 
'From an early age', Kington later wrote, 'perhaps confused by my shifting geography, I knew I wanted to be a humorous writer and a jazz musician.' At school he started his own jazz band and set up a humorous magazine in opposition to the official school magazine. While at Trinity College, Oxford, where he read French and German, he played the double bass in jazz groups and wrote humorously for undergraduate magazines. No doubt because of his extracurricular activities, he graduated with a third-class degree in 1963. 'When I left university I was almost entirely unfitted for life,' he later said, 'and consequently went to London to try my luck as a free-lance humorous writer, where I nearly starved to death.' To stave off hunger, he took up part-time gardening. Meanwhile, on 29 February 1964, he married Sarah (Sally) Paine ('b'. 1941), a museum research assistant, and daughter of Robert William Paine, architect. They had a daughter, Sophie, and son, Thomas (Tom). The marriage ended in separation in 1980, and subsequently divorce in 1987. In 1981 Kington met (Hilary) Caroline Maynard ('b'. 1948), a theatre and television director, and daughter of Bryan Carter, writer. They married on 6 June 1987. Through this marriage Kington gained a stepdaughter, Isabel, and then another son, Adam. He lived latterly in Limpley Stoke, near Bath. 
Music was always important to Kington and he played a number of instruments, particularly the piano (always classical music) and the double bass (always jazz). Jazz was a passion and he acquired his first professional writing job, in 1965, at 'The Times', having lobbied the arts editor to employ him as the paper's jazz reviewer, a job he did for fifteen years. Similarly, in 1965 he set his sights on joining 'Punch' and bombarded the editor with articles until he gave in and allowed him to join the staff. In 1970 he became the literary editor, recruiting a stable of talented reviewers. He was perhaps best known for his column, 'Let's Parler Franglais', described by Michael Bywater as 'a macaronic jeu d'esprit in which he dissected the vagaries of the British from behind the screen of a crazed bilingualism' ('The Independent', 1 Feb 2008). So successful was the column that four volumes of Franglais were published between 1979 and 1982, followed by a fifth, 'The Franglais Lieutenant's Woman', in 1986. With characteristic self-deprecation, Kington described them as 'probably the most popular bilingual lavatory books of the 1980s' ('Le Bumper Book of Franglais', 2010, book cover). His first book had been 'The World of Alphonse Allais' (1977, republished in 1983 as 'A Wolf in Frog's Clothing'), translations of the work of a nineteenth-century French poet and humorist. The book led to a broadcast on Radio 3 and was the beginning of a long association with the BBC as a broadcaster and writer. 
In 1970 Kington joined Instant Sunshine, a popular cabaret group, all doctors excepting Kington himself. 'I always travel with three physicians in tow', he would quip (personal knowledge). He was the bass player, and wrote most of the introductions to their songs as well as wry, witty monologues. This gave him a taste for audiences and was a good training ground for developing his skills as an accomplished public speaker. He was a regular at the Edinburgh fringe festival and wrote his only full-length play, 'Waiting for Stoppard' (1995), to premiere there. He also performed a one-man show, 'A Rough Guide to the Fringe' (1992), and co-wrote and acted in 'Bizarre' (1995) and 'The Death of Tchaikovsky: a Sherlock Holmes Mystery' (1996), both with actor-musician Simon Gilman. 
By the 1980s Kington was making regular appearances on British television and radio. Television programmes included 'Three Miles High' (1980), about a railway journey in Peru, 'Steam Days' (1986), 'The Burma Road' (1989), 'In Search of the Holy Foreskin' (1996), in which he searched for holy relics, and 'Fine Families' (1998), in which he interviewed eccentric members of the Welsh aristocracy, all for the BBC; 'Jazz at the Albert' for HTV; 'Let's Parler Franglais' for Channel 4; and numerous guest appearances on 'Call My Bluff' and other shows. But he eschewed a potentially glittering television career, turning down, among other things, the offer to present 'Around the World in Eighty Days'. Television, he said, got in the way of writing. Radio, however, gave him the opportunity to exercise his considerable broadcasting skills. His light, witty touch, and his ability to look at life's experiences in a different, tangential, and oblique way meant he was much in demand. He presented various radio series, including 'In the Archives', 'Double Vision', 'Reading Music', 'The Miles Kington Interviews', and 'It's a Funny Old World'. He was a regular guest on a wide variety of programmes including 'The Write Stuff', 'Quote, Unquote', 'It's a Good Read', and 'The News Quiz', and made over sixty documentaries on subjects as diverse as General de Gaulle, Brezhnev, Franco, John Betjeman, Jean-Paul Sartre, Django Reinhardt, Kansas City Jazz, and teaching English as a foreign language. 
In 1980 Kington parted company with 'Punch'. He wrote to Harold Evans, editor at 'The Times', offering himself as a humorous columnist. When Evans did not reply, Kington sent him copy daily until Evans relented. Kington's column, 'Moreover', appeared until 1987 when he switched to 'The Independent', where he continued to write on a daily basis, the last copy appearing the day he died; he also wrote a column for 'The Oldie'. In all he wrote over 4500 columns, described by Simon Kelner as 'witty, topical, erudite, acutely observed' ('The Independent', 1 Feb 2008). 'As with the very best in any sphere of endeavour,' Simon O'Hagan asserted, 'Miles's trick was to make it look easy. His lightness of touch amounted to a kind of genius. But behind the conversational prose lay craftmanship of the highest order. His standards never wavered' ('The Independent', 8 Feb 2008). What struck his colleagues was his intense curiosity about everything, and his ability to wring humour from the most mundane object or situation. As Terence Blacker wrote, 'He had an excellent eye for a funny story but also had a great ear, presenting the column in a wide variety of registers and voices while retaining the particular personality of his writing' ('The Independent', 1 Feb 2008). 
Kington's later books included 'Miles and Miles' (1982), 'Nature Made Ridiculously Simple' (1983), 'Vicarage Allsorts' (1985), 'Welcome to Kington' (1989), 'Jazz: an Anthology' (edited, 1992), 'Motorway Madness' (1998), 'Someone Like Me: Tales from a Borrowed Childhood' (2005), and the posthumously published 'The Best by Miles' (2009) and 'Le Bumper Book of Franglais' (2010). 
Kington was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 2007 but continued working until his death, at his home, on 30 January 2008. His funeral was held on 11 February at St Mary's, Limpley Stoke, where he was buried; a memorial service followed on 25 June 2008 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. His hilarious response to his final illness, totally lacking in self-pity, formed the basis of the posthumously published 'How Shall I Tell the Dog?' (2008). He was survived by his wife, Caroline, his three children, and his stepdaughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 99981


Knowles, Jeremy Randall (1935-2008), chemist, was born on 28 April 1935 at 1 Murray Road, Rugby, Warwickshire, the younger son of Kenneth Guy Jack Charles Knowles (1908-1988), schoolmaster, and his first wife, Dorothy Helen, 'nee' Swingler. His father subsequently taught economic history at University College, Nottingham, before taking a post at the Institute of Economics and Statistics in Oxford; while there he published seminal statistical works on strikes and on wage patterns in industry in the UK. 
From 1948 to 1953 Knowles was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford. For the next two years he did national service as a pilot officer in the Royal Air Force, working primarily as a radar controller. He was the Sir Louis Stuart exhibitioner at Balliol College, Oxford, where he read chemistry from 1955 to 1959 and was taught by R. P. Bell, W. A. Waters, and R. J. P. Williams, all fellows of the Royal Society. He was awarded a first-class degree, having written his undergraduate thesis on the role of hyperconjugation in aromatic substitution. He continued his research in the Oxford laboratory of the physical organic chemist Richard O. C. Norman, receiving his DPhil degree in 1961 for a thesis on intramolecular effects in aromatic systems. This work was completed while Knowles was a Harmsworth senior scholar of Merton College and lecturer at Christ Church, Oxford. On 30 July 1960 he married Jane Sheldon Davis ('b'. 1938), daughter of Herbert John Davis, professor of English literature at Oxford and a noted authority on Swift. They had three sons, Sebastian ('b'. 1961), Julius ('b'. 1963), and Timothy ('b'. 1965). 
In 1961-2 Knowles took leave for six months to work with the organic photochemist George S. Hammond at the California Institute of Technology. There extensive discourse with J. Bryan Jones, who like Knowles was an Oxford DPhil and who was doing postdoctoral work on enzymes, made the allure of these biological catalysts overwhelming. On returning to Oxford as a fellow of Wadham College, Knowles focused his attention on the glycolytic enzyme triosephosphate isomerase. He realized that the simple reaction that it catalysed facilitated detailed characterization. In the early 1970s he subjected triosephosphate isomerase to sixteen experiments, each employing isotopes of hydrogen in a distinct but incisive manner. The ensuing data, which were interpreted in collaboration with the Oxford physical chemist W. John Albery and reported in a series of eight papers in 1976, led to the elucidation of the first free energy profile for an enzyme-catalysed reaction. Surprisingly the energy of each enzyme-bound intermediate was comparable, as was the energy of each flanking transition state. This equanimity led Knowles and Albery to anoint triosephosphate isomerase as a 'perfect' enzyme and led to penetrating insights about the evolution of enzymatic catalysis. 
Extended time at Illinois in 1962, Yale in 1969 and 1971, and Harvard in 1973 enticed Knowles to move to the United States. He joined the faculty at Harvard University in the autumn of 1974. Along with his Harvard colleagues Konrad E. Bloch and Frank H. Westheimer he established the roots of biological chemistry on that campus. In 1979 he was named the Amory Houghton professor of chemistry and biochemistry. At Harvard he continued to make broad and seminal contributions to chemical enzymology. His work on greekLetterbeta-lactamases, their inhibition, and their localization spanned the realms of organic chemistry and microbiology. Fascinating enzymatic mechanisms were revealed in the shikimic acid pathway of plants and microbes, and intellectual seeds were planted for 'green' chemistry. Phosphoryl groups, chiral by virtue of oxygen isotopes, were synthesized, and the stereochemical consequences of their transfer were discerned by clever mass spectrometric and phosphorus-31 NMR spectroscopic methods. This work provided the first direct evidence (in 1982) for pseudorotation in the reaction of a phosphate monoester and (in 1988) of monomeric metaphosphate, which had long been sought as a solvated species. 
A decade after triosephosphate isomerase, proline racemase provided a coda, along with more notable discoveries. In a series of seven papers in 1986 Knowles and Albery revealed the consequences of 'oversaturation', a regime in which catalysis is limited by the interconversion of distinct unliganded forms of the enzyme. They also described an elegant kinetic isotope experiment that reveals, without ambiguity, whether a reaction proceeds in a stepwise or concerted manner. By 1991 thirty years of rigorous analyses had convinced Knowles that enzymic catalysts were 'not different, just better'. Though most renowned as an enzymologist, he made landmark contributions to other aspects of biological chemistry. In 1968 he and Frederic M. Richards deduced the mechanism and products of chemical crosslinking by glutaraldehyde. In 1972 he developed the method of photoaffinity labelling. 
These accomplishments led to Knowles becoming a fellow of the Royal Society (1977), the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1982), and the American Philosophical Society (1988); a foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences (1988); and a trustee of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (1988). He was awarded the Davy medal of the Royal Society (1991); the Prelog medal of the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule in Zurich (1989); the Bader award, Repligen award, and Nakanishi award of the American Chemical Society (1989, 1993, and 1999 respectively); and the Robert A. Welch award in chemistry (1995). He was an honorary fellow of Balliol and Wadham colleges, Oxford, and a recipient of honorary degrees from the University of Edinburgh and the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule. He was the Newton-Abraham visiting professor at Oxford in 1983-4. He was appointed CBE in 1993. In 2008 the Royal Society of Chemistry established the Jeremy Knowles award 'to recognise and promote the importance of inter- and multi-disciplinary research between chemistry and the life sciences'. 
In 1991 Knowles accepted an offer to become the dean of the faculty of arts and sciences, one that he had declined in 1983, and he closed his research laboratory. Intellectual sensitivity, born of genuine appreciation for the full spectrum of academic disciplines, made him especially well suited for this new challenge. Integrating extraordinary intellectual acuity with polished charm, eloquence, and wit, he was able to restore financial equilibrium to Harvard while renewing its expansion and renovation. He served in University Hall until 2002, and returned again as interim dean from 2006 to 2007, following a period of turbulence in the university. 
Having transformed both chemical enzymology and Harvard University, Knowles died on 3 April 2008 at his home in Cambridge, Massachusetts, following a prolonged struggle with prostate cancer. On 12 April he was buried in the Mount Auburn cemetery on a hillside that affords a panoramic view of Harvard. On 30 May, a memorial service filled the Memorial Church on the Harvard campus. He was survived by his wife, Jane, and their three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 99987


Laing, Sir John William (1879-1978), builder and civil engineering contractor, was born on 24 September 1879 at 21 Newcastle Street, Carlisle, the third but only surviving son of John Laing (1842-1924) and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Wood (1845-1924). His father was the son of James Laing (1818-1882), who had founded the family construction business in 1848. Laing received his primary education in Carlisle and Sedbergh and then attended Carlisle grammar school. He was brought up in a strict religious environment, his parents having joined the congregation of the Carlisle Brethren following their marriage in 1874. He joined the family firm in January 1895 at the age of fifteen and served a three-year apprenticeship as a bricklayer and mason. In 1902 he went to work on the company's first major civil engineering contract -- the construction of a reservoir at Uldale in Cumberland -- and spent some two years with a navvy gang of 200 men which gave him a good understanding of the construction labourer. On 28 September 1910 Laing married Beatrice Harland (1885-1972), the daughter of a chartered accountant from Stockton-on-Tees; they had two sons. The Harland family also belonged to the Brethren movement and became strongly linked to the Laing family with the preparation of the Laing company's annual reports and the marriage of Laing's sister to Beatrice's brother. 
By 1908 Laing had taken over the firm's management and two years later became the sole proprietor on the retirement of his father. He was a pioneer in perceiving the importance of accurate costing and control of performance during construction and he introduced work-study methods. The First World War saw great expansion of the Laing company, largely due to government contracts. During this period Laing undertook a contract for Barrow in Furness corporation which brought him up against unforeseen and costly natural hazards and led to a law suit, which he won. His Christian commitment was strengthened at this time and he drew up a financial plan for giving away on a graduated system anything from one-eighth to one-third of his income. 
Laing was deeply interested in experimental building work and developed in 1919 his own system of 'in situ' concrete housing construction. This helped overcome the post-war shortage of skilled labour and it was patented as Easiform in 1924 when it featured at the Palace of Housing at the 1924-25 Wembley British Empire Exhibition. Another development of the same period was a suspended patent fireproof flooring method known as Ferrobrick. A tendering and costing system which he developed was one of the finest of its time in the industry, and he believed that the key to sound contract financing was accuracy of estimating and labour productivity. 
Laing exercised a benevolent paternalism over his workers and in 1922 he introduced a scheme for employee shares. These were frequently purchased in instalments but were sometimes given as part of the distribution of company profits and they had to be returned on leaving the company's employment. A 'pupils' scheme', started in 1924, was a form of indenture training for grammar or public school leavers, and this was later to incorporate training for professional qualifications. Laing was respected by his employees for his absolute integrity. Productivity bonuses and payments for time lost by wet weather were introduced well ahead of the industry generally. Long-service employees were always found employment during slack periods and he built up a stable and loyal workforce. A charitable trust for employees was started in 1932 and this was followed by the first holidays-with-pay scheme within the industry in 1934. 
In the late 1920s, at a time of decline in the construction market, Laing launched into speculative private house building, particularly in the Greater London area. His company had built up sufficient resources to be able to finance the development of both shopping and factory precincts where they did not already exist near to his new estates. His advocacy of owner-occupation was very significant at the time; his house specification and building standards were high so his houses were more expensive than some others on the market, but they still sold readily. 
Laing supported the foundation of the National House Builders' Registration Council, formed in 1937, which registered builders and guaranteed their houses. His estates were always carefully planned with preserved trees and shrubs lining road verges. He, along with others, promoted a builders' pool system, an arrangement with the building societies which reduced the cash deposits required for mortgages. A visit to Russia in 1935 had a profound influence on his practical thinking. The great blocks of Russian flats with their communal kitchens and facilities were contrasted unfavourably with his own housing estates where each house possessed its own gardens and kitchen. 
At this time the company began to grow as a result of the award of government military contracts, and because of the urgency of these, the normal lengthy procedures of competitive tendering were impractical and they had to be negotiated. Laing had always disliked the cost-plus type of contract which had been extensively used during the First World War. He considered it to be inefficient, destructive of enterprise, and open to questionable practice. The company already had a long association with the Air Ministry which had led to a relationship of mutual respect and Laing was able to negotiate a 'target' form of contract. A target cost would be set and if the actual cost of labour and material proved to be less than this figure the contractor was paid cost and profit, plus a sliding-scale bonus based on the savings; if he exceeded the target, he was penalized. 
The Second World War brought a tremendous expansion of the firm, which constructed fifty-four airfields, the underground headquarters of RAF Bomber Command at High Wycombe, munitions factories, and sections of the D-day Mulberry harbour. Laing reached sixty-five in 1944 but as his two sons were serving in the forces he carried on running the business alone. He also served as a consultant to the wartime government and sat on several committees. After the war, and confronted with a chronic housing shortage, Laing launched his company into Easiform construction again, supporting it with a research and development programme. The company's rapid growth continued and, despite his characteristic reluctance to delegate, he slowly transferred the firm's management to his sons, (William) Kirby ['see below'] and (John) Maurice ['see below']. Financial and management decentralization was to follow and the business was converted into a public limited company in 1952. The Laing family and their charitable trust held sufficient ordinary shares in the company to retain control. 
Laing finally retired as chairman in 1957 and became the company's life president. In that year his company was awarded the so-called 'power and the glory' contracts -- Berkeley nuclear power station (decommissioned in 1989) and the rebuilding of Coventry Cathedral (consecrated in 1962). The following year the company won the contract for the first 55 miles of the M1, a new activity in which it became a national leader and which derived from its wartime airfield construction experience. For his services to the industry, Laing was appointed CBE in 1951 and knighted in 1959. 
To the end of his life Laing, supported by his wife, remained a generous benefactor of evangelical Christian enterprise. In 1922 he gave nearly 40 per cent of his personal ordinary shares in the company to a Brethren charitable holding foundation, the Steward's Company Ltd. This applied its income to missionary, evangelistic, and poor relief work. A wide range of Christian international organizations benefited from Laing's support, including the London Bible College, the British and Foreign Bible Society, the Missionary Aviation Fellowship, Fact and Faith films, and the Billy Graham crusades. Paternalistic and dominating, Laing gained a reputation for straightness in his personal and business dealings. Pursuit of efficiency and quality and close personal control marked his business style, as did his policy of extensively ploughing back profits; his frugality was expressed in his preference for the works canteen or sandwiches instead of an expensive restaurant. He also worked immensely hard, enjoyed physical fitness and held a simple, bold Christian faith until his death, aged ninety-eight, at 8A Wellington Place, Westminster, London on 11 January 1978. He was buried on 16 January 1978 in Paddington new cemetery. 
Laing's elder son, Sir (William) Kirby Laing (1916-2009), industrialist, was born on 21 July 1916 at 42 St James's Road, Carlisle. He was educated at St Lawrence College, Ramsgate, a strongly Christian school, and Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he read engineering. On graduation in 1937 he joined the family business, becoming a director in 1939. On 8 July that year he married Joan Dorothy Bratt (1916-1981), daughter of Eric Cecil Bratt, company director. They had three sons. He joined the Territorial Army before the outbreak of the Second World War. His attempts to volunteer for active service were initially unsuccessful, as he was assigned to work with his company on aerodromes, temporary hospitals and housing, and barrage balloon sites. He eventually succeeded in transferring to active service in 1943, and served for the remainder of the war with the Royal Engineers, in Italy and France. On demobilization he rejoined the company, working initially on the property development side. He succeeded his father as chairman of John Laing & Son in 1957, and led the company through a time of sustained expansion, its flagship projects including the Bullring shopping centre in Birmingham and the Calder Hall and Berkeley nuclear power stations. Kirby Laing and his more extrovert brother, Maurice, formed an effective partnership, Kirby focusing more on property and on international building projects and Maurice on domestic ones. Kirby, who was knighted in 1968, stepped down as chairman in 1976 to make way for his brother, but he remained a director. In 1978, concerned by the possibility of the nationalization of construction companies should the Labour Party win the next election, Maurice restructured the company into separate property and construction divisions, and invited Kirby to become chairman of Laing Properties. This was initially highly successful under his chairmanship, which lasted until 1987, but three years later it was the victim of a hostile takeover by P&O, which made a good deal of money for the family's charitable trusts but which both brothers saw as destroying the Laing heritage. 
Kirby Laing was a notable benefactor and philanthropist, and in 1972 he had started the Kirby Laing Foundation, which supported a wide range of charitable projects, with a particular focus on medical research, youth development, ancient churches, and Christian outreach. He was a communicant of the Church of England. In 2006 the Whitefield Institute was renamed the Kirby Laing Institute for Christian Ethics in recognition of his support. He was president, 'inter alia', of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1973-4), to whose proceedings he contributed a number of papers, the council of the Royal Albert Hall (1979-92), and the Smetonian Society (1988). He was a member of the Royal Fowey Yacht Club, and was also a keen fly fisher. Following his first wife's death, on 20 September 1986 he married (Mary) Isobel Lewis, 'nee' Wray, radiologist, daughter of Edward Chapman Wray, research chemist, and widow of Cledwyn B. Lewis. He died on 12 April 2009 and was survived by her and by the three sons of his first marriage. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 1 September 2009. 
Sir John Laing's younger son, Sir (John) Maurice Laing (1918-2008), industrialist, was born on 1 February 1918 at the same house as his brother, and also educated at St Lawrence College, Ramsgate. He joined John Laing & Son Ltd in 1935, initially as a costing clerk and then an apprentice builder, but took his first managerial role in 1938 and became a director of the business in 1939. On 20 March 1940 he married Hilda Violet Richards ('b'. 1918), a library assistant, and daughter of William Tom Steeper Richards, schoolmaster; they had one son, John ('b'. 1959). Meanwhile in 1941 (against his father's wishes, and despite being in a reserved occupation) he enlisted in the RAF, with which he served for the remainder of the Second World War, including as a glider pilot during the crossing of the Rhine. On demobilization he returned to the family firm, becoming deputy chairman in 1966 and succeeding his brother, Kirby, as chairman in 1976, holding that position until his retirement in 1982. 
Though he left the Brethren for the Church of England, he was deeply influenced by his Christian faith, served as president of the London Bible College (1993-9), and continued his father's policies of benevolent paternalism in employee relations. He undertook a wide range of outside appointments, most notably as a director of the Bank of England (1963-80) and as president of the British Employers' Confederation (1964-5), and, following the latter's merger with the Federation of British Industries and the National Association of British Manufacturers, first president of the Confederation of British Industry (1965-6). He was knighted in 1965. He was a keen sailor, serving as admiral of the Royal Ocean Racing Club (1976-82) and president of the Royal Yachting Association (1983-7), and was deeply interested in complementary medicine, funding the Centre for Complementary Medicine at the Peninsula Medical School in Exeter, founded in 1993. He also gave extensively to environmental and development projects in the developing world. He died in London on 22 February 2008 and was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 99996


Lawther, Patrick Joseph (1921-2008), physician and medical researcher, was born at 15 Victory Avenue, Gretna, Dumfriesshire, on 9 March 1921, the son of Joseph Lawther, marine engineer, and his wife, Winifred, otherwise Winefride, 'nee' Mulholland. He went to school in Carlisle and then in Morecambe. His undergraduate career began at King's College, London, in 1939 where he read chemistry but did not take a degree. He returned to Morecambe and taught at Apperley Bridge, Yorkshire, for a year. In 1941 he was appointed as a chemist with Hickson and Welch Ltd, where he stayed for the remainder of the Second World War. In 1944 he decided to study medicine, read for the first MB examination while at work, and, after pre-clinical studies at Cambridge, proceeded to St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school and graduated MB BS in 1950. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1954. Meanwhile he married Kathleen May Wilkowski (1917-1998), daughter of Vincent George Wilkowski, accountant, on 4 November 1944. She also became a doctor. They had two sons, Anthony and Christopher, and one daughter, Judith (died 2003). 
The London smog of December 1952, which killed at least 4000 people, had a great effect on Lawther's career. He had been a house physician at St Bartholomew's Hospital between 1950 and 1951 and was a Cooper and Coventson research scholar at the time of the smog. In 1955 the Medical Research Council established the MRC Group for Research on Atmospheric Pollution (later the Air Pollution Unit, and later still the Environmental Hazards Unit) at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and Lawther was appointed director. This was a remarkable step for a young physician and a brilliant appointment by the Medical Research Council. Lawther recruited a number of scientists to his unit, including Brian Commins, in charge of analytical work, and Robert Waller, who had read physics at Imperial College, moved to statistical work, and worked on cancer producing compounds with Sir Ernest Kennaway. Thus began a remarkably productive association and a series of seminal research programmes on the effects of air pollutants on health. The focus of the work was on the effects of particulate matter and of sulphur dioxide, the main pollutants of the coal-smoke era. Lawther adopted a characteristically broad approach: he measured concentrations of pollutants in the air, studied panels of patients suffering from chronic bronchitis and related their symptoms to ambient levels of pollution, and undertook experimental studies on himself and his staff. With Waller he was one of the first to apply the electron microscope to the examination of particles collected from the air. The work led to a series of publications and established the reputation of the unit as perhaps the world's leading centre for air pollution research. The 'Clean Air Act' of 1956 led to the progressive reduction of levels of air pollutants in London and other British cities, and Lawther's group followed the declining effects on health. By the 1970s London air pollution was much reduced and in 1977 the unit was closed with Lawther's agreement, its work being seen as essentially complete. In retrospect this was an error: research on the effects of air pollutants on health dried up in the UK and did not recover until the early 1990s. This soured relations between Lawther and his North American colleagues, and only later did UK research workers regain a leading position in the field. It was later discovered that levels of air pollution that Lawther would have regarded as trivial have a significant effect on health. After the closure of the unit Lawther moved to the Medical Research Council's toxicology unit at Carshalton and led the clinical section there. He retired in 1981. In addition to his work for the Medical Research Council he had been honorary consultant and physician in charge of the department of environmental and preventive medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1962 to 1981, and had held the chair in environmental and preventive medicine there from 1968 until 1981. In the latter year he was appointed an emeritus professor of London University. 
Lawther's distinction as a medical research worker led him into a good deal of committee work. He served as chairman of the Department of Health and Social Security's committee on the medical aspects of contamination of air and soil (1973-85), the same department's working party on lead and health (1978-80), and the Royal Navy's underwater medicine committee, and as a member of the medical committee of the Ministry of Defence's Chemical Defence Establishment at Porton. This work took up a good deal of his time: he was an excellent chairman and committee member. His wide range of knowledge and infectious wit enlivened all discussions. He was advanced to fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians in 1963, made DSc by London University in 1971, and appointed CBE in 1978. His distinction was also recognized by the award of the silver medal of the Royal Society of Arts (1964), the bronze medal of the Academie Nationale de Medicine (1972), the Bissett Hawkins medal of the Royal College of Physicians (1974), and the Edwin Stevens gold medal of the Royal Society of Medicine in 1975. 
Lawther's interests extended far beyond medicine. He was a keen fisherman, and excellent shot, an enthusiastic cricketer (in his younger days), and a bibliophile of note. He founded the Lawther Library at his old school in Morecambe and donated a splendid Golden Cockerel edition of the King James gospels (designed and edited by Eric Gill) and the Gegynog Press edition of the Arabic romance 'The Stealing of the Mare' to the library of the Royal College of Physicians. He was interested in music, played the recorder, and presented a rare piccolo to the Victoria and Albert Museum. He was widely read, especially in poetry, and knew many of the poems of W. B. Yeats by heart. He died at Dawson Lodge nursing home, Botley Road, West End, Southampton, on 6 June 2008, of sepsis, and was survived by his two sons. 


