@@@@@


doc= 7611


Dickson, Adam (bap. 1721, d. 1776), agricultural writer, was baptized on 5 October 1721 at Aberlady, Haddingtonshire, the son of the Revd Andrew Dickson, minister of Aberlady, and his wife, Agnes Burnside. He studied at Edinburgh University, and took the degree of MA in 1744. In 1742 he married Anne Haldane. They had one son and one daughter. From his childhood his father had intended him to go into the church, and Dickson was presented in 1748 as minister of Duns in Berwickshire, though he did not take up the post until 1750, after a long lawsuit on the subject of the presentation, which went to the House of Lords. He soon lived down the opposition which this raised in his parish. After twenty years at Duns, he was transferred in 1769 to Whittingham in Haddingtonshire. 
Dickson became interested in farming at an early age, and after moving to Duns he decided to write 'A Treatise on Agriculture'. The first volume of this appeared in 1762, and was followed by a second in 1769. A new edition was published in 1785. Concerned with farming in Scotland, the first four books of this work dealt with soils, tillage, and manures in general; the other four concentrated on problems of farm management. One section, an essay on manures, was reprinted in Alexander Hunter's 'Georgical Essays' (1770); it attacked Jethro Tull, who held that careful ploughing alone provided adequate fertilization for the soil. Dickson also wrote 'Small Farms Destructive to the Country in its Present Situation' (1764), and 'An Essay on the Causes of the Present High Prices of Provisions etc.' (1773). 
Dickson died on 25 March 1776 at Whittingham, after falling from his horse. Twelve years after his death the work by which he was best known was printed, with a dedication to the duke of Buccleuch. Entitled 'The Husbandry of the Ancients' (1788), this had been written at the end of Dickson's life, after many years devoted to studying ancient writers on agriculture. He compared ancient agricultural practice with the practice of his day. The first volume discussed the Roman villa, and crops, manures, and ploughs; the second dealt with the different ancient crops and the times of sowing. He translated freely from Latin sources, and his scholarship was often faulty. The book was translated into French in 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 7612


Dickson, Sir Alexander (1777-1840), army officer, was born on 3 June 1777 at Sydenham House, Roxburghshire, the third son of Admiral William Dickson and his first wife, daughter of William Collingwood of Unthank, Northumberland. His brother was Admiral Sir Collingwood Dickson, second baronet. He was educated presumably at a private school. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, as a cadet on 5 April 1793 and became second lieutenant Royal Artillery on 6 November 1794. His subsequent commissions in the British artillery were first lieutenant (6 March 1795), captain-lieutenant (14 October 1801), captain (10 April 1805), major (26 June 1823), lieutenant-colonel (2 April 1825), and colonel (1 July 1836). As a subaltern he served at the capture of Minorca in 1798, and at the blockade of Malta and siege of Valletta in 1800, where he was employed as acting engineer. As captain he commanded the artillery of the reinforcements sent out to South America under Sir Samuel Auchmuty, which arrived at the River Plate on 5 April 1807 and captured Montevideo, and which was afterwards present at, but not engaged in, the disastrous attempt to take Buenos Aires. For a time Dickson commanded the artillery of the army, in which he was succeeded by Augustus Frazer. 
When Colonel Howorth arrived in Portugal to assume command of the artillery of the army of Arthur Wellesley (the duke of Wellington) in April 1809, Dickson, who hoped to obtain employment in a higher grade in the Portuguese artillery under Marshal W. C. Beresford, accompanied Howorth and served as his brigade major in the operations before Porto and the subsequent expulsion of Marechal Soult's army from Portugal. Soon afterwards he was appointed to a company in the Portuguese artillery when Captain John May returned home. He subsequently became major and lieutenant-colonel in the Portuguese service, which gave him precedence over officers who were his seniors in the British artillery. In command of the Portuguese artillery he took part in the battle of Busaco in 1810, the action at Campo Mayor, the siege and capture of Olivenza, and the battle of Albuera in 1811. His abilities were recognized by Wellington, and the artillery details at the various sieges were chiefly entrusted to him. He superintended the artillery operations in the first and second sieges of Badajoz under the immediate orders of Wellington in 1811, as well as the siege and capture of Ciudad Rodrigo and the siege and capture of Badajoz in 1812. He joined the force assembled by Rowland Hill to march secretly against the forts at Almaraz. His feints and the planting of false information effectively screened his movements from the French, and the operation ended in a close-run but brilliant capture of the forts and bridge on the River Tagus. In 1812 he also contributed to the siege and capture of the forts of Salamanca, and the siege of Burgos. He commanded the reserve artillery at the battle of Salamanca and the capture of Madrid. He was a lieutenant-colonel in the Portuguese artillery, and brevet major and first captain of a company of British artillery (no. 5 of the Old 10th battalion Royal Artillery, which under its second captain, Cairns, did good service in the Peninsula and was afterwards disbanded). On 27 April 1812 he became brevet lieutenant-colonel in the British service. An earnest and active officer, he suffered recurring attacks of fever. 
In May 1813 Wellington, whose relations with the commanding officers of the Royal Artillery in Spain for some time past had been very unsatisfactory, invited Dickson to take command of the allied artillery, his brevet rank giving him the necessary seniority. Dickson, still a captain of artillery, thus succeeded to what properly was a lieutenant-general's command, having 8000 men and between 3000 and 4000 horses under him. He commanded the allied artillery at Vitoria, and by virtue of his brevet rank was senior to Augustus Frazer (under whom he had served in South America) at the siege of San Sebastian, who wrote of his 'manly simplicity'. Dickson commanded the allied artillery at the passage of the River Bidassoa, in the battles of the Nivelle and the Nive, at the passage of the River Adour, and in the battle of Toulouse. After the war the officers of the field train department who had served under him presented him with a splendid piece of plate, and the officers of the Royal Artillery who served under him in the campaigns of 1813-14 presented him with a sword of honour. 
In the Anglo-American War of 1812-14 Dickson commanded the artillery in the expedition to New Orleans and at the capture of Fort Bowyer at Mobile, Alabama. He returned from the United States in time to take part in the Waterloo campaign. At this time he was first captain of G (afterwards F) troop, Royal Horse Artillery. He was present at the battles of Quatre-Bras and Waterloo in 1815, with Sir George Wood, commanding the artillery. He subsequently commanded the battering train sent to aid the Prussian army at the sieges of Maubeuge, Landrecies, Philipville, Marienburg, and Rocroy, in July and August of 1815, but which Wellington, disapproving of the acts of Prince Augustus of Prussia, directed later to withdraw to Mons. In all his campaigns Dickson was never once wounded. 
In 1822 Dickson was appointed inspector of artillery, and he succeeded Lieutenant-General Sir John Macleod as deputy adjutant-general Royal Artillery on Macleod's removal to the office of director-general in 1827. On William Millar's death in 1838 Dickson succeeded him in the office of director-general of the field train department, combining this duty with that of deputy adjutant-general of Royal Artillery until his death in 1840; during this period artillery progress was stifled by parliamentary retrenchment. He became a major-general on 10 January 1837. In 1838 Dickson, who had been made KCH in 1817 and KCB in 1825, was made GCB, the only Royal Artillery officer then holding the grand cross of the military division. He was royal aide-de-camp (1825-37), a commissioner of the Royal Military College at Sandhurst, and was one of the original fellows of the Royal Geographical Society and a fellow of other learned societies. 
Dickson was not only a great artilleryman but also a most industrious and methodical collector of data. During the Peninsula sieges he kept diaries, in which he mentioned even the most trifling facts, and on his return to England he obtained from General Macleod the letters he had written to him between 1811 and 1814. All this became the property of his son General Sir Collingwood Dickson (1817-1904), Royal Artillery, who lent it to Colonel Francis Duncan who used it in preparing his 'History of the Royal Regiment of Artillery'. 
Dickson was twice married, first, on 19 September 1802, to Eulalia Briones (died 24 July 1830), daughter of Don Stefano Briones of Minorca, with whom he had a large family; and second, on 18 December 1830, to Harriet Maria, widow of Eustace Meadows of Conholt Park, Hampshire, who after Dickson's death married Major-General Sir John Campbell of the Portuguese service. He died at his residence in Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 22 April 1840, at the age of sixty-two, and was buried on 28 April in Plumstead old churchyard, Plumstead, Middlesex. In 1847 a monument was erected by regimental subscription in the grounds of the Royal Military Repository, Woolwich. Sir Collingwood Dickson, Dickson's third son with his first wife, presented his father's papers to the Royal Regiment of Artillery: an edition of them, edited by J. H. Leslie, was published as 'The Dickson Manuscripts' in 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 7613


Dickson, Alexander (1836-1887), botanist, was born on 21 February 1836 at 6 Fettes Row, Edinburgh, second son among the eight children of David Dickson (1793-1866), advocate and landowner, and his wife, Jemima, daughter of the Revd David Pyper. His father's family had long held estates at Kilbucho in Lanarkshire and Hartree in Peeblesshire. He was educated privately and at the University of Edinburgh, whence he graduated MD in 1860 with a thesis on the development of the seed vessel of 'Caropyllacae'. In 1862, having already written a number of papers for the 'Transactions of the Edinburgh Botanical Society', Dickson lectured in botany at the University of Aberdeen during the illness of professor George Dickie (1812-1882). In 1866 he was appointed to the chair of botany at Dublin University and, for a brief period in 1868, he was concurrently professor of botany at Dublin's Royal College of Science. In the latter year he returned to Scotland as professor of botany at Glasgow, where he remained until 1879. He was then appointed professor of botany at Edinburgh, and regius keeper of the Royal Botanic Garden. 
Dickson, whose early researches were into reproductive organs of the Coniferae (conifers), was regarded by contemporaries as an excellent field botanist. His later studies included work on phyllotaxis (arrangement of leaves on a stem), flower and embryo development, and the morphology and structure of pitchers in carnivorous plants. The results of his researches were published in a number of journals including the proceedings and transactions of the Royal and Botanical societies of Edinburgh and the 'Journal of Botany, British and Foreign'; the Royal Society catalogue lists a total of some fifty papers. However, he was essentially a cautious botanist, and believed that if the latest botanical publications were left for a year or two, those worth reading would sort themselves. He was a fellow of the Linnean Society and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, was twice president of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh, and was awarded an honorary MD from Dublin and an LLD from Glasgow. 
In 1866 Dickson succeeded to the family estates, where he was considered a generous and improving landlord. It was said of him that he would 'spend everything on his tenants, on his gates, on his trees -- as little as possible on himself' (Hole, 201). Of a quiet and retiring nature, he was a skilled draughtsman and accomplished musician, and in later years collected many Gaelic airs. During the winters he was fond of curling on the ponds near Hartree House, his Peeblesshire home. It was while playing a game on 30 December 1887 at Thriepland Pond, Peeblesshire, that he 'dropped dead in the act of making a shot' ('Nature'). He was widely mourned by students and tenants; a contemporary wrote of him that 'He could never lose a friend, for he could never say an unkind word or omit to do a kind action' ('Nature'). 


@@@@@


doc= 7614


Dickson, David (c.1583-1662), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born in Glasgow, the only son of John Dick or Dickson, a wealthy and devout Glaswegian merchant. He was educated at the University of Glasgow and, after graduating MA, served an eight-year term as a regent of the university. On 23 September 1617 he married Margaret Roberton (died in or before 1662) and on 31 March 1618 was ordained minister of Irvine, Ayrshire. After publicly testifying against the five articles of Perth he was summoned to appear before the court of high commission at Edinburgh on 9 January 1622. He declined the jurisdiction of the court in what he maintained was a purely ecclesiastical matter, was deprived the following day, and was confined to Turriff, Aberdeenshire. He was permitted to return to Irvine at the end of July 1623, where he remained, relatively unmolested, until 1640. 
During the 1620s and 1630s Dickson became one of the leading members of what David Stevenson has termed the kirk's 'radical party' (Stevenson, 24). This band of zealous presbyterians opposed the religious policies of James VI and Charles I and reacted against them by holding conventicles, private prayer meetings where the godly could assemble for religious instruction and mutual edification. By all accounts Dickson was a powerful preacher of 'experimental Calvinism'. His method and style of preaching were considered by many of his contemporaries to be second only to those of William Guthrie, minister of Fenwick. Serious Christians from all over Scotland converged on Irvine to hear his sermons, particularly during communion seasons, the kirk's twice yearly celebration of the Lord's supper. It was during one such season, under Dickson's preaching, that the famous revival of religion known as the 'Stewarton sickness' broke out in Irvine and its environs (Tweedie, 8). 
In the early years of his ministry Dickson's expository sermons on various books of the 'Bible' were transcribed by his auditors and widely circulated in manuscript form among the godly. In response to the demand for his sermons Dickson developed a plan, with the approval of his radical colleagues, to produce a series of brief popular biblical commentaries, the first instalment of which was 'A Short Explanation of the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews' (Aberdeen, 1635). 
During the tumultuous period leading up to and following the signing of the national covenant in 1638 Dickson emerged as one of the natural leaders of the presbyterian party. Together with Alexander Henderson he was instrumental in organizing the infamous prayer book riots which occurred at Edinburgh on 23 July 1637. He also influenced the presbytery of Irvine to denounce the prayer book and petition the Scottish council to suspend letters of horning issued against ministers who refused to purchase copies. In 1638 he was one of the ministers who engaged in a polemical war with the 'Aberdeen doctors', a group of six Arminian ministers holding the degree of doctor of divinity who supported the religious policies of Charles I. In response to the doctors' anti-covenanting pamphlet, 'Generall Demands Concerning the Late Covenant' (Aberdeen, 1638) Dickson and Henderson wrote 'Ansueris of Sum Bretheren of the Ministrie' (Aberdeen, 1638). He was a member of the 1638 Glasgow general assembly and, according to Robert Wodrow, 'made a great figure there', giving a learned discourse against Arminianism, and delivering an influential speech when the king's commissioner threatened to leave the assembly (Tweedie, 10). The following year he was elected moderator of the general assembly which met at Edinburgh, and distinguished himself by his 'wise management' of the assembly's business at 'so critical a juncture' (Tweedie, 10). 
Throughout the 1640s Dickson continued to be very active in the affairs of the national kirk. In 1640 he was translated to the newly created professorship of divinity at the University of Glasgow, and was admitted to the collegiate charge of St Mungo's. He appears to have relinquished his ministerial charge after attending one session meeting, but continued to preach frequently at the kirk. During the 1640 general assembly Dickson staunchly defended the radicals' practice of conventicling against the attacks of Henry Guthry, and for his pains was verbally abused by the assembly's conservative members. From 1642 onwards, as a regular member of the general assembly's powerful standing committee, the commission for the public affairs of the kirk, he continued to defend the radicals' use of conventicles and support their calls for the further reformation of the national kirk. In 1643 he was appointed by the general assembly, along with Alexander Henderson and David Calderwood, to draw up a directory for public worship. Two years later he published a learned commentary on 'St Paul's epistles', 'Expositio analytica omnium apostolicarum epistolarum' (1645), and subsequently a second popular commentary, 'A Brief Exposition of the Gospel According to Matthew' (1647). 
In early 1650 Dickson was translated to the chair of divinity at Edinburgh and appointed to the second charge of St Giles. The same year he and James Durham produced their famous 'Sum of Saving Knowledge', an important work espousing federal theology which, while never officially sanctioned by the kirk, was traditionally bound with the Westminster confession of faith and catechisms. In February 1650 Dickson abandoned his allegiance to the kirk regime's radical party and joined with the forces of the 'new moderatism' in calling for the return of Charles II from exile. Following the Cromwellian invasion of Scotland in the summer of 1650 he resisted the radicals' demands for a severe purge of the covenanting army in accordance with the 1646 and 1649 acts of classes, and supported the moderate controlled commission's public resolution to allow royalist malignants and former engagers back into the military. In early 1651 he wrote a number of papers vindicating the commission's role in this matter, including 'No separation of the weill affected from the army of the covenanters'. In May 1651 he supported the commission's second public resolution, which paved the way for parliament's full repeal of the acts of classes. During the ensuing schism at the 1651 general assembly he sided with the 'resolutioners' against his former radical colleagues, the 'protesters'. He was elected moderator of the equally controversial 1652 general assembly, and as outgoing moderator the following year, saw the assembly dissolved by English troops before it could be constituted. Throughout the remainder of the 1650s Dickson remained a zealous resolutioner and, together with his colleagues 'the Ministers of Edinburgh', led the national party during the assembly's suspension. During 1655 and 1656 he was instrumental in the resolutioners reaching an accord with Lord Broghill and the Scottish council, and in 1657 and 1659 he and his colleague Robert Douglas helped to direct the activities of the party's agent, James Sharp, in his sojourns at London. 
At the height of the protester-resolutioner controversy Dickson found time to return to his plan for a series of popular commentaries and published his three-volume 'Brief Explication of the Psalms' (London, 1653-4). He also returned to his academic writings, and, two years later, produced his most important theological work, an exposition of federal theology entitled, 'Therapeutica sacra' (London, 1656). 
After the Restoration, Dickson refused to take the oath of supremacy and in October 1662 was ejected from his university chair and ministerial charge. The hardships which resulted from this loss broke his health, and in December of the same year he fell extremely ill and died in Edinburgh before the month was out. He was buried on 31 December. Among his last spoken words are those recorded by his friend and former radical colleague John Livingstone: 'I have taken all my good deeds, and all my bad deeds, and cast them through each other in a heap before the Lord, and fled from both, and have betaken me to the Lord Jesus Christ, and in him I have sweet peace. (Tweedie, 12)' 



@@@@@


doc= 7615


Dickson, David (1754-1820), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born in the parish of Newlands, Peeblesshire, on 30 March 1754, the son of David Dickson (1709-1780), minister of Newlands, and his wife, Ann Gillon (died 1756). After attending school at West Linton and Peebles grammar school, he studied at Glasgow University from 1766 to 1774 or 1775, and then at Divinity Hall, Edinburgh University. He became assistant to his uncle John Noble, minister of Libberton, and, on Noble's death replaced him in that parish, being ordained on 1 May 1777. On 10 December 1777 he married Christiana Wardrobe (1754/5-1832); they had eight children, including David Dickson (1780-1842), Church of Scotland minister. In 1783 Dickson was translated to Bothkennar in Stirlingshire. In 1795 he was transferred to the chapel in New Street, Edinburgh; in 1799 to Trinity Church; and in 1801 to the New North Church in the same city, where he remained until his death. 
Dickson was a popular minister in all his parishes; his appointments to Libberton and Bothkennar were both the results of petition by parishioners to the parish patrons. He was always conscientious about visiting his parishioners, and was involved in all of Edinburgh's charitable institutions. 
Dickson was a supporter of the popular party in the Church of Scotland. He voted in the general assembly of 1789 against receiving the explanation of the Revd William McGill of Ayr as a satisfactory answer to the heresy with which he was charged. This case was satirized in Robert Burns's poem 'The kirk's alarm'. Dickson was outspoken in his championship of popular party principles and was prepared to face censure by the ecclesiastical courts, as he did in the cases of the settlements of Biggar and Larbert, rather than act against his conscience. During his life he published several separate sermons, as well as a collection in 1818. He also wrote the account of Bothkennar parish for John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account'. He died in Edinburgh on 2 August 1820. He was survived by his wife, who died on 14 March 1832, aged seventy-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 7616


Dickson, David (1780-1842), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 23 February 1780 at Libberton, Lanarkshire, the son of David Dickson (1754-1820), minister of Libberton, and his wife, Christiana, 'nee' Wardrobe (1754/5-1832). He was educated at the parish school of Bothkennar and then at Edinburgh University. In December 1801 he was licensed as a preacher in the Church of Scotland; early in 1802 he was appointed to a chapel at Kilmarnock. In 1803 he was chosen as junior minister of St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh. After the death of the Revd Sir Henry Moncrieff in 1827 he became senior minister, a position he held until his death. On 27 August 1808 he married Janet, daughter of James Jobson of Dundee; they had four sons and five daughters between 1810 and 1825. 
Dickson had a contemporary reputation as a Hebrew scholar, and in 1824 the University of Edinburgh conferred a DD on him. He wrote several articles in the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia' and in the 'Christian Instructor' and other magazines, and published 'The Influence of Learning on Religion' in 1814. He edited the 'Memoir of Miss Woodbury' (1826), the sermons of W. F. Ireland (1829), and the lectures and sermons of G. B. Brand (1841). 
Dickson's sermons were plain and straightforward; besides publishing several separate sermons, he also published a volume of sermons in 1818; 'Discourses, Doctrinal and Practical' appeared posthumously in 1857. Dickson served as secretary for the Scottish Missionary Society for many years. Stout and bespectacled, he was a kindly and peaceable man: although one of the leading figures in the whig evangelical wing of the Church of Scotland, originally associated with Henry Wellwood Moncrieff and Andrew Thomson, he avoided prominence in the controversies preceding the Disruption. He is perhaps better remembered for officiating at the Church of Scotland funeral service for Sir Walter Scott in the house at Abbotsford. Dickson died on 28 July 1842 in Edinburgh, and was buried in St Cuthbert's Church, where a monument by Handyside Ritchie was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 7617


Dickson, Elizabeth (c.1793-1862), philanthropist, was the daughter of Archibald Dalzel (1740-1818), a surgeon and slave merchant, who for many years was employed by the Company of Merchants Trading to Africa, first at Ouidah and from 1791 at Cape Coast Castle, and eventually became governor-in-chief of the company's establishments on the west coast of Africa. In 1788 he was one of five delegates chosen by Liverpool common council and the merchants of the African Committee of Liverpool to give evidence against Sir William Dolben's 'Slave Limitation Bill', then going through parliament. Dalzel was also the author of 'The History of Dahomy' (1793), a book which again reflected his strong anti-abolitionist sentiments. 
It seems likely that Elizabeth Dalzel was born on the west coast of Africa. Little is known about her early education, but while she was still a teenager she visited Algiers, where her brother, Edward, was a merchant and, from 1812, agent and vice-consul for the Portuguese government. It was here that she witnessed the terrible plight of white Christians who had been captured and enslaved by Barbary pirates. In Algiers alone in 1816 there were more than 1500 of these slaves, including men, women, and children from France, Spain, Portugal, and Britain. Others were held in captivity in Tunis and Tripoli. 
Elizabeth was so incensed by what she saw in Algiers that she furnished reports to the British press. These, in turn, attracted the attention of the Knights Liberators and Anti-Piratical Society, founded in 1814 by Admiral Sir William Sidney Smith to agitate for the abolition of the Barbary slave trade. As a result Elizabeth was made a member of the society, 'with the honours and privileges of a lady Foundress' ('GM', new ser., 13, 1862, 112), and presented with a gold medal and a unanimous vote of thanks. 
Through these and other efforts the plight of the Christian slaves in Barbary was brought to the attention of the wider public. Henry Brougham took up the issue in the House of Commons in June 1816, and in August Lord Exmouth led a naval expedition to Algiers that crushed the Algerian slave trade and resulted in the release of 3000 Christian slaves. 
Elizabeth Dalzel was married to John Dickson, probably about 1812; their eldest known child was born in 1815. Dickson was a surgeon in the Royal Navy. Declared unfit for active service in 1839, in May 1845 he was reported to be surgeon to the bashaw of Tripoli, where he and Elizabeth had made their home. Elizabeth died a widow at Tripoli on 30 April 1862, aged about seventy. Her will, executed in February of the previous year, mentions four sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 7618


Dickson, James (1738?-1822), botanist, was born at Kirke House, Traquair, Peeblesshire, allegedly of humble parentage, and began work as an apprentice in the gardens of the earl of Traquair. He then went to London and worked as an improver at the famous nurseries of Jeffrey & Co. in Brompton. He held several posts as a gardener before opening his own shop in Covent Garden in 1772 and establishing a business as nurseryman and seedsman. Dickson could now count among his friends William Forsyth, the king's gardener, Sir Francis Drake, master of the household, and Sir Joseph Banks. With Banks's support he secured in 1781 the contract to maintain the British Museum's garden. Several of Banks's overseas correspondents enclosed with their letters plant material for Dickson. 
The identity of Dickson's first wife is unknown, but after her death he married, on 24 October 1786 at Selkirk, Margaret (1762-1837), sister to his friend the then medical student and later explorer, Mungo Park (1771-1806). Their son, James ('b'. 1800), and daughters Isabella ('b'. 1796) and Jean ('b'. 1805) were baptized at the Scottish presbyterian church in Covent Garden. Before leaving for Africa, Park gave Dickson power of attorney, and in 1806 and 1807, when Park had been missing for some time, Dickson reminded the Treasury of the government's promise to support Park's family. 
In February 1788 Dickson was one of seven who formed the first 'fellows' meeting' of the Linnean Society at Marlborough Coffee House. Sixteen years later, on 7 March 1804, he was one of seven who gathered in the house of bookseller John Hatchard to found 'a society for the improvement of horticulture'. This body developed into the Royal Horticultural Society, with Dickson as one of its vice-presidents. 
Although his daily work concerned cultivated plants and vegetables, Dickson's reputation as a botanist rested on his studies of mosses, begun in 1781, and on grasses and fungi, much of his material being gathered in visits to Scotland between 1793 and 1802. In 1785 he began publication of 'Fasciculus plantarum cryptogamicarum Britanniae', a quarto work in four parts with 400 descriptions. However, Dickson himself was ill-educated, as his correspondence shows, and the Latin texts were prepared by John Zier, a Polish-born London apothecary. Zier died in 1796, before the last volume was completed, and Dickson was then assisted by Robert Brown. Neither man was credited in the work, and Zier's role only came to light in the 1880s with the discovery of some of his manuscripts. Dickson also published 'A Collection of Dried Plants, Named on the Authority of the Linnaean Herbarium' (1789-92), consisting of 425 species, followed by 'Hortus siccus Britannicus' (1793-1802). Few copies of this work survive as many purchasers extracted the specimens to add to their own dried collections. 
From the 1790s Dickson also had a nursery garden at Croydon, Surrey. He lived at Bedford Street, Covent Garden, from 1795 to 1799, thereafter at Broad Green, Croydon, where he died on 14 August 1822. On 22 August he was buried, at his own request, in the churchyard of All Saints, Sanderstead, among the Surrey hills where he was accustomed to gather mosses. The Covent Garden nursery passed to Dickson's nephew, James Anderson (1800-1830), and Margaret Dickson inherited the Croydon house and garden; she was buried at Sanderstead on 17 June 1837, passing the property to their unmarried daughter Jean. Dickson's memory is preserved in the genus 'Dicksonia', consisting chiefly of tree ferns. 


@@@@@


doc= 7619


Dickson, Robert (1804-1875), physician, was born in Dumfries. Educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, and Edinburgh University he graduated MD in 1826 with a thesis on pulmonary consumption. His love of botany began at Edinburgh, leading him to an extensive knowledge and use of vegetable remedies in his medical practice. He became licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1830 and fellow in 1855. In 1834 Dickson married Mary Ann Coope, daughter of a member of the celebrated brewing firm of Ind Coope & Co. In London he looked for a post at a teaching hospital and began by lecturing on botany at St George's Hospital medical school and also at the private medical school in Webb Street, Southwark, established by Edward Grainger in 1819. In 1848 Dickson was disappointed not to receive the support of the medical staff and governors at St George's in his application to be elected physician there and this failure he felt coloured his future practice in London. As a result his clinical appointments were varied and widespread. He was visiting physician to the Camberwell House Lunatic Asylum, physician to the Scottish Hospital, 7 Crane Court, Fleet Street, the British Orphan Asylum in St Mary Axe, and the London branch of the Edinburgh Life Assurance Office (established 1823). In 1855 he assisted his friend Major the Hon. Henry Littleton Powys Keck in founding the Soldiers' Daughters' Home in Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead. Originally intended for destitute war orphans, it later took the daughters of serving officers or retired soldiers. They were admitted from infancy to thirteen and left at the age of sixteen, the able ones being trained to become teachers. Dickson also selected all the shrubs and flowers for the garden. In 1841 he sat on the founding committee of the Brompton Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest. 
Dickson was a fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, and of the Linnean Society, and was a member of the Microscopical Society. In 1837 he gave a lecture to the Institute of British Architects, 'Dry rot and the most effectual means of preventing it'. He wrote popular articles on science in the weekly 'Church of England Magazine' under the heading: 'Sacred philosophy: contributions to the natural theology of the vegetable kingdom', and also many of the articles on materia medica and therapeutics in the 'Penny Cyclopaedia' (1833-43) including one on wine, of which his knowledge was extensive and his cellar well stocked. In the 'Gardeners' Magazine', 1839, it is said that Dickson gave the botanical descriptions in the first volume and part of the second of Maund's 'Botanist' which included a collection of fifty articles, each devoted to one plant with a full description of genus, species, character of genus, where grown, derivation of name, and reference in other journals. Dickson had been stimulated to involve himself in this work by Mr Bentham, the secretary to the Horticultural Society. Dickson was also a patron of popular music and art, and was an early subscriber to the Art Union of London, established in 1837. 
Dickson was also an early and earnest advocate of sanitary reform. When the cholera epidemic broke out in London in 1831 he offered his house for a cholera hospital to show his contempt of others for their fear of contagion. He was one of the original promoters and guarantors of the public baths and wash houses in Goulston Street, Whitechapel. Dickson was an honest, active, learned, and well cultivated gentleman, a friend to any deserving person. In spite of this his practice was small and select, mainly as a result of his failure to be appointed to the clinical staff of St George's Hospital or any other teaching hospital in London. 
Dickson and his wife lived for a time at 14 Finsbury Square but soon moved west to 16 Hertford Street, Mayfair. In 1868, with his retirement from active practice, they moved to Cambridge Lodge, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, where Dickson enjoyed gardening. His wife died shortly before him in July 1875. On the evening of 9 October 1875 he took a hot bath and badly scalded his right hand and both legs. Shock and collapse followed and although he seemed to recover he died on 13 October. Of their six children, Frederick John joined the civil service in Ceylon; Robert Bruce entered the church; Charlotte married C. Major, and three daughters, Frances Barton, Anna Maria Emily, and another whose name is unknown, were unmarried at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 7620


Dickson, Samuel (1802-1869), physician, studied medicine at Edinburgh (where he attached himself to Robert Liston in anatomy and surgery), and at Paris, qualifying at the Edinburgh College of Surgeons in 1825. Having obtained a commission as assistant surgeon in the army, he went to India to join the 30th regiment of foot at Madras. During five years' service in India he acquired a large surgical experience. When cholera broke out there, he bled his patients, and most of them died. After this he began to express doubts about the value of bloodletting. In 1829 he published his 'Report on the Endemic Cholera of his Majesty's 30th Regiment, 1828-29'. On his return home he graduated MD at Glasgow University in 1833, and began private practice, first at Cheltenham, and afterwards in Mayfair, Westminster. 
In 1836 Dickson published 'The Fallacy of the Art of Physic', in which he gave an unqualified condemnation of bloodletting. Arguing both theoretically and from clinical experience, he believed that all remedies acted solely by altering temperature, and that other measures were more effective than bloodletting at doing this. He later called his alternative system 'chrono-thermalism'. Dickson's two main themes, opposition to antiphlogistic measures and the value of chrono-thermalism, were embellished but largely unrevised in most of his subsequent writings. Although he wished his opposition to bloodletting to be his main message, this was largely overlooked by the medical profession. Instead, they condemned Dickson's books for their fiery polemics against organized medicine. 
In Dickson's later works, such as 'Fallacies of the Faculty, with the Principles of the Chrono-Thermal System' (1839), his tirades against the profession became more extreme and more personal. This led to scathing reviews by the medical press. Some of Dickson's other books that cover similar ground include 'The unity of disease analytically and synthetically proved, with facts subversive of the received practice of physic' (1838); 'The Destructive Art of Healing, or, Facts for Families' (1853); 'London Medical Practice and its Shortcomings' (1860); and 'Memorable Events in the Life of a London Physician' (1863). In 1850 Dickson started a monthly journal, 'The Chrono-Thermalist, or, People's Medical Inquirer', which was written by him alone. This ran for twenty-two months. He also produced a poem, 'Physic and its Phases, or, The Rule of Night and the Reign of Wrong' (1857). 
Dickson's 'What Killed Mr Drummond -- the Lead or the Lancet?' (1843) used the accidental shooting of Sir Robert Peel's private secretary, Edward Drummond, as a platform to air Dickson's views against bloodletting. Dickson (calling himself 'an old army surgeon') claimed that 'every successive bleeding brought the unfortunate gentleman nearer the grave' (Bryan, 25). Again, the medical press largely ignored these views, apart from alluding to 'clamours and boastings by ignorant and discreditable charlatans' (ibid.). 
Despite such criticism, Dickson's books did find a definite market: 'The Fallacies' went through five London editions by 1845. Dickson's chief following was in the United States, where the Penn Medical College of Philadelphia was founded to teach Dickson's doctrines. There a staff of ten professors spoke of 'the system for which we are indebted to that mastermind, Samuel Dickson of London' (Abrahams, 176). That Dickson's attacks on the profession were resented is reflected in his career. By 1850 he had practised in London for twelve years, but belonged to no medical society, faculty, or hospital. 
By the early 1850s most patients were being treated with stimulants, rather than antiphlogistic measures. In his later works Dickson claimed that these changes were a direct result of his calls for reform. These claims were ignored. As the practice of bloodletting disappeared, so Dickson's arguments became irrelevant. Later works reflect Dickson's feeling that he had become a victim of a professional conspiracy. Among those he attacked were the queen's attendants and Sir Benjamin Brodie. He also began to argue that other leaders of medicine, such as Paget, were plagiarizing his ideas. 
Dickson was perhaps the first and surely the most vehement British physician of his generation to condemn bloodletting openly and completely. However, his arguments relied too heavily on personal opinion and sweeping generalizations to be the driving force behind changes in therapeutics. Dickson died at his home, 12 Bolton Street, Mayfair, on 12 October 1869, leaving a widow, Eliza. His obituaries reflect the bitterness felt towards him within the medical profession. The 'Medical Times and Gazette' described him as a man of 'moderate ability' with a 'talent for abuse which he exercised to an unlimited extent' ('Medical Times and Gazette', 23 Oct 1869, 502). 
The character of Dr Sampson in Charles Reade's 1863 novel, 'Hard Cash', was based on Dickson. 


@@@@@


doc= 7621


Dickson, William (1744/5-1804), Church of Ireland bishop of Down and Connor, was the son of James Dickson, dean of Down from 1768 until 1787. He was educated at Eton College, where he formed a lifelong friendship with Charles James Fox and several of Fox's nearest friends, one of whom, Lord Robert Spencer, became his executor. Dickson matriculated at Hertford College, Oxford, aged eighteen, on 28 September 1763, graduating BA (1767), MA (1770), and DD by diploma (1784). He was first chaplain to Lord Northington, who became lord lieutenant of Ireland on 3 June 1783, and was promoted to the bishopric of Down and Connor by patent dated 12 December 1784. He was indebted for this rapid promotion to Fox, who informed him that: 'I have ceased to be minister, and you are bishop of Down' (Mant, 2.686). Dickson's appointment made him the official superior of his father, who was still dean of Down. He married a Miss Symmes, and the couple had six children, of whom one son, John, was archdeacon of Down (1796-1814); another, William, was prebendary of Rathsarkan or Rasharkin, in the diocese of Connor (1800-50); and a third, Stephen, held the position of prebendary of Carncastle, in the same diocese (1802-49). A man of notable kindness and politeness, Dickson was admired by churchmen from different parties and faiths. He died at Charles James Fox's house in Arlington Street, London, on 19 September 1804, and was buried in the cemetery of St James's Chapel, Hampstead Road, London, where a monument was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 7622


Dickson, William Gillespie (1823-1876), advocate and legal writer, was born on 9 April 1823, the second son of Henry Gordon Dickson, writer to the signet in Edinburgh. He was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and at Edinburgh University, and destined for the legal profession. On 9 March 1847 he was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates. He practised at the bar of the supreme court of Scotland in Edinburgh for some years. His success as an advocate was moderate, leaving him time, during his first years of practice, to prepare 'A Treatise on the Law of Evidence in Scotland', the first edition of which was published in July 1855. The work had immediate success. A second edition was published in 1864. 
In July 1856 Dickson accepted the office of procureur and advocate-general of Mauritius, where he remained for the next ten years and was greatly liked. In 1867, on account of the failing health of his wife, he obtained leave of absence, and while in Britain in 1868 he was offered by Sheriff Glassford Bell, then sheriff-principal of Lanarkshire, the office of sheriff-substitute in Glasgow. Dickson accepted the post, and on Sheriff Bell's death in 1874 he succeeded him as sheriff-depute (or principal sheriff) of the county. He was installed on 21 January 1874, and in April 1874 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University. 
In Glasgow as in Mauritius Dickson made himself a general favourite, with a reputation for diligence. His reputation rested, however, on his 'Treatise on the Law of Evidence', which was republished by John Skelton (2 vols., 1864) and P. J. Hamilton Gierson (2 vols., 1887); it was for long the standard work. Dickson's amiability and geniality made him popular in private life. He died suddenly on 19 October 1876, and was survived by his wife, Mary Clementina Dickson, formerly Tytler. 


@@@@@


doc= 7623


Dickson, William Steel (1744-1824), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and political radical, was born William Dickson on Christmas day 1744, the eldest son of John Dickson, farmer, and his wife, Jane Steel, at Ballycraigy, in the parish of Carnmoney, co. Antrim. Following the death, on 13 May 1747, of his uncle William Steel he was given the additional name of Steel. Having received a grounding in classics, logic, metaphysics, morals, and natural theology from the Revd Robert White of Templepatrick he matriculated from Glasgow University in 1763. He was received on 'trial' by Templepatrick presbytery on 20 January 1766 and licensed on 8 April 1767. This presbytery had abolished subscription to the Westminster confession and so Dickson was not required to subscribe. Four years later, on 6 March 1771, he was ordained by Killyleagh presbytery at Ballyhalbert and, as this presbytery was also non-subscription, he was not required to sign the confession. Soon after his ordination he 'became an husband and a farmer' (Dickson, 'A Narrative', 7). His wife, Isabella McMinn (died 1819), whom he married on 21 August 1771, came from a 'genteel family, brought up in affluence and liberally educated' (ibid., 7). They had four sons and two daughters. 
Dickson first entered the political arena when he denounced the war with the American colonies as 'unnatural, impolitic and unprincipled' (Dickson, 'A Narrative', 7). During the conflict the government appointed two general fast days. On 13 December 1776 Dickson spoke to his congregation on 'The advantages of national repentance', and on 27 February 1778 on 'The ruinous effects of civil war'; both sermons were published later that year and caused considerable offence to those who sympathized with the British government. For his part Dickson defended his stance: 'If we have, in any instance censured the principle or conduct of the war... [it] has been justified by the general feelings of humanity, and a zealous concern for the common interests of Britain and America' (W. S. Dickson, 'Sermons', 1778, 58). Alexander Gordon has suggested that it was Dickson's radical politics that caused a portion of his congregation to secede and build a new church at Kircubbin in 1777. But a remonstrance presented to the synod of Ulster by commissioners from neighbouring congregations of Greyabbey and Portaferry maintained that the Kircubbin seceders had not separated 'on account of any religious concern, matter of or objection against the conduct or ministry of Mr Dixon' ('Records of the General Synod of Ulster', 2.588). 
When the volunteers were raised with government approval in 1778 to meet a possible French invasion Dickson was an enthusiastic supporter. On 28 March 1779 he delivered a sermon to the Echlinville Company, entitled 'The propriety and advantages of acquiring the knowledge and use of arms in times of public danger'. In his address he deplored the exclusion of Catholics from the movement. The effect of his remarks was 'to offend all the Protestant and Presbyterian bigots in the country' (Dickson, 'A Narrative', 10), but the general tenor of the sermon was approved as promoting the volunteer cause. 
Dickson preached at Portaferry on 14 November 1779 on the occasion of the death of its pastor, the Revd James Armstrong. His address so impressed his hearers that he was invited to fill the vacant pulpit. He accepted, resigned his charge at Ballyhalbert on 1 February 1780, and was installed at Portaferry by Killyleagh presbytery on 6 March. There he opened an academy from which he derived about $100 per annum. In 1781 he was appointed to preach the annual sermon at synod. In 1784 Glasgow University conferred on him a doctorate in divinity. 
When Robert Stewart, later first marquess of Londonderry, stood for re-election to parliament as MP for County Down in 1783 Dickson devoted a considerable amount of time, labour, and purse to further Stewart's cause against the marquess of Downshire's interest, but in vain. However, at the 1790 parliamentary election Stewart's son Robert, the future Lord Castlereagh, was successful, and again Dickson was prominent in the election campaign. His political commitment to the Stewarts, who were independent whigs, stemmed from their championing of the dissenting interest in the county. 
The Society of United Irishmen was founded at Belfast in October 1791. Dickson took the 'test' early in December but apparently did not attend any further meetings, although he later admitted that he was often in their company. He was present at the volunteer rally in Belfast on 14 July 1792 to mark the third anniversary of the storming of the Bastille. Aided by two ministerial colleagues, Thomas Ledlie Birch of Saintfield and Sinclaire Kelburn of Belfast, he strongly challenged a proposal calling for the gradual emancipation of Catholics; consequently a proposal for total and immediate emancipation was overwhelmingly adopted. In the same year he published a small pamphlet, 'Psalmody an Address to the Presbyterian Congregations of the Synod of Ulster', issued with the approbation of nine presbyteries. 
At a volunteer convention at Dungannon, co. Tyrone, on 15 and 16 February 1793 Dickson supported radical resolutions such as that calling for Catholic emancipation. So impressive was his oratory that he was invited to preach in the local meeting-house on the Sunday afterwards. A crowded church heard him expound Joseph's advice to his brethren: 'See that ye fall not out by the way' ('Genesis' 45: 24). A few weeks later he published his celebrated 'Three Sermons on the Subject of Scripture Politics', in which he argued forcibly for the need and enforcement of reform and emancipation on biblical grounds. In June he was elected moderator of synod, which congratulated their Roman Catholic countrymen on their regaining of the franchise under the 'Catholic Relief Act' of April 1793. His stance on reform, however, caused many families in the Portaferry congregation to withdraw from his ministry. Spurred on by the dissension Dickson used every effort to regain the confidence of the disaffected; the church committee marked his success with a presentation 'for the services he had rendered to the congregation' (Portaferry congregation MSS, 24 Oct 1793). 
Little is known about Dickson's activities during 1794 and 1795 and most of 1796. There was some civil unrest among the Presbyterians and Catholics in the upper Ards district which he sought to resolve, only to find that charges of sedition were directed against him for his pains. His detractors contended that he occupied these years preaching inflammable and seditious sermons. In the autumn of 1796 the government, alarmed by rumours that the French were about to invade Ireland, arrested a number of leading northern United Irishmen. Several members of Dickson's congregation were detained and efforts were made to obtain evidence of his involvement in the United Irishmen's plot to overthrow the government. One of those arrested, a man named Carr, was offered $1000 to provide information leading to Dickson's conviction, but his testimony was judged unreliable. 
In the spring of 1797 Dickson was summoned by the defence to attend the co. Antrim assizes at Carrickfergus to impeach the character of the chief prosecution witness, Bell (or Belle) Martin (originally from Portaferry), at the trial of a United Irishman. He attended a meeting of co. Down magistrates and gentlemen at Ballynahinch in May and endorsed the resolution 'not to relax in our exertions by any legal and constitutional means to obtain a full and adequate representation of the people of Ireland without regard to differences of religious opinions' ('Belfast News-Letter', 15 May 1797). At the summer assizes in Downpatrick, Dickson -- along with J. Philpot Curran -- persuaded the attorney-general to release the Portaferry prisoners. In the latter part of the year illness confined him to the manse. 
In March-April 1798, the year of the Irish rising, Dickson visited Scotland, and on return his baggage was searched at Portaferry but no incriminating documents were found. In May he was active, attending to sacramental duties in parts of co. Down and visiting friends in Belfast. It has been alleged that he agreed to accept the post of adjutant-general for the United Irishmen of co. Down around this time. He was arrested, on the orders of Lord Annesley, at Ballynahinch on 5 June, some days before the outbreak of the rising in co. Down, and was taken to Lisburn before being transferred to Belfast, where he was detained in various prisons until 25 March 1799. Having been put on board a ship he and other important United Irish prisoners sailed for Scotland and were conveyed overland to Fort George, near Inverness, where they arrived on 9 April. During Dickson's incarceration government officials in Belfast made strenuous efforts to obtain sufficient evidence to indict him. Two United Irishmen-turned-informers were offered inducements to confirm that he was appointed adjutant-general by the co. Down colonels in May 1798 but they refused to testify in open court. Later Dickson was offered his liberty on condition of his emigrating to a foreign country. He insisted on being brought to court and tried, but to no avail. Having been confined for over three years he was taken back to Belfast and released on 13 January 1802. 
At first Dickson contemplated emigrating to America but, aware that this would be taken as evidence of his guilt, he decided to remain. Efforts to have him installed as minister at Donegore, co. Antrim, failed, as it was implied that payment of the 'regium donum' would not be granted in his case because of his alleged connection to the rising. He attended the meetings of synod in 1802 and, as he did not have a congregation, he was received as an honorary member. He was installed in the newly formed congregation of Second Keady, co. Armagh, on 24 March 1803. As his installation service did not involve signing the confession some members of Tyrone presbytery moved that he should not be admitted unless he subscribed. Since this was not the majority view of presbytery he was accordingly received. His stipend was fixed at $50 without the 'regium donum' and so his congregation petitioned synod for a share of the 'regium donum' but this was rejected in 1804 and again in 1805. In response Dickson submitted a memorial requiring synod to state explicitly whether or not it had been referred to in a minute of 1799 that he was 'implicated in treasonable or seditious practices' in 1798 ('Records of the General Synod of Ulster', 3.302). His memorial was summarily dismissed, at which he 'entreated the Moderator to hear him one word, [and] laying his hand upon his breast, he pronounced with great emphasis, 'Farewell for ever'!, and left the house' (Black, 8). He absented himself from synod in 1806 but returned in 1807 and remained until 1810, without making any reference to his complaint. 
At synod in 1811 Dickson obtained permission to use synodical documents for the forthcoming publication of his narrative of his life. He took part in the speeches at a Catholic dinner in Dublin on 9 May and was probably the first Presbyterian parson ever to address a wholly Catholic gathering. He also spoke at a Catholic meeting in Armagh on 9 September; on his way home to Keady he was waylaid and assaulted. His 'Narrative', published in May 1812, caused a major storm at synod. The members, led by the Revd Dr Robert Black, declared that the work 'contained a number of gross misstatements and misrepresentations, highly injurious to the reputation of the ministers of this body' and demanded a public retraction ('Records of the General Synod of Ulster', 3.383). Dickson refused to put his signature to an apology prepared by synod. The immediate reaction was to suspend him 'ab officio', which was later amended to postponement for a year to allow him to retract. Dickson used the time to publish what he facetiously termed 'Retractations', which was an attack on Black's criticism of him. This led to a reappraisal of Dickson's situation by synod in 1813. The Revd William Porter and the Revd Henry Montgomery questioned whether the minute of 1799 had been accurate, and it was agreed that the words as applied to Dickson had been inaccurately used. However, an apology from him regarding certain statements made in his 'Narrative' relative to the synod was demanded. Dickson later handed in a paper purporting to be an apology but this was refused as inadequate and synod decided to dismiss the whole subject. His last political appearance was at a meeting of Catholics at Newry on 19 October 1813. He did not intend to address the gathering but responded to a 'general cry from every quarter' to speak. He did so 'amidst expressions of the most unbounded applause' ('Proceedings at public meetings', 400, 403). 
Increasing infirmity caused Dickson to resign from Second Keady on 27 June 1815. He retired to Belfast and was forced to depend on the support of friends to provide him with accommodation and a weekly allowance. In 1817 he published a book of fifteen sermons, which did not alleviate his financial situation. His wife died on 15 July 1819, and a small annuity ceased with her death. As a member of the synod's committee Dickson attended the public examinations of theological students from 1821 to 1824. He died in Belfast on 27 December 1824 and was buried in a pauper's grave in Clifton Street cemetery, at which the Revd W. D. H. McEwen delivered a panegyric to a small group of mourners. 


@@@@@


doc= 7624


Dicuil (fl. c.795-825), scholar and teacher, of Irish descent, went to the continent some time between 795 and 814 as one of an international constellation of Anglo-Saxon, Visigothic, Italian, and Irish scholars attracted to the court of Charlemagne ('r'. 768-814). The palatine scholars provided impetus and direction to the Carolingian reform of education and learning. 
Dicuil wrote in prose and in poetry for an emperor and for schoolboys. His talents ranged over Latin grammar, astronomy, calendar reckoning, and geography. A careful schoolmaster, he often outlined the contents of his works, recorded the dates of their composition, and noted his own literary output. While his works lack style and polish, they are remarkable for their originality and keen critical sense. 
In 814, probably while teaching at the palace school, Dicuil began work on his 'Liber de astronomia et computo', which he dedicated in four yearly instalments to the emperor Louis the Pious ('r'. 814-40). The work, which alternates prose with poetry, enabled Dicuil to display his erudition and virtuosity in two fields, metrics and time reckoning (computus). The extensive use of poetry served to honour the emperor and to encourage his continued patronage. Dicuil's verses also served a mnemonic function when they conveyed difficult computistical rules. Verse could also be used to entertain. 'In these verses I playfully spin puzzles' ('Astronomical treatise', ed. Esposito, 392), Dicuil announced when he showed the emperor how the four verse endings of four hexameters could be manipulated to produce seventy-two hexameters. He repeated the ingenious exercise in the second book of his treatise where he worked the permutation to produce 166 verses based on the same limited vocabulary. His model was Optatianus Porfyrius, court poet to Constantine the Great. Porfyrian verse, especially acrostic and figure poems, enjoyed great vogue among Carolingian court poets. 
Computus, one of the few disciplines specifically emphasized in Carolingian educational reform legislation, also attracted considerable attention among scholars and royal patrons. Proper observance of the liturgical cycle required delicate calculations between solar and lunar calendar systems and knowledge of astronomical phenomena. The variety of calculations and rules inherited from earlier centuries and cultures proved difficult for Carolingian computists when they tried to devise an efficient and uniform method of time reckoning. Charlemagne was deeply interested in calendar and astronomical problems and in 809 charged a committee of computus experts to resolve disagreements. In 811, Dungal, another Irish scholar, replied with a wide-ranging letter to Charlemagne's request for information on solar eclipses. Dicuil's 'Liber de astronomia et computo' is a product of this intense interest in astronomical and calendar issues. 
Dicuil's treatise had no impact in the ninth century. The author himself acknowledged that even Louis the Pious turned a deaf ear to its metrical passages and did not reward the scholar for his efforts. Dicuil's misfortune was to write on computus for the wrong emperor; Louis did not share his father's enthusiasm for the subject. Nevertheless, Dicuil's treatise remains significant on its own merits. Unlike the more widely copied 'De computo' of Hrabanus Maurus ('c'.780-856), Dicuil's work is that of an experienced computist thinking through the theoretical problems that vexed his colleagues. Hrabanus Maurus's compilation provided a polished, general overview of its subject, better fitted for non-specialists than Dicuil's technical and terse, but more critical and innovative, treatise. Dicuil's computus opens with a set of calculations for determining that if one begins the year in April, April will be the first month of the year 814. Modern commentators have not appreciated the force of Dicuil's example. Medieval calendars were lunisolar. Since the lunar year is approximately eleven days shorter than the solar year, the lunar and solar months diverge after three years. To correct this discrepancy, computists inserted a periodic 'saltus lunae' ('moon's leap') into their calculations. Dicuil's formula, based on the pedagogically astute strategy of proceeding from the familiar and the particular (the example of the current year) to general principles, attempted to provide a simple calculation to reconcile easily the lunar and solar cycles. Although Dicuil drew on Pliny and Isidore of Seville, he critically appraised his sources. He refrained from discussing the effect of the moon on the ocean since, writing far from the ocean's shores, he could not verify the sources. He challenged received tradition regarding the south polar star and planetary orbits. When his own ingenuity failed him, he encouraged his readers to improve upon the unsatisfactory explanations found in his sources and expressed his readiness to follow his colleagues' solutions to obscure questions rather than those of earlier authorities. 
Dicuil's critical spirit also animated his second major work, the 'De mensura orbis terrae', completed in 825. Its nine chapters treat in order Europe, Asia, Africa, Egypt, and Ethiopia, the longitude and latitude of the earth, rivers, islands, the latitude and longitude of the Tyrrhenian Sea, and the six principal mountains. Dicuil began his book, the first medieval geography, with an evaluation of the merits of his authorities. He preferred the Theodosian 'Divisio orbis' to Pliny the Elder's more ancient and authoritative 'Naturalis historia' because he believed that the envoys of the Roman emperor Theodosius II ('r'. 408-50) actually measured the distances they recorded. Dicuil also noted that scribal mistakes sometimes falsified the distances reported in manuscripts of Pliny's work. In these cases, he left spaces blank which readers with access to better manuscripts could complete with correct numbers. Dicuil's attitude toward texts prefigures that of the noted bibliophile, Abbot Lupus of Ferrieres ('c'.805- 'c'.862). Although much of Dicuil's text derives from his sources, he approached these not as a mere compiler, but as a scholar. He challenged Solinus's statement that elephants could not lie down on the basis of the evidence provided by Abul Abaz, the elephant Caliph Harun-al-Rashid presented to Charlemagne. He reported at length the experiences of Irish monks who had visited remote islands in the north Atlantic and used their information again to challenge Solinus. He described his own voyages among the islands north of Britain: 'I have never found these islands mentioned in the authorities' (vii, 15, ed. Tierney and Bieler). The sources likewise were silent on the canal that joined the Nile to the Red Sea. Young Dicuil, however, had overheard Fidelis (a pilgrim and presumably a fellow Irishman) report on the canal and other Egyptian wonders to Suibne, Dicuil's teacher. In addition to preferring the authority of contemporaries over traditional textual sources, Dicuil maintained a healthy scepticism towards claims made for exotic places. He doubted Solinus's account of the eating habits of the people who dwell on the Ganges, as well as his description of the crocodile. He questioned Isidore of Seville's figures for the circumference of Sicily. He again took Solinus to task for describing Mount Atlas both as snow-covered and as rising above the clouds. Experience indicates that snow falls from clouds, thus the mountain's snow-covered peaks cannot rise above the clouds. 
Dicuil noted in the preface to the 'De mensura orbis terrae' that he had just completed an 'Epistula de quaestionibus decem artis grammaticae'. This work is lost, but three other minor works emanating from Dicuil's teaching survive: the 'De prima syllaba' was also written in 825, as a guide to Latin prosody for 'little boys'; his 'Epistula censuum' (unpublished), composed in 818, begins with 225 verses on weights and measures and includes a glossary of homonyms and synonyms; and the twenty-seven hexameters he wrote to accompany the text of Priscian's 'Partitiones duodecim versuum Aeneidos principalium', a fundamental Carolingian schoolbook, summarized the contents of Priscian's work for Dicuil's pupils. It is not known when Dicuil died. 


@@@@@


doc= 7625


Digby, Everard (d. 1605), Church of England clergyman and author, was a scion of the Digby family of Stoke Dry, Rutland, although not of its main branch as historians once believed. In later life he described his county of origin as Rutland, but he was possibly a son of John Digby (died 1556) of Welby, Leicestershire, brought up by his cousins of Stoke Dry after his father's death. He first appears for certain in 1567 when he matriculated as a sizar (poor scholar) of St John's College, Cambridge, gaining a college scholarship in 1570 and a fellowship in 1574. He graduated BA in 1571, MA in 1574, and BD in 1581, was appointed as principal lecturer in the college in 1584, and was elected a senior fellow in 1585. After ordination as deacon in 1576, and probably as priest, he acquired parochial benefices which he held, until 1588, with his college post. These included the rectories of Lyndon, Rutland (1581-2), Glaston, Rutland (1582-1605), Hamstall Ridware, Staffordshire (1583-6 and 1590-1601), and Orton Longueville, Huntingdonshire (1593-1605). 
In 1579 Digby published in Latin 'Theoria analytica', an outline of knowledge and proposals for a method of research drawn from ancient philosophers, notably Aristotle, and from continental scholars of the sixteenth century, including Jacques Charpentier, Jacob Degen, and Nicolas de Grouchy. In it Digby attacked the methodology of Peter Ramus, the French protestant logician who had recently been killed in the St Bartholomew's day massacre. This provoked William Temple, fellow of King's College, Cambridge, to publish a defence of Ramus under the pseudonym 'Francisci Mildapetti -- Navarrensi ad Everardum Digbeium Anglum' (1580) -- to which Digby replied with 'Admonitioni F. Mildapetti responsio' (1580), dedicated to Sir Christopher Hatton. A rejoinder was published by Temple under his own name, 'Pro Mildapetti de unica methodo' (1580). The controversy had a religious as well as a philosophical significance: Ramus was a hero to protestants, and Temple represented Digby as a follower of medieval Catholic scholasticism. 
Digby's next and most original publication was 'De arte natandi' (1587), a Latin treatise on swimming. The Swiss writer Nicholas Wynman had written a dialogue on the subject, 'Colymbetes' (1538), which Digby's treatise resembled in discussing the history and value of the art, but he surpassed Wynman by systematically describing a large number of strokes, feats, and manoeuvres. The text was illustrated by forty-three detailed woodcuts, making the treatise also a landmark in the use of pictures to convey techniques. An abridgement in English by Christopher Middleton, entitled 'A Short Introduction for to Learne to Swimme', appeared in 1595 with the same woodcuts, and Digby's work was copied by other writers on swimming in the seventeenth century, notably Melchisedech Thevenot, whose 'L'art de nager' (Paris, 1696) drew extensively on 'De arte natandi' and reissued its illustrations in updated form. Since Thevenot's work circulated in both France and England until the late eighteenth century, Digby may be said to have influenced the understanding and teaching of swimming for the next 200 years. 
In the autumn of 1587 Digby became involved in a disagreement about the payment of college dues. He refused to pay in the manner demanded, and was declared to have forfeited his fellowship by the master of St John's, William Whitaker, in January 1588. This dispute, too, involved religious prejudices. Whitaker was a strong protestant and suspected Digby of Roman Catholic sympathies, alleging that he had 'inveighed against Calvinists', 'never preach[ed] any sermons more than of necessity he must', and 'delivered nothing almost but magical, suspicious and popish conceits of angels' (Lake, 172). He also accused him of being insubordinate, coarse, and over-indulgent in outdoor pursuits. Contemptuously refuting the charges, and affirming his support for the oath of supremacy, the articles of religion, and the 'Book of Common Prayer', Digby appealed to the college visitors, Lord Burghley and Archbishop Whitgift, who restored him in May 1588, but Whitaker enlisted the help of the earl of Leicester and Digby vacated his fellowship on 29 September (it is not clear whether voluntarily or by compulsion). He left Cambridge and finally lived at Orton Longueville. In 1590 he published his last book, 'Everard Digbie his Dissuasive' 'from taking away the livings and goods of the Church', a work in English lamenting the ruin of religious buildings, the misappropriation of church endowments, and the avarice to acquire what remained in the hands of bishops and cathedrals. The work emits a sense of bitterness and exile. Digby died in 1605, at about the time of the Gunpowder Plot, which involved his namesake and kinsman Sir Everard Digby of Stoke Dry, but the cause and place of his death and burial are not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 7626


Digby, Sir Everard (c.1578-1606), conspirator, was the son of Everard Digby (died 1592) and Maria Digby ('nee' Neale) of Stoke Dry, Rutland. Maria Digby was daughter and coheir of Francis Neale of Keythorpe, Leicestershire. John Gerard the Jesuit says in his account of the Gunpowder Plot that Digby, upon the early death of his Catholic father, was brought up 'at the University by his guardians, as other young gentlemen use to be', but his name does not appear in any surviving record for Oxford or Cambridge ('Catholics under James I', 88). Gerard, in a glowing portrait, also describes Digby as handsome, 6 feet tall, a complete sportsman and gentleman, skilled at riding and at arms, an accomplished musician and generous patron (ibid., 87-90). In 1596 he married Mary ('c'.1581-1653), only daughter of William Mulsho of Gayhurst or Gotehurst, Buckinghamshire. He was appointed to a household office at the court of Queen Elizabeth, and by his own admission 'was a pencioner to Quene Elizabeth aboute six yeres, and tooke the othe belonging to the place of a pencioner and no other' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/135). The historian of the Elizabethan gentleman pensioners, however, explains that although Digby was associated with the band he was never formally a pensioner (Tighe, 358). Towards the end of the century he made the acquaintance of Father Gerard, who effected the conversion of both husband and wife. Nevertheless Digby was knighted by the new king, James I, at Belvoir Castle on 24 April 1603, during his journey south to London. Four days afterwards he appears as a gentleman pensioner extraordinary at the queen's funeral. 
Little more than two years later, however, Digby's friendship for Robert Catesby, and the latter's need of money to underpin his enterprise, resulted in the admission of Digby to the Gunpowder Plot, early in October 1605, as the two men rode together from Harrowden to Gothurst. He was one of the last to be recruited, and the motive was clearly financial. Sworn to secrecy before, as he insisted, he was told the details of Catesby's secret, he scrupled against the sweeping nature of the design, but took his friend's bland guarantees at face value. 'Assure your selfe', said Catesby, 'that such of the nobilitie as are worth the saving shalbe preserved and yet knowe not of the matter'. No one they regarded as a friend, he went on, would suffer in the explosion (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/135). 
That was sufficient. There can be no doubt that Digby entered into the conspiracy heart and soul. On 4 November he travelled to Dunchurch, the planned rendezvous in Northamptonshire, sending his hounds on ahead -- the lure of a day's hunting drew together many of the local Catholic gentry. After supper, however, the arrival of Catesby, Thomas Percy, and other confederates brought news of Guy Fawkes's arrest, and the frustration of all their hopes. Catesby tried a final, desperate lie -- the king, he said, had indeed died, now was the time to rise on behalf of the Catholic cause. But no one believed him, and the panic-stricken majority, wishing no part in treason, fled into the night. Digby's brother George was among those at Dunchurch on 5 November, and like so many others he declined to join in an open rebellion against the crown. 
Buoyed by desperation, Sir Everard still felt that there was a chance of success; he remained with Catesby, Percy, and their associates, some eighty in number, all told. At eleven that same night the rebels raided Warwick Castle, seizing fresh horses from the stables. But thereafter the tale is a dismal succession of desertions and ultimate disillusion. At Hewell Grange, plundering weapons, the conspirators tried to recruit curious bystanders, announcing that they were 'for God and the countrie'. The response underlined the futility of their cause. 'One of the countrimen sett his backe to the wall and sett his staff before him saying he was for King James for whome he would live and die and would not goe against him' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/119). Digby afterwards recalled how the hopelessness of their predicament gradually dawned on the rebel band. At his examination on 2 December he said 'that they in the whole when they had most were not above fiftie horse. And that not one man cam in to take there parte thoughe they expected for verie many' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/135). 
Perhaps the keenest blow, so far as Digby himself was concerned, was the denunciation of their actions by senior Jesuits. He wrote to the superior, Henry Garnett, on 6 November, asking his pardon for these rash actions and, optimistically, seeking Garnett's support. But Garnett wrote back from Coughton saying that he 'marvelled they would enter into so wicked actions, and not be ruled by the advice of frends' (Nicholls, 63). Digby's wife was also at Coughton at the time, and she came into the room while Garnett and his fellow Jesuit Oswald Tesimond were discussing Digby's letter with the messenger, Thomas Bate. Her reaction is recorded simply and movingly in a letter from Garnett, smuggled out of the Tower of London the following year: 'what did shee? Alas what but cry' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/241). Some of Garnett's colleagues were slower to condemn the rebels. Tesimond visited the plotters at Huddington that day, with Garnett's knowledge, while another priest, Father Hammond, comforted his co-religionists in their extremity, saying mass at Huddington on 7 November. 
At daybreak on Friday 8 November, shortly before his colleagues made their final stand against the sheriff of Worcestershire's men at Holbeach House, Digby rode off with two servants, by his own account to find further reinforcements. Reading between the lines this amounted to desertion, or common sense woefully delayed. No one now truly believed that new recruits were to be found. After trying to outrun the hue and cry he was eventually arrested near Halesowen, at about nine in the morning. Gerard tells how Digby tried to hide in a wood, waiting for nightfall, and how he was tracked to a dry ditch by the pursuing forces, following his horse's hoofmarks. 'Here he is, here he is', cried the excited posse. Digby rode out to meet them. 'Here he is indeed, what then?' he answered. At first he hoped to break through them, drawing on superior horsemanship, but recognizing at last the overwhelming odds he surrendered, in order, says Gerard: 'to have some time before his death for his better preparation, and withal out of a desire (as it afterwards appeared) to have done some service to the Catholic cause by word, sith he saw he could not do it by the sword. ('Catholics under James I', 111)' He was taken to London and lodged in the Tower, where to begin with he tried to insist that he had first heard of the plot on 5 November. But the investigators had Guy Fawkes's and Thomas Winter's evidence to hand, and confronted with this Digby admitted prior knowledge. 
Digby remained a prisoner while all the evidence was sifted carefully by the privy council and its agents. A series of letters to his family was smuggled out of the Tower, preserved by his sons as precious relics, and rediscovered among the papers of his eldest child only in 1675. Written over the two and a half months between arrest and trial they prove that he was never, despite many lurid stories spread down the years, subjected to torture, although in one letter he fancied that torture had been 'in a fashion, offered' to him (Barlow, 248). The truth is that after the initial panic and confusion in the days immediately after 5 November the prisoners were well looked after in the Tower, to the extent that they wondered at the motives behind their treatment. Digby's letters make painful reading, for they show an idealistic, poetic, faithful young man distracted by the dreadful fate he has brought upon himself and his family. He tries to defend Gerard and other Jesuits, attempts to excuse the savagery of Catesby's design, but also offers in one bizarre letter to secure the services of a priest who might visit Rome and obtain from the pope guarantees that any Catholic setting out 'to disturbe the kinges quiet and hapie raygne' will be excommunicated. He mixes the offer with threats, warning that Catholics will not stand quietly by and let James treat them as Elizabeth had done. Not surprisingly the earl of Salisbury rejected the proposal out of hand (TNA: PRO, SP 14/17/10; Barlow, 245). 
Meanwhile, Digby's wife was facing up to the vindictiveness of local authorities in Buckinghamshire. She petitioned Salisbury for relief from the depredations of the sheriff, who had permitted her house to be ransacked. The lord chief baron of the exchequer, Sir Thomas Fleming, supported her, censuring the sheriff's actions in uncompromising terms, and the council ordered measures for her relief, somewhat ineffectively implemented. 
Digby was arraigned with seven others in Westminster Hall on 27 January 1606. Because his treason was first committed in Northamptonshire he was tried upon a separate indictment at the end of the day. Alone among the eight accused he pleaded guilty. At the same time he insisted that the king had reneged upon promises of toleration for Catholics, and mitigated his offence by maintaining that affection for Catesby and love of the Catholic cause had prompted his actions. The earls of Northampton and Salisbury refuted these statements at some length. His arguments entirely failed to sway the court, but Digby's gallantry nevertheless impressed many in the packed hall. He sought a gentleman's death by the axe, begged mercy from the king for his young family, and left the court with a grand flourish, bowing to the lords commissioners and asking their forgiveness. 'God forgive you,' they replied, 'and we do' ('State trials', 2.194). 
No place of execution was specified at the trial, and the matter may have been given further consideration over the next forty-eight hours. However, on 30 January Digby and his co-conspirators Robert Winter, John Grant, and Thomas Bate were drawn on traitors' hurdles through streets lined with guards recruited from among the householders of London. Their destination was St Paul's Churchyard, where a gallows had been erected. All four were hanged, drawn, and quartered. The first to suffer, Digby met his death bravely. 
Everard and Mary Digby had two sons. Digby took an affecting farewell of his children in his last surviving letter, dated 23 January. Sir Kenelm Digby was the elder. The younger boy, John Digby, knighted in 1635, died while fighting for his king in 1645. 


@@@@@


doc= 7627


Digby, George, second earl of Bristol (1612-1677), politician, was the eldest known son of John Digby, first earl of Bristol (1580-1653), and his wife, Beatrice or Beatrix (1574?-1658), daughter of Charles Walcot of Walcot, Shropshire, and widow of Sir John Dyve of Bromham, Bedfordshire. He was baptized at Madrid, where his father was ambassador to the Spanish court, on 5 November 1612; his birth may therefore be presumed to have taken place there shortly before. 
Spain remained Digby's home for eleven years, and he grew up fluent in its language. His first public appearance was at the age of twelve, when he presented a petition to the House of Commons on behalf of his father, who had been recalled from his embassy in disgrace and committed to the Tower. His bearing and eloquence much impressed the members, and the elder Digby was released soon after. George Digby matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 15 August 1626, and proceeded MA on 31 August 1636. The delay was not due to any lack of aptitude for learning, for he gained a reputation at Oxford, and in the cultivated circle which his father gathered at his country seat of Sherborne in Dorset, as an assiduous scholar. His two greatest enthusiasms in this period were for astrology and theology, and in 1638-9 he exchanged a series of letters with his Roman Catholic kinsman Sir Kenelm Digby (son of the executed gunpowder plotter Everard Digby), advancing the claims of the Church of England against that of Rome; these were to be published in 1651. After achieving his degree he travelled in France, and completed his learning of that language in turn. Observers thought him a youth of unusual brilliance as well as cherubic blond good looks. 
During a visit to London in 1634 Digby was slighted by a court favourite, William Crofts, and challenged him to a duel with swords, which he won. The action was technically treasonable, having taken place within the precincts of Whitehall, and Digby took the blame for it and underwent a term in the Fleet prison. This was recognized at the time as compounding an alienation from the government which had been natural in his family since his father's disgrace, and it cannot be accidental that when he married, in 1635 or 1636, it was into a noble house associated with sustained opposition to the royal policies of the decade. His bride was Lady Anne Russell (died 1697), second daughter of Francis, fourth earl of Bedford, and they produced two sons and two daughters. 
With these experiences and associations it is hardly surprising that Digby was in the forefront of the attacks which brought down the personnel and measures of Charles I's personal rule. He was elected to represent Dorset in both the Short and the Long parliaments of 1640, and distinguished himself near the opening of the latter, on 10 November, by presenting to the Commons a petition from his county against royal misgovernment and proposing that a remonstrance against it should be made by the house to the king. The following day he became one of the managers of the impeachment of the earl of Strafford, describing him as 'that grand Apostate to the Commonwealth' ('Journal', ed. Notestein, 25-9). By February 1641 he had also become one of the foremost proponents of the bill for triennial parliaments. It is true that on the 8th of that month he was also one of the most determined opponents of the proposals for root and branch reform of the church and showed dislike of the Scots who were encouraging it, but this stance was still consistent with that of his erstwhile allies. 
Digby parted company with the latter spectacularly on 21 April, when he became the most celebrated opponent of Strafford's attainder in the Commons. The move probably reflected the inclinations of his father and father-in-law, and was intended to prevent the complete estrangement of the king from the reform party, but it left him in a small minority. On 1 June his speech was published in an attempt to rally support for Charles during another period of tension. Whether or not he countenanced this action it infuriated most of the Commons, and on 9 June the king rescued him from probable committal by elevating him to the Lords as Baron Digby of Sherborne. The MPs were left to order the public burning of his speech on 13 July and to request the king not to give him any office thereafter; Charles promptly appointed him ambassador to France. In this manner the partnership between the two men, to their mutual political disadvantage, was formed. 
Digby did not proceed to France but became one of the most extreme of the king's defenders in the Lords. He encouraged Charles to bring moderate MPs into the government but was also almost certainly his principal adviser in the rash courses which finally lost the king control of London and the Commons: the appointment of the notorious Thomas Lunsford to govern the Tower in December and the attempted arrest of the five members on 4 January 1642. Following the latter debacle Digby and Lunsford went to meet disbanded officers at Kingston upon Thames, and the Commons assumed (with what truth will never be known) that they were planning a military coup. Parliament ordered the Surrey militia to disperse their men and Digby was summoned to explain himself to the Lords. Instead, using a pass from the king, he sailed on 16 January from Deal to Middleburg in the Dutch Netherlands. There he wrote letters to his friends and the queen encouraging Charles to avoid compromise in his now open breach with parliament. It was the interception of these that caused the Commons to decree his impeachment on 26 February. He had become the stereotypical evil royal counsellor. 
All that can be said with any certainty about Digby's activities in the summer of 1642, as civil war commenced, is that at some point he rejoined the king. There are tales of secret journeys between the Netherlands and the royal court, on one of which he was captured by a parliamentarian warship and only escaped by first pretending to be a seasick Frenchman and then talking the governor of Hull, Sir John Hotham, into assisting him. Whatever the truth of these he was with the royal army by the time that it went on campaign, and commanding a horse regiment which he had raised for it. As such he displayed exemplary courage, charging with his regiment at Edgehill on 23 October, proposing and participating in the taking of Marlborough on 5 December, and being wounded in the thigh at the attempted storming of Lichfield on 20 April 1643. In this initial period of the war the king carefully failed to give him any employment as a minister or adviser, doubtless as a gesture of reassurance to moderate and hostile opinion. By the autumn, however, parliament's continued refusal to make peace had hardened the king's mood. The death of Lord Falkland at the battle of Newbury on 20 September left vacant one of the two posts of secretary of state and a seat on the privy council, and eight days later Digby was appointed to both. This promotion of one of the men in the kingdom least acceptable to parliament was a sign of the hardening of Charles's attitude towards his enemies. 
Digby proved to be an industrious and conscientious administrator, and the clarity of his thought and handwriting remains a boon to the historian as it was to contemporaries. Nor did he immediately become part of any ultra-royalist bloc among Charles's counsellors. His main allies in the winter of 1643-4 were two civilians, Sir Edward Hyde and Lord Culpeper, moderates whom he had helped to bring into government in 1641, and two soldiers, lords Wilmot and Percy, who had been associated with plots to use armed force against parliament in that year. He and Culpeper became Charles's most trusted civilian advisers and accompanied him on campaign in 1644. There they fell out with Wilmot and Percy, as the former became jealous of them, and were obliged in self-defence to work upon the king's own growing suspicion of Wilmot, and achieve the dismissal of both him and Percy in August. 
Digby now badly needed an ally in the royal army and found one in Prince Rupert, with whom he had formerly been at enmity, but whom he now wooed by supporting the appointment of the prince to command the army in November. In February Culpeper and Hyde were removed to duties in the west, with Digby's connivance, leaving the latter the main civilian adviser of the king. His position, however, depended upon his partnership with Rupert, and this broke down as the prince turned against him just as Wilmot had done. There was clearly something about Digby which soldiers found instinctually unpleasant and untrustworthy. It may have been simply that he had become the courtier-politician 'par excellence', whose mode of dealing with opponents was to behave impeccably to their faces while undermining their credit with the king. It was of a piece with this behaviour that he repeatedly attempted to win over enemy garrisons by suborning their officers -- a tactic employed, with total lack of success, at Gloucester, Aylesbury, and Abingdon. 
The breach with Rupert proved catastrophic for their cause. First it encouraged Digby to urge Charles into committing the royal army to battle at Naseby on 14 June 1645, an action undertaken against the advice of Rupert and which resulted in its destruction. This turned the prince into his implacable enemy, a feud which took on ideological dimensions as Rupert advised the king to make peace while Digby counselled continued resistance. On 14 September he convinced Charles that his nephew had become untrustworthy and caused the dismissal of Rupert and his supporters from their commands. The furious prince set out to plead his case to the king in person, at Newark. Digby, desperate to avoid the encounter, persuaded Charles on 13 October to commission him as lieutenant-general in England north of the Trent and give him his remaining cavalry, with which he proposed to break through to Scotland. The odds against this expedition were probably too great from the start, and Digby's force was defeated at Sherburn, Yorkshire, on the 15th and disintegrated on the banks of the Solway six days later. Its commander's only achievement was to evade death or capture himself and reach safety in Ireland. 
Digby now formed the new project of persuading the prince of Wales to become the figurehead for a royalist counter-attack to be launched from Ireland, and in April 1646 followed the track of the prince's own flight into exile, to Jersey. Finding the boy's councillors, who included Hyde and Culpeper, opposed to the venture, he went on to France and concocted a plan with Cardinal Mazarin to bring the prince to the French court and persuade Charles to make concessions to the Scots which would turn them against parliament on his behalf. This scheme got further than the last, only to backfire. The king joined the Scots but would not make the intended concessions, and so became their prisoner. The prince crossed to France and became stranded there, at the court of his mother, together with Digby and other exiles. The latter included Rupert, who would have duelled with Digby had not the queen prevented it, and Wilmot, who did cross swords with him and was wounded and disarmed as effectively as Crofts had been long before. 
By 1648 Digby had managed to lose the confidence of the queen in turn, and entered the French royal army as a volunteer, serving with such courage and energy that by 1651 he had become commander of the French forces in Normandy, with the rank of lieutenant-general. In that year the exiled Charles II reappeared in France and Digby somehow talked his way back into his favour and that of Hyde, being awarded the Garter in January 1653 and a place on the new privy council in April; on 6 January he had succeeded his father as earl of Bristol. He remained in the French service until the summer of 1656, when he somehow managed to make a mortal enemy of Mazarin and had to leave the country. Most opportunely Charles II had just settled in the Southern Netherlands as an ally of Spain, and Bristol moved straight to Brussels and used all his charm and linguistic ability to befriend the governor of the province. He then did good service to Charles by pleading his case, being rewarded on 1 January 1657 with his old posts of secretary of state and privy councillor. In March he delighted the Spanish by talking the French garrison of St Ghislain into defecting, and was given the soldiers as his own regiment. He remained one of the inner ring of the exiled court, though subordinate to Hyde, until January 1659, when he committed political suicide by making a personal conversion to Roman Catholicism. As he never reversed it when its political disadvantages became obvious and lasting it must have been wholly sincere, but it represented an acute embarrassment for Charles at a time when he was trying to distance himself from identification with Catholicism. Bristol was dismissed from all his offices. At the same time he ruined his credit with the Spanish by a piece of indiscretion which leaked military secrets to the French, and lost his regiment. In the autumn he accompanied Charles on a mission to Spain as an interpreter, but was abandoned as his master hurried back north on the first lap of the journey which was to end in his restoration. 
Bristol followed him, and was restored to his own lands and titles along with other former royalists, but remained barred from office because of his religion and his track record. He became instead one of the ornaments of the court, noted for the recklessness of his gambling and the extravagance of his entertainments. He specially became identified with the interests of his fellow Catholics and of Spain, and with the enemies of his old colleague Hyde, who was still chief royal minister and had become earl of Clarendon; in particular, he was associated with the king's mistress, the countess of Castlemaine. Doubtless jealousy would have propelled these moves in any case, but he had a particular reason to dislike Clarendon. On 31 October 1643, when he was a new royal minister, he had been appointed to the honorary post of high steward of Oxford University, which had been left to him, in theory, upon his dismissal from office in 1659. After the Restoration he claimed it in earnest, only to be dispossessed of it by Clarendon, in the latter's new dignity of chancellor of the university, upon the grounds of Bristol's Catholicism. It must have rankled also that in 1661 Bristol had almost persuaded Charles to marry the daughter of an Italian client of Spain, and actually set out to negotiate the match, only for Clarendon to lead the lobby which persuaded the king into a Portuguese marriage alliance instead. 
By 1663 Bristol's fortunes again seemed in the ascendant; the king was disappointed with his Portuguese wife and devoted to Castlemaine, while Bristol had acquired a potent ally in the new secretary of state, Lord Arlington. Clarendon seemed to be increasingly isolated and out of favour. Once again, however, Bristol spoiled his chances, with a risky agreement with an ambitious MP, Sir Richard Temple, to manage the House of Commons in the king's interest. When news of it leaked, and the Commons reacted with fury, Bristol was abandoned by all his friends, and had to protest his innocence to the MPs on 1 July. Humiliated, he turned on Clarendon and accused him of high treason before the House of Lords on the 10th. The hearing lasted four days, and represented the final disaster of Bristol's political career. His charges were soon revealed to be so baseless that they wasted the time of the house, and a furious Charles ordered his arrest as a troublemaker. Bristol went into hiding and had to remain there for years. He was able to emerge only in October 1667, when Clarendon finally fell out with the king, and his enemy was able to obtain both forgiveness and revenge by helping to draw up a fresh impeachment of the earl, this time with royal support. This restored him to public life but not to favour. In 1673 he courted popularity by supporting the 'Test Act', which formally disabled Catholics like himself from office, but this was his last notable appearance. He died at his house in Chelsea on 20 March 1677, and his wife had him buried in the Russell family chapel at Chenies, Buckinghamshire, four days later. 
George Digby remains one of the foremost English examples of irresponsible brilliance. He possessed apparent exceptional talent as a politician, administrator, courtier, soldier, and scholar, and failed as all of those, a pattern which may be related to three defects. One was an inability to keep friends: during the civil war he already saw himself as 'single against all the world' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/510/74). Another was his constant tendency to choose the most flamboyant, sensational, and risky course out of every political and military problem, without the skills needed to steer such courses to success. The third was an ingrained carelessness in planning actions and observing discretion. He was and remained remorselessly self-destructive, with a proportionate tendency to destroy all those, including monarchs, whom he carried along with him. In this sense, he was one of English history's most dangerous men. 


@@@@@


doc= 7628


Digby, John, first earl of Bristol (1580-1653), diplomat and politician, was born in February 1580, the fourth and youngest son of Sir George Digby (died 1586), of Coleshill, Warwickshire, and of Abigail Heveningham of Ketteringham, Norfolk. He became a fellow-commoner of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1595, and was created an MA on 30 August 1605. He was also admitted to the Inner Temple in 1598. In November 1605 Lord Harrington, who had charge of Princess Elizabeth, sent Digby to inform the king that the gunpowder plotters' plan to seize Elizabeth had failed. James took a liking to Digby and made him a gentleman of the privy chamber and a carver. Digby was knighted on 16 March 1607, and on 31 May 1609 he married Beatrice or Beatrix (1574?-1658), daughter of Charles Walcot of Walcot in Shropshire, and widow of Sir John Dyve of Bromham in Bedfordshire. 
In October 1610 Digby was appointed resident ambassador in Madrid, and arrived there in June 1611. He succeeded in obtaining concessions for English merchants trading with Spain, but James I's hopes of a marriage alliance between Prince Henry and the infanta Anne, daughter of Philip III, were dashed when Digby learned that she was already engaged to Louis XIII of France. Then, in November 1612, Prince Henry died. In 1613 Digby uncovered details of the pensions that the Spanish court had paid to prominent figures in England, and early the following year he returned to London to present this information to James. 
Later in 1614 James decided to propose a match between Prince Charles and Philip III's youngest daughter, the infanta Maria, and Digby was sent back to Madrid to pursue the negotiations. Despite his private conviction that the prince should marry a protestant, Digby wished to see a good understanding between the protestant and Catholic powers of Europe, and was determined to promote the negotiations to the best of his ability. However, early in 1616 he was again summoned home, following the fall of the earl of Somerset, to give evidence of the disgraced favourite's links with Spain. He arrived in March, and candidly informed James that he thought it unwise to proceed further in the marriage negotiations given that the king of Spain could not dispose of his daughter's hand without papal consent. It is likely that James appreciated Digby's frankness, and further preferment quickly followed: on 3 April he was made vice-chamberlain of the royal household and was sworn of the privy council. 
In May 1617 James nevertheless dispatched Digby back to Madrid to open formal marriage negotiations, and he left in August. Digby once again threw himself into the task and tried to obtain the best terms possible, especially with regard to the bride's portion, which James wished to fix at not less than $500,000. Matters such as the arrangements for the infanta's future household were successfully resolved, but the issue of liberty of conscience for English Catholics was reserved for James's own decision. In April 1618 Digby was able to return to England with the news that the infanta's portion would be $600,000. He was rewarded on 25 November 1618 by being created Baron Digby of Sherborne. However, James refused to sanction liberty of conscience for English Catholics, and the marriage negotiation was suspended. 
Early in 1620 James asked Digby for advice concerning the crisis that had arisen on the continent following the election of the king's son-in-law, Frederick, elector palatine, to the Bohemian throne. Digby apparently advocated the search for an understanding with Spain while also making preparations for the defence of the palatinate. In June 1620 he accompanied Buckingham on a visit to the Spanish ambassador, Gondomar, at which the possible partition of the Dutch republic between England and Spain was discussed. Digby's hostility towards the Dutch did not, however, imply subservience to Spain, and in March 1621, following Frederick's expulsion from Bohemia, Digby was sent to Brussels to urge the Archduke Albert to mediate a cessation of arms. 
On 23 May, shortly after his return to England, Digby was instructed to embark on a mission to the emperor, Ferdinand II. He was authorized to make peace on the basis that Frederick would abandon his claims to Bohemia while in return Ferdinand would not seek to punish him. Digby reached Vienna on 4 July and initially the talks appeared to go well. However, by the end of September the duke of Bavaria had occupied the upper palatinate in the emperor's name, and Frederick's forces were obliged to retreat to the lower palatinate. Digby left Vienna soon afterwards, and on his way home visited Frederick at Heidelberg in mid-October. By the end of the month he was back in England, and his return prompted James to reconvene parliament on 20 November. The next day Digby addressed both houses: he 'narrated his embassage and the state of the Lower Palatinate' ('Buccleuch MSS', 222) and urged parliament to prepare forces for the relief of the lower palatinate, costing $900,000. However, before this proposal could be fully debated, James quarrelled with the House of Commons over the issue of free speech and promptly dissolved the parliament. This seriously weakened England's bargaining position by ensuring that threats of military force could not be backed up in practice. 
In February 1622 Digby was again instructed to return to Spain, where Philip IV had succeeded his father the previous year. Digby resumed the marriage negotiations that had been in abeyance since 1618, and on 15 September was rewarded with the earldom of Bristol. By January 1623 the marriage articles were sufficiently far advanced, except the one relating to toleration for English Catholics, for James to feel able to accept them. Bristol was unable to secure a Spanish promise that the palatinate would be restored, and he was convinced that the goodwill of Spain afforded the best chance of restitution. 
On 7 March 1623 Prince Charles and the marquess of Buckingham arrived at Bristol's residence at Madrid, thereby taking negotiations out of Bristol's hands. He appears to have deeply offended the prince by believing a rumour that Charles had come with the purpose of declaring himself a Catholic, and by expressing his willingness to collude in this. During the course of the visit Bristol persisted in his attempts to maintain good relations with Spain, and he further alienated Charles by supporting a scheme for educating the elector palatine's eldest son in Vienna. He also incurred Buckingham's lasting enmity when, on 29 August, he wrote to James describing the 'high... dislike' that Philip IV and his ministers felt towards the newly created duke ('Miscellaneous State Papers, 1501-1726', 1.477). By the time they left for home in September Buckingham and Charles were thoroughly hostile to Spain, and believed that Bristol had been far too easily taken in by vague assurances from Philip and his chief minister, Olivares. 
When Charles departed from Madrid he left Bristol with a proxy authorizing him to appear in the marriage ceremony on his behalf, but shortly afterwards he ordered him not to use this without further instructions. Bristol continued to try to avert the breach with Spain on which Charles and Buckingham were now set. In October James insisted that the marriage would have to be postponed until satisfactory assurances were received regarding the restitution of the palatinate, and Bristol only conveyed this ultimatum to Olivares with great reluctance. By this time Bristol's wish to preserve relations with Spain diverged so strongly from the prevailing mood at the English court that on 30 December he was recalled. He formally took his leave of Philip IV on 29 January 1624. Before he left Olivares offered him a blank piece of paper on which he invited Bristol to write down anything that he wished in the way of favours or protection as a mark of the king's gratitude. Bristol courteously declined, saying that he had acted out of loyalty to the English crown and 'would rather offer himself to the slaughter in England than be duke of Infantado in Spain' (S. R. Gardiner, 'History of England from the Accession of James I to the Outbreak of the Civil War, 1603-1642', 10 vols., 1883-4, 5.165). 
Meanwhile Buckingham was deeply fearful that if Bristol had an audience with James he would reveal damaging information about the duke's conduct in Madrid. He therefore ensured that when Bristol landed at Dover he received instructions to 'retyer yourselfe to your house or lodgeing' ('Defence', v). Bristol went, under virtual house arrest, to his home in St Giles' Fields, but he refused to admit any error on his part and declared his willingness to stand trial before parliament. Buckingham successfully resisted this request. Instead, Bristol was sent a list of twenty interrogatories relating to his conduct to which he replied in detail, demonstrating that he had at no time acted without James's prior knowledge or subsequent approval. However, though Bristol was granted permission to return to Sherborne in July, he was neither brought to trial nor set at liberty, despite his repeated pleas to the king and to Buckingham. 
On the accession of Charles I in March 1625 Bristol was removed from the privy council, and in June Charles instructed him not to attend parliament, his writ of summons notwithstanding. In January 1626 Bristol asked to attend Charles's coronation. The king retaliated by accusing Bristol of trying to make him convert to Catholicism while in Madrid. Bristol reiterated his willingness to stand trial, but Charles then denied him a writ of summons to the parliament that assembled in February 1626. On 22 March Bristol submitted a petition to the House of Lords, requesting either to be summoned to parliament or to be placed on trial. The Lords' committee on privileges upheld his right to take his seat, whereupon Charles grudgingly issued a writ of summons but intimated, via a letter from Lord Keeper Coventry, that 'your Lordship's personal attendance is to be forborn' ('Defence', xxxv). Bristol replied, sardonically, that the monarch's writ of summons must take precedence over the lord keeper's letter, and promptly journeyed to Westminster. 
Having taken his seat in the Lords, Bristol indicated his wish to bring charges against Buckingham. Charles immediately instructed the attorney-general to charge Bristol with high treason, and on 1 May he was brought to the bar of the House of Lords. Bristol at once presented twelve specific charges against Buckingham, including that of bringing Prince Charles to Spain with the purpose of converting him to Catholicism, and of conspiring with the Spanish ambassador, Gondomar, to this end. The Lords ordered that consideration of the king's charges against Bristol and of Bristol's charges against Buckingham should proceed simultaneously. However, these proceedings were brought to an abrupt halt by the king's dissolution of parliament in June. Bristol was then sent to the Tower, pending prosecution before the Star Chamber. Shortly afterwards he fell ill and Charles and Buckingham, fearing the damaging revelations that a trial was likely to bring, used the earl's illness as an excuse to postpone the case indefinitely. In September 1626, probably through the earl of Pembroke's intervention, Bristol was allowed to return to his home at Sherborne, but he remained under house arrest. 
When Charles's third parliament met in March 1628 the Lords insisted that Bristol be set at liberty and restored to his place in the upper house. In the debates over the king's powers of imprisonment without cause shown, which ultimately gave rise to the petition of right, Bristol attempted to secure a compromise and argued that certain royal discretionary powers were necessary for use in emergencies. As he reportedly put it on 22 April: 'As Christ upon the Sabbath healed' (thus breaking Jewish law for the greater good), 'so the prerogative is to be preserved for the preservation of the whole' ('Proceedings in Parliament, 1628', 5.327). The Lords accepted this proposal, but it was rejected by the Commons. When the Commons sent the petition to the Lords, Bristol again sought a compromise. However, on 20 May he came out against the idea of incorporating a clause saving the royal prerogative, and suggested instead that such a saving should be verbal (ibid., 483-4). He allegedly regarded the king's first answer (2 June) as 'rather a waiving of the petition than any way satisfactory to it' (ibid., 598), and demanded a fuller and better answer. 
Following the end of the 1628 session Bristol regained a certain amount of favour, and payment of his ambassador's pension, which had fallen into arrears, was resumed. However, for most of Charles I's personal rule he seems to have lived quietly at Sherborne, and a fuller rehabilitation -- for which he gave the credit to the earl of Holland -- did not occur until August 1637. He apparently played no further part in public affairs until the spring of 1639, when Charles summoned the peers to assist his expedition against the Scots. In May Bristol vainly tried to dissuade the king from advancing against Berwick with such a poorly prepared army. The following month he warned Charles that most peers wished to see parliament recalled, and was influential in persuading the king to pursue the talks with the Scots that led to the pacification of Berwick. After the dissolution of the Short Parliament he advocated the calling of another parliament, though he refused to have anything to do with the twelve peers who in August 1640 petitioned the king to recall parliament. He played a prominent part in the great council of peers which Charles summoned to meet at York on 24 September. In particular, he moved for -- and was appointed to -- a committee of sixteen peers to conduct negotiations with the Scots, and these talks occupied most of his time over the next few months. 
Unsympathetic towards the Scots, and deeply resentful of their interference in English affairs, Bristol's main hope seems to have been that Charles would cut his losses by reaching a settlement with them as rapidly as possible. In a speech on 12 January 1641 he attached particular blame to 'the improvidence and evill counsells of certaine badd instruments, who had reduced his roiall Majestie and this kingdome to these straits', a veiled reference to Strafford ('The Journal of Sir Simonds D'Ewes from the Beginning of the Long Parliament to the Opening of the Trial of the Earl of Strafford', ed. W. Notestein, 1923, 247). 
Bristol's rehabilitation was finally complete when, on 19 February 1641, he was again appointed a privy councillor, apparently in recognition of his services in the negotiations with the Scots. The following spring, despite his earlier implied criticism of Strafford, he attempted to reach a compromise whereby the earl would be deprived of his offices but his life spared. This stance incurred the wrath of the anti-Straffordian crowds outside the palace of Westminster, and on 3 May some members of the mob denounced Bristol as 'an apostate from the cause of Christ, and our mortall enemie' ('A Briefe and Perfect Relation, of the Answeres and Replies of Thomas Earle of Strafford', 1647, 85). He was excused from voting on Strafford's attainder on the grounds that he had been a witness in the earl's trial. Charles clearly approved of his conduct, and when the king departed for Scotland the following August he made Bristol a gentleman of the bedchamber. 
Bristol's identification with the emerging royalist party became even clearer after parliament reassembled after the autumn recess. On 17 December he was responsible for an amendment to a Commons declaration against any toleration for Catholics, to the effect that 'no religion shall be tolerated in His Majesty's dominions but what is or shall be established by laws of this kingdom' ('JHL', 4.480). Like many other royalists he combined anti-Scottish sentiments with an attachment to episcopacy and the prayer book. By this time he had increasingly become a target for the more radical members of the Commons. On 27 December Walter Long named him an 'evill counsellor' in the Commons, and the house ordered that Charles's letter of 1626 accusing Bristol of trying to lure him away from protestantism be produced ('The Journal of Sir Simonds D'Ewes from the Final Recess of the Long Parliament to the Withdrawal of King Charles from London', ed. W. H. Coates, 1942, 352-3). The following day Oliver Cromwell moved that the Commons join with the Lords in requesting the king that Bristol 'bee removed from his Counsell' on the grounds that he had 'perswaded his Majestie to putt' the northern army 'into a posture' against parliament the previous spring (ibid., 358). There appears to be no surviving evidence either to support or to refute this statement and several other members, including Bristol's close friend Sir John Strangways, succeeded in thwarting the motion. 
On 28 March 1642 the Lords committed Bristol to the Tower of London for his failure to disclose that he had been given a copy of the Kentish petition, which the house regarded as 'scandalous, dangerous and tending to sedition' ('JHL', 4.678). He was released on 19 April, and spoke twice in the Lords advocating an accommodation, though on 27 May he disowned the printing of a speech bearing his name. He joined the king shortly afterwards, and he became widely perceived among parliamentarians as a hardliner who wished to perpetuate the conflict, a perception that may have been fuelled by his earlier association with Spain. In October 1642 the houses exempted Bristol from a general amnesty and stopped his pension. The Oxford propositions of February 1643 demanded that he be removed from the king's counsels, and that he and Lord Herbert of Raglan be 'restrained from coming within the verge of the Court, and that they may not bear any office, or have any employments concerning the State or commonwealth' (S. R. Gardiner, ed., 'Constitutional Documents of the Puritan Revolution, 1625-1660', 3rd edn, 1906, 264). 
Between November 1643 and January 1644 Bristol became involved in secret talks with Thomas Ogle, a prisoner in Winchester House. The aim appears to have been to develop an anti-presbyterian coalition between royalists and Independents, and the terms that Ogle devised included a plan for a modified episcopacy that bore some resemblance to that later embodied in 'The Heads of Proposals' in 1647 (Gardiner). However, Ogle indicated that the parliamentarian garrison of Aylesbury would be betrayed as proof of the serious intentions behind the proposals, and this intelligence quickly reached the committee of safety. The 'plot' collapsed and Ogle fled abroad early in January 1644. 
Bristol's involvement in these secret talks appears only to have reinforced the houses' negative perception of him, and in the Uxbridge propositions (November 1644) he was listed among fifty-eight royalists who could 'expect no pardon' (S. R. Gardiner, ed., 'Constitutional Documents of the Puritan Revolution, 1625-1660', 3rd edn, 1906, 278). This image of him was probably reinforced by the fact that his eldest son, George Digby, Lord Digby, who was also listed among those exempted from pardon, was known to be one of the more hardline royalists. Although father and son do not appear to have been closely politically aligned during the civil war, Digby's association with Henrietta Maria and his swashbuckling military career may well have coloured views of his father. However, Bristol's reputation among those at Westminster as a hardline advocate of the prolongation of the war appears to have been misplaced. Following the Oxford propositions he withdrew from the king's court at Oxford in order to remove a cause of difference between the two sides, and he went first to his house at Sherborne and then in the spring of 1644 to Exeter, where he remained until that city capitulated to Fairfax on 13 April 1646. The following month he submitted a petition to the Lords asking to be allowed to compound for his estate by paying a composition fine, and to remain in England. The houses rejected this request, and on 11 July ordered that he receive a pass to go overseas. He left for France shortly afterwards and spent the rest of his life there. He died in Paris on 21 January 1653 and was buried in the protestant cemetery in the city. His widow lived on until 12 September 1658, and was buried at Sherborne. 
In 1647, at Caen, Bristol published 'An Apologie of John Lord Digby Earl of Bristoll' in which he repudiated the 'many most unjust and untrue calumnies and aspersions which have been cast upon me both in print and otherwise' ('Apologie', 5). Bristol then robustly defended his reasons for adhering to the king, insisting that he was bound to do so 'by the law of God, by the doctrine and practice of all Christian Churches, and in all times, by many oathes, by the laws of the kingdome, by my natural allegiance as a subject, and by gratitude and fidelity, as a sworn servant, both to his father and himself. (ibid., 12)' Using both common law arguments and scriptural texts, he denied the lawfulness of resistance and argued that to take up arms against the king was contrary to all 'duties of religion, of oaths, of loyalty, of laws, of gratitude, and moral honesty' (ibid., 61-2). This 'Apologie' was reprinted in London in 1660. 
The overall impression of Bristol's career is of a man who gave much important public service and did not always gain the rewards or recognition that he merited. He surely did not deserve the intense hostility he received from Buckingham in the 1620s, or the parliamentarians in the 1640s. Yet his own temperament may have been partly to blame for his fate. His integrity and high principles at times verged on self-righteousness and prickliness, and helped to make him something of a loner, both politically and personally. His character was well summed up by Clarendon, who wrote that 'though he was a man of great parts, and a wise man, yet he had been for the most part single, and by himself, in business, which he managed with good sufficiency, and had lived little in consort; so that in Council he was passionate and supercilious, and did not bear contradictions without much passion, and was too voluminous a discourser; so that he was not considered there with much respect. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.532)' Sir Philip Warwick offered a similar assessment: 'Well accomplished, and of great parts natural and acquired,... but he had likewise so much of a romantick spirit, and of such superfined politics... so as these eminences made him never prosperous either to himself or his master. (P. Warwick, 'Memoires of the Reigne of King Charles', 1701, 1.279)' 



@@@@@


doc= 7629


Digby, Sir Kenelm (1603-1665), natural philosopher and courtier, was born on 11 July 1603 at Gayhurst, Buckinghamshire, the elder son of Sir Everard Digby (c.1578-1606), later executed for involvement in the Gunpowder Plot, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1581-1653), only daughter and heir of William Mulsho. The Digbys were an ancient gentry family. They had held the manor of Tilton, Leicestershire, since the thirteenth century and the manor of Stoke Dry, Rutland, since the fifteenth. However, Sir Everard's bride brought him the richer manor of Gayhurst and there Kenelm and his brother, Sir John Digby (1605-1645), spent their childhood. 
Mary Digby did not remarry after her husband's execution. She remained a steadfast Roman Catholic and lived at Gayhurst with a companion, Dorothy Habington, devoting herself to religion and good works. Wisely, Sir Everard had entailed his manors of Stoke Dry and Tilton on Kenelm while Gayhurst was in the hands of trustees, so all were secure from permanent appropriation. Under the 'Recusancy Act' of 1606 Mary's two children were required to be brought up by relatives who conformed to the established church but the act was seldom enforced with full rigour. The boys were mainly taught by Jesuits, probably including John Percy, though Kenelm, as the heir, is likely to have had instruction from Richard Napier (known to Kenelm as Parson Sandy), rector of Great Linford near by and a learned medical man and astrologer. Napier remained a good friend and probably started Kenelm's interest in medicine and astrology. 
Digby had as a childhood playmate the beautiful Venetia (1600-1633), daughter of Sir Edward Stanley and his wife, Lady Lucy Percy, daughter of the Roman Catholic Thomas Percy, seventh earl of Northumberland ['see 'Digby, Venetia, Lady Digby]. When his wife died young, Sir Edward left Venetia and her sister Frances to be brought up by a devout Roman Catholic not far from Gayhurst. Later, when he inherited Eynsham Abbey, near Oxford, the girls went to live with their father and the relationship was broken off. In 1617-18 Digby visited Spain with his distant Anglican cousin, Sir John Digby, who had been appointed ambassador. When he was fifteen, then not an unusual age for entry, he entered Gloucester Hall, Oxford, to the care of a humanist don with Roman Catholic sympathies, Thomas Allen, a well-known manuscript collector, mathematician, and astrologer and one of Sir Thomas Bodley's main collaborators in founding the Bodleian Library. Allen had been a friend of Sir Everard's stepfather, Sampson Erdeswicke, the Roman Catholic antiquary, and at Gloucester Hall a Roman Catholic might attend the university without damaging his faith because there was no chapel and conformity in religion was not enforced. The tall, handsome, and precocious Digby impressed Allen: he was to call him, according to John Aubrey, 'the Mirandola of his age' after the Renaissance prince and philosopher Pico della Mirandola ('Brief Lives', 1.225). 
Digby left Gloucester Hall in 1619 for the grand tour: his mother hoped in this way to end the infatuation he already felt for Venetia, a girl of high birth but small fortune. They had met again and fallen in love at a house party held by a friend of Mary Digby; later Kenelm gave Venetia a diamond ring in exchange for a long lock of her chestnut hair. Before he left London for Paris on 31 May 1620 Digby sent a manuscript of elections (horoscopes) to Parson Sandy for safe keeping. An outbreak of plague drove him from Paris to Angers where the queen mother, Marie de' Medici, was living with her court. Here, according to 'Loose Fantasies' (his early private memoirs), he attended a court masque, where a lady-in-waiting whom he had met in Paris invited him to dance and he caught the eye of the middle-aged queen. The next day a messenger brought him to the lady's lodgings and escorted him to a bedchamber where to his amazement the queen declared herself desperately in love and implored him to go to bed with her. Appalled, Digby made his politest excuses, said his heart was committed elsewhere, and contrived nimbly to escape. The queen at the time was at war with her young son, Louis XIII; there was fighting around Angers and many were killed. Digby gave out that he was dead and fled south, taking ship to Leghorn; he was established at Florence by November 1620. Digby wrote to Venetia to reassure her but his first letter miscarried and the rest were suppressed by his mother. During two years in Florence he survived an attack of smallpox, became fluent in Italian, and collected books and manuscripts. He also gave three addresses to the Accademia dei Filomati in Siena; a master-of-arms dedicated a military textbook to him; and an aged Carmelite gave him the recipe for his famous 'powder of sympathy'. 
Digby's cousin John Digby, now earl of Bristol, hearing that he was alive after all, summoned him to Spain to join the negotiations for the marriage of Charles, prince of Wales, to the Spanish infanta. Digby arrived in Madrid in the spring of 1623. Here he and his kinsman Lewis Dvye were involved in a dangerous affray and, at the suggestion of Henry Rich, Lord Kensington, he paid court to Donna Anna Maria Manrique, sister of the duke of Maqueda. He also found time to collect books and make some lifelong acquaintances, including the courtiers Toby Matthew and Walter Montagu and the letter-writer James Howell. More important, he made an excellent impression not only on the earl of Bristol but also on Prince Charles. The marriage negotiations failed but on returning to England, Digby was knighted on 28 October 1623 and became a gentleman of the privy chamber to the prince. 
Living alone in London, grief-stricken by the news of Digby's death, and unaware of his survival, Venetia had embarked on a disordered life of pleasure. According to John Aubrey, she became the mistress of Sir Edmund Wyld and Richard, third earl of Dorset, who had one or more children with her and settled on her an annuity of $500. But Wyld was dead by April 1620 and Dorset's will of 1624 shows no sign of a settlement or children. 'Loose Fantasies' suggests that both Dorset and his brother Edward Sackville pursued Venetia, the latter imploring her to 'marry' him, but since Sackville had been married since 1612 Digby here as elsewhere retouched the true picture. In any event Sackville began pursuing another beauty and Venetia broke off the 'engagement'. The lovers made contact on Digby's return to court but only gradually became reconciled. Venetia had been overjoyed to hear that he was alive but the lack of letters had convinced her that she had lost his affection, while gossip about Venetia's relations with Sackville, who had succeeded his brother as the fourth earl in March 1624, made Digby chary of marrying her. However, in the summer of 1624, while Mary Digby was abroad, Venetia arranged to stay with her sister Frances, who had married John Fortescue and lived at Linslade, near Gayhurst. Digby and Venetia went riding together and became deeply enamoured. In December Digby accompanied the duke of Buckingham to Paris to make arrangements for the marriage of Prince Charles to Princess Henrietta Maria and Venetia sacrificed most of her jewellery and plate to pay for his expenses. This so moved Digby that he determined to overrule his mother's objections. Probably in January 1625 the lovers were secretly married. Digby had come of age, and into a rich patrimony, in July 1624, but Venetia's father was disposing of some estates to Venetia and since he was quarrelling with Mary Digby it seemed prudent not to reveal the marriage until the will was made. The couple's eldest son, Kenelm, was born on 6 October 1625. 
Charles had ascended the throne the previous March and Lord Bristol advised Digby to advance himself in the king's service. Since England was at war with France and Spain he now determined on a privateering voyage to the Mediterranean to attack and plunder French and Spanish ships and eventually to seize French ships in the rich Venetian port of Iskenderun (Scanderoon) at the junction of Asia Minor and Syria. Despite his wife's tearful protests and the duke of Buckingham's opposition, Digby finally obtained letters of marque on 13 December 1627. He commissioned two ships, the 'Eagle' (400 tons) and the 'George and Elizabeth' (250 tons), with as principal officers Captain Milborne, an experienced seaman, and Sir Edward Stradling, a Glamorgan gentleman. Before Digby set sail on 6 January Venetia gave birth to a second son, John, and Digby told her to make their marriage public. 
Digby kept a day-to-day log of the voyage. He passed Gibraltar on the night of 19 January but his crews sickened in a severe epidemic. After an action with seven Spanish ships, on 15 February he reached Algiers, where he stayed six weeks, buying the freedom of forty to fifty captive English sailors to replace his dead crewmen. He took several prizes before passing the Strait of Messina. Digby suppressed a mutiny in April and visited Zante to buy provisions in May, arriving off Iskenderun on 10 June. He attacked the following day, cannonading the Venetian galleasses guarding the port because they fired on him. After a three-hour battle, according to Digby, the Venetian admiral asked for a ceasefire. This he agreed provided he could take the French vessels in port. In the event there was no plunder since the French crews had taken their goods ashore and, at the English vice-consul's plea, he did not damage the ships for fear of a heavy fine on the English merchants. Digby lost no men killed, according to his account, while the Venetians, according to theirs, lost one man killed and two wounded. On 16 June Digby left, exchanging salutes with the Venetians. Subsequently the English merchants in the Levant complained to the privy council and the Venetian ambassador lodged a protest in London. 
On the return journey, on 16 August 1628 Digby reached the island of Milos, where he stayed a week and wrote out 'Loose Fantasies'. Elsewhere in the Cyclades he collected antiquities and then careened his ships and bought provisions at Zante. He captured two prizes off Sardinia on 10 December but allowed the crews, with two ships, to go to Leghorn. He passed Gibraltar on 1 January and anchored at Woolwich on 2 February 1629. The court of admiralty then had to consider claims brought by foreign merchants against him. There was little trouble over his French and Spanish prizes (he had already disposed of most of the ships) but all Italian captures, including a ship, were returned to their owners. Meanwhile the English merchants of Aleppo were severely fined. Nevertheless the audacious voyage, with its booty and the battle at Iskenderun, made Digby a hero at court. 
Digby could now launch his career on a favourable tide, just as Lord Bristol had recommended. As Edward, earl of Clarendon, was later to recall: 'he was a man of a very extraordinary person and presence, which drew the eyes of all men upon him, which were more fixed by a wonderful graceful behaviour, a flowing courtesy and civility, and such a volubility of language that surprised and delighted. (G. D. Boyle, 'Characters of the Great Rebellion', 1889, 294)' In 1630 Digby found employment with the Navy Board and in October was made a junior principal officer of the navy. The Venetian ambassador reported on 27 December that 'moved by ambition, he has recently abandoned the Catholic Faith and become a Protestant' ('CSP Venice', '1629-32'). John Aubrey said more accurately that he 'received the sacrament in the chapel at Whitehall and professed the Protestant religion' ('Brief Lives', 1.227). Appointment to office made the oaths of supremacy and allegiance virtually inescapable and Digby was following the example of other crypto-Catholic courtiers. He became friendly with Sir John Coke, one of the secretaries of state, and various further appointments came his way, including membership of the Council for New England in 1632. 
At this time the Digby family lived in Charterhouse Yard in fashionable Clerkenwell while a new home was built in Aldwych Close, Holborn, from the profits of privateering. Digby commissioned his friend Van Dyck to paint a portrait of Venetia, his two sons, Kenelm and John, and himself in 1632; other portraits followed and Peter Oliver painted miniatures. Meanwhile Venetia lost another son, Everard, after childbirth and twins in a miscarriage; a fourth son, George, was born in 1633. Digby was deeply uxorious. To preserve Venetia's health and beauty he introduced edible snails into the grounds of Gayhurst and concocted 'viper wine'. Ben Jonson, the court poet, celebrated the Digbys' domestic bliss in a collection of verses and called Venetia his muse. Digby was Jonson's patron and one of the 'tribe of Ben' who dined in the 'Apollo room' of the Devil tavern in the City. Digby himself was a competent lyric poet and it was he who later prepared the manuscript material of the 1640 folio of Jonson's poems for printing. But the 'tribe of Ben' included several rakes, and Digby was not above temptation. Letters acknowledge several extra-marital 'escapes' and one prolonged liaison which made him later wonder 'what devil reigned in my blood' ('Letter book', 9.146, 448). Venetia, on the other hand, given the security of matrimony, became a model wife and mother. Careful and vigilant in managing her household, she joined a group of court ladies who were Franciscan 'tertiaries'. But Digby was becoming disillusioned with official life: he dreamed of retreating to the library of his new house in Holborn. Late in 1632 his Oxford friend Thomas Allen died and left him a huge collection of manuscripts -- some of immense value and antiquity -- and all the printed books he fancied, apart from special bequests. Digby therefore added to his new home a library wing. 
Suddenly everything was utterly changed. On the night of 30 April / 1 May 1633 Venetia had a cerebral haemorrhage. As Digby was sitting in his drawing-room after breakfast, discussing literature with a recusant friend, Sir Thomas Hawkins, she was found dead in bed. It was a thunderbolt from heaven: God had taken her to punish his sins. Digby was grief-stricken. On 2 May he had Van Dyck make a death-mask for a deathbed portrait and on 3 May Venetia was buried in Christ Church, Newgate. To his brother John, Digby wrote, 'This torment must never have an end while I live... I can have no physician but death' ('Letter book', 9.137). But gradually the frenzy burned out: the wife so suddenly snatched away by providence he now idealized. He had been fortunate to possess this angelic creature: having reached perfection she was ripe for heaven. In a long letter addressed to his children when they were older, he recorded all Venetia's virtues and urged them to emulate her. After receiving a cluster of funeral verses from Ben Jonson, Aurelian Townshend, William Habington, and others from the 'tribe of Ben', Digby gathered the drafts of forty-five letters he had written to relatives and friends after her death and added five memoranda, entitling the whole collection, copied on vellum, 'In Praise of Venetia'. Despite the advice of a friend to remarry and the entreaties of a youthful maid of honour with whom he had had a long liaison and who was herself resisting the importunity of the earl of Dorset, he resolved to remain faithful to Venetia's memory. In a memorandum of 23 June 1634 he concluded that Venetia was 'either in glory or in the way to it'. He would offer up 'masses, prayers, penances and other devotions... to expiate... any human infirmity in her'. 'I ought to... make an entire renunciation... and pass the remnant of my sad days... where I may be free from all worldly cares' (ibid., 10.96-102). He never remarried. 
Late in 1633, having handed over his two older sons to their grandmother and put the youngest to nurse, Digby, as Aubrey noted: 'retired into Gresham College at London, where he diverted himself with his chemistry and the professors' good conversation. He wore there a long mourning cloak, a high-crowned hat, his head unshorn -- looked like a hermit -- as signs of sorrow for his beloved wife. ('Brief Lives', 1.226-7)' He had Van Dyck paint him in black, bearded and bare-headed, with his right hand touching his breast in plaintive repentance. The college had become an important research centre and Digby had had scientific interests for many years. He had dabbled in experiments since 1624 and his earliest medical recipe dates from 1625. In making his 'viper wine' he bred vipers from the egg, dissected them, and made observations about the movements and fibres of their hearts. When Venetia died he took detailed notes of the results of the post-mortem dissection and examination. 
Digby had a large laboratory at the college and engaged a Hungarian alchemist, Johannes Hunyades, as his instructor. Among his experiments Digby investigated the theory, revived by Paracelsus, that a bird could be reconstituted from its own ashes. Henri IV's court physician, Joseph Duchesne, had claimed success for such experiments in 'palingenesis'. Digby's failed, but he reckoned that he succeeded with baked crayfishes. He also produced a recipe for making silver into apparent gold through mercury, nitric acid, heating, and a powdering process: the result was yellow but could not have passed a goldsmith's assay. It was from Gresham that he negotiated with Archbishop Laud his famous donation in 1634 to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, of more than 200 manuscripts inherited from Thomas Allen, together with about 100 of his own, all magnificently bound in 233 books. They were to be followed by thirty-six Arabic manuscripts in 1640-42. 
However, Paris, the capital of northern European culture, became Digby's objective. Here Gallican Roman Catholicism allowed scientists and natural philosophers to exchange ideas in freedom. On 29 September 1635 he informed Sir Francis Windebank of his arrival. Digby took rooms in the College de Boncourt, a hostel in the Quartier du Jardin du Roi, near the University of the Sorbonne and the royal chemistry laboratory. He collected books for a second library and obtained rare volumes for friends like Sir Edward Conway and John Selden. On the bindings of his books that survive is embroidered the loving monogram 'KDV'. 
Digby had confessed to Archbishop Laud in March 1634 his doubts of the validity of Anglican claims to catholicity, and now thought it time to make his reconversion public. On 22 October 1635 his friend James Howell disclosed his defection in a letter to Thomas Wentworth. On 15 February 1636 Digby wrote to his old patron, Sir John Coke, to thank him for his sympathy, saying that he had written to Laud. The archbishop replied on 27 March, deeply pained by Digby's decision 'to enter again the communion of the Church of Rome, in which you had been born and bred, against that semblance of good reason which... made you adhere to the Church of England'. Nevertheless he praised Digby's letter as 'full of discretion and temper and so like yourself... Most sorry I am that a man whose discourse did so much content me should thus slide away'. But he said he retained 'all the love and friendliness' which Digby had won from him (Wharton, 610-16). 
Late in 1636 Walter Montagu, a recent convert to Rome, took Digby to an Ursuline convent at Loudun where an outbreak of diabolical possession was believed to have occurred among the nuns. Digby acquired a manuscript describing the events but considered them of psychological, not spiritual, significance. What fascinated him, unlike Montagu, were the phenomena of collective hysteria and 'folie a deux'. At a time when witches were put to death he denied the possibility of possession by evil spirits. (He was later prepared to participate in seances with John Dee's medium, John Evans.) After many months of theological study, Digby's last intellectual difficulties were resolved by a Carmelite lecturer in theology, Father Hilary, whom he visited with Montagu for ten days in January 1637. Two controversial works on religion announced unequivocally his return to Rome. One was a letter to an intending convert, Lady Purbeck, the other a treatise in French on the question of which faith was the true one. The preface to a little book on 'infallibility in religion', published fourteen years later and addressed to Lord George Digby (son of the earl of Bristol), related how in the summer of 1638 they enjoyed a 'long discourse' about religion. The ensuing correspondence was published in 1651. 
Digby now formed a lifelong association with Thomas White, a philosopher and former professor of theology at the English College at Douai. Owing to unorthodox ideas, White had fallen from favour at Rome but he confirmed the Aristotelian cast of Digby's thinking. An introduction to Marin Mersenne, a Minim friar who corresponded with all the leading scientific thinkers and whose convent was a scientific and philosophical rendezvous, linked Digby to the new philosophical world of the continent. He became friendly with Thomas Hobbes, who was in Paris in 1635-6, and they corresponded during 1636-7. Digby adopted the 'atomist' and 'mechanical' ideas of the new philosophers but, like Gassendi in France, sought to integrate them with the Aristotelianism that was currently reviving in the universities. Mersenne introduced him to the works of Descartes and in 1637 he read the newly published 'Discours sur le methode', of which he sent a copy to Hobbes, greatly praising it. In 1638 Digby wrote to Descartes, enclosing a refutation of the philosopher's proof of the existence of God, almost certainly written by White. In 1640 he went to the Netherlands to meet Descartes and they enjoyed a week's conversation. The philosopher evidently took to him because after the publication of Digby's 'Two Treatises' in Paris in 1644 they met again at the College de Boncourt. According to Descartes's seventeenth-century biographer, Baillet, their conversations were concluded in mutual esteem. Descartes became the main influence on Digby among the new philosophers, though he never accepted Descartes's basic principle that everything must be rejected unless it could be proved beyond doubt. Digby accepted the substantial validity of Thomist metaphysics and his citing of authorities, ancient and modern, was precisely what Descartes most objected to; nor did he question so carefully the foundation of his own knowledge. 
Digby returned to England late in 1638 and was soon involved in a scheme of the queen to raise money from Roman Catholics to aid her husband's campaign against the Scottish covenanters. On 17 April 1639 she issued an appeal, covered by a letter from Digby and Walter Montagu. The response was meagre. Digby himself seems unlikely to have contributed materially since on 6 December 1639 he had to mortgage his estates at Stoke Dry and Tilton to pay a debt of $10,000 to Eliab and Daniel Harvey of London. But the Long Parliament, which opposed the Scottish war, called Digby and Montagu to account on 28 January 1641. On 16 March the Commons resolved to petition the king to remove all 'Popish recusants' from court, including Digby, Montagu, and Sir Toby Matthew. Removed they were, but Digby was called before the Commons again on 22 June. He spoke at length with great eloquence, making no secret of his loyalty both to his faith and to the king and the laws. The Commons were mollified but he thought it prudent to leave for France. Later that year he challenged a Baron Mont le Ros to a duel for calling Charles I 'the arrantest coward in the world' at a dinner party, and killed him. Duelling incurred the death penalty in France but Louis XIII excused him, provided he left the country. The Commons, however, were offended by a tract recounting the affair, 'Sir Kenelm Digby's Honour Maintained' (1641), which concluded, 'May more such Noble Digbies increase... Then shall the enemies of our gracious King be scattered'. Now a suspect character, having returned to England, Digby was arrested on 7 August 1642 but was released after a week at the instance of the House of Lords. 
The civil war broke out in August 1642 and Digby was rearrested on 12 November. He was detained by parliament at Winchester House, a former episcopal palace in Southwark, for almost a year, but took to imprisonment with zest. At the earl of Dorset's request he wrote in twenty-four hours a critical commentary on Sir Thomas Browne's recently published 'Religio medici' (and after a courteous exchange of letters with the author, later editions were often printed with Digby's commentary annexed). He also wrote out the first draft of his treatise 'On bodies' (as early as 24 February 1640 he had told Mersenne that he had fully thought out a work 'On the soul'). 
Digby's combined work, the 'Two treatises, in the one of which the nature of bodies, in the other the nature of man's soul is looked into: in way of discovery of the immortality of reasonable souls', is on a massive scale. The essential design was to trace the course of nature and to demonstrate immortality from the basic facts of physical existence. 'On bodies' was much the larger and more significant treatise, much of its thought derived, as Digby confessed, from White. In thirty-eight chapters he took all natural phenomena for his subject and onto an Aristotelian framework built concepts selected from current thinkers. Digby adopted the two dominant ideas of the time -- the atomist theory, that everything in nature consists of atoms, and mechanical explanations, that every physical effect has a physical cause. Digby's own experiments provided part of the evidence leading to his conclusions. In three chapters on the embryology of animals, for example, his experiments upheld Aristotle's theory of epigenesis against the prevailing theory of pre-formation and led him to the modern conception of embryonic development. Medical historians are agreed that Digby deserves a very high place among seventeenth-century biologists: indeed he has been called the father of modern embryology. The much briefer second treatise, 'On the soul', contains no explicit reference to Christian revelation or even the existence of God. Digby sought to prove immortality from ordinary experience: only the life of the body could be proved to end at death. But despite complex argument, how and where the soul subsists after death seems unsatisfactorily explained. 
'On bodies' for a time made Digby's reputation as a natural philosopher. It was the first comprehensive synthesis of the new philosophy with the Aristotelian thought then current in the universities and one of the first fully developed atomist systems of the seventeenth century. Thus Isaac Barrow of Cambridge in 1652 picked out Digby among those, like Descartes, Bacon, and Gassendi, who had renewed ancient thought and struck out new paths in natural philosophy. When John Webster recommended reform of the university curriculum in his 'Academiarum examen' (1653) he took for granted the importance of Digby and White, as well as Descartes. John Wallis, the Oxford mathematician, dedicated his 'Commercium epistolicum' (1658) to Digby and included in it a letter praising Digby and White. Thomas Barlow, a friend of Robert Boyle and later bishop of Lincoln, in his 'Library for Younger Scholars' ('c'.1655) cited Digby and White, along with Descartes, Gassendi, and Bacon, as modern natural philosophers. The first edition of the 'Two Treatises' was published in Paris in 1644. Four further English and two Latin editions were printed by 1669, though none since. 
Publication had become possible when Digby's imprisonment ended. Having undertaken to do nothing directly or indirectly prejudicial to parliament, he was released on 30 July 1643 and left for France. There in the following year, after the defeat at Marston Moor, Queen Henrietta Maria set up her household and made Digby her chancellor. She had him in mind for a further, more desperate, exercise in raising cash, this time from the pope. By the end of February 1645 Digby left Paris with his two older sons, Kenelm and John; George was left at school. Evidently, like his royal master, Digby attached little weight to a promise to a rebel parliament. White accompanied them to help press the case for two additional bishops for England and formal recognition of the status of the dean and chapter of the secular clergy. When Digby left Rome at the end of 1645 he had obtained an advance of 20,000 crowns. He was back in Rome in October 1646, offering to lead a fleet against the Turks in return for greater financial support but the curia prevaricated, knowing the weakness of Charles's cause after the crowning defeat of Naseby the previous June. Digby had no more luck even in persuading the curia to recognize the dean and chapter. After a year's frustration Digby addressed a long memorandum to Pope Innocent and in an audience on 30 November 1647 'he grew high and hectored with His Holiness' ('Brief Lives', 1.225-6). He left Rome in February 1648 never to return. His only consolation was the friendships formed with Luke Holstenius, the Vatican librarian, and Cassiano dal Pozzo, a fellow art patron and book collector. 
In the summer of 1647 Digby had joined an abortive scheme to persuade the puritans, now in power in England, to rescind the penal laws against Roman Catholics in return for a guarantee of obedience to the state. The plan, mainly devised by Henry Holden, a professor at the Sorbonne and vicar-general of the Paris diocese, was to have English bishops ordained in France who would be independent of the pope except as 'chief pastor' and to provide an oath of allegiance omitting any reference to the pope. The scheme collapsed because neither the English chapter nor the French authorities would support it. 
From then on Digby's main concerns were to return to England and to raise money from his estates. These had been confiscated and all or most were mortgaged and burdened by further debts. He petitioned the central committee for compounding, appealed to the barons of the exchequer, petitioned both houses of parliament, and in 1653 even appealed to the protector, Cromwell, himself. In November 1653 and January 1654 orders in council finally permitted Digby to return to England and freed his estates from sequestration, and he seems to have been granted a pension. He acted as intermediary between Cromwell and the ruler of France, Cardinal Mazarin, in 1654-6 and was occasionally keeping company with high officials -- even the protector. But he was a middle-man, not an informer. During 1654-5 he lived for a while at Gayhurst with his surviving son John, who had inherited the use of the estate (the younger Kenelm had been killed in action on 7 July 1648 and George had died at school the same year). In 1654 Digby published a translation of Albert the Great's mystical treatise, 'Of Adhering to God', and he sent a gift of about forty, mainly theological, books to Harvard University the following year. 
After 'Two Treatises' was published Digby set himself the task of examining on mechanical principles the concepts of current Paracelsian chemistry, especially alchemy and the 'universal spirit' giving life to all things. In Paris he studied chemistry under the Scottish royal physician, William Davidson. John Evelyn visited Digby at his laboratory on 7 November 1651 and was given his 'powder with which he affirmed that he had fixed mercury before the late King' and 'a dissolvent of calx of gold' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 3.20, 48). Digby's experiments often involved faulty observation and conclusions that went further than the facts allowed. A prime example was the celebrated 'sympathetic powder'. Made from dried green vitriol, this was a variant of the well-known Paracelsian 'weapon salve' which cured wounds by being applied, not to the patient, but to the offending weapon. He offered a complex mechanical explanation in a lecture to a congress of French virtuosi ('A Late Discourse Made... at Montpellier', 1658). Digby had cured his friend James Howell, then the duke of Buckingham's secretary, of a sword-cut in the hand by dissolving some powdered vitriol crystals in water and plunging into the mixture a cloth stained with blood from the wound. The pain in Howell's hand, some yards away, immediately ceased. Many were convinced by Digby's evidence, including Joseph Glanvill, later a Royal Society fellow, and Nathaniel Highmore, a distinguished anatomist and friend of William Harvey. In fact the cure lay in washing and bandaging the wound. There were four editions in English of Digby's oration, three in German, and at least seven in French. 
On the restoration of Charles II in 1660 Digby returned to England. He remained the queen mother's chancellor, continued to support Thomas White, and unsuccessfully petitioned the king for toleration for Roman Catholics. On 14 June 1661 a warrant for payment to him of $1325 was issued in respect of his ransoming captives in Algiers in 1628; on 6 December bonds for $12,000, $2000, and $300 were diverted to him for the same purpose. He lived 'in the last fair house westward in the north portico of Covent Garden... He had a laboratory there' ('Brief Lives', 1.227). His operator, George Hartmann, collected Digby's records of experiments and after his death published them as 'A Choice Collection of Rare Secrets' (1682). The first section of 143 pages is devoted mainly to alchemical recipes and processes: virtually all are presented in practical laboratory terminology. A second section of 125 pages lists medical and cosmetic recipes. 
Digby was not among the ten men who held the initial meeting of the Royal Society on 28 November 1660 but was among the twelve additional members elected a fortnight later ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. He became a member of the chemical committee. His personal distinction added lustre to the new body, whose patron, Charles II, was himself a chemist in the Paracelsian tradition. Digby's paper on the vegetation of plants, read on 23 January 1661, was the first formal publication authorized by the society, entitled 'A Discourse Concerning the Vegetation of Plants' (1661). It described Digby's detailed observation and experiments and attempted to draw wider conclusions, among them that a nitrous salt in earth 'attracteth a like salt that fecundateth the air... a hidden food of life' (p. 64), echoing Paracelsus, Duchesne, Seton, and Sendivogius. Never one of the central core of members, Digby's attendance at the society's meetings decreased with time, perhaps owing to ill health and the increasingly obvious divergence of his thinking from that of Robert Boyle and his associates. Digby's paper was his last publication. Increasingly he turned to medicine and collecting recipes for cookery and wine-making. 
Burdened by debts and suffering from gout and the stone, Digby prepared a will in January 1665. He expressed the wish to have his 'dust lie by hers who was my greatest worldly blessing' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/325, fol. 130). He succumbed to a violent fever and died at home in Covent Garden on 11 June of the same year, aged almost sixty-two. He was buried in the elaborate tomb of black marble and copper which he had prepared for Venetia in the crypt of Christ Church, Newgate. By his direction no inscription was added. 
The extraordinary intelligence, courage, and ambition that carried Sir Kenelm Digby through so many adventures in his youth and made such an impression at court inspired him to take part in the philosophical and scientific revolution of the seventeenth century. His pioneering work in integrating mechanical philosophy with traditional Aristotelianism was soon superseded. Credulity mingled with precise observation in his wide-ranging, receptive mind but some of his research, especially in embryology, made positive contributions to scientific progress. All in all, Digby was one of the most remarkable thinkers and scientific enquirers of his day. 


@@@@@


doc= 7630


Digby, Kenelm Henry (1795/6-1880), writer, was born at Geashill, King's county, Ireland, the younger of the two sons of the Very Revd William Digby ('c'.1735-1812), dean of Clonfert, and his third wife, Mary, 'nee' Wood, of Devon descent, widow of William Cooper. The Irish branch of the Digby family had provided a baron in the seventeenth century, bishops of Dromore and Elphin in the eighteenth, and had originated from a Leicestershire branch of the same name. Kenelm Henry Digby inherited his powerful physique from his father, who had been a considerable athlete, was over 6 feet tall, had a swarthy complexion, and dark hair and eyes. The deaths of his father in 1812, of his mother shortly after, and of his elder brother, Richard Edward, in 1820, provided him with ample independent means and the ability to finance the publication of his works. 
Digby was educated at Petersham, near Richmond, Surrey, and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 22 October 1814 at the age of eighteen. Having taken his degree in mathematics in 1819, he continued to keep his rooms at Trinity as a base until 1829. In 1820 he won a Norrisian prize for an essay on the evidences of the Christian religion, regarded as displaying a wide range of reading, although not closely reasoned. The rest of his considerable literary output showed precisely these characteristics; his creativity was derivative rather than imaginative. During travel in France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, he researched the culture of the middle ages and the concept of chivalry, resulting in his first published work, 'The Broadstone of Honour, or, Rules for the Gentlemen of England', in 1822, and his reception into the Roman Catholic church in 1825 by Father Edward Scott SJ. With Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle, an undergraduate at Trinity with whom he had a long friendship, he rode each Sunday to mass at the nearest Roman Catholic chapel, at the seminary of Old Hall, St Edmund's, Ware, a journey of 26 miles each way. His relationship with De Lisle endured, but a coolness developed when Digby did not share enthusiasm for the members of the Oxford Movement and De Lisle's attitude towards corporate reunion of the churches. Some of their correspondence is preserved by the De Lisle family. Over a hundred letters to another close friend and fellow Roman Catholic, Squire Richard Huddleston of Sawston Hall, are held in the Cambridgeshire Record Office. 
Digby rewrote 'The Broadstone of Honour' after his conversion, with the subtitle 'The True Sense and Practice of Chivalry', in four lengthy parts between 1826 and 1829. It and the eleven long volumes of 'Mores Catholici, or, Ages of Faith' (1831-42), and seven volumes of 'Compitum, or, The Meeting of the Ways at the Catholic Church', written between 1848 and 1854, were his major works. The remainder, five books of prose and eleven books of verse, were of less consequence, though two of the latter, 'Ouranogaia, or, Heaven on Earth' (1872) and 'The Temple of Memory' (1874), are of interest for their descriptions of his contemporaries at Trinity. All his work showed an uncritical and elitist view of the past, particularly of the medieval period; his style was laboured, his sentences long, and punctuation sparse; there were few paragraphs. His saving grace was the enthusiasm he was able to transmit. This undoubtedly conveyed itself to those who were open to fresh interest in the middle ages, a large number in the first half of the nineteenth century. Since Digby was, however, one of several contemporary or near contemporary writers in this vein, his particular influence is not easy to gauge. Some of his friends wrote approvingly of his works in his lifetime, but sales were slow and the fact that subsequent editions were paid for by their author makes calculation of appreciation difficult. Modern readers, used to more succinct modes of expression, would undoubtedly find his works hard going; but it is likely that they would find evidence of his character and outlook more interesting than his writing. 
In 1833, in Dover, Digby had married Jane Mary Dillon (1816/17-1860), daughter and coheir of Thomas Dillon of Mount Dillon, co. Dublin, and this had brought him further financial provision at the time. Although Irish, she had been educated in France and was sixteen when she married. The couple had seven children: Thomas, Marcella, Kenelm Thomas, Mary-Ann Letitia, John Gerard, and Mary; a fourth daughter died in infancy. The only children who survived their father were Kenelm Thomas, who became an Irish MP, Marcella, a nun, and Mary, who married the Hon. Hubert Dormer. 
Digby lived in Paris and various towns in France until 1857 when he and his family settled in England, his literary energy still matched by physical strength. He was credited with having plunged into the Rhine, despite the current, and reaching the further shore with difficulty 3 miles downstream; also with riding a tiger from a travelling zoo. Daily swimming in the Serpentine in London was his practice in old age. He died at his home, Shaftesbury House, Hammersmith, London, on 22 March 1880, and was buried in Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7631


Digby, Lettice, Lady Digby and 'suo jure' Baroness Offaly (c.1580-1658), landowner, was the only surviving child of Gerald Fitzgerald (1559-1580), Lord Gerald, and his wife, Catherine (died 1632), daughter of Sir Francis Knollys (1511/12-1596). She may have lived first on her mother's Irish jointure lands at Portlester, Woodstock, and Athy, but these were forfeited on Catherine's remarriage to Sir Philip Boteler of Walton Woodhall, Hertfordshire. Shortly after a pre-nuptial settlement on 19 April 1598 Lettice married Sir Robert Digby ('bap'. 1575, died 1618) of Coleshill, Warwickshire, a client of the earl of Essex; they had seven sons and three daughters. Following the successive deaths of her paternal grandfather, Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare and first Baron Offaly (1525-1585), and uncles Henry Fitzgerald (died 1597) and William Fitzgerald (died 1599), respectively twelfth and thirteenth earls, Lady Digby (as heir general) assumed the style of Baroness Offaly and claimed the title and certain lands, while the earldom went to the heir male, another Gerald Fitzgerald (died 1612). Although Sir Robert Digby represented his native county as an MP in 1601, thereafter the couple spent most of their time in Ireland. 
Over the next two decades the Digbys made concerted efforts to consolidate their position. Making common cause with Mabel Fitzgerald, widow of the eleventh earl of Kildare, they pressured the fourteenth earl for restitution of jointure rights and concession of the Offaly title. Digby became a justice of the peace in co. Kildare and a member of the Irish privy council. He was an active supporter of the government in the Irish parliament of 1613 and in 1615 became a member of the council of Munster. With powerful friends at the English court, including Lady Digby's uncle William Knollys (1547-1632), Villiers connections of her stepfather, and Digby's younger brother Sir John Digby, ambassador to Spain, the Digbys continued to press their case through the minority of Gerald Fitzgerald, fifteenth earl of Kildare (1611-1620). The cost of the dispute meant that, when Sir Robert died on 24 May 1618, he left his estate, and Dame Lettice as his executor, in financial difficulties, but on 11 July 1619 James I awarded her and her heirs the manor and parsonage of Geashill, comprising considerable lands near Philipstown in King's county. Although the king dismissed her claim to be heir general of her grandfather, on 26 June 1620 he confirmed her as Baroness Offaly for life, stipulating that the barony was then to revert to the earls of Kildare. The baroness's eldest son, Robert Digby, was in compensation created on 29 July Baron Digby of Geashill. 
Anticipating by several months the final formal transfer of Geashill into her hands, Lady Offaly took up residence at Geashill Castle and lost no time in placing an English clergyman, John Meall, in the local living. She regarded the estates as traditionally a nest of rebels, and energetically collaborated in setting up English plantations with successive guardians of the sixteenth earl of Kildare. From 1629 this was Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, whose daughter Sarah had married Robert Digby in 1626. Following Sarah's death in 1633 her children lived with Lady Offaly at Geashill, provided for by their grandfather Cork. The plantations came in for fierce local resistance, and in 1642 Lady Offaly was closely besieged. She resisted with spirit, though the rebels sent four messages to remind her that the castle was garrisoned only by women and boys. In reply to their first summons to surrender she avowed her loyalty to the king, proclaiming 'I will live and die innocently and will do my best to defend my own, leaving the issue to God' (GEC, 'Peerage', 10.19'n'). The besiegers' guns burst upon themselves, and she was at last rescued, in October that year, by Sir Richard Grenville. She then retired to Coleshill, in which her husband had left her a life interest and where she died on 1 December 1658, and was buried with her husband. A portrait of her at Sherborne Castle represents her with a book inscribed 'Job' 19:20 ('I am escaped with the skin of my teeth'). 


@@@@@


doc= 7632


Digby, Robert (1732-1814), naval officer, was born on 20 December 1732, the son of Edward Digby ('c'.1693-1746), MP for Warwickshire, and Charlotte, daughter of Sir Stephen Fox and sister of Stephen, first earl of Ilchester, and Henry, first Baron Holland. Robert's grandfather was William Digby, fifth Baron Digby of Geashill, and his elder brother was Henry, first Earl Digby. Robert Digby first went to sea in 1744 in the 'Edinburgh' (74 guns), and was promoted lieutenant in October 1752. On 5 August 1755 he was promoted captain of the frigate 'Solebay' and in the following year he was advanced to command the 'Dunkirk' (60 guns), in which he continued until the peace, serving for the most part on the home station, and being present in the abortive expedition against Rochefort in 1757. In 1758 he took part in the successful attack by Commodore Augustus Keppel on Goree and in 1759 in Sir Edward Hawke's victory in Quiberon Bay. In 1760 he was ordered to join the Mediterranean Fleet and served under Captain Hugh Palliser in the pursuit of the Toulon fleet. Following the treaty of Paris in 1762 he retired from active service, though he was appointed colonel of marines on 4 April 1775. 
In 1778, with the outbreak of war, Digby was appointed to the 'Ramillies' (74 guns), which he commanded in the indecisive battle of Ushant (27 July 1778) under the immediate command of his friend Palliser (now an admiral). This led to his being summoned by Palliser as a witness for the prosecution at Keppel's court martial. However, Digby's evidence tended distinctly to Keppel's advantage, as indicated in Edmund Burke's letter to Frances Pelham of 12 January 1779 ('The Correspondence of Edmund Burke', vol. 4, 1778-82, ed. J. A. Woods, 1963, 37). 
Upon promotion to rear-admiral of the blue (19 March 1779), Digby was ordered at once to hoist his flag on the 'Prince George', so that he might -- as was affirmed by the opposition -- sit on Palliser's court martial. During the summer of 1779 he was second in command of the Channel Fleet under Sir Charles Hardy, and in December he was second in command of the fleet which sailed under Sir George Rodney for the relief of Gibraltar. It was at this time that he was first appointed the governor of Prince William Henry, who began his naval career on the 'Prince George'. Digby had previously received warm praise from George III, who in November 1778 described him as 'a most excellent officer, sensible, prudent, and discreet' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 4.225). When, after relieving Gibraltar, Rodney, with one division of the fleet, went on to the West Indies, Digby, with the other, returned to England, having the good fortune on the way to disperse a French convoy laden with military stores for the Ile de France. Three merchant ships and the 'Prothee' (64 guns) were captured. After being advanced to rear-admiral of the red he continued as second in command of the Channel Fleet during the summers of 1780 and 1781, and in the second relief of Gibraltar by Vice-Admiral George Darby. In August 1781 Digby was sent as commander-in-chief to North America. He arrived just as his predecessor, Thomas, Lord Graves, was preparing to sail for the Chesapeake in hopes, in a second attempt, of effecting the relief of Cornwallis; and, courteously refusing to take on himself the command at this critical juncture, Digby remained at New York while Graves sailed on his vain errand. Afterwards, when he had assumed the command, he removed into the 'Lion', a smaller ship, in order to allow the 'Prince George', as well as most of his other ships, to accompany Sir Samuel Hood to the West Indies. The tide of the war rolled away from North America, and in any case Digby had no force to undertake any active operations. His command was therefore uneventful, and he returned home at the peace in 1783. He held no further appointment, though duly promoted vice-admiral four years later and admiral in 1794, and living to see the end of the French Revolutionary Wars. 
Digby married in 1784 Mrs Jauncy, the daughter of Andrew Elliot, brother of Sir Gilbert Elliot, third baronet, and Admiral John Elliot. Digby died on 25 February 1814; his wife died on 28 July 1830, leaving no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7633


Digby, Venetia, Lady Digby (1600-1633), gentlewoman and celebrated beauty, was born on 19 December 1600 at Tong Castle, Shropshire, the daughter of Sir Edward Stanley (died 1629?), from a younger branch of the family of the earls of Derby, and his wife, Lady Lucy Percy ('b'. before 1572, died 1601?), daughter and coheir of Thomas Percy, seventh earl of Northumberland (1528-1572). Venetia's mother died a few months after her birth and she was brought up in the Roman Catholic faith of her family by Francis and Grace Fortescue, of Salden, Buckinghamshire. At nearby Gayhurst lived another Catholic family, the Digbys, and Sir Kenelm Digby (1603-1665) later recorded in his 'Loose Fantasies', that he and Venetia were childhood friends and sweethearts, despite the fact that he was two and a half years younger. 
Growing up to be a very beautiful young woman, Venetia was presented at the court of James I, where she was pursued by many aristocratic admirers, among them Edward Sackville, later fourth earl of Dorset. According to contemporary gossip recounted in Aubrey's 'Brief Lives', Venetia had affairs with several young men, including Sir Edmund Wyld and the earl of Dorset; the latter allegedly had 'one if not more children by her' ('Brief Lives', 260). There is no evidence to support these allegations, however, and the rumours of Venetia's promiscuity as a young unmarried woman were hotly denied by Sir Kenelm in his memoirs and letters. After a period of separation during which Digby was abroad the couple were married about May or June 1624 (though some sources suggest January 1625). As Sir Kenelm later explained to his sons, the marriage was kept secret for years, mainly because of strong disapproval of the match by both Sir Kenelm's mother and Venetia's father, from whom Venetia was hoping for a financial settlement. While Sir Kenelm was away at sea, on 6 October 1625, Venetia had her first child, Kenelm, in secret, with no help except that of a single servant. In all she had five more pregnancies: she had a son, Everard, who died as an infant, two more sons, John and George, and twins whom she lost in a miscarriage. All her labours were 'exceeding painefull and dangerous', as her husband recalled, but she suffered with stoic patience, with her husband at her side holding her hand, which she said 'did abate a great part of her paines' (Digby, 'Letter-Book', 126). 
All contemporary sources agree that Venetia was the perfect companion to Sir Kenelm: a loyal, chaste, and obedient wife, a loving and careful mother, a frugal and efficient housewife, and a fervent Roman Catholic like her husband. She gave large sums to the poor, earning the money through gambling, in which pursuit she was both skilful and lucky. Toward the end of her short life she became increasingly pious, mortifying herself with fasts, penances, and the wearing of a hair shirt, partly because of her premonition that she would die young like her mother. In the event her premonition was fulfilled: she died suddenly in her sleep on 1 May 1633 at the Digby London residence at Charterhouse Yard, and was buried three days later. An autopsy performed by several eminent physicians found that her brain tissue was 'much putrifyed and corrupted: all the cerebellum was rotten, and retained not the forme of the braine but was meere pus and corrupted matter' (Digby, 'Letter-Book', 134). 
Venetia Digby was painted by Anthony Van Dyck both in her lifetime (as the allegorical figure Prudence) and on her deathbed. Sir Kenelm also had a death mask made. A number of contemporary poets including Ben Jonson dedicated elegies to her memory (a manuscript volume of elegies is now Add. MS 30259 in the British Library). Although Venetia herself composed devotional meditations and other works, none of her own writings has survived. Virtually all the information on her life and death comes from Sir Kenelm's autobiographical romance, 'Loose Fantasies', and his memorial letters to his sons and other relations written after Venetia's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 7634


Digby, William, fifth Baron Digby of Geashill (bap. 1661/2, d. 1752), politician and philanthropist, was baptized on 20 February 1661 or 1662 at Coleshill, Warwickshire, the third (and perhaps the posthumous) son of Kildare Digby, second Baron Digby of Geashill ('c'.1631-1661), governor of King's county, Ireland, and his wife, Mary (died 1692), the daughter of Robert Gardiner of London. He was educated privately before entering Winchester College in 1677. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 16 May 1679, graduated BA on 5 July 1681, and then travelled on the continent. Following the deaths of his elder brothers, Robert, third baron, and Simon, fourth baron, he succeeded to the peerage, an Irish barony, on 19 January 1686, as well as substantial estates in Warwickshire and King's county. On 22 May 1686 a licence was issued for his marriage to Lady Jane Noel (1666/7-1733), the second daughter of Edward, first earl of Gainsborough. The couple had four sons and eight daughters. 
Appointed deputy lieutenant of Warwickshire by James II, Digby sat in the Convention Parliament for Warwick, and was re-elected to the Commons in 1689, 1690, and 1695. He was a follower of John Kettlewell, vicar of Coleshill from 1682 until he was deprived as a nonjuror in 1690. A sincere and devout believer in passive obedience, Digby voted against making William and Mary king and queen, but none the less sat on the committees which drafted the coronation oath and the oaths of allegiance and supremacy in 1689. His concern for the doctrinal integrity of the Church of England led him to sympathize with the nonjurors. While he remained in communion with the established church he financially supported nonjuring clergymen, including Kettlewell, and Coleshill itself became a renowned retreat for nonjurors. In the Commons, Digby spoke against the 'Abjuration Bill' of 1690, arguing that it would make enemies of those who could live under the government of William III while in principle acknowledging the rights of James II. The support of Digby and others like him was important to the broadly based ministries of the early part of William III's reign, but they were marginalized as the reign progressed. Digby was an active legislator during this period, and was involved in drafting the 'Game Bill' of 1693 and redrafting the 'Place Bill' of 1694. In December 1694 and January 1695 he managed the bill for the rebuilding of Warwick, which had been devastated by fire, through the Commons, and served on the commission which oversaw the reconstruction of the town. In February 1696 he was one of the most prominent non-signatories of the Association, as he and other tory members could not permanently renounce the possibility of the restoration of James II or his heirs, and in November he opposed the attainder of Sir John Fenwick. 
Digby retired from parliament in 1698, as he disagreed with the direction the revolution settlement had taken and could no longer sit in the parliament of a king he could not wholeheartedly affirm. His stance probably offended the borough patron at Warwick, Fulke Greville, fifth Baron Brooke of Beauchamps Court. However, that year Digby inherited the Sherborne estate in Dorset on the death of his kinsman John Digby, third earl of Bristol. This was a grander estate than Coleshill, including the mansion built for Sir Walter Ralegh. Although Digby's existing estates made him wealthier than Lord Bristol, Sherborne allowed him more scope for exercising the responsibilities of an independent country gentleman. He retained his political connections, principally through his friend Edward Nicholas, MP for Shaftesbury, and later through his sons John (died 1717), Robert (died 1726), and Edward (died 1746), all of whom were at different times members of parliament. However, extra-parliamentary expression for his priorities became more important. He was a patron of Thomas Bray, supported the goals of the SPCK, and in 1701 was one of the founding members of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. In 1703 he resisted pressure to stand again for the Commons at Oxford University. At Sherborne, Digby showed his continued attachment to the Church of England by designing and building a new chapel and adding new features to the cathedral. He is said to have made regular visits to the Fleet prison to pay the debts of the inmates. His theological conservatism did not prevent him developing friendships with those of differing views, including the anti-trinitarian clergyman William Whiston, who hailed him as 'the best Christian Nobleman whom I ever knew, the good Lord Digby' (Erskine-Hill, 165), although in 1712 Digby had refused to support Whiston's plan for an anti-trinitarian society. 
Digby demonstrated his attachment to the Stuarts by maintaining the ruins of old Sherborne Castle, destroyed by parliament during the civil war. He refused to take the oaths to George I in 1714, and it is possible that he was at least aware of the Atterbury plot to place James Stuart on the throne in 1721. Alexander Pope knew many of those connected to the scheme, but it was probably through Digby's niece Frances, Viscountess Scudamore, who lived in Twickenham, that Pope was introduced to the Digby family. Pope visited Digby at Sherborne in 1724. When composing the epitaph which appears on the monument at Sherborne to Digby's son Robert and daughter Mary (died 1729), Pope wrote to Digby (8 September 1729) that 'your whole family is an example of what is almost now lost in this Nation, the Integrity of ancient Nobility' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 3.52). He had already expressed these sentiments to others and alluded to them in the 'Essay on man' and 'Epilogue to the Satires'. 
Following the death of his wife, Jane, on 10 September 1733, Digby took over the school that she had founded in Sherborne, and in 1743 he endowed it with provision for a mistress and thirteen poor girls as scholars. This school was the basis for the Lord Digby's School, which survived in Sherborne past the end of the twentieth century. He also became a member of the common council of the society for the establishment of Georgia in 1733, and his third son, Edward, MP for Warwickshire, was the first chairman of the trustees. 
Digby outlived most of his children; aside from those mentioned above, his second daughter, Elizabeth, who had married the clergyman Sir John Dolben in 1720, died in 1730. His youngest son, Wriothesley, became a barrister and died in 1767. Digby himself died at Sherborne on 29 November 1752, leaving an estate of approximately $23,000 with a further $14,000 to clear debts and support his younger grandsons. He was succeeded by his grandson Edward (1730-1757), the son of the Georgia trustee, who may have confounded the expectations of his grandfather and Pope by compromising with the whig ascendancy and sitting in parliament as a follower of his maternal uncle Henry Fox. 


@@@@@


doc= 7635


Digges, Sir Dudley (1582/3-1639), politician and diplomat, was the elder surviving son of the mathematician Thomas Digges (c.1546-1595) of Digges Court, Barham, Kent, and his wife, Anne or Agnes (died in or after 1595), daughter of Sir Warham St Leger of Leeds Castle, Kent. The poet and translator Leonard Digges (1588-1635) was his younger brother. Dudley's godfather was Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, under whom his father had served in the Netherlands. On 18 July 1600 Digges matriculated from University College, Oxford, aged seventeen. He graduated BA in 1601. In 1602 the master of his college, George Abbot (later archbishop of Canterbury), introduced Digges to Sir Robert Cecil, who may have provided him with his introduction to political life. In 1604 Digges published his father's tract on military discipline, entitled 'Four Paradoxes'. In 1605 he married Mary ('bap'. 1590, died 1631), daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Kempe of Olantigh, near Wye, Kent. He then went on his first trip to the continent. After he returned he was knighted at Whitehall on 29 April 1607. In 1610 he was elected to parliament to represent the newly enfranchised borough of Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire. Following the death of his wife's father that year, Mary's three sisters conveyed their shares in Chilham Castle and manor (Kent) to her and Sir Dudley, who became possessed of the entire fee of it. Digges proceeded to demolish the ancient mansion and built a magnificent new house, finally taking up residence there about 1616. 
In 1611 Digges contributed a few lines to the collection of 'panegyrick verses' which prefaced Thomas Coryats's 'Coryats Crudities'. Much preoccupied with overseas trade, he was a shareholder in the Virginia Company and the East India Company. He also took a keen interest in the search for the much vaunted north-west passage. One of the founders of a company incorporated in 1612 for the purpose of trading by that route, he published an account of the ensuing exploration. In 1613 Digges was appointed to the high commission, a prerogative court with jurisdiction in church matters, and his appointment was renewed periodically thereafter. The following year he was candidate for the governorship of the East India Company. Also in 1614 he sat at Westminster for Tewkesbury again, taking an active role as a committee member and speaking out against papists and the impositions which he believed were responsible for putting English merchants out of business. His papers on the subject of impositions were requisitioned and burnt by order of the privy council at the dissolution of that assembly. It is said that he himself was even imprisoned for a short time. In 1615, in connection with investigations into the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, Digges gave testimony which has been interpreted as having helped to incriminate the earl of Somerset. In the same year he published the treatise 'The Defense of East India Trade', an apology for the East India Company's monopoly. 
In 1618 the tsar of Russia, who was then engaged in a war with Poland, approached James I for a loan. The king ordered the Muscovy and East India companies to furnish $20,000, and Digges was dispatched to convey the money to Moscow. Years later, Digges claimed that he had been honoured by appointment to the service of the king's bedchamber in respect of this diplomatic mission. He left England in April, and on reaching Russia he sent his secretary, Finch, to Moscow, with half of the cash and letters from the king. Refusing the terms of the loan, the tsar extorted the money from the hapless Finch, and Digges returned to England with the balance in October. An account of this journey, written by John Tradescant, who accompanied Digges in the capacity of naturalist, is preserved in manuscript in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. In 1620 Digges and the president of the East India Company, Maurice Abbot, brother of Archbishop George Abbot, went to the United Provinces to negotiate a settlement of the company's disputes with its Dutch counterpart, but returned unsuccessful. 
In 1621 Digges was returned for a third time by the electors of Tewkesbury. He spoke against monopolists and Catholics, and was a keen advocate of war with Spain. Initially popular in the lower house for his stance during the stand-off with the king at the end of the first session, later, in the dispute regarding privilege, he was hesitant in supporting the Commons and as a result lost his reputation with his fellow MPs. Digges's quest for favour at court had become all the more urgent as his financial position deteriorated. The cost of rebuilding Chilham forced him to request the withdrawal of his stock from the East India Company, but he was turned down, despite the grant of royal warrants in support of his request. In 1622 he was appointed to the commission sent to Ireland to investigate the kingdom's financial straits, a development which has been described inaccurately as a punishment for his behaviour in parliament. The commission had been conceived by Lord Treasurer Cranfield as a weapon against the marquess of Buckingham, whose exploitation of Irish resources was notorious. But having marked Digges as a potential client, Buckingham secured his appointment as a counterweight to those commissioners who might seek to damage his interests. Digges certainly saw his posting as a 'probation for promotion' made honourable by his appointment as commission vice-president and Irish privy councillor (Treadwell, 189). 
By the autumn of 1622 Digges was back in England, trailing the court to Royston and Newmarket in the hope of pressing the case for his preferment. But as far as his intended patron was concerned, Digges mishandled his responsibilities by making a preliminary report on the commission's work which led to a moratorium on grants of royal bounty in Ireland, and his hopes of catching a ride on Buckingham's bandwagon were disappointed. His only appointment was to attend a welcoming ceremony for the Spanish ambassador in June 1623, which can hardly have been to his taste, given his publicly stated views on relations with Spain. Naturally it was these views which eventually made him useful once the tide of foreign policy turned, and there are suggestions that Digges was courted by the duke of Buckingham and the prince of Wales prior to the parliamentary elections of 1624. Certainly his rival for one of the county seats in Kent, Sir Edwin Sandys, was able to triumph over him by portraying him as a courtier, while colleagues in the house appear to have regarded Digges, the member for Tewkesbury once more, as a would-be 'undertaker'. 
But Digges, like many contemporaries, was always caught between his desire for a war with Spain and a reluctance to pay for it. When his hopes of reward once again came to nothing, his support for court policy began to wane. After the accession of Charles I he composed a long letter of advice to the new king in which he added his own voice to the calls for an 'advised council' which were increasingly becoming the staple of the anti-Buckingham opposition. In the parliament of 1625 he was hesitant in his defence of the duke. By 1626 he had apparently become positively 'disgusted at the failure of his attempt to become a Buckingham man' (Russell, 33). Henceforth he was a leader of the attack on the king's favourite. 
Digges was not motivated solely by the frustration of his quest for preferment. He argued that the duke should be held to account for the detention of the French merchant vessel the 'St Peter', and for the deleterious consequences for English merchants trading in France. These concerns doubtless reflected the nature of his constituency among the merchants of the London exchange, and probably indicate that he co-operated with the French ambassador, who was vehement in his prosecution of the same business. Digges may even have been involved in co-ordinating the attack on Buckingham with supporters of the king's new French wife, Henrietta Maria. Sir James Bagg wrote to the duke that Digges, 'being privately more dangerous than publicly, is thought to be wholly my Lord of Canterbury's', also indicating the strength of Digges's continuing association with George Abbot ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1625-49', 113). 
Pressing for the foundation of a West Indies Company, Digges clearly also continued to hanker after a freebooting war with Spain in the Caribbean which would avoid burdening the country with direct taxation, clearly setting him at odds with Buckingham's preferred strategy. He got into trouble for his introduction and preamble to the charges of impeachment against the duke, in which he compared him to a comet which, having appeared suddenly amid a firmament of fixed stars, demanded closer examination. Following Digges's speech, Sir John Eliot compared the duke to Sejanus, and by implication likened the king to the tyrant Tiberius. On 11 May both men were thrown into prison. Amid uproar over the implications for parliamentary privilege, Digges's release was secured four days later, and he kissed hands with the king. But whatever the hopes for a reconciliation, the slight in parliament to the king's favourite was evidently not forgotten. 
In September 1626 Digges's appointment to the commission for the collection of the privy seal loan in Kent was rescinded by the privy council. He appears to have lost his place on the county bench about the same time. Summoned before the board in December, apparently for insisting that he be allowed to pay the forced loan in London rather than at home in Kent, he spoke out of place and was imprisoned for sharp words against Lord Tufton, and for showing disrespect to the council. He spent two months in gaol. Relations apparently improved by the time of his appointment to the Kent recusancy commission in November 1627, increasing the likelihood that, for fear of any further punishment, Digges had eventually complied with the demands that he offer the king a loan. 
In 1628 Digges won the parliamentary seat to represent his home county. He was appointed chair of the committee of trade and consequently was in a position to forward legislation supporting the chartered companies, particularly the East India Company. He also sat on committees for drafting the petition of right and gave the introduction, subsequently printed, at the first major conference with the Lords on 7 April. In the first session of this parliament Digges spoke more than ninety times; in the second he addressed the matter of tonnage and poundage, called for an inquiry regarding the increase of Catholics in England, and vigorously supported parliamentary privilege for John Rolle, a merchant whose goods had been seized on his refusal to pay tonnage and poundage. He also spoke up against the burdens which military preparations were placing on his county. It has been said that he strongly disapproved of the violent scenes which preceded the dissolution of 1629. In 1630 hard cash finally obtained that which fortune had denied him hitherto when he obtained the reversion of the office of master of the rolls for a down payment of $5000 and the promise of the same amount at the death of Sir Julius Caesar, the incumbent. Having obtained honorific admission to Gray's Inn by right of the house's lord of misrule, the prince of Purpoole, in 1618, Digges now had himself readmitted and was called to the bench with full voting rights five days later. He served as master of chancery from 1631 to 1637. In 1636 he assumed the mastership of the rolls. The judge Sir Richard Hutton wrote that Digges was 'an able and sufficient man of great understanding, very affable and courteous and gives good orders' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 107). 
Digges retained his interest in the trading companies until the end of his life. In 1631 he was named as a commissioner for advancing the Virginia plantation, and in 1637 he was called upon to advise regarding the formation of a new company for the West Indies. He died on 18 March 1639 and was buried in the family mausoleum at Chilham, which he began constructing in 1620. In his will he charged his estate near Faversham, where he had much increased his water courts, with an annuity of $20 to provide prizes for a foot-race, open to competitors of both sexes, to be run in the neighbourhood every 19 May. The annual competition was kept up until the end of the eighteenth century. Digges was survived by four sons. The eldest, Thomas, married a daughter of Sir Maurice Abbot and had one son, Maurice, who was created a baronet on 6 March 1666, but died childless. His third son, Dudley Digges (1613-1643), achieved some distinction as a royalist pamphleteer, publishing 'The Unlawfulnesse of Subjects Taking up Armes against their Soveraigne in what Case soever' in 1643, the year of his death of camp fever at Oxford. Digges also had three daughters, of whom one, Anne, married William Hammond of St Alban's Court, near Canterbury, and was an ancestor of James Hammond, the elegiac poet. A memorial in the Chilham mausoleum records the eventual success of Digges's judicial career, but draws a veil over his earlier days as a parliamentarian. In 1643 the Long Parliament ordered publication of his speech at the opening of the prosecution of the duke of Buckingham. In 1655 a tract was published entitled 'The Compleat Ambassador', compiled from Digges's copies of the correspondence of Queen Elizabeth with Leicester, Burghley, Walsingham, and Sir Thomas Smith regarding the negotiations for a treaty of alliance with France. 


@@@@@


doc= 7636


Digges, Dudley (1613-1643), royalist political writer, was born in Chilham, Kent, the third son of Sir Dudley Digges (1582/3-1639), diplomat and judge, and Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Kempe of Olantigh, Kent, and a grandson of Thomas Digges, mathematician. He entered University College, Oxford, in 1629, proceeding BA on 17 January 1632 and MA on 15 October 1635. He was elected fellow of All Souls College in 1632, and in 1637 was incorporated into the University of Cambridge. In 1641 he was entered at Gray's Inn, but before September 1642 was back in Oxford, as one of the delegacy appointed to provide means for defending the town against parliament during the civil war. Digges contributed loyal poems to collections published by the university, including 'Musarum Oxoniensium' and 'Solis Britannici perigaeum coronae Carolinae', both in 1633, and 'Flos Britannicis versis novissimi filiola Carolae et Mariae', in 1637. A poem by him on the great frost of 1634 also survives in the Bodleian Library. In the same year Digges published an edition of his grandfather's mathematical work 'Nova corpora regularia', but he is remembered as a royalist pamphleteer and political philosopher. 
In July 1642 Henry Parker, secretary to the parliamentary army, argued in an anonymous pamphlet that the parliament had a 'special function of 'umpirage' between king and kingdom in rare cases of conflict' (Burgess, 204). Digges replied with 'An Answer to a Printed Book, Intituled, Observations upon some of His Majesties Late Answers and Expresses', printed at Oxford in November 1642, by his majesty's command. It was one of several royalist responses to Parker, but is regarded as the most detailed and persuasive. Two counterfeit editions of this work were printed in London, one in 1642, and another in 1647. 'A Reply to the 'Answer''... by 'J. M.' (previously ascribed to John Milton by the first edition of Wing's 'Short-Title Catalogue') was also published in November 1642. 'An Appendix to the Late 'Answer'' followed, but this was both written and printed in a different style from the original, and Falconer Madan questioned whether it was the work of Digges or published in Oxford (Madan, 2.181). Madan also contradicts the otherwise widely accepted attribution to Digges of yet another answer to Parker's 'Observations' entitled 'A Review of the 'Observations' upon some of His Majesties Late Answers'. This 'ponderous' work was issued in April 1643, and Digges is named as the author in Philip Bliss's edition of Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses', in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and in the 'British Museum Catalogue of the Thomason Tracts'. Madan suspected this may have been due to confusion with 'An Answer to a Printed Book' by a previous owner of a copy of 'A Review', and regarded the attribution as 'unlikely' (ibid., 2.249-50). 
Digges's most substantial work, and his contribution to contemporary political philosophy, was 'The Unlawfulnesse of Subjects Taking up Armes against their Soveraigne', which appeared in late 1643, after his death. This was a detailed and closely reasoned debate over the respective authorities of the king and parliament, described as 'a sort of compendium of royalist argumentation' (Allen, 494). It is based mainly on natural rights arguments, and 'closer to Hobbesian than to James I and Filmer's school of royalist thought' (Burns, 670-71). Digges argued that people were originally in a condition of complete liberty, but that it was rational for them to covenant to establish a civil sovereign. The renunciation of original rights was irreversible, and to suggest their continuance in civil society was subversive. He did not argue for absolute royal authority, but 'the right of the monarchy not to be accomptable to any inferior jurisdiction' (Burgess, 210). This work enjoyed continuing popularity among royalists and was reprinted in London in 1644, and on three occasions after the Restoration (in 1662, 1664, and 1679). 
Digges died at Oxford from a malignant camp fever (presumably typhus) on 1 October 1643 and was buried in the antechapel of All Souls. He left over 1000 volumes to the college. Anthony Wood described him as 'advantaged by a great memory, and excellent natural parts, which he improved by close studying, he became a general scholar and a good poet and linguist' ('Biographia Britannica', 3.1717-18). 


@@@@@


doc= 7637


Digges, Leonard (c.1515-c.1559), mathematician, was the son of James Digges (died 1535), of Digges Court, Barham, Kent, and his second wife, Phillippa, daughter of John Engham of Chart, Kent. Little is known of Digges's upbringing, though he appears to have been educated at Oxford. A letter written by his father in 1531 refers to the maintenance of his son at Oxford and his grandchildren at school. The grandchildren are presumably the children of Digges's elder brother John, son of James Digges's first marriage, so Digges must therefore be the student, though no university evidence survives to prove the point. This letter of 1531 is also the best evidence from which his year of birth can be inferred. His subsequent education is known more securely: he entered Lincoln's Inn in 1537. 
The Digges family was substantial and long established, with a record of holding county office, but Digges held no major office. He was named as one of those charged with defending the Kent coast from Dover to Folkestone in 1545 and was also listed as a supporter of Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger's 1549 scheme for a militia. He took part in Wyatt's revolt against the marriage of Queen Mary in January 1554 and, after its failure, was charged with high treason and sentenced to death. He was pardoned on 1 April 1554 but his lands and goods, which had been seized after his attainder, continued to be held subject to payment of recognizances to the crown. Digges's major fine of 400 marks was imposed in February 1555 and paid off in instalments, being finally discharged on 7 May 1558. Digges married Bridget, daughter of Thomas Wilford of Hartridge, Kent, and they had at least three sons and four daughters, of whom the best known is his eldest son, Thomas Digges (d. 1595), who edited and republished several of his father's mathematical works. Leonard Digges was left the manor of Brome, Kent, by his father but sold this and established himself near by at Wootton in 1546 or 1547. The record of lands seized by the crown in 1554 reveals the extent of his landholdings in Kent. 
Digges was an important member of the first generation of English mathematical authors to publish in the vernacular. Only two of his works were printed during his lifetime, a popular almanac and a short treatise on mensuration, both of which appeared in the 1550s. However, his interest in practical mathematics had been established much earlier. In 1542 he and three other gentlemen visited the English castle of Guines near Calais where they impressed their host through debate and demonstration of their skills in geometry, navigation, measurement, and artillery. 
The earliest surviving edition of Digges's almanac is 'A Prognostication of Right Good Effect, Fructfully Augmented'. This was published in 1555 and dedicated to Sir Edward Fiennes, Lord Clinton and Saye, who was thanked for his help in preserving Digges during his 'troubles', evidently a reference to the consequences of Digges's participation in the Wyatt uprising. Digges described the 1555 text as a revision and expansion of a now lost earlier version, referred to as his 'general prognostication', printed in 1553. After 1555 there were at least thirteen subsequent editions into the early seventeenth century, usually under the title 'A Prognostication Euerlasting'. From 1576, the work became the vehicle for an addition by his son Thomas, which included a presentation of Copernicus's heliocentric world system. 
Digges's almanac deliberately departed from the usual form of such texts, which were typically printed for a single year and required annual renewal. The material he included was intended to be more generally valid; surviving fragments of a single sheet almanac for Kent dated 1556 show that he also contributed to the more standard genre. The 'Prognostication' has calendrical tables and explanations of meteorological phenomena, with basic astrological information and rules for predicting the weather as well as times for planting, grafting, and blood-letting. Digges discussed the use of instruments such as the quadrant and square for time-telling, and provided tide tables for mariners. To satisfy readers who doubted the possibility of the astronomical statements in his early editions he included diagrams of the geocentric world system and of the relative sizes of the planets. This collection of miscellaneous material was prefaced by an apology for astronomy and the mathematical sciences, citing Melanchthon and Guido Bonatus to defend these against charges of impiety and vanity. Digges here recommended the mathematical sciences for their pleasure as well as their utility: 'the ingenious learned and well experienced circumspect student mathematical receiveth daily in his witty practices more pleasant joy of mind than all thy goods (how rich soever thou be) can at any time purchase' ('Prognostication', 1555, sig. [*iiij]'r'). 
Digges's 'Tectonicon' appeared in 1556, advertised on its title-page as a book for surveyors, 'landmeters', joiners, carpenters, and masons. It taught the measurement of land, the calculation of quantities, and the use of various instruments such as the carpenter's rule, the square, and a version of the cross-staff ('the profitable staff'). Digges was at pains to correct common errors practised by those without an adequate grounding in mathematics; this theme of 'vulgar errors' became standard in many subsequent mathematical texts. The success of 'Tectonicon' is evident from its subsequent history: at least twenty editions were printed, the last in 1692. The work also marks the public debut of the commercial trade in mathematical ('scientific') instruments in England: the text's publisher, the Flemish immigrant Thomas Gemini, used the title-page to advertise the availability of the instruments described in the volume. 
In the 'Prognostication' and 'Tectonicon', Digges promised several other volumes: a larger work on the use of the square to expand on the brief treatment in 'Tectonicon', a treatise on the construction of the letters of the alphabet, a volume devoted to astrology, and a more substantial text on practical mathematics. Only the latter appeared, in the form of 'Pantometria', published posthumously by his son Thomas in 1571, with a second edition in 1591. The three books of 'Pantometria' covered the measurement of length, area, and volume and show Digges's familiarity with the latest continental sources. The work extended and complemented 'Tectonicon' through its focus on surveying, and offered accounts of new and important devices such as the 'topographical instrument', the first appearance in England of the altazimuth theodolite. Thomas Digges added a work of his own on geometrical solids to the volume but his role in 'Pantometria' was limited to revising the text for the press. He dedicated the work to Sir Nicholas Bacon, doing so in fulfilment of the wishes of his father, who had both discussed mathematics with Bacon and planned to present him with this particular treatise. 
Leonard Digges also wrote on arithmetic, and some surviving papers became the basis for the first book of Thomas Digges's 'Stratioticos' of 1579, a work on military mathematics whose second edition appeared in 1590. Other investigations by Digges senior never reached print. On the basis of comments by his son, occasional claims have been made that Digges devised a reflecting telescope; there is no evidence that his reported optical experimentation led to a working instrument for astronomical observation, but it seems likely that he did indeed use a rather unwieldy lens-mirror combination for terrestrial viewing. He was interested in the closely related topic of burning mirrors and in the seventeenth century he was also credited with skill in fortification and architecture. 
Digges's other major research was on artillery and ballistics. The most important text in this area was Niccolo Tartaglia's 'Nova scientia' of 1537, which had inaugurated the mathematical study of ballistics. Although his published works of the 1550s were elementary and popular, Digges's artillery investigations were pursued as a self-conscious combination of theory and practice. After a programme of mathematical work and experimental trials, Digges concluded that a number of the most important results announced by Tartaglia were incorrect. Some of his artillery conclusions were published by his son in 'Stratioticos', but in a form which makes the respective contributions of father and son impossible to distinguish. 
Thomas Digges, who actively publicized the life and work of his father, is also the only source for his death. From Thomas's autobiographical comments in a legal dispute of the 1590s it can be inferred that Leonard died about 1559, shortly after he had resumed possession of his confiscated lands and when he had only just begun the mathematical education of his eldest son. The close ties between the published work of father and son have obscured the marked differences in their careers -- historians have often simply referred to the Diggeses as if the two were indistinguishable. Leonard was an able popularizer who had enormous success in writing for a large audience, but he was more than just a talented compiler with a flair for instrumental innovation and exposition. Through his promotion of the mathematical arts and his claims for the civic utility of practical geometry, he was a key figure in the establishment of the role of the mathematical practitioner. 


@@@@@


doc= 7638


Digges, Leonard (1588-1635), poet and translator, was born in London, the son of Thomas Digges (c.1546-1595), mathematician, and Anne (or Agnes), daughter of Sir Warham St Leger. Sir Dudley Digges (1582/3-1639) was his brother. After Thomas Digges's death his widow married Thomas Russell of Alderminster, whom in 1616 William Shakespeare named as an overseer of his will. The remarriage of his mother had literary repercussions for Leonard Digges. He went to University College, Oxford, in 1603, aged fifteen, and graduated BA on 31 October 1606. Having left Oxford, he returned briefly to London before embarking on a period of study in foreign universities. In 1611 it seems that he went to Spain with his friend James Mabbe, a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, who was secretary to the English ambassador, Sir John Digby. The evidence for their companionship in Spain is provided by a copy of Lope de Vega's 'Rimas' (1613), now in the library of Balliol College, Oxford, which Mabbe sent to another Oxford friend, Will Baker. In a note to Baker on the flyleaf Digges compared Lope's sonnets to those of Shakespeare, which were clearly regarded, at least in Digges's circle, as the finest of their kind. In consideration of the accomplishments Digges acquired in classical and modern languages he was created MA at Oxford on 20 November 1626, and allowed to reside at University College, where he died on 7 April 1635 and was buried in the chapel. 
Digges has been lauded as an 'eminent-poet' (Hunter) and his earliest text, a verse translation from Claudius Claudianus's 'The Rape of Proserpine', was published in 1617, with further editions appearing in 1628. It is dedicated to Digges's sister (1587-1619), wife of Sir Anthony Palmer KB (1566-1630), who had recently nursed Digges through a 'desperate sicknesse' (L. Digges, 'Rape of Proserpine', 1617, sig. A2'r') and whose devotion was similarly recorded on her funerary monument in Chilham church, Kent. In 1622 he issued a translation of a Spanish novel by the former prisoner G. de Cespedes y Meneses, entitled 'Gerardo, the Unfortunate Spaniard', and dedicated it, admitting that he was a 'stranger rather than an intruder', to the brothers William, earl of Pembroke, and Philip, earl of Montgomery. 
In addition Digges composed short verses prefixing a number of texts. The first of these, praising the accuracy and originality of the succeeding narrative, was printed in Matheo Aleman's 'The Rogue, or, The Life of Guzman de Alfarache' (1623). This work, a highly moral depiction of a linguistically gifted cleric's refusal to heed good counsel, and the subsequent calamities he suffered, was followed in 1639 by Giovanni Sorriano's 'The Italian Tutor, or, A New and most Compleat Italian Grammar'. Digges again celebrated the author's skills: '
What reader but will say thy paines are such, 

No tongue nor pen can praise too much 

For what although thou mortall quickly die? Thy fame shall live eternally. 
(L. Digges, 'Italian Tutor', 1639, sig. [a2'v'])' Consolidating his association with the stationer Edward Blount, Digges (like Mabbe) produced commendatory verses prefacing Shakespeare's first folio (1623) -- '
This Booke, 

When Brasse and Marble fade, shall make thee looke 

Fresh to all Ages 
(sig. A7'r')' -- and the 1640 edition of his 'Poems'. The latter verses reveal Digges's admiration for the poet's inventive creativity and fame: '
Briefe, there is nothing in his wit fraught Booke, 

Whose sound we would not heare; on whose worth looke 

Like old coynd gold, whose lines in every page, 

Shall passe true currant to succeeding age. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 7639


Digges, Thomas (c.1546-1595), mathematician and member of parliament, was the eldest son of Leonard Digges (c.1515-c.1559), practical mathematician, and his wife, Bridget, daughter of Thomas Wilford of Hartridge, Kent. Digges was presumably brought up on his father's estate at Wootton, Kent, but Leonard's land and property were seized after his involvement in the Wyatt uprising of 1554. Condemned to death for high treason, Leonard was pardoned and subsequently recovered his lands, but his sons lost their right of inheritance. Thomas Digges and his younger brother James were restored in blood by act of parliament only in 1563. In the interim their father had died and Thomas Digges's education was taken over by John Dee; Digges would later refer to Dee as his 'revered second mathematical father' ('Alae seu scalae mathematicae', 1573, sig. A2'r') and Dee considered Digges as 'my most worthy mathematical heir' (Dee, sig. A2'v'). 
The combination of filial duty and the unusually mathematical nature of Digges's upbringing helps to explain the character of much of his published work. His first publication was 'Pantometria' (1571), an edition of a manuscript on surveying and practical geometry by his father. Appended to this text was Digges's own contribution, 'A Mathematicall Discourse of Geometricall Solids'. This was the most self-consciously advanced and novel work on geometry published in sixteenth-century England. Digges provided several hundred theorems on the properties, dimensions, and interrelations of the five regular (Platonic) polyhedra, and the final section of his text extended the enquiry to an investigation of five 'transformed' bodies -- semi-regular (Archimedean) solids generated by the metamorphosis of each of the five Platonic solids. 
The elevated level of Digges's work was confirmed by 'Alae seu scalae mathematicae' (1573), a text prompted by the appearance of the new star of 1572. Addressed to a European audience of astronomers, 'Alae' was Digges's only Latin publication and offered an analysis and improvement of the mathematical and instrumental techniques available for the study of the nova. Recent radio astronomy has shown that Digges's observations were the most accurate then made. Moreover, he concluded that the new star was indeed a celestial body rather than a meteorological phenomenon, thus challenging the interpretations offered by contemporary Aristotelian natural philosophy. 
Digges's cosmological ambitions went beyond his claims concerning the new star. In 'Alae' he condemned the 'monstrous' planetary astronomy of Ptolemy and wrote approvingly of Copernicus ('Alae', sigs. A4'v', 2A3'r', 2A4'v', L2'v'). But he did not wholeheartedly endorse the Copernican heliocentric system, in which the sun rather than the earth is stationed at the centre of the universe. Writing only shortly after the appearance of the new star, Digges initially hoped that its changing brightness might provide concrete observational evidence to support or modify the Copernican doctrine. 
Digges's hopes were frustrated, as the star simply faded from view. But he nevertheless became the first English author publicly to declare his support for Copernicus's cosmological scheme, in the 1576 edition of his father's 'A Prognostication Everlasting'. As an appendix to this popular almanac, Digges included his 'Perfit description of the caelestiall orbes', which made Copernicus's general claims accessible to an English audience by providing a free translation of the cosmological sections of book one of 'De revolutionibus orbium caelestium' (1543). Digges also added his own touches, particularly in a famous diagram which went beyond Copernicus's own scheme, by showing an infinite universe in which the stars extended indefinitely outwards from the solar system. 
In parallel with his innovative mathematical work of the early 1570s Digges also began a gentlemanly career of service. He was selected as MP for Wallingford in 1572 and sat at this parliament's subsequent sessions in 1576 and 1581. For the next parliament in 1584, he was returned as MP for Southampton. Over this period Digges was increasingly active, whether making speeches, sitting on committees, or consulting with the privy council. He has been identified as one of the House of Commons' 'men of business' and he earned a reputation for speaking 'for the common wealth of all England, and for no private cause' (Hitchcock, last page). 
Digges's parliamentary work reached a peak in 1584-5 when he drafted memoranda on such topics as the provision of a standing army, the oath of association, a bill on Jesuits, and the question of the succession to Queen Elizabeth. He was by then a prominent and respected figure: 'Digges commonly doth speak last, and therefore saith, every matter must have an end, and therefore to draw this to a conclusion' (HoP, 'Commons', 38). Outside parliament he took on other public duties. He promoted plans for a new harbour at Dover in the early 1580s and involved himself in the detailed design of this major Elizabethan technical project. He was appointed a commissioner for the harbour in 1582 and made surveyor, but delegated his responsibilities to a local deputy. His mathematical skills were also called on in 1583 when he was asked to review John Dee's proposal for reform of the calendar, prepared after the introduction of the Gregorian calendar. 
Rather than keep them in separate spheres, Digges sought to integrate his twin commitments to civic service and to mathematics. As early as 1576 he had included a programmatic call for the mathematical reformation of navigation along with the Copernican appendix to his father's 'Prognostication Everlasting'. He subsequently spent fifteen weeks at sea, both to satisfy himself and to overcome the scepticism of experienced mariners. Digges not only proclaimed his criticisms of navigational errors to be triumphantly vindicated, but demonstrated that he could not be dismissed as merely a study-bound scholar. 
Digges developed his vision of the identity of the mathematician most explicitly in 'Stratioticos' (1579), a text on military mathematics. He confessed that he had once been delighted with the elevated subtlety of mathematical demonstration but that, with more mature judgement, he had spent his time 'in reducing the Sciences Mathematical from Demonstrative Contemplations to Experimental Actions, for the Service of my Prince and Country' ('Stratioticos', 1579, sig. A2'r'). 'Stratioticos' exemplifies this self-conscious choice of role and agenda. Its first book is on arithmetic and was based on surviving manuscript material of Leonard Digges. The remaining two books are Thomas Digges's own, adapting elementary algebra for use by soldiers and providing a lengthy treatment of the qualities and roles of all the ranks of men in an army. The volume was dedicated to the earl of Leicester, and had been composed in response to hopes over the winter of 1577-8 that he would lead an English force against the Spanish in the Netherlands. The last book of 'Stratioticos' was evidently intended as a blueprint for a model army and, although Leicester's expedition came to nothing at the time, Digges himself visited the Low Countries in the autumn of 1578, touring and reporting on fortifications, and observing the troops. 
When the Netherlands crisis came to a head in the mid-1580s Digges was again exhorting Leicester to active intervention. He was appointed as both trench-master and muster-master in the expeditionary force sent over in late 1585 and, after initially busying himself surveying fortifications, concentrated wholly on the office of muster-master. Although praised for his unswerving rectitude, his attempts to check abuses in the distribution of soldiers' pay led to increasing hostility and dispute. Far removed from the textbook military prescriptions of 'Stratioticos', Digges already complained of intolerable malice in September 1586 and, when he finally received his official discharge in early 1588, he considered that the disorders and abuses plaguing the army were above his power to remedy. 
Digges's last years were dogged by continued and bitter wrangling over his army accounts and his position was weakened by the loss of his principal patron. While he appears to have been most closely linked with Lord Burghley in the early 1570s, by the end of the decade Digges had aligned himself with the activist and interventionist policy associated with Leicester. As well as the dedication of 'Stratioticos' and the contacts leading to Digges's military service, Digges was nominated to his parliamentary seat in 1584 by Leicester; in addition, he named his eldest son Dudley after his patron. Digges also served Leicester in print, defending his reputation and military honour in both 'A Briefe Report of the Militarie Services done in the Low Countries, by the Erle of Leicester' (1587) and 'A Briefe and True Report of the Proceedings of the Earle of Leycester for the Reliefe of the Towne of Sluce' (1590). 
Despite promising books on a wide range of mathematical subjects, 'Stratioticos' was Digges's last major composition. His military concerns were reflected in new editions of 'Stratioticos' (1590) and 'Pantometria' (1591), which both contained additions on artillery, and particularly ballistics. Digges had built once again on prior work of his father by publishing a series of questions on artillery in the first edition of 'Stratioticos'. His subsequent answers and notes of 1590 and 1591 foreshadowed his projected treatise on the subject and also demonstrated how advanced mathematics could be brought to bear on urgent military matters. 
Despite the disappointments of his own military service, Digges still upheld the ideal of joining theory and practice in the service of the commonwealth. In presenting himself as a gentleman mathematician he became probably the most important Elizabethan promoter of mathematics as an engaged and effective worldly practice. His significance lay not only in his advocacy of novel geometry and cosmology but in shaping the tradition of practical mathematics. 
Digges established his country residence at Chevening in Kent and also maintained a house in London. He married Anne (or Agnes), daughter of Sir Warham St Leger, and his will lists their surviving children as Dudley Digges (1582/3-1639), Margaret, Ursula, and Leonard Digges. Digges died on 24 August 1595 and his will was proved on 1 September, being opposed by his brother James and by William Digges, who were excluded by codicil. He was buried in the chancel of St Mary Aldermanbury, London, where his wife erected a monument to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 7640


Digges, West (1725?-1786), actor and theatre manager, was probably born in 1725, the elder of the two sons (there was no daughter) of Thomas Digges, gentleman, of Chilham Castle, Kent, and his wife, Elizabeth West ('bap'. 1695, died 1762), who were married on 18 August 1724. George Colman the younger claimed in his 'Random Records' that Digges was the illegitimate son of Elizabeth's brother John West, seventh baron and later first Earl De La Warr (1693-1766), but as Elizabeth clearly identifies West Digges as the elder son of her marriage to Thomas Digges this can be discounted. 
Thomas Digges's income had since 1727 been administered by trustees, possibly connected to failed investments in the South Sea Company, and the young West Digges was expected to be guided in his career by his uncle Lord De La Warr. According to his mother's will, with De La Warr's help Digges obtained a commission in the army, but 'by his Extravagance suffered a Commission of Bankruptcy to be issued against him' and 'instead of applying himself to any Profession or Calling worthy of his Birth has betaken himself to the publick Stage to the great Disgrace of himself and Family' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/875, sig 192). The first public notice of West Digges as an actor occurred when he appeared on stage at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin on 29 November 1749, playing Jaffeir in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd'. His success was immediate, and he soon added Hamlet, Lear, Antony, Romeo, George Barnwell, and Macheath to his repertory, attaining overwhelming popularity for six seasons and attracting the attention of David Garrick. However, in November 1754 Digges was unwittingly party to a political riot at Smock Alley for refusing to repeat a volatile political passage in James Miller's 'Mahomet the Impostor'. 
In spring 1756 Digges performed major roles at the Canongate Theatre in Edinburgh; by autumn he had become manager there. His flamboyant style led him to puff his first production, John Home's tragedy 'Douglas'; the success of the play created a national furore, fuelled by a clergy apprehensive of secular entertainment. Although it was condemned by the Edinburgh presbytery, the tragedy enjoyed unprecedented success. Digges remained at Canongate for three years as manager, but in 1758 a quarrel with his musicians over salary precipitated a strike and a series of six pamphlets airing the dispute. When his partner, Sarah Ward (1726/7-1771), with whom he had been living since 1752, left him, thus breaking the contract both had with the theatre, the Canongate's owners dismissed Digges. 
Digges's personal life consistently impinged upon his prospects for success; he was damaged both by unsatisfactory relationships with women and by his consistent extravagance, which kept him in debt throughout his life. His marriage to Mary Wakeling, on 3 March 1746 at All Hallows, London Wall, though short-lived, coloured his future relationships with women. His liaison between 1752 and 1759 with the actress Sarah Ward, which produced at least six children, ended with mutual recriminations, revealed in 'Letters which Passed between Mr. West Digges, Comedian, and Mrs. Sarah Ward, 1752-1759'. A later stormy relationship with the actress George Anne Bellamy (1731?-1788) lasted several years, during which the couple lived on Newhaven Road in Bonington, near Edinburgh. Digges's impecuniousness placed him in situations both embarrassing and criminal; he was forced to flee his creditors (1753, 1759), suffer arrest (1772), and endure imprisonment (1777). 
Despite these distractions, Digges pursued his career energetically, especially in Edinburgh, where he was always warmly welcomed. He performed in Edinburgh in 1759 and 1762 and in Dublin in 1760 and 1761. His apparent inactivity for a few years after 1762 may be related to his inheritance from his mother, whose will stipulated that he was entitled to a half-share of her South Sea stock, worth $7312 7's'., if he could assure his younger brother, Dudley, that he would give up the stage and discharge his debts. If he did retire, that retirement was brief; he was acting at Limerick in 1767, and in August 1771 he resumed managing at the Canongate. Extant stage bills indicate that he acted at Limerick again in 1774, at Cork in 1774, at York in 1775, and at Liverpool in 1776. Digges made his London debut in the title role of Joseph Addison's 'Cato' at the Haymarket on 14 August 1777. During that season he performed a number of his celebrated roles, including Wolsey in 'Henry VIII', Sir John Brute in John Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife', and Macheath in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera'; the next season he performed Caratach in George Colman's version of Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Bonduca', called 'an excellent piece of acting' (Colman, 1.255). The critic from the 'London Chronicle' of 14 August 1777, although noting his antiquated style of acting and citing 'the extreme difference between the stile of the old school... and the modern', could not deny the power of Digges's performance, admitting that he 'awed us into esteem and admiration'. Digges performed in London until 1781, and from 1781 to 1783 he acted in Edinburgh, Cork, and Limerick. From 1782 to 1784 he was a member of Daly's company in Dublin, where he suffered a stroke on 2 July 1784 during a rehearsal of 'Venice Preserv'd'. 
Digges was a commanding figure on stage. John O'Keeffe remembered that 'he had a noble presence, a fine figure, large and manly; a full expressive and pleasing face, and ruddy complexion' ('Recollections of the Life of John O'Keeffe', 1826, 1.290). Victor remarked that 'almost all the Requisites to form a great Actor seemed to unite [in him]; every Advantage of Art and Nature, except an harmonious Voice' (Victor, 1.147). James Boswell wrote to Garrick that Digges 'threw open to me the portals of Theatrical Enchantment' (Yale MS L 569), while Colman mentions that, as Wolsey, he drew tears 'even from the eyes of flinty-hearted critics' (Colman, 1.255). 
Digges died on 11 November 1786 at his home on the Coal Quay in Cork and was buried the following day in the cathedral of St Fin Barre in Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 7641


Dighton, Denis (1791-1827), military painter, was born in London on 16 October 1791, the son of Robert Dighton sen. (1751-1814), actor, caricaturist, and printseller, and Catherine Caroline. Although baptized Mark James Dennis Dighton (at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, on 24 November 1791), he seems to have used only the last forename, spelt Denis, during his adult life. His half-brother, Robert Dighton jun. ('c'.1786-1865), and his younger brother, Richard (1795/6-1880), were also known as watercolourists and printmakers. In 1807 Denis became a student at the Royal Academy Schools. Then, having come to the attention of the prince of Wales early in his career, he was commissioned in the 90th regiment (Perthshire volunteers) on 11 July 1811, through royal patronage. However, he resigned not long afterwards, on 17 March 1812, in order to marry Phoebe Earl ('b'. 1790), flower painter and daughter of the portraitist, James Earl (1761-1796). They were married on 22 June 1812 at St Pancras church, and settled in London, initially at Denis's father's address, 4 Spring Gardens, Westminster, London. 
In 1813 Dighton may have visited the British army on campaign in the Peninsular War, where his brother Robert was serving with the 38th (1st Staffordshire) regiment. He produced a number of fine watercolours depicting Spanish patriot leaders and their men, signed and dated that year and apparently drawn from life, one of which is inscribed 'from a sketch from life at Cadiz' (Royal Collection). Robert was also wounded at the sortie from Bayonne, France, on 14 April 1814 and there is a watercolour portrait of General Thouvenot, governor of Bayonne, signed by Dighton and dated 1814 (Royal Collection). In 1814 he exhibited at the Royal Academy 'The Storming of San Sebastian, 31st August [1813]' (Leith Hall, Aberdeenshire). 
Appointed military draughtsman to the prince regent in 1815, Dighton painted the dramatic 'Battle of Orthez' (exh. RA, 1815; Plas Newydd, Anglesey) which the prince sent as a present to the marquess of Anglesey on 27 July. Anglesey also acquired Dighton's large canvas celebrating Napoleon's final defeat on 18 June 1815, 'The Battle of Waterloo; the General Advance of the British Lines' (exh. RA, 1816; Plas Newydd, Anglesey), based on the artist's own studies of the topography. Dighton had visited the battlefield only days after the event and made nine studies in watercolour (Royal Collection), from which he also produced two battle paintings in watercolour (NAM). On 7 November 1816 the prince paid Dighton $50 for a smaller version of Lord Anglesey's Waterloo painting (Royal Collection), and in the following year he purchased 'The Battle of Waterloo; the Charge of the Second Brigade of Cavalry', depicting Sergeant Ewart of the Scots Greys capturing the eagle of the French 45th regiment (exh. RA, 1817; Royal Collection). 
Between 1811 and 1825 Dighton exhibited seventeen pictures at the Royal Academy, the first of which was 'The Lace Maker'. Thereafter, his work was mainly military, either battle paintings or detailed uniform studies, although he also painted the notable naval work, 'The Battle of Trafalgar, 21 October 1805, Fall of Nelson' (NMM). When the prince regent succeeded to the throne, Dighton painted a large watercolour, 'The Coronation Banquet Champion' (1821), and in 1822 he accompanied the king on his visit to Scotland, where he made drawings of the ceremonies (all Royal Collection). However, according to Redgrave, 'he lost his access to his royal patron, and... the chief source of his income was stopped' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 126). This is said to have affected his health and eventually his sanity. Dighton's wife took him to Brittany, where he died at St Servan, on 8 August 1827. Phoebe Dighton painted fruit and flower pieces influenced by Dutch masters, and was appointed flower painter to Queen Adelaide. Between 1820 and 1835 she exhibited sixteen pictures at the Academy, and eight at the British Institution. In 1835 Ackermann published 'Relics of Shakespeare, from Drawings by Mrs Denis Dighton'. Following this, in 1839 she married Patrick McIntyre and, between 1841 and 1854, exhibited a further three pictures under her second married name. 
Dighton was an accomplished watercolourist and graphic artist, and the Royal Collection holds some 243 watercolours and sixty-seven preliminary pencil drawings by him, all depicting European military uniform between about 1811 and 1822, which are generally very accurate. There are also four indian-ink drawings in the British Museum's department of prints and drawings, which were engraved to illustrate Maria, Lady Callcott's, works on Chile and Brazil. He also etched and lithographed several plates of military subjects and portraits of Russian leaders, among which is 'Denis Davidoff, the Black Captain' (1814). 


@@@@@


doc= 7642


Dighton, Robert (1751-1814), draughtsman and singer, was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 5 December 1751, the son of John Dighton, a print seller, and his wife, Hannah. Both were portrayed in a mezzotint by Robert Laurie after Robert Dighton, 'Court of Equity, or, A Convivial City Meeting' (1778), which shows a gathering of friends at the Belle Savage on Ludgate Hill, London. Robert Dighton entered the Academy Schools in 1772 and afterwards set up as a drawing-master and miniature portrait painter. The first prints that he designed were of actors in character for John Bell's edition of Shakespeare's works (1775-6) and for Thomas Lowndes's 'New English Theatre' (1776-7). In 1779 sets of his portraits of actors and actresses in mezzotint were published by William Richardson and a 'Book of Heads', with a self-portrait as title-plate, was engraved for Carington Bowles. Dighton exhibited seventeen miniature portraits and comic drawings with the Free Society (1769-74), and he also occasionally exhibited at the Royal Academy (1775-99). 
Dighton's career developed in two distinct directions. He achieved considerable popularity as a singer. On 27 August 1776 the 'Morning Post' identified him as the gentleman who had performed at the Haymarket the night before, and in 1777 he probably appeared at Brighton during the summer season. Quite soon he was in demand for benefit nights at Covent Garden, playing such leading roles as Mungo in 'The Padlock' (1781), Hawthorn in 'Love in a Village' (1784), and, for his own benefit, Macheath in 'The Beggar's Opera' (1784). Since he had no regular place in the Covent Garden company it is likely that this celebrity status was acquired by singing at the pleasure gardens. By 1792 he was certainly also appearing at Sadler's Wells, but it is impossible to establish how frequent his performances were owing to the fragmentary nature of the evidence. He was principal tenor in 1794 and appeared regularly until 1800. 
As an artist Dighton is most interesting as the foremost designer of droll mezzotints and engravings after the death in 1780 of the previous master of the field, John Collett. Dighton worked chiefly for Carington Bowles, and also designed comic literary series such as 'Twelve prints illustrating the most interesting, sentimental and humorous scenes in Tristram Shandy' (1785) and, around 1800, sporting prints. Most of these were published anonymously but can be assigned to Dighton, as his original drawings, 128 signed watercolours, and twenty-one Indian ink wash drawings were preserved in an album by the Bowles family. The album surfaced at auction in 1953 but was broken up and dispersed at a second auction in 1978. Dighton's earliest comic designs date from 1781, and their flavour is indicated by such titles as 'Mr Deputy Dumpling and Family Enjoying a Summer Afternoon' (1781), 'The Return from a Masquerade -- a Morning Scene' ('c'.1784), or 'The Frenchman in Distress' (1797). Much of his work is enduringly funny. 
On 22 September 1771 Dighton was married to a Latitia Clark and they had two children, Latitia Sarah ('b'. 1775) and Robert ('b'. 1777). By the late 1780s Dighton was involved with the Vauxhall Gardens soprano Catherine Caroline Bertles ('fl'. 1787-1794), who in 1792 appeared on stage with him at Sadler's Wells. Together they had four sons and two daughters. With the help of his offspring he drew, etched, and published lightly caricatured portraits from his house at Charing Cross. But times were hard in the art world on account of the war. In 1806 it was discovered that since 1798 Dighton had been regularly stealing prints from the British Museum. In 1812 he tried to put one of his daughters on the stage 'by which she might obtain the favour of assisting me in my present pecuniary embarasment ['sic']' (Rose, 27). He died in 1814 at his home, 4 Spring Gardens, Charing Cross. His prints and drawings are held by the British Museum, London, the Royal Library, Windsor, the Sadler's Wells Library, and several private collectors. 
After his death Latitia Sarah, by then married to Thomas Burnell, was, as 'the natural and lawful daughter and only next of kin of the said deceased' (Rose, 26), granted administration of her father's estate. This implies that Dighton's three (or possibly four) surviving sons were conceived out of wedlock. Of these, Robert Dighton ('c'.1786-1865) worked as a caricature portrait etcher from 1800 until 1809, when he was commissioned in the army; he served as a regular soldier until 1847. Denis Dighton (1791-1827) painted battle scenes, while Richard Dighton (1795/6-1880) continued his father's business as an etcher of mildly caricatured portraits. A Joshua Dighton produced sporting caricatures between 1820 and 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 7643


Dignum, Charles (1765?-1827), singer, was born at Rotherhithe, London, probably in 1765. His father, a master tailor and a Roman Catholic, moved to Wild Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, and young Dignum became a chorister at the Sardinian chapel; there his fine voice attracted the attention of Samuel Webbe, the organist, who taught him music. Dignum, however, wished to become a priest, and was prevented only by his father being too poor to pay for his training. A proposed apprenticeship to a carver and gilder was cut short after nine months. He was then articled for seven years to the composer Thomas Linley. For the first two years Linley would not let him sing in public, so as to allow his voice to mature. He made his debut at Drury Lane, as young Meadows in 'Love in a Village', on 14 October 1784; according to the advertisements he was received by a packed house with unbounded applause. He appeared in Michael Arne's 'Cymon' on 26 November and as Damon in Boyce's 'The Chaplet' on 18 December. Dignum remained associated with Drury Lane during the greater part of his life, but for an interval at Covent Garden in 1792-4. At both theatres his salary, where known, was $4 a week. He had a fine tenor voice, but his build was clumsy, ultimately fat, and he seems to have been good-natured but somewhat stupid. He sang both leading and supporting parts, chiefly in ballad opera, pantomime, and musical romance; his speciality was patriotic, sailor, and sentimental songs, some of which he composed himself. He was particularly successful as Tom Tug in 'The Waterman' and as Crop in 'No Song, No Supper'. He also sang oratorio, and on 28 March 1800 took part at Covent Garden in the first London performance of Haydn's 'The Creation'. During the summers Dignum sang at Vauxhall, where he was a great favourite. In 1786 he married the heiress daughter of Charles Rennett, an attorney of the Middle Temple; she died at 23 New North Street, Red Lion Square, in 1799, and of their children only one daughter survived. Dignum's name disappears from the theatre bills after 1812. He died of inflammation of the lungs at his home, 47 Gloucester Street, Queen Square, on 29 March 1827. He is said to have accumulated, together with his wife's property, a fortune of some $30,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 7644


Dilke, Ashton Wentworth (1850-1883), traveller and politician, was born on 11 August 1850 in London, the younger son of Sir (Charles) Wentworth Dilke, first baronet (1810-1869), and Mary (died 1853), the only daughter of Captain William Chatfield, Madras cavalry; his elder brother was Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke, second baronet, the Liberal cabinet minister. Dilke was educated privately before being admitted at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1868. He was made a scholar in 1870, and was prominent in the Cambridge Union in 1871, but left without taking a degree, being anxious to travel in and discover more about Russia, having visited the country on three occasions in 1869. He spent some two years during 1872-3 visiting much of Russia and central Asia, living for some months in a Russian village, studying the language, and examining the condition of the peasantry. He returned showing symptoms of the consumption which later killed him, but began a book on Russia, one or two chapters of which appeared in the 'Fortnightly Review' in 1874, although it was never published complete. His energies were absorbed by the 'Weekly Dispatch', which he bought for $14,000 in January 1875 and edited for fifteen months until 1876, and then again from 1878 to 1880. He published a translation of Turgenev's 'Virgin Soil' in 1878. 
On 10 April 1876 Dilke married Margaret Mary Smith ['see below']. They had two sons and a daughter. In 1880 he was returned to parliament for Newcastle upon Tyne. Variously described as an advanced Liberal and a radical (he was secretary of the Radical Club and a member of the London Municipal Reform League), he seemed set for an active career but his health, never robust, gradually gave way and he resigned his seat at the beginning of the session of 1883. He spent the last few months of his life at Algiers, where he died on 12 March 1883. 


From 1878 Maye Dilke was an active member of the National Society for Women's Suffrage and became a member of its executive. When the society split, in 1888, she joined the remaining members who formed the Central National Society for Women's Suffrage, becoming the society's treasurer in 1896. In 1885 she published 'Women's Suffrage' and in 1889 contributed an article to the 'Nineteenth Century' in response to the anti-suffragist appeal against women's suffrage. Involved in Liberal politics, she was elected in 1888 a member of the London School Board for Lambeth, advocating free education. She retired from the board in 1891. 
On 19 September 1891 she married William Russell Cooke (1854/5-1903), solicitor and legal adviser to the Liberal party, at Kensington parish church. They had two sons. As Mrs Russell Cooke she continued her suffrage activities and was also active in the Women's Emancipation Union. Having attended the International Council of Women at Washington, USA, in 1888, she was one of those who, in 1897, advocated the creation of a national council of women to represent all the societies in which women took a part. In 1899 she opposed provisions which would have curtailed the role of women in London local government. Among the other causes which she took up was the provision of seating for women shop assistants, who were required to stand for long periods. 
After the death of her second husband she settled on the Isle of Wight, where she became a member of the county education committee and unsuccessfully stood for the county council (being the first woman candidate). After a long illness she died at her home, Bellecroft, near Newport, Isle of Wight, on 19 May 1914. The elder son of her first marriage, Fisher Wentworth Dilke (1877-1944), succeeded as fourth baronet in 1918; the elder of her second marriage, Sidney Russell Cooke (1892-1930), became a Liberal parliamentary candidate. 


@@@@@


doc= 7645


Dilke, Charles Wentworth (1789-1864), newspaper editor and writer, was born on 8 December 1789 at Bedhampton, Hampshire, the third of four children and elder son of Sarah Blewford (1765/6-1825) and Charles Wentworth Dilke (1742/3-1826), a chief clerk in the paymaster branch of the Admiralty. Although he attended schools in Portsea and London, his education was primarily by private tutoring. In April 1805 he entered the navy pay office of the Admiralty as a clerk, and in London, on 10 October 1806, he married Maria Walker (1790-1850), daughter of an official in the East India Company. They had one child, (Charles) Wentworth Dilke (1810-1869), who served as leading commissioner of the Great Exhibition of 1851, and later became first baronet; he, in turn, was the father of Charles Wentworth Dilke (1843-1911), politician and cabinet minister. In 1816 the family settled in Wentworth House, Hampstead, which they built with Charles Armitage Brown, an old school friend, and it was here, probably early in 1817, that Dilke made the acquaintance of members of the 'cockney school' such as Leigh Hunt, John Hamilton Reynolds, Thomas Hood, and John Keats, all of whom became close friends. He also knew Shelley. In April 1819 when the Dilkes moved to Westminster, where Dilke was to remain until the early 1850s, Mrs Brawne occupied the Dilkes' portion of the Hampstead house. Long after Keats's death, Dilke was active in the affairs of the Keats family and served as a trustee for Fanny Brawne. Dilke's friendship with Charles Brown ended in 1830 in a disagreement over the probity of George Keats, which Dilke defended robustly and Brown denounced. Later commentators endorsed Brown's view, noting Dilke's inflexibility once he formed an opinion, and citing Lamb's phrase 'a Dilkish blockhead' and Keats's opinion that Dilke was 'a Godwin-Methodist' who lacked the gift of negative capability (Richardson, 119-20). 
Dilke's leisure hours were devoted to reading and, sharing the enthusiasm for the Elizabethan dramatists which was fostered by the publication of Lamb's 'Specimens of the English Dramatic Poets', he began to edit Renaissance play texts. William Gifford, editor of Massinger and Jonson as well as the 'Quarterly Review', encouraged him, and between 1814 and 1815 Dilke published the first of his antiquarian works, a continuation of Robert Dodsley's 'Old English Plays, being a Selection from the Early Dramatic Writers'. 
From about 1818 Dilke began to contribute anonymously to the crop of new periodicals, and when Henry Southern's distinctively antiquarian 'Retrospective Review' started in 1820, Dilke became one of its contributors. His anonymous pieces in 'The Champion' (1818) edited by John Scott, 'The Retrospective', the Benthamite 'Westminster Review' (1830), also edited by Southern, and probably other magazines of the period, were mainly literary. In 1821 he produced a political pamphlet addressed to Lord John Russell, which was characteristically radical in tone, and pleaded for the repeal of the corn laws. This caught the attention of John Taylor, by then editor of the 'London Magazine', who invited both antiquarian and political contributions from Dilke, the latter of which, in 1823, became a dominant political voice of the journal's monthly 'View of public affairs'. In January 1824, in the first of his editing stints, Dilke became editor of the 'London Magazine', with 'its passion for anciency' (Bauer, 246), and probably served a year until Southern took over in 1825. Dilke's lifelong radical politics are clearly visible here, before he took on the mantle of neutrality that characterized his association with 'The Athenaeum'. So closely was Dilke associated with the 'London Magazine', its circle, and the ethos of honest journalism promulgated by its first editor, John Scott, that Dilke's conduct of 'The Athenaeum' has been seen by Bauer (ibid., 335) as a continuation of the cultural work of the 'London Magazine'. 

'The Athenaeum' (1828-) was a London arts and science weekly which eschewed politics and religion; in its earliest years it was closely associated with the Cambridge Apostles. It was purchased first by John Sterling and eventually in 1830 by a group which included Dilke, the latter becoming editor in that year. The effect of his firm hand on the management of the paper was speedily seen. In 1831 he reduced the price by half to 4died, a measure which resulted in a marked increase in its sales and a corresponding reduction in the circulation of its rival, the 'Literary Gazette' at the then customary price of 8died Alarmed by the change, the majority of his co-proprietors gave up their shares while continuing to write for it, leaving the financial responsibility to Dilke and the printer, James Holmes. Gathering support from a group which included Lamb, Barry Cornwall, H. F. Chorley, George Darley, and other friends, Dilke also enlisted the aid of Sainte-Beuve, Jules Janin, and other continental writers of repute, an unusual move for a British journalist at the time. Although the circulation of the paper responded quickly and dramatically to the reduction in price, the heavy tax on advertisements prohibited their growth in the paper, and for several years there was no surplus profit; throughout his tenure as editor Dilke worked without a salary, putting profits back into the business. 
The main principle of Dilke's editorship was to preserve a complete independence from the trade, and to criticize a book without concern for the writer or the publisher; promulgated most concertedly between 1830 and 1832, this antipathy to puffing was singular at the time. To maintain it Dilke withdrew from general society, confining his social life to entertaining at home, and thus avoiding as far as possible personal contact with authors or publishers who might seek to influence the reviews in 'The Athenaeum'. In 1836 the navy pay office was abolished and Dilke, retired on a pension, was able to devote all his energies to the improvement of the paper. By the 1840s 'The Athenaeum''s success was established, and Dilke handed over the editorship to T. K. Hervey in 1846. In that year too W. J. Thoms's monthly columns of material on folklore began appearing in 'The Athenaeum' with Dilke's encouragement, and so popular did they become that in 1849 Thoms founded 'Notes and Queries' to accommodate the burgeoning material. 
Called in to aid the infant 'Daily News' -- by this time abandoned by Dickens and edited by John Forster -- Dilke became its manager in April 1846; he reduced the price of the daily by half from 5'd.' to 21/2died, halved the number of pages from eight to four, and increased the amount of copy. Although the circulation rose from 4000 to 22,000 per day, the paper lost money, and the old price was eventually restored in February 1849. Closure was avoided, despite a massive drop in sales, and in April 1849 Dilke completed his contract and retired. 'The Bookseller' in 1864 commended Dilke's 'Daily News' prospectus for its strong endorsement of the importance of the newspaper press and praised his foresight in creating a cheap daily before the removal of the stamp duty, lamenting that 'had this policy been persevered in there can be little doubt that the 'Daily News' would have occupied a foremost position in the cheap issue of the present day' (31 Aug 1864, 526). In 1850 his wife died, and by 1853 Dilke had moved from Lower Grosvenor Street to the house of his son in Sloane Street, where he acted as companion and mentor to his grandson. 
A third period in Dilke's career began with his retirement from newspaper management, and all the articles on which his literary reputation rests are subsequent to 1847. While editing 'The Athenaeum' he had on principle avoided writing in it; having ceased to edit it he became a contributor. The mystery attaching to the authorship of the highly political 'Letters of Junius', which appeared from 1768 to 1772 in the 'Public Advertiser', especially fascinated him, and he acquired a knowledge of everything bearing on the problem that has remained unsurpassed (Ellegard, 10). Unlike others, he was not so anxious to identify the author of the articles as to show who he was not. He commenced in 'The Athenaeum' of July 1848 by demolishing John Britton's theory that Colonel Barre was Junius, and over the next five years he wrote a series of reviews which form the most weighty contribution of his day to the controversy. The Junius pieces led to the study of Edmund Burke and John Wilkes MP, founder in 1762 of the 'North Briton'. Dilke was the first to rescue Wilkes from the obloquy that attached to his name for allegedly libelling the king in 1745 and for publishing the obscene 'Essay on women'. He also became the apologist for the satires of Peter Pindar, the pseudonym of John Wolcot. 
Articles on Pope followed, informed by Dilke's purchase of the Caryll papers in 1854. In a series of contributions to 'The Athenaeum' and 'Notes and Queries' Dilke was able to explain the mystery of the publication of the letters by Edmund Curll, to make clear the poet's parentage, to settle several matters in his early life, to identify the 'Unfortunate lady', and in various other points to throw fresh light on Pope's career and his poetry. These articles brought the writer into controversy with various Pope scholars, but his conclusions remained unshaken and were adopted by Whitwell Elwin in his edition of Pope (1871-89). One of his last articles in 'The Athenaeum' was devoted to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu and her quarrel with Pope, an article prompted by the appearance of Moy Thomas's edition of her work in 1861. Other issues to which Dilke turned in his retirement included the systemization of the British Museum catalogue and establishing the corpus of work by Jonathan Swift which involved the attribution of work by 'William Wagstaffe' to Swift. 
In his later life the reform of the Literary Fund occupied a large part of Dilke's attention. As early as 1836 he had begun to scrutinize its management from within its general committee; but it was not until 1849 that the controversy, which had been regularly reported in 'The Athenaeum', became open and heated. In 1858 he joined with Dickens and John Forster in the pamphlet called 'The case of the reformers of the Literary Fund', part of which appeared in 'The Athenaeum' (6 March 1858, 304-6). The reformers, although they had the best of the argument, had the worst of the voting, and finding it impossible to convert their minority into a majority, they attempted, with the aid of Lord Lytton, to found the Guild of Art and Literature, a scheme which did not meet with the success anticipated. 
In 1862 Dilke withdrew altogether from London, and settled at Alice Holt near Farnham in Hampshire where he died from kidney disease on 10 August 1864. He was buried privately on 16 August in Kensal Green cemetery, London. The best contemporary comments on his character and work were those of his old friend W. J. Thoms, in 'Notes and Queries': 'The distinguishing feature of his character was his singular love of truth, and his sense of its value and importance, even in the minutest points and questions of literary history. What the independence of English literary journalism owes to his spirited exertions, clear judgment, and unflinching honesty of purpose will, we trust, be told hereafter. (13 Aug 1864, 140)' 



@@@@@


doc= 7646


Dilke, Sir (Charles) Wentworth, first baronet (1810-1869), art patron, was born in London on 18 February 1810, the only son of the civil servant, art critic, and 'Daily News' editor Charles Wentworth Dilke (1789-1864) and his wife, Maria Walker (1790-1850). He was known as Wentworth Dilke in order to distinguish him from his father. His eminent family included ancestors who had sat in the parliament of Elizabeth I and in the Long Parliament. By the seventeenth century they were known as 'sturdy reformers of the Puritan type' (Pearce, 8), and the family seat was Maxstoke Castle, in Warwickshire. Dilke was educated at Westminster School, and at sixteen, following his father's educational principles, he was sent to Florence to live with the painter Seymour Kirkup; thereafter he studied at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and graduated LLB in 1834. In his early years in London, Dilke 'was principally known to his friends for never missing a night at the Opera' (Gwynn and Tuckwell, 6). After his marriage, on 30 March 1840 to Mary (died 1853), daughter of William Chatfield, a captain in the Madras cavalry, Dilke began to follow his father's editorial and entrepreneurial example by founding the 'Gardeners' Chronicle', with John Lindley and Sir Joseph Paxton, and the 'Agricultural Gazette'. His wide cultural and aesthetic interests, coupled with his horticultural and editorial work, led to his involvement in efforts to improve national education in design and technology. 
From 1845 Dilke was party to the Society of Arts's discussions regarding the Great Exhibition; this brought him into close personal contact with John Scott Russell, Henry Cole, and Prince Albert. He served as both council member and chairman of the society. As one of the society's group who promoted the Great Exhibition, and then a member of the royal commission's executive committee for the exhibition from 1849 to 1851, he proved himself one of its most assiduous, organized, and hard-working members; he was one of the representatives appointed by Prince Albert to travel the country and sound out the public's views on the proposed exhibition. The executive committee, which also included Henry Cole, William Reid, Matthew Digby Wyatt, and Francis Fuller, co-ordinated and corresponded with local and international commissions formed to organize the exhibition, and oversaw the setting up and layout of the event. The exhibition itself would prove to be highly complex, vast in scale, and hugely successful. Dilke's role included investigating the best means of producing an exhibition catalogue; dealing with the press and publicity; strategically managing the often fractious local and international commissions; and overseeing the arrival and installation of exhibits. He also acted as Queen Victoria's trusted purchaser of goods at the exhibition. His deep involvement in the project is demonstrated by his massive bequest of exhibition material now held at the Victoria and Albert Museum. A reliable executor of the royal commission's directives, he was afterwards called on repeatedly to report on other such exhibitions (Dublin, 1852; New York, 1853; Paris, 1855; St Petersburg, 1868); he was also one of the five royal commissioners for the 1862 International Exhibition in London. Dilke was created baronet on 22 January 1862. 
The Great Exhibition brought Dilke into contact with influential people, notably Lord Granville, who worked to bring him into parliament. In 1865 he was elected Liberal MP for Wallingford, although he lost his seat at the general election of 1868. The absorbing nature of his work in promoting and reporting on exhibitions, together with his meticulous, unostentatious nature, set him apart from his family. They lived at 76 Sloane Street, London, and at Alice Holt, a small country property near Farnham, Surrey. Mary Dilke, having given birth to two sons, was 'almost certainly unhappy in her marriage' (Jenkins, 13), and died in 1853. The first son, Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke, second baronet (1843-1911), formed a close temperamental bond with his grandfather and disparaged his father's work on exhibitions as pen-pushing. Charles eventually overshadowed his father as a well-known travel writer and Liberal MP. The younger son was Ashton Wentworth Dilke, traveller and politician. 
Dilke died at the Hotel de France, St Petersburg, on 10 May 1869, while reporting there on the horticultural exhibition. The importance of mid-nineteenth-century exhibitions as agents of modernization and opportunities for the formation of complex economic and commercial links is only now being recognized. Dilke's role in this development was significant; Prince Albert awarded him a commemorative medal for his work on the Great Exhibition 'as one of those who stood by its cradle, helped in its education and served it truly and zealously after it had been brought to maturity' (Prince Albert to Dilke, 15 Oct 1851, F25, the Great Exhibition of 1851, 1851-3, Royal Archives, Windsor). 


@@@@@


doc= 7647


Dilkes, Sir Thomas (c.1667-1707), naval officer, was described in 1687 as a relative of Sir William Coventry, and later as a protege of Lord Carbery. He served as a king's letter boy between 1683 and 1686, became a lieutenant in 1687, and took command of the fireship 'Charles' in April 1689. In 1692 he was appointed to the 'Adventure' (50 guns), in which he shared in the victories of Barfleur and La Hogue. In different ships he remained actively employed in the channel, on the coast of Ireland, in the Bay of Biscay, or on the coast of Portugal until, in 1696, commanding the 'Rupert' (60 guns) he went to the West Indies in the squadron under Vice-Admiral John Nevell. Following the deaths of Nevell, Rear-Admiral George Mees, and nearly all the other captains, Dilkes succeeded to the command, and brought the squadron home in October 1697. He held a series of short-lived commands in the years of peace that followed, and was seriously injured when his ship was wrecked on the Irish coast in 1699. In 1702 he commanded the 'Somerset' (70 guns) in the fleet under Sir George Rooke, who hoisted his flag in that ship for the attack on the combined fleets in Vigo harbour. 
In March 1703 Dilkes was promoted rear-admiral of the white, and during the summer, with his flag in the 'Kent', he commanded a squadron on the coast of France. On 26-7 July he drove onshore near Granville and Avranches, and captured or destroyed almost all the fleet of forty-five merchant ships and three frigates which formed their escort -- a service for which the queen ordered gold medals to be struck and presented to the admirals and captains. Dilkes was then employed cruising in the channel, and he returned to Spithead just in time to escape the fury of the great storm on 26 November 1703. In the same year he was elected MP for Castle Martyr in the Irish House of Commons, a seat he held until 1707. 
In 1704 Dilkes sailed with Sir Cloudesley Shovell to join Rooke at Lisbon; afterwards he took a prominent part in the battle of Malaga as rear-admiral of the White squadron, in acknowledgement of which he was knighted by the queen on 22 October 1704. In February 1705 he sailed again for the straits, with his flag in the 'Revenge', and on 10 March, after joining Sir John Leake, he played a major role in capturing and destroying the French squadron that was blockading Gibraltar. He remained with the Mediterranean Fleet under the earl of Peterborough before returning to England with Shovell in November. During 1706 he was employed chiefly in the blockade of Dunkirk but in January 1707 he sailed in company with Shovell for the Mediterranean, where he took part in the operations, including the siege of Toulon. On the siege being lifted Dilkes remained commander-in-chief and, after conferring with Archduke Charles at Barcelona, he sailed for Leghorn where he anchored on 19 November. On his arrival Dilkes became involved in a dispute over salutes with the fort. He claimed the right to be saluted first, but it was contended that the fort never saluted any flag first, except those of admirals or vice-admirals. Dilkes had to be content with this. To show that there was nothing personal in this refusal, he was invited to a public dinner on shore on 1 December. In going back to his ship from the heated room he got a chill, followed by a fever, of which he died on 12 December 1707; his death, so soon after his dispute with the grand-ducal court, led to a groundless rumour that he had been poisoned. He was survived by his wife, Mary, daughter of Murrough O'Brien, first earl of Inchiquin, and widow of Henry Boyle of Castle Martyr; they had at least one child, Michael O'Brien Dilkes, army officer. Mary Dilkes later married Colonel John Irwin. 


@@@@@


doc= 7648


Dillenius, Johann Jakob (1687-1747), botanist, was born at Darmstadt where his family, formerly Dill and later Dillen, civil servants in the state of Hesse, had settled at the end of the sixteenth century; his mother was the daughter of Danile Funk, clergyman. His father was professor of medicine at the University of Giessen, where he latinized his name to Dillenius. The young Dillenius practised medicine in Grunberg, Hesse, and qualified in 1713, being appointed town doctor ('Poliater') in Giessen. His botanical interests led to his being elected to the Caesare Leopoldina-Carolina Academia Naturae-Curiosorum under the name of 'Glaucias', and he contributed several papers, mostly botanical, especially on cryptogams and their sexual organs. In 1718 (with another edition in 1719), he published 'Catalogus plantarum circa Gissam sponte nascentium', enumerating 980 species of vascular plants, 200 of 'mosses' and 160 fungi from the Giessen area, with many new genera and sixteen plates (now preserved in the Natural History Museum, London), drawn and engraved by the author. Although the work attracted much attention, Dillenius made little progress in Germany, probably because in it he criticized the classificatory system, based on the number and regularity of petals, of Augustus Bachmann (Rivinus), rightly preferring the system of the Englishman John Ray. 
The British consul at Smyrna, the wealthy William Sherard, who was interested in the sexuality of cryptogams, persuaded Dillenius to move to England, which he did by August 1721. Dillenius stayed with Sherard at Oxford and afterwards in London, and with Sherard's brother James at Eltham, Kent, but also had lodgings in London, which in 1728 were in Barking Alley. He was the first president of the Botanical Society (London), being appointed in 1721. With John Martyn as its first secretary, the society met in the Rainbow Coffee House, Watling Street. 
Sherard wanted Dillenius to arrange his herbarium and compile an encyclopaedia ('Pinax') of all names given to plants, according to a 1623 plan originally conceived by Gaspard Bauhin (1560-1624). He also wanted to endow the existing chair of botany at Oxford and appoint Dillenius to the post, but the unendowed chair was occupied by Gilbert Trowe ('c'.1685-1737). Dillenius's first published work in England, however, was the third edition of Ray's 'Synopsis stirpium Britannicarum' (July 1724), to which he added many species and twenty-four plates of rare plants; the basis for this work, which was effectively the textbook of British botany until the publication of Hudson's 'Flora Anglica' (1762), was his 'Synopsis' herbarium, which is preserved at Oxford. In 1726, perhaps in preparation for a fourth edition, Dillenius made a botanical tour of Wales and the west of England with Littleton Brown (1699-1749) and Samuel Brewer; plants, including the first British collection of a grass ('Koeleria vallesiana') are preserved in Sloane's herbarium at the Natural History Museum. 
About 1724 Dillenius, at James Sherard's suggestion, had begun illustrating and engraving plates for 'the most important book to be published in England during the eighteenth century on the plants growing in a private garden' (Henrey, 2.265), the 'Hortus Elthamensis sua plantarum rariorum quas in horto suo Elthami... Jacobus Sherard' (two large folio volumes, 1732), illustrated by 417 drawings (a Leiden edition of 1774 comprising merely the plates), some also coloured by himself, with the pertinent specimens preserved at Oxford. It is important because of the new genera described and later taken up by Linnaeus and because of the accuracy of the plates, especially of succulent plants, which make bad specimens. James Sherard wanted a sumptuous tribute to his own glory but Dillenius resented neglecting his other work for a project on which he personally lost some $200. 
Dillenius was elected FRS in 1724 and was foreign secretary of the Royal Society in 1728-47. In 1728 William Sherard died, bequeathing his herbarium and library and $3000 to Oxford University to provide a salary for the professor of botany, on condition that the university pledge greater financial support for the botanic garden and that Dillenius should be the first professor, which post he finally gained, on Trowe's resignation, and after six years' wrangling between Sherard's executors and the university, in 1734, the same year he was admitted MD from St John's College. He had already visited Oxford to supervise plantings and construction of new conservatories in which the herbarium was temporarily housed. By 1735 he found that Sherard's legacy had been invested unwisely and his stipend was both in arrears and reduced. 
Before August 1724 he had begun research on his greatest work, the 'Historia muscorum' (1742), illustrated by eighty-five plates of which the drawings for the first seventy-nine are preserved in the Natural History Museum; the 'Historia' is one of the first English botanical books to include references to the work of Linnaeus, who in the summer of 1736 spent a month with Dillenius at Oxford after which the Swedish naturalist dedicated his 'Critica botanica' to him. Subscribers paid a guinea for a copy but sales were poor and Dillenius decided on an abridged edition; this, however, was never published, though there were 1763 and 1768 (London) and 1822 (Edinburgh) editions of the complete work. He prepared in Oxford a catalogue of Thomas Shaw's plants collected in north Africa and the Levant and at least 250 unpublished coloured drawings of fungi, a subject which he studied with his friend, the German George Deering. 
Dillenius was somewhat corpulent and, in March 1747, was seized with apoplexy, from which he died in Oxford on 2 April; he was buried at St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, leaving the 'Pinax' unfinished. His pupil, Humphrey Sibthorp, succeeded him as professor. 
Dillenius was contemporaneous with both Ray and Linnaeus: adhering to the 'natural system' of Ray, which philosophy is acceptable today, he was wise to appreciate the pragmatic approach of Linnaeus. He was central to British botany in academic as opposed to virtuoso circles, advancing basic knowledge besides cataloguing the world's flora. Linnaeus, who sent him specimens of Old World tropical trees, commemorated him in a genus 'Dillenia': 'of all plants [it] has the showiest flower and fruit, even as Dillenius made a brilliant show among botanists'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7649


Dillingham, Francis (d. 1625), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Deane, Bedfordshire. He matriculated as a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, in June 1583, graduating BA early in 1587 and proceeding MA in 1590. From 1594 he was a fellow of the college, resigning in 1599, the year of his admission to the degree of BD. Fuller reports his father's testimony that Dillingham was: 'an excellent linguist and subtle disputant... a Greek act was kept, between him and William Alabaster of Trinity College, to their mutual commendation; a disputation so famous that it served for an era or epoch for the scholars in that age thence to date their seniority. (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.170-71)' Ordained priest by Bishop Wickham of Lincoln, Dillingham was instituted in 1601, on the presentation of a gentleman, John Roult, to the rectory of Wilden, Bedfordshire, which had been rated in the 'valor ecclesiasticus' at the large annual sum of $18 7's'. 4died 
Dillingham was a prolific writer on religious themes. The frequency of his publications, and the dedications to prominent men and women which so often preface them, suggest that he was well connected as well as prosperous. In 'A Disswasive from Poperie' (1599) the author recalls, in his dedication to Oliver Lord St John, his 'honourable and singular favour towards me and all my friends'. By 1617, in 'Enchiridion Chrisianae' ['sic'], the even greater eminence of Archbishop Abbot appears as the object of Dillingham's prefatory obsequies. He was chosen to work on the translation of the King James 'Bible' published in 1611. It is clear, however, that Dillingham was acutely aware that few clergymen were as comfortably placed as himself, and that he hoped for reforms. Dedicating 'A Silver Locke' (1611) to Lady Sara Hastings he laments the times, with their 'deluge and flood of iniquity... a great and main cause thereof no doubt, is the example of great men', and asks whether they are 'to be laughed at, or rather to be pitied, who are puffed up with their greatness, and have no religion in them, which is the greatest jewel in the world' (Dillingham). A second epistle directs to William Barlow, bishop of Lincoln, some outspoken criticism of the meanness of lay patrons, a chief cause of clerical impoverishment; also included in the book is a long attack on simoniacal practices in the church. 
It has been plausibly suggested that Dillingham remained unmarried, and his will (dated 14 January 1625 and proved at the Bedford archdeaconry court on 21 May) mentions neither wife nor children. But he left substantial sums to various members of the Selby family, much larger than the bequests to his own four sisters, and this may hint at an earlier marital link with that family. Dillingham named as executor and residual legatee his brother Thomas, probably the man of Jesus College, Cambridge, who was rector of Deane, Bedfordshire, between 1603 and 1632, who died there on 10 December 1647, and who was father of Theophilus Dillingham (1613-1678). Francis Dillingham himself died at Wilden and was buried in the parish on 24 February 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 7650


Dillingham, Theophilus (1613-1678), college head, was born on 18 October 1613 at Over Deane, Bedfordshire, the elder son of Thomas Dillingham (died 1647), rector of that parish. He was educated at the school at Over Deane and then matriculated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 13 September 1629. From that college he graduated BA in 1634 and proceeded MA in 1637. The following year he moved to Sidney Sussex College as a fellow, taking his BD there in 1644. 
In 1654 Dillingham was elected master of Clare and proceeded DD from that college the following year. At the Restoration he was ejected from the mastership, but the successful claimant, Thomas Paske (died 1662), who had been master from 1620 to 1645, became his father-in-law on 30 March 1661 on Dillingham's marriage to Elisabeth Paske at St Edward's, Cambridge. With the assent of the fellows Paske resigned his mastership to Dillingham. His popularity within the university both before and after the Restoration is evident in the fact that he served as vice-chancellor in 1655-6, 1656-7, and 1662. Evidently, too, he was not out of favour with the restored regime, since he became prebendary of Ulleskelf, in the church of York, on 29 January 1661 (a position he again owed to the fact that his father-in-law resigned in his favour) and archdeacon of Bedford on 3 September 1667, as well as retaining the rectory of Offord Cluny, Huntingdonshire (to which he was appointed in 1654), until 1678. 
Dillingham died at Cambridge on 22 November 1678 and was buried at St Edward's Church, Cambridge. He was survived by his wife, three sons (Thomas (died 1722), John, and Theophilus), and three daughters (Elizabeth, Dorothy, and Ann). 


@@@@@


doc= 7651


Dillingham, William (c.1617-1689), Latin poet and anthologist, was the eldest of the three sons of Thomas Dillingham (died 1647), rector of Barnwell All Saints, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Dorothy. On 22 April 1636 he was admitted sizar of the puritan foundation of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he roomed with William (later Archbishop) Sancroft, who had gone up in 1633. They shared a taste for poetry, and despite differing political and religious perspectives remained close friends throughout life. Dillingham proceeded BA in 1639, was elected fellow of his college in 1642, and incepted MA in the following year. In 1646 he wrote commendatory English verses for the 'Poems' of John Hall of St John's, and in 1649 was one of three fellows who bore witness to some feats of engineering carried out by Captain John Bulmer. He took the degrees of BD in 1650 and DD in 1655. 
As a moderate presbyterian Calvinist who voluntarily subscribed the solemn league and covenant (1643), Dillingham remained untouched by the ejections carried out by Edward Montagu, second earl of Manchester. While Sancroft was deprived in 1651 for refusing the engagement, Dillingham's own acquiescence in the new order was rewarded two years later with the mastership of Emmanuel. In September 1654 he was appointed by Cromwell one of the thirty visitors of the university. Although puritanism had passed its zenith, religious observances in the college remained much as described by John Cosin in 1636; the chapel, built on a north-south axis, was still unconsecrated. Dillingham's rule coincided with a decline in the numbers and social standing of entrants, though in April 1658 he supported Matthew Poole's initiative for funding students who showed a vocation for the ministry. 
Emmanuel's position at the heart of the Cambridge Platonist movement occasioned Dillingham's debut as an entrepreneur of letters, when he put into print Nathaniel Culverwell's 'Spiritual Opticks' (1651) and 'The Light of Nature' (1652). In 1653 he edited from manuscript Theodore Bathurst's Latin verse-translation of Spenser's 'The Shepheardes Calender', and in the next year wrote Latin verses on the death of the puritan controversialist Thomas Gataker. Between 1656, when he issued two of his own sermons on the biblical maxim 'Prove all things, hold fast to that which is good', and his departure from Cambridge in 1662 his name appeared as a syndic of the university press on licences for sixteen works (CUL, UA, Pr.P.4(8)). These included his own Latin translation (1656) of the Westminster assembly's confession of faith and his edition of Sir Francis Vere's military 'Commentaries' (1657). He was also involved in editing Ferrarius's 'Lexicon geographicum' (1657), and published John Arrowsmith's 'Armilla catechetica' (1659) with his friend Thomas Horton, whose 'Forty Six Sermons' and 'Choice... Expositions on Four Select Psalms' he was to bring out in 1674 and 1675 respectively. Besides contributing Latin verses to the various congratulatory volumes (1659-62) issued by the university, he helped to draft new regulations for its library. 
About this time Dillingham married, and with his wife, Elizabeth, had a daughter and three sons, the eldest of whom, Thomas, was born on the eve of the Restoration, while Dillingham was serving as vice-chancellor. In this capacity he drafted a letter to Monck on his election as MP for the university in April 1660 ('N&Q', 1st ser., 7, 1853, 427 and 486) and introduced 'Musarum Cantabrigiensium [SOSTRA]' on the king's restoration. When the 'Act of Uniformity' was passed his refusal to reject his obligations to the solemn league prevented him from taking the new oath, and he automatically forfeited his posts in August 1662. To Sancroft, who was unanimously elected master in his place, he addressed a generous letter (Waters, 2.639) from Oundle, where his brother Benjamin (died 1679) was vicar. There Dillingham lived in retirement for the next ten years, amusing himself by writing verses in English and Latin which he shared with neighbours (ibid., 2.642; 'Diary of Thomas Isham', 82 n. 11 and 84 n. 19). He was briefly joined by another ejected presbyterian poet, Robert Wild, the Ferus of his poem 'Campanae undelenses'. Following the death of Elizabeth Dillingham he was persuaded to conform, and in May 1672 was presented to the rectory of Woodhill (now Odell) in Bedfordshire, by Sir Thomas Alston, over whose wife he read the funeral sermon in September 1677 (published 1678). On 30 October 1673 he married Mary Toller (1622/3-1690) at Horbling in Lincolnshire. Mary was fifty years old, three times a widow, and mother to seven children. 
In 1678 Dillingham published 'Poemata varii argumenti', the first English anthology of neo-Latin verse. The anthology included many poems by Dillingham himself; his translations from George Herbert take up nearly a quarter of the whole. The translations of Herbert's 'The Church Porch' and 'The Sacrifice' had been discussed in detail with Sancroft, whose appointment as primate he had celebrated in verse (Waters, 2.641) and who now contributed anonymously a Latin version of an epigram by Thomas Bastard (BL, Sloane MS 1710, fol. 210). Besides 'Campanae undelenses' Dillingham's own compositions include 'Sphaeristerium Suleianum', inspired by the earl of Westmorland's bowling green at Sullehay Lodge, and 'Sepes hortensis', some lines 'on a garden clipt hedge' that he had sent to Sir Justinian Isham of Lamport in February 1672 ('Diary of Thomas Isham', 85). The prescriptive hexameters 'De moribus puerorum' were written for his son Thomas, whose ownership inscription appears in a copy of the work that bears his father's autograph notes and corrections (BL, 1213.g.30). An earlier anthology entitled 'Wilhelmi Dillinghami poemata ab eo vel inventa, vel versa' (BL, Sloane MS 1815, fols. 54-61) had been abandoned, and a later one, 'Poemata selecta ex auctoribus qua veteribus, qua neotericis', comprising forty-six poems in manuscript or printed texts, remained unpublished (BL, Sloane MS 1766). 
Until the year of his death Dillingham continued to consult Sancroft on various schemes for publication (BL, Sloane MS 1710, fols. 206-15; Waters, 2.643-7). These included an enlarged edition of Richard Parker's historical register 'Skeletos Cantabrigiensis' (now BL, Sloane MS 1765), a 'collection of academical orations and epistles which I had made 30 yeares since' (listed in Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 461, fols. 1-2, 174-6), an ambitious compendium of Greek poets with their commentators (Waters, 2.643-4), and William Bedell's pastoral dialogue on the Gunpowder Plot, 'A Protestant Memorial'. Only the last of these was published, from Dillingham's papers, in 1713. His Latin lives of Laurence Chaderton, first master of Emmanuel, and of Archbishop Usher, together with his exercises for the degrees of BD and DD, all of which survive in autograph (BL, Harley MS 7052), were published posthumously by his son Thomas at Cambridge in 1700. 
Dillingham's last published poem, 'Aegyptus triumphata' (1680), was a brief epic in hexameters on the plagues of Egypt. His version of the essay 'Concerning the cure of anger' appeared in a collaborative translation of Plutarch's 'Morals' (1684, 1.48-82). The British Library (Sloane MS 1818) holds an autograph manuscript of this and of 'Protestant certainty, or, A short treatise showing how a protestant may be well assured of the articles of his faith' that was issued in the summer of 1689. He followed this in the autumn with 'The Mystery of Iniquity Anatomized', alleging the erosion of primitive Christianity by the Catholic church. He was buried at Odell on 28 November 1689, and his wife at Horbling on 21 June 1690. His son Thomas died in 1704 as rector of his grandfather's old parish. 


@@@@@


doc= 7652


Dillon, Arthur, Jacobite Earl Dillon (1670-1733), Jacobite army officer and politician, was born in co. Roscommon, the third, but second surviving, of six sons of Theobald, seventh Viscount Dillon of Costello-Gallen (died 1691), of Loughglinn, co. Roscommon, and Mary (died 1691), daughter of Sir Henry Talbot of Mount Talbot, co. Roscommon. His mother was a niece of the duke of Tyrconnell, and during the Williamite wars both his father and elder brother, Henry, served in the Irish army, the latter in command of an infantry regiment. His father was killed at the battle of Aughrim (1691), and his mother soon afterwards by an exploding bomb during the siege of Limerick. With his father and brothers, Arthur Dillon, a lifelong Roman Catholic, was outlawed by the Williamites; however Henry, eighth Viscount Dillon of Costello-Gallen, was pardoned and remained on the family estate in Ireland after the war. 
In 1690 Arthur Dillon was chosen to go to France as colonel of a second Dillon regiment. This unit was newly raised to form part of Lord Mountcashel's brigade, a body of Irish troops exchanged for a French brigade sent by Louis XIV to Ireland. On disembarkation at Brest in May the Irish soldiers were reorganized into three infantry regiments and incorporated into the French army. Dillon's regiment, numerically weak on arrival, was brought up to two-battalion strength with reinforcements from two regiments which were disbanded, and he was confirmed as colonel on 1 June 1690. He served until 1697 in Catalonia under the duc de Noailles, participating in a number of engagements, including the taking of Roses (1693); the crossing of the River Ter and the capture of Palamos, Girona, and Hostalric (1694); the relief of Hostalric, during which he commanded the rearguard with great distinction (1695); and the capture of Barcelona by the duc de Vendome (1697). In the War of the Spanish Succession he served under Vendome in Italy in 1702-6, where he participated in the battle of Luzzara (1702); the invasion of the Trentino, during which he won distinction at Riva, the victory of San Sebastiano, and the capture of Asti (1703); the capture of Vercelli and Ivrea (1704); the capture of Mirandola, the defence of Moscalino, and the victory at Cassano (1705); and the victories of Calcinato and Castiglione (1706). He was promoted brigadier on 1 October 1702, 'marechal de camp' on 26 October 1704, and lieutenant-general on 24 September 1706. In 1707, under Marshal de Tesse, he played a role in the manoeuvres that compelled Prince Eugene to abandon the siege of Toulon. In 1709, while posted near Briancon under the duke of Berwick, he defeated two considerable bodies of the enemy in quick succession. Having transferred to the army of the Rhine, under Marshal de Villars, in 1713, he took Kaiserslautern and Verastein Castle, and was prominent in the reduction of Landau and Fribourg. His last campaign was in 1714, when he played a prominent role, under Berwick, in the capture of Barcelona. He was created 'comte' in 1711 and received into the order of St Louis. 
Although widely respected as a soldier of courage and ability, and popular with his troops, Dillon was given no further military appointment after 1715, evidently because the French regency government disapproved of his pro-Jacobite activities. The tension between the French government and the Jacobite exiles (during a rare period of Anglo-French harmony) is well illustrated by the collapse in 1722 of the Atterbury plot which, before Mar betrayed its aims, Dillon had helped to plan. He resigned the command of the Dillon regiment in favour of his eldest son in 1730. Throughout his long military career, although often in the thick of action, he was fortunate never to have received a serious wound, and was regarded as handsome in his appearance. Some time before 1701 he had married Christiana (Catherine) Sheldon (1684-1757), a lady-in-waiting to Queen Mary of Modena. Described as 'a very good woman and much esteemed by everybody' (Fagan, 2.132), she was the daughter of Ralph Sheldon, equerry to James II, and the niece of the Jacobite general Dominic Sheldon. Dillon was rumoured to have been an early lover of Claudine de Tencin, who later, as the lover of Viscount Bolingbroke, betrayed the Jacobite plans in 1715 to the French. Otherwise, apart from occasional amours while on campaign, he was considered a fond husband and an attached father to his family of ten children. 
Dillon played a leading role in Jacobite politics. He was active in the preparations for the attempted rising in Scotland in 1715 and was mentioned as a suitable leader of a parallel expedition to Ireland, which was also under consideration at the time. From 1717 to 1725 he acted as ambassador in Paris for James III (James Francis Edward Stuart). He was given the title of Viscount Dillon by James in 1717, and of earl on 24 June 1721. He recommended Charles Wogan to James to assist in his search for a bride, an introduction which ultimately resulted in the Pretender's marriage to Clementina Sobieska. In 1717 he negotiated with Sweden to raise troops and, as part of the Atterbury plot, was charged with leading forces from France to assist in the proposed London rising. He died on 5 February 1733 at the chateau of St Germain-en-Laye, where he had an apartment. Soon after his death, at the request of James III, his widow lodged his papers in the Scots College at Paris, where they were destroyed during the French Revolution. His widow entered a Paris convent in 1750, where she died and was buried in 1757. Four of his sons, Charles (1701-1741), Henry (died 1787), James, and Edward, commanded the Dillon regiment in succession. Charles and Henry succeeded as tenth and eleventh viscounts Dillon of Costello-Gallen following the death of the ninth viscount, Arthur Dillon's nephew. Both Charles and Henry returned to live in Ireland. A fifth son, Arthur Richard Dillon (1721-1806), was ordained a priest and became archbishop of Narbonne and president of the states of Languedoc. Two of Dillon's daughters, Catherine (died 1758) and Frances, entered the Carmelite convent at Pontoise. A third, Marie-Elizabeth, did not marry. Brigitte married Baron Blaisel, a French general, and Laure (1708-1741) married the Jacobite exile Lucius Cary, sixth Viscount Falkland. A grandson, Lieutenant-General Arthur Dillon (1750-1794), the last colonel-proprietor of the Dillon regiment in France, was guillotined in 1794 during the revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 7653


Dillon, Arthur, Count Dillon in the French nobility (1750-1794), army officer in the French service, the second son of Henry Dillon, eleventh Viscount Dillon (1705-1787), also an army officer in the French service and a French count, and his wife, Lady Charlotte Lee, and the nephew of Arthur Richard Dillon, archbishop of Narbonne, was born on 3 September 1750 at Braywick, Berkshire. In 1768 he married Lucy de Rothe (1751-1782), the daughter of General Edouard de Rothe (1710-1766) and Lucie Cary (1728-1804). She became lady-in-waiting to Marie Antoinette. The couple had one surviving child, Henriette Lucy (1770-1853), who in 1787 married the marquis de La Tour du Pin; she later wrote her memoirs, 'Journal d'une femme de cinquante ans'. In 1785 Dillon married, secondly, Marie de Girardin de Montgirald, comtesse de La Touche, a widow; they had one daughter, Elisabeth Frances (Fanny), who married General Bertrand in 1808. As the younger son of a French count, he was known in France as Count Dillon. 
A junior officer in the family regiment, Dillon became its proprietary colonel on 25 August 1767, but did not take command until five years later, on 1 May 1772. During the American War of Independence he participated in combat at Grenada, St Eustatius, Savannah, Tobago, and St Kitts, of which he served as governor (1782-3). He was named brigadier on 1 March 1780 and major-general on 1 January 1784, and was governor of Tobago from 1786 to 1789. As deputy for Martinique in the national assembly of 1789 he defended colonial interests but generally voted with the liberals. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 13 January 1792 and served under the command of Lafayette and of Dumouriez during the fighting of July to October. Because of his ambivalent response to the overthrow of the monarchy on 10 August and his correspondence with the landgrave of Hesse, he was recalled to Paris to explain his conduct on 13 October and suspended from his duties five weeks later. He was reinstated on 23 February 1793 and associated with Camille Desmoulins, but was again suspended on 1 June; on 13 July he was arrested and imprisoned in the Luxembourg. He was accused of being a leader of an alleged royalist conspiracy and was condemned to death by the revolutionary tribunal on 13 April 1794. The following day he was executed in Paris, together with Lucille Desmoulins, who met her death nine days after her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 7654


Dillon, Arthur Richard (1721-1806), archbishop of Narbonne and emigre leader, was born on 1 September 1721 at St Germain-en-Laye, Paris, the fifth and youngest son of Arthur Dillon, Jacobite Earl Dillon (1670-1733), 'marechal de camp' and head of the Dillon regiment in the French service, and Christiana (1684-1757), daughter of Ralph Sheldon, first equerry to James II of England. Arthur Dillon was intended for the church, and from 1740 was educated at St Sulpice in Paris, the seminary invariably attended by young men destined for leadership positions in the Gallican church, taking his master's degree on 26 October 1743. 
After ordination Dillon benefited from Louis XV's particular regard following his (fourth) brother Edward's death leading the Dillon regiment at the battle of Lauffelt in 1747. In the same year Dillon became vicar-general of Pontoise, a post which was usually a springboard to the episcopate. In 1753 he was appointed bishop of Evreux; in 1758 he was translated to the archdiocese of Toulouse, and in 1763 became archbishop of Narbonne and primate of the Gauls, a valuable diocese with an income of 250,000 livres annually. In 1766 he additionally received the abbey of St Jean-des-Vignes (diocese of Soissons) 'in commendam'. Dillon also held the titular headship of the abbey of St Etienne de Caen (worth 110,000 livres), which he exchanged in 1787 for the equally lucrative religious house of Cigny in the diocese of Rheims. These revenues enhanced his existing fortune, albeit one burdened by his own debts, his efforts to relieve those incurred by other members of the Dillon family, and his personal charity. He spent large sums on his Paris town house and on his estate at Hautefontaine, near Soissons, where he maintained his own pack of staghounds. 
An eloquent orator and capable administrator, Dillon was a man who combined intellectual capacity with style and physical presence which went to make up what his niece called 'an air of elegant assurance' ('Memoirs of Madame de la Tour du Pin', 38). Before the revolution he served as president of the general assembly of the clergy of France in 1775 and 1785, and was a member of both the first and second Assemblies of Notables in 1787 and 1788. Though ready to abandon clerical fiscal privileges and to advocate the doubling of the third estate, Dillon defended the hierarchical principle in the Gallican church at the moment it was coming under intensive criticism from the lower clergy. As 'president' of the Languedoc estates, the archbishop had a leading influence in the government of the province, and established a reputation as one of the leading 'prelats administratifs' of the pre-revolutionary generation, one who also supported civil rights for members of the reformed faith. He visited the province annually and promoted the building of roads, bridges, canals, harbours, and other improvements in Languedoc, but paid less attention to the spiritual direction of his diocese beyond the immediate vicinity of Narbonne. Dillon was not popular with his neglected parish clergy, and his standing fell generally in 1788-9 through his association with what was increasingly seen as the antiquated constitution of the Languedoc estates. 
Dillon was unsympathetic to the changes brought about by the French Revolution, especially the reorganization of the Gallican church by the civil constitution of the clergy, passed by the national assembly in July 1790. Dillon refused to take the oath to the civil constitution and thereby forfeited his possession of the see of Narbonne, which was anyway one of those abolished under this legislation. Until September 1791 he remained on his estates at Hautefontaine, then emigrated to England via the emigre centre of Koblenz, and Prussia. He had debts of 1,800,000 livres when he left France, and the loss of all his offices ensured they were never repaid. In London, Dillon lived modestly, supported by his nephew Viscount Dillon, but his house was still large enough for six other bishops to join him. As the most senior of the prelates exiled in London he resisted efforts by Louis XVIII in 1796-7 to reduce episcopal independence in the interests of a more streamlined organization for the church. He subsequently refused to accept the concordat of 1801, and concerted the opposition of those in London to Pius VII's request for resignation of their sees without reference to a conciliar ruling on the question. Archbishop Dillon died in George Street, Portman Square, London, on 5 July 1806, and was buried in St Pancras old churchyard. Some of his speeches to the general assembly of the clergy were published, as was his uncompromising 'Lettre de Monseigneur l'archeveque de Narbonne au tres-saint pere, en envoyant a sa saintete la lettre des eveques refugies a Londres' (1802). 


@@@@@


doc= 7655


Dillon, Edouard (1750-1839), army officer and diplomatist in the French service, was born at Wrightington, Lancashire, on 20 June 1750, the second son of Robert Dillon (1710-1764), formerly a banker at Dublin, and his second wife, Marie Dicconson. His father settled in Bordeaux, where he became a shipowner and outfitter. On 19 June 1777 Dillon married Fanny Harland ('bap'. 1749, died 1777), the daughter of Sir Robert Harland at Hautefontaine, but she died six months later. He remarried in London on 20 October 1796; his new wife was Emilie Pocquet de Puilhery; they had a daughter, Georgine. During the American War of Independence he fought in the West Indies and was wounded at Grenada. Known as 'le beau' Dillon, he became a favourite at the court of Louis XVI, where he was closely associated with the Polignac family and Queen Marie Antoinette. He was appointed colonel of the regiment of Provence and gentleman-in-waiting to the king's younger brother, the comte d'Artois. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the French Revolution, Dillon emigrated from France, joined Artois, and, together with some of his brothers, raised counter-revolutionary forces to attack France. After the failure of the invasion of 1792 he continued his exile and served in the Irish brigade sponsored by England. At the restoration of Louis XVIII in 1814 he was named lieutenant-general and later served as ambassador to Saxony (1816-18) and to Tuscany (1819). He died in Paris in 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 7656


Dillon, Sir James (b. c.1600, d. in or after 1669), army officer, was probably born at Kilfaughny, co. Westmeath, the eighth and youngest son of nineteen children of Theobald, first Viscount Dillon of Costello-Gallen (died 1624), an extensive landowner in Connaught and co. Westmeath, and his wife, Eleanor (died 1638), daughter of William Tuite of Tuitestown, co. Westmeath. Nothing is known of his education or youth. He was twice married. His first wife was Elizabeth (died before 1653), daughter of Thomas Plunkett of Rathmore, co. Meath. They had two sons, Ulick and James, both of whom predeceased him. His second marriage, to Mary (died before January 1665), daughter of Roger Jones of Sligo and widow of Major John Ridge of co. Roscommon, was childless. 
Dillon had an estate of 2500 acres in Mayo and Roscommon, but he seems to have lived near Athlone. He was the senior member of his family resident in co. Westmeath, which he represented in parliament in 1634-5 and from 1640 until his expulsion as a rebel in 1642. In 1641, after the disbandment of Wentworth's 'new army' in which he was a captain, he was authorized to recruit a regiment for service in the Spanish army from the soldiers affected. His investment of $1000 in this project was lost when the scheme became a casualty of the growing conflict between King Charles I and parliament. This setback, possibly coupled with the belief that he was acting in accordance with the king's wishes, involved him with Lord Maguire and others in the conspiracy that preceded the 1641 rebellion. He made the radical proposal to seize Dublin Castle, but then withdrew from the plot, probably on the insistence of the commander-in-chief of the army, the earl of Ormond, that it was unhelpful to the king's cause. 
After the outbreak of the 1641 rising Dillon was sent to the midlands as governor of Longford and Westmeath. Initially he exercised a restraining hand on the rebels, many of whom were his kinsmen, before reluctantly following his fellow Old English Catholics into revolt. He remained very much on the moderate wing of the confederacy. He was appointed colonel of an infantry regiment in the Leinster army. The prestige and wealth of his family made him the dominant military leader in west Leinster, where he recruited and provided sustenance for more than 1000 men. Throughout 1642 he invested Athlone, the key midland fortress on the Shannon. His forces twice broke into the east town but failed to dislodge the Connaught president, Viscount Ranelagh, from his stronghold in the castle west of the river. Dillon did not oppose Ormond's relief of the town in the summer, but in January 1643 he took part in an unsuccessful attack on a second relief force at Rathconnell, near Mullingar, as it retired to Dublin having evacuated Ranelagh and the remnants of his garrison. He then occupied east Athlone, and eventually gained the castle after his royalist nephew, Viscount Dillon, to whom he was closely allied, became president of Connaught in 1644. Smaller strongholds in the midlands were also brought under his control. In 1643 he helped negotiate a truce with Ormond, who recommended him as 'person of honour and good affection' ('Irish Confederation', ed. Gilbert, 4.355). His regiment took part in Castlehaven's fruitless offensive in Ulster (1644). He joined Taaffe in reducing pro-parliament strongholds in co. Roscommon in 1645, and was present the following year with his regiment when Preston took Roscommon and Jamestown. Competition for quarters and ideological differences embittered his relations with Owen Roe O'Neill, who responded to his lethargic military performance with the sarcastic suggestion that he 'forego a military career, as not suiting to his humours, and at ease at home court ladies for which he was a fit instrument' (Gilbert, 'Contemporary history', 2.72). In 1646 the seizure of Athlone by O'Neill's supporters briefly drove him to side with Ormond, but he soon reverted to the confederacy, recovering the town and eventually the castle with Preston's help. He escaped from the battle of Dungan's Hill (1647), leaving his regiment to be destroyed with the rest of the Leinster army. His efforts to re-form it made slow progress, and by 1649 he could only muster 100 men in addition to two companies supplied to the Drogheda garrison. He served under Ormond in 1649-50. In 1651 he was much criticized by other royalist leaders for his hasty surrender of Athlone to the parliamentarians. His own surrender followed in 1652. He forfeited his estate, but was permitted to take a regiment to Spain, from which he was sent to France to support the Bordeaux Fronde. His Franciscan brother, Father George Dillon, persuaded him to surrender the chateau of Lormont to the duc de Vendome in 1653. His regiment then entered the French army, and he was promoted to brigadier-general. His change of allegiance met with the approval of the exiled Charles II, who later acknowledged his loyalty. He served in the army of Flanders and fought with distinction at the battle of the Dunes (1658). His regiment was disbanded in 1664. He returned to the British Isles, where Charles II granted him a pension of $500. In 1664 he sought a licence for the distribution of a new artificial fuel in Ireland. In 1666 he obtained a pass for Flanders, from where he corresponded with Ormond in Irish, evidently performing an intelligence-related role during the war with France and Holland. 
The date and place of Dillon's death are unknown, but he was still in receipt of his pension in 1669. Much of his estate seems eventually to have reverted to his nephew, Thomas, fourth Viscount Dillon, who was presumably his heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 7657


Dillon, John Blake (1814-1866), Irish nationalist and journalist, was born on 5 May 1814 in Ballaghaderreen, on the borders of Mayo and Roscommon, the fourth of seven children of Luke Dillon (died 1825), farmer and shopkeeper, and his wife, Anne Blake, of Dunmacrina, co. Mayo. Dillon was educated at St Patrick's College, Maynooth (1830-32), and Trinity College, Dublin (1834-41). A prizewinner in political economy, he gained a BA in logic and ethics, and was called to the Irish bar. At Trinity College he made the most important friendship of his political career, with Thomas Davis, whom he succeeded as president of the Historical Society, the student debating forum. In 1842, Dillon, Davis, and Charles Gavan Duffy launched 'Nation', one of the most notable journalistic ventures in Irish history. Initially, the 'Nation', or Young Ireland, group supported O'Connell's repeal agitation, but as its hopes were not realized, they turned increasingly towards the romantic nationalism then sweeping through Europe. 
Dillon married Adelaide Hart (1828-1872), the daughter of a Dublin solicitor, in October 1847. In an unpublished memoir she described him as tall, 'dark as a Spaniard in complexion, with regular noble features and great melancholy eyes'. He associated 'nearly all the sweet memories' of his life with Druid Lodge, her home in Killiney, co. Dublin (Dillon MSS, TCD: 26 June 1849); it became their home after 1856. It was a happy marriage but troubled by ill health, especially Adelaide's. They had eight children: five boys and three girls. 
The Paris revolution of February 1848 raised unrealistic expectations in famine-stricken Ireland. With the suspension of habeas corpus on 22 July, Dillon and Thomas Francis Meagher persuaded William Smith O'Brien to lead an insurrection, which ended in failure one week later in co. Tipperary. In spite of a $300 reward for his capture, Dillon escaped with the assistance of clerical friends to the United States. During his exile in New York he prospered as a lawyer. In the era of reaction which succeeded the year of revolutions in Europe, he went through a period of disillusionment with Irish politics and the Roman Catholic church. His perspective changed, however, after his wife induced him to return to Ireland in 1856, following an amnesty offered in the previous year. 
Dillon was a liberal Catholic (among his papers in Trinity College is his translation of part of 'Words of a Believer', by Felicite Lamennais). But in the last phase of his political career he formed the anti-Fenian National Association with the ultramontane archbishop of Dublin, Paul Cullen. The best explanation for this paradox is perhaps that they were both deeply religious men and, essentially, constitutional nationalists. 
Dillon was elected MP for Tipperary in July 1865. He died suddenly of cholera in Killiney on 15 September 1866, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. According to Gavan Duffy, John Blake Dillon's 'generous nature made him more a philanthropist than a politician' (Duffy, 'Young Ireland', 1.38). During his brief parliamentary career, none the less, he made a decisive contribution to the Irish-Liberal understanding which ushered in the great era of Gladstonian reform. Together with his wife, Adelaide, he founded a political dynasty: their son John Dillon was a leading figure at Westminster for nearly forty years, and a grandson, James Mathew Dillon (1902-1986), was a tribune of democracy in independent Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 7658


Dillon, John Talbot (1734-1806), traveller and historian, was the elder son of Francis Dillon (died 1767), whose father was William Dillon of Proudstown, Ireland, and Mary, daughter of Sir Mervyn Wingfield, sixth and last baronet, of Letheringham in Suffolk (the Wingfield baronetcy, granted by Charles I, could not pass through the female line). He was educated at Westminster School from about 1742 to 1747. In the latter year, at the age of thirteen, he joined the Royal Navy under the protection of Captain Dennis of the 28-gun frigate the 'Mermaid'. He is not to be confused with Sir John Talbot Dillon ['see below'] of Lismullen, co. Meath, Ireland. The confusion, perpetuated by the 'Dictionary of National Biography', arose not only from the two men having the same names and their each having a son named William, but also from the curious coincidence of their both being barons of the Holy Roman empire. The two men knew each other and their branches of the Dillon family were certainly related, but distantly. Clarification of their separate identities came in 1953-6 when the Navy Records Society published 'A Narrative of my Professional Adventures (1790-1839)' (2 vols.) by Sir William Henry Dillon, illegitimate son of John Talbot Dillon: the introduction and notes by M. A. Lewis provide essential information. 
Only two years after entering the navy Dillon seems to have peremptorily engineered his own discharge following a perceived insult in Portsmouth when he was evicted from the Parade Coffee House, an establishment reserved for naval captains. Thereafter, he seems to have spent much of his life abroad, particularly in Spain where he travelled extensively and learned the language and literature. His son's 'Narrative' records that Dillon married first into a noble family from Namur, that his first wife died in childbirth, and that he had a network of friends and relatives in France. Sir William Henry Dillon (1780-1857) was born to Dillon and Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Collins, but the couple do not seem to have married. 
Dillon was clearly proud to be a baron of the Holy Roman empire -- a title conferred on his father, Francis, and passed down on his death in 1767 -- since it is emblazoned on the title-page of his first publication, 'Travels through Spain, with a view to illustrate the natural history and physical geography of that kingdom, in a series of letters' (1780). The preface makes clear that the 'Travels' are the fruit of three separate visits to Spain. Much of the text is lifted (and acknowledged as such) from the 'Introduction to the Natural History and Physical Geography of Spain' by William Bowles, published in Spanish at Madrid in 1775. Dillon weaves his own commentary and itinerary into Bowles's account and he also incorporates some of the observations of Don Antonio Ponz, secretary of the Royal Academy of San Fernando. The resulting work offered one of the most complete pictures of Spain then available to the British reading public and it was favourably reviewed, although its focus on natural history and antiquity made it old-fashioned at a time when travelogues were increasingly concerned with politics and cultural anthropology. In 1781 Dillon published 'Letters from an English traveller in Spain, in 1778, on the origin and progress of poetry in that kingdom'. This text integrates personal anecdote with a comprehensive literary history that can be related to other mid-eighteenth-century explorations of the origins of national poetry (by, for example, Thomas Percy and Thomas Warton). 
Dillon was soon regarded as an authority on the Spanish language. In 1781 John Bowles published an edition of 'Don Quixote' in which he acknowledged Dillon's expertise. In 1786 Joseph Baretti published 'Tolondron', a ferocious attack on the inaccuracies of Bowles's edition; he related a meeting in a Holborn tavern with Dillon and Bowles in which Bowles had boasted that 'he could not utter a syllable of Spanish, nor understand a word of it, when spoken' (p. 6), Baretti wonders why Bowles had not consulted 'Baron Dillon' for advice on his edition, since 'he speaks Spanish fluently' (ibid., 231). In the summer of 1781 Dillon corresponded briefly with Thomas Percy (the letters are reprinted in Nichols's 'Illustrations'), who had read Dillon's account of Spanish poetry. Clearly emboldened by Percy's interest, Dillon wrote to ask for his help in requesting permission from the duke of Northumberland to be the dedicatee for his forthcoming history of the Holy Roman empire. Despite Percy's efforts this request was not granted. Dillon seems at this time to have been living on the proceeds of his literary labours: he writes to Percy that 'Though in my commercial occupations I have very limited prospects, very much so at present, I endeavour to occupy my mind and time with literary pursuits' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 8.194). His literary output in the following years was substantial, if miscellaneous, and seems to reflect both his need to generate income and his genuine interest in European culture, liberty, and toleration. In 1782 he published 'Sketches on the Art of Painting', a translation from the Spanish of Anthony Raphael Mengs, painter to the Spanish king, and in 1783 'A Political Survey of the Roman Empire'. In 1788 appeared 'The History of the Reign of Peter the Cruel, King of Castile and Leon', in which Dillon attempted to acquit that ruler from charges of tyranny, somewhat to the scepticism of contemporary reviewers. A similar, though more romanticized work appeared in 1800, 'Alphonso and Eleonora, or, The Triumphs of Valour and Virtue', in which Dillon attempted to redeem the reputation of Alfonso VIII of Castile: the book's novelistic title seems calculated to attract a wide readership. In 1790 Dillon published a rather rushed compilation entitled 'Historical and Critical Memoirs of the General Revolution in France in the Year 1789', which is condemned for its opportunism, but praised for its editor's 'rational attachment to the cause of liberty' ('Monthly Review', new ser., 10, Jan 1793, 84-7). Perhaps surprisingly, Dillon speaks out against extending the right of liberty to slaves in the West-Indian plantations, maintaining that freedom would not improve their condition. Overall Dillon's works project a mixture of enlightened cosmopolitanism and aristocratic paternalism. 
In later years Dillon resided in different parts of London with Mary Barbara, whom he had married in 1797 when he was sixty-three. Dillon's son describes her as his father's 'third wife', though she was probably only his second if, as seems likely, he never married his son's mother. Dillon was engaged in a protracted lawsuit over a property in Suffolk, which he eventually lost, and he seems to have had some connection with Manchester since he left to the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society some of his works on agriculture. He encouraged his son's active and successful naval career, and was acquainted with such diverse persons as Lord George Gordon, William Wilberforce, and the travel writer and agriculturist Arthur Young (Dillon was under-secretary to the board of agriculture when Young was secretary). His son describes his visits to Dillon's London residences as 'one continued round of dinners and entertainments' (W. H. Dillon, 1.157). 
Dillon died at Brompton on 19 March 1806. In his will, he bequeathed to his 'beloved wife' the: 'two Imperial Diplomas of Nobility granted by the most serene Emperors of Germany, Francis I and Joseph II to my Father and family... for her to keep and preserve in memory of her affection for me and to be disposed of by her according to her own discretion. (M. A. Lewis, 'Introduction' to W. H. Dillon, 'Narrative', 1.x)' This suggests that he had no legitimate issue. Although the 'Gentleman's Magazine' obituary notice refers to him as 'Bart' and his son's 'Narrative' as 'Sir', he seems to have had no legitimate title save that of baron of the Holy Roman empire. 
Dillon's namesake, 


@@@@@


doc= 7659


Dillon, Sir Lucas (d. 1592), judge, was the eldest son and heir of Sir Robert Dillon (d. 1579?), of Newtown Trim, co. Meath, chief justice of common pleas, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Barnewall of Crickstown. He was probably born after 1530 and entered the Middle Temple in 1551. On his return to Ireland he resided at Moymet Castle, which he built 3 miles north-west of Trim. His first wife was Jane, daughter of James Bathe, chief baron of the exchequer from 1535 to 1570. 
Dillon took office as the queen's principal solicitor in 1565 and in 1566 became, like his father, attorney-general. In 1566 he was a commissioner to hear civil causes in Kilkenny, and he commended the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, to Sir William Cecil in 1568 for expanding the judicial presence in Ireland beyond the pale, citing the 'marvellous' resort of litigants to the council (TNA: PRO, SP 63/26/68). He was sent to London in 1569 with bills for the parliament, and the following year he explained to the queen the need for a university in Dublin. Dillon returned to Ireland as the new chief baron of the exchequer in 1570 on the nomination of Sidney, succeeding his father-in-law. He was a constitutional moderate and maintained a long correspondence with Cecil, noting in 1570 'that it stode better with good polecy to procede by degrees (as wherein stode safetie) then to take in hande so moche as we should not be hable to welde' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/30/130). 
Dillon was the most loyal of the Old English privy councillors and Sidney knighted him in 1575 at Drogheda, calling him ''meus fidelis' 'Lucas'' (Ball, 212). Sir Lucas was a commissioner of the court of wards and his merit as a councillor was acknowledged in 1572 by Fitzwilliam, who recommended him to replace his father on the junior bench. Sidney sought the chief justiceship for him, whereas the lord chancellor, Gerard, proclaimed his honesty, 'though he dealeth and conveyeth conninglye' (LPL, Carew MS 628, fol. 312), and employed him in the hotly contested cess controversy in 1577 to examine legal precedents for purveyance. Dillon argued before the privy council in 1578 that the cess was traditionally authorized by the grand council and thus required the sanction of the leading palesmen. Yet he was lauded in 1577 by Sir Nicholas Malby for his support of the cess on a badly divided council, and by Sir Edward Waterhouse for his service to the crown and his willingness to afford 'a good table in town and campe' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/72/147). He attended Sidney on numerous expeditions to apprehend and punish Irish rebels, such as those who aided Rory Oge O'More in 1578. 
Dillon joined Lord Justice Pelham in Philipstown in 1579 at the outset of the Desmond rebellion of 1579-83, and in 1580 journeyed with him to Munster. In May 1581 he was proposed as a candidate for the vacant lord chancellorship, but his rival for the post, Archbishop Adam Loftus, denounced him as corrupt in 1582 and won the post for himself. Dillon was nominated chief justice of queen's bench in 1583, but his reputation was compromised by an Irish exile who informed that he kept a Catholic priest named Charles, and was 'catholick at hart' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/88/60). During the multiple crises of the Desmond rebellion the new chief justice of common pleas, Nicholas Nugent, was accused of supporting his cousin's insurrection in the pale, conspiring to take Dublin Castle, and planning to ambush Dillon on his way to hold sessions at Mullingar. At a special tribunal on 4 April 1582, convened out of term and held at Trim, Dillon and other councillors, including his cousin Sir Robert Dillon (c.1540-1597) of Riverston, sat as judges when the chief justice was tried for treason before a Meath jury. Nugent protested both the exceptional venue and the intervention of his adversaries, complaining that only one, tainted, witness gave testimony. Dillon was accused of bullying the jurors into reversing their verdict, and Nugent was hanged at Trim two days later. 
After the departure of Lord Deputy Grey in 1582 Dillon helped to arrange the trial by battle in the yard of Dublin Castle between two O'Connor chieftains in 1583, a cynical attempt to kill off the leaders of a prominent Gaelic family. The appointment of Sir John Perrot as lord deputy on 4 January 1584 signalled a return to reform, and Dillon became one of Perrot's leading supporters on the faction-ridden Irish council. He joined Perrot on progresses to Ulster and Munster, and was sent to England for the required sanctioning of an Irish parliament, returning at the head of 400 troops on 6 March 1585 and bringing the parliamentary robes for the viceroy. Dillon and Nicholas White, master of the rolls, attempted to steer Perrot's ambitious reform of the cess through parliament, but the queen rebuked her intemperate chief governor for toleration of recusancy and she encouraged Loftus and his allies to exclude Old English councillors from most confidential business after 1586. Although named a commissioner for the plantation of Munster on 26 April 1587, Dillon was later implicated in the charges of coddling recusants brought against Perrot by the new lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam, in 1590. In 1592 Sir Lucas and Sir Robert Dillon were accused of instigating Sir Brian O'Rourke's rebellion in Connaught, charges probably inspired by the Nugents. The crucial involvement of moderate voices in Irish government was effectively silenced on the departure of Perrot, and after Dillon's death, which took place in Dublin in 1592, he was replaced by Sir Robert Napier of Dorset, completing the practical exclusion of the Old English. 
As a loyal privy councillor and a key member of its inner circle, Dillon enjoyed the patronage of several chief governors. He became steward of the royal manors near Dublin in 1574. After the death of his first wife, Jane, he married Marion ('nee' Sharl), widow of Sir Christopher Barnewall of Turvey, in 1575. He succeeded his father as steward of Kilkenny West in 1578, and in 1580 inherited the profitable estates at Newtown, joining them with the dissolved priory of St Mary in Trim. He resided in St Nicholas Street when in Dublin, and he was buried in 1592 in the parish church at Newtown Trim, where his fine Renaissance altar tomb, with effigies of Lucas and Jane, may still be seen. In 1589 Dillon had also erected a marble monument at Lusk in honour of his second wife's first husband. He and his first wife had seven sons and five daughters, including their eldest son, James (died 1642), who was granted livery of his father's lands on 8 April 1594. James was created Baron Dillon on 24 January 1620 and earl of Roscommon on 5 April 1622. Another son, John, married the daughter of Sir William Sarsfield of Lucan, co. Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 7660


Dillon, Peter (1788-1847), adventurer in the south seas, was born on 15 June 1788 on Martinique, the son of an Irishman, Peter Dillon, probably a soldier stationed on the island. About 1806 Dillon appears to have sailed for Calcutta and he later traded sandalwood between the west Pacific islands and China. In 1809 he spent four months in Fiji, mixing with Fijians and learning their language. He lived on Bora-Bora, in the Society Islands, from 1810 to 1812 and claimed to have become the adopted son of Tapoa, a powerful chief; he took as his mistress a daughter of another chief. 
In 1812 and 1813 Dillon was third mate on the 'Hunter'. In September 1813 men from the 'Hunter', when on shore at Wailea, were attacked by Fijians, who killed twelve Europeans and about forty others, later eating many of them. Dillon's coolness and knowledge of the Fijians allowed him and two others to escape. Those who had fled the fighting were taken by Dillon on the 'Hunter''s sister ship 'Elizabeth' to Tikopia (lat. 12 degree 10' S, long. 168 degree 50' E), where the Prussian Martin Buchert, his Fijian wife, and a Lascar known as Joe were landed. After his return to Sydney, Dillon achieved some fame by recounting the affair. In 1814 he was commissioned by the Church Missionary Society to take missionaries to New Zealand. On 22 September 1814 he married Mary Moore in Sydney and she and their children often accompanied him on his voyages. From 1819 to 1825 he shipped criminals, mail, and merchandise between India and Australia in his own ships, two of which he wrecked. 
On a trip to South America, Dillon met the widow of Maximo Rodriguez, the Spanish explorer of Tahiti, whose diary she gave to Dillon and a summary of which he published in the Bengal 'Government Gazette'. This fostered his interest in early Pacific exploration, an interest which gained impetus in May 1826, when, on a visit to Tikopia, Dillon obtained from Buchert and Joe a silver sword-guard and spoon, which he rightly guessed were relics of the lost expedition of J. F. G. de La Perouse. The artefacts had come from Vanikoro, in the Santa Cruz Islands; Dillon made for the islands, but when his supplies ran short and the ship began to leak he was forced to return to Calcutta. 
Keen to investigate the discovery further, the East India Company fitted out the 'Research' which, under Dillon's command, sailed from Calcutta in January 1827. The voyage was marred by illness and a quarrel between Dillon and Robert Tytler, the ship's doctor. Dillon thought Tytler mutinous: Tytler thought Dillon mad. Although Tytler was the more reprehensible, it was Dillon who was tried and imprisoned in Hobart for assault and false imprisonment. Dillon's sentence was remitted and the 'Research' sailed on, reaching New Zealand, where he learned that Dumont D'Urville was also looking for the remains of La Perouse's expedition. In September Dillon reached Tikopia, where, through Buchert's influence, he bought further artefacts; he sailed on to Vanikoro, where he found the remains of La Perouse's two wrecked ships, and numerous artefacts unquestionably from La Perouse's expedition, which he carried off. D'Urville, hearing of Dillon's discovery, landed at Tikopia, gathered further relics and erected a memorial. On reaching Calcutta in April 1828, Dillon was warmly received by the governor, but found that the failure of his agents had left him penniless. He and his family sailed to England where, despite acclaim from the press, he got a mixed reaction from the East India Company. They left, after only three days, for Paris, where Dillon gave his finds to Charles X, who placed them in the Louvre; the king awarded Dillon the Legion d'honneur, an annual pension of 4000 francs, and a grant towards his expenses. Through the 'Narrative' (1829) of his voyage, Dillon tried to secure public acclaim, a scientific reputation, and financial security; its valuable descriptions of the peoples of the south seas won it some fame, and French and Dutch editions were published, but it is marred by diatribes against Tytler. 
After this Dillon never found occupation which made use of his knowledge of the south seas or which relieved his poverty. His plans for French Roman Catholic missions in the Pacific, his employment in 1834 as a flax trader to New Zealand, and his repeated petitions to the British, French, and other governments for a pension in recognition of his services to exploration all came to nothing. After the death of his wife in 1840 Dillon went to Paris, where he died, at 23 rue des Postes, on 9 February 1847. Dillon was 6 feet 4 inches tall, heavily built with a mop of red hair. He was courageous, and understood and liked the peoples of the Pacific. He could be brutal to his wife and subordinates, but in general commanded the respect even of those who disliked him. His knowledge of the Pacific and its exploration was impressive in one who lacked formal education. 


@@@@@


doc= 7661


Dillon, Sir Robert (d. 1579?), judge, was the third son of James Dillon of Riverston, co. Meath, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Bartholomew Bathe of Dollardstown. His father was chief remembrancer and second baron of the exchequer about 1499. Robert probably received legal training at the inns of court, since nearly all of his contemporaries were in residence there prior to commencing their legal careers in Ireland. His eldest brother, Sir Bartholomew Dillon (died 1534), became an important ally of the earl of Kildare, to whom Bartholomew owed promotion as chief baron of the exchequer and under-treasurer (1514-20), second justice of king's bench (1520-33), and chief justice of king's bench (1533-4). Another brother, Thomas, was prior of the cathedral canons of Sts Peter and Paul in Trim, co. Meath, in 1511. 
Dillon married Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Barnewall of Crickstown and granddaughter of Sir Thomas Plunket (died 1471), chief justice of common pleas. As a well-connected member of a distinguished family of jurists, Robert was named attorney-general of Ireland on 9 June 1534, at the outset of the Kildare rebellion. Though undoubtedly Catholic, he assisted in the dissolution of the Irish monasteries, receiving on 22 December 1538 the site of St Peter's Priory at Newtown, near Trim. Dillon made Newtown his principal seat, and he acquired the Carmelite monastery at Athnecarne, co. Meath, on 20 March 1546. He resided in Dublin, near St Patrick's Cathedral, from 1547, and in 1548 he acted as civil governor of Athlone. He became second justice of queen's bench on 17 January 1554, and was commended for his discretion and learning. On 9 November 1556 Dillon travelled with John Plunket on a commission to Munster to take depositions in a controversy between the lord of Upper Ossory and the earl of Ormond. A witness to constant political intrigue, Dillon was a survivor who established the family's fortune without risking his investment in partisan alignments at court. 
Elizabeth renewed Dillon's appointment in January 1559, and on 3 September 1559 he was made chief justice of common pleas with a fee of $67 10's'. He attended the Irish privy council regularly, served as commissioner for ecclesiastical causes on 6 October 1564, and was knighted by Sir Henry Sidney in 1567. He was frequently commissioner for martial law and for collection of the cess in co. Meath and won additional lands, including estates in Connaught worth $30 in April 1568, and the monastery of Kilkenny West in co. Westmeath in 1569. Nevertheless, he was described by Sidney on 20 April 1567 as 'a man muche spent in yeares and decayed both in sence and bodie' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/20/142). After 1571 he was notably absent from meetings of the privy council, and on 8 March 1575 Elizabeth declared her intention of sending an Englishman to replace him on the bench. Lord Chancellor Sir William Gerard in 1576 cited Dillon's incapacity to serve on regular assize courts as part of the rationale for judicial reform, and on 5 July 1579 he wrote to Walsingham that Dillon had died. A famous quarrel over his succession in office ended with the trial and execution of his successor, Nicholas Nugent, and his replacement by Dillon's great-nephew, Robert Dillon of Riverston. Dillon and his wife had four sons and three daughters, including his eldest son, Sir Lucas Dillon, who joined his father on the privy council in 1570 as chief baron of the exchequer. 


@@@@@


doc= 7662


Dillon, Sir Robert (c.1540-1597), judge, was the eldest son of Thomas Dillon of Riverston, co. Meath, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Luttrell (died 1554), former chief justice of common pleas. His grandfather Sir Bartholomew Dillon (died 1534) had been an important ally of the earl of Kildare and served briefly as chief justice of king's bench in 1533-4. Sir Robert Dillon (d. 1579?), of Newtown Trim, his great-uncle, was chief justice of common pleas from 1559 to 1579, and Sir Lucas Dillon (d. 1592), his cousin, was chief baron of the exchequer from 1570 to 1592. Robert Dillon of Riverston was probably born about 1540 and studied law at Lincoln's Inn where he was escheator in 1560. After a quarrel with Nicholas Nugent in that year he was bound to keep the peace. In 1562 he signed the book of twenty-four articles, a critique of the Dublin government's use of purveyance. He was called to the bar in England in 1567 and on 1 June 1569 was named second justice of the newly installed presidency and council of Connaught as 'a suitable man of this country, learned in the laws and with the knowledge of the Irish tongue' (Morrin, 533-4). 
Dillon was an ambitious and exceedingly well-connected member of a distinguished judicial family. In his first post, however, he exhibited the combative temper which marked his subsequent career. Allied with the first president of Connaught, the wily Sir Edward Fitton, Dillon defended his ruthless campaigns against the criticism of the cautious lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam. When the truculent Fitton won higher office as vice-treasurer, after retreating from his precarious role in Athlone, Dillon was appointed chancellor of the exchequer in Ireland on 5 June 1572. Though aligned with his moderate older cousin Sir Lucas Dillon, who was made chief baron in 1570, Robert the younger made an enemy of Fitzwilliam. The viceroy attacked Fitton in council for refusing to sign a warrant and imprisoned the unruly vice-treasurer in June 1573. Fitzwilliam urged Elizabeth to commit Dillon to the Fleet when he arrived in London as agent for the closeted Fitton. However, the queen took the side of Dillon and Fitton, reprimanding Fitzwilliam, who was soon to be replaced. 
When Sir Henry Sidney succeeded as chief governor in 1575 he regarded the Dillons as loyal allies and Robert was appointed second justice of common pleas, under his aged great-uncle, on 26 November 1577. Lord Chancellor Gerard commended him for his learning in 1576, and in 1580 the vice-treasurer, Wallop, sought the chief justiceship for him, noting that he had executed both offices during the past four years while the senior Dillon was too enfeebled to serve. During the constitutional crisis of the cess (1577-9) Dillon was apparently an interested bystander, while his nemesis and rival Nicholas Nugent was summarily expelled as second baron of the exchequer for his challenge to the legality of purveyance. None the less, on the death of the ancient chief justice, Nugent was preferred as his successor on the nomination of the lord chancellor, frustrating the expectations of Dillon. Wallop claimed that Nugent had purchased the reversion of office for a mere $100 and that he was a covert papist. The recommendation of Dillon by Edward Waterhouse on 20 April 1580 declared 'he is reported one of the most sufficient in knowledge and Judgment and he is of very good hability to beare out the Countenace of a Consaillor, being born to fair living as the chief of that surname' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/72/147). 
Denied his chance in 1580, another opportunity came quickly for Dillon in the form of the Nugent rebellion in the pale in 1581. The new lord chancellor, Archbishop Adam Loftus, had written in April 1581 to Cecil that the chief justiceship had been promised by Sidney to Dillon, that Nugent was less skilful, and that Dillon's loyalty to the queen was not inferior to those of English birth. Dillon was appointed chief justice of common pleas on 14 July 1581 and the dismissed Nugent was accused of supporting his cousin's insurrection, conspiring to take Dublin Castle, and planning to ambush Sir Lucas and Sir Robert on their way to hold sessions at Mullingar. At a special tribunal at Trim on 4 April 1582 Nugent was tried for treason. He complained that only one tainted witness gave testimony, and Sir Robert was accused of soliciting witnesses and bullying jurors into reversing their verdict; but Nugent was hanged at Trim two days later. 
Despite the political scandal Dillon was knighted in 1581 and raised to the honour of privy councillor. He was reputed the wealthiest commoner in the pale in 1586, and received a lease of land in Oxmantown in 1588 as token of gratitude from Dublin corporation. Like his cousin, Dillon was a supporter of Lord Deputy Perrot in council. In 1588 he was named a commissioner for the new composition of Connaught, but after Perrot's dismissal he faced his old enemy Sir William Fitzwilliam as the new chief governor. Dillon had quarrelled with Sir Richard Bingham over the management of the Connaught presidency and was excluded from the council during the inquiry into Bingham's government in 1589. In 1591 Dillon was accused by the former rebel William Nugent of encouraging Sir Brian O'Rourke in rebellion. His trial was managed by the English privy council in June 1593, seeking proofs from Dublin and requiring a speedy conclusion out of respect of the office of chief justice. On the evidence, Dillon was removed from office and imprisoned in October 1593, yet his supporter, Lord Chancellor Loftus, declared him innocent of the charges on 22 November. Five days later he was named a commissioner of ecclesiastical causes, and he was restored to the council in the following year. On the death of his replacement, Sir William Weston, on 23 September 1594, Secretary Fenton wrote to Burghley that Dillon should be restored to office. He regained the chief justiceship by patent on 15 March 1595, a notable exception to the elimination of loyal Old English councillors after 1592. 
Dillon's first wife was Eleanor, daughter of Thomas Allen of Kilteel, co. Kildare, with whom he had one son who predeceased him. After the death of Eleanor he married Katherine (died 1615), daughter of the wealthy Dublin alderman Sir William Sarsfield of Lucan; with his second wife he had five sons and nine daughters. Dillon died in office while at Riverston on 15 July 1597, and was buried at the parish church in Tara where a memorial was placed in his honour. His brother Gerald was clerk of the crown and third justice of queen's bench, though he was imprisoned as part of the anti-Dillon inquisition of 1591-3. His kinsman Thomas Dillon of Proudstown was chief justice of Connaught and third justice of common pleas, though he also was briefly imprisoned in the Bingham conflict of the 1590s. 


@@@@@


doc= 7663


Dillon, Robert Crawford (1795-1847), author and rebel Church of England clergyman, was born in the rectory house of St Margaret's, Lothbury, in the City of London, on 22 May 1795. His parents' names are unknown, but his father is said to have died when Robert was young; his mother then had him privately educated by John Cawood. He entered St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in the Michaelmas term of 1813. He took his BA on 16 May 1817 and his MA on 3 February 1820, and proceeded BD and DD 27 October 1836. He was ordained on 20 December 1818 to the curacy of West Milton, Dorset. Having received priest's orders, in 1819 he was appointed assistant minister of St John's Chapel, Bedford Row, London, the recognized centre of evangelical teaching, of which Daniel Wilson, later bishop of Calcutta, was at that time the incumbent. There he became a popular preacher, and was much sought after, especially by the female members of the congregation. Dillon moved in 1824 to the curacy of Willesden and Kingsbury, Middlesex, and the next year to that of St James's, Clerkenwell; the following year, 1826, he obtained an appointment at St Matthew's Chapel, Denmark Hill, London. In 1822 Dillon was chaplain to Alderman Venables when sheriff and remained so when Venables was lord mayor of London in 1826-7. In the latter year he accompanied the lord mayor and corporation on an official visit to Oxford, of which, on Venables's request, he wrote an account, published in 1826, which quickly became notorious. Its preface acknowledges that 'it is a species of writing not altogether in accordance with the sacred profession of which the writer is the unworthiest member' (R. C. Dillon, 'The Lord Mayor's Visit to Oxford', 1826). Its style is hyperbolic and it was felt that the mayorial party had been held up to ridicule. Dillon tried to buy up copies -- which were 'rigorously suppressed', as the bookseller's advertisement, tipped into the copy in the Bodleian, reads -- and the book became a collector's item. 
In 1828 Dillon was elected by a large majority to be morning preacher of the Female Orphan Asylum, a post which he resigned the next year for a proprietary chapel in Charlotte Street, Pimlico, to which he was licensed on 24 July 1829. From 1829 to 1837 he was early-morning lecturer at St Swithin's, London Stone, where he attracted large congregations. During this period Dillon continued his evening lectureship at St James's, Clerkenwell, and in 1839, on the vacancy of the rectory, which was in the gift of the parishioners, he became candidate for the benefice. The consequent election was marked by bribery and the publication of broadsheets. Dillon's private life was closely enquired into, and various sexual scandals were brought to light; despite the support of a vocal group of female parishioners (organized as a 'ladies' committee'), Dillon was not elected. The charges of immorality having been proved, C. J. Blomfield, bishop of London, revoked Dillon's licence, and suspended him from his ministry in Charlotte Street on 29 February 1840. In defiance of the inhibition, Dillon continued to officiate in the chapel, and a suit was brought against him in the consistory court in April of the same year, when he was condemned with costs. 
Dillon then left the Church of England, and, helped by his female followers, set up a 'reformed English church' in Friar Street, Blackfriars, with a new system of discipline and a reformed liturgy. His congregation increased, and Dillon moved to a large building in White's Row, Spitalfields, where he appointed himself 'first presbyter' or 'bishop' of his new church, and ordained ministers to serve branch churches in various parts of London. On 26 November 1839, Dillon married Frances Charlotte, daughter of John Rumball, from whom he soon separated. In 1842 Dillon was involved in an unsavoury case in the consistory court, brought against him by his wife, for the restitution of conjugal rights. His defence was that his wife had committed adultery with James Nicholls, a barrister. In his evidence he claimed that his wife was the illegitimate daughter of John Rumball and the wife of Captain Augustus Vere Drury. Despite this, Dillon continued to be a popular preacher, and at the time of his sudden death on 8 November 1847, in the vestry of his chapel in Spitalfields, he had received large promises of money for expanding his church outside London. He was buried in the churchyard of his native parish, St Margaret's, Lothbury, in which church a mural slab was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 7664


Dillon, Theobald Hyacinthe (1745-1792), army officer in the French service, the son of Thomas Dillon and his wife, Marie Hussey, the daughter of Edward Hussey of Donore, co. Kildare, and a distant relative of General Arthur Dillon, was born in Dublin on 22 July 1745. The following year his father moved his family to France and settled near Orleans. Dillon never married, but he and Josephine de Viefville lived together for nine years and had three children, all of whom took his name. 
On 1 September 1761 or 1762 Dillon entered the family regiment as a cadet, and was a captain in 1779 when it participated in the attack on Grenada and the siege of Savannah, after which he fell ill and returned to France. He was promoted colonel in second on 13 April 1780, received the cross of St Louis on 29 July 1781, and was admitted to the order of Cincinnatus on 15 March 1785. Three years later he assumed command of the regiment, and on 25 August 1791 was promoted general. After commanding the garrison at Valenciennes and at Lille he was given command of a detachment of the army of the north with orders to feign an attack on Tournai in order to divert the enemy from the real objective, Mons. But upon encountering an advancing Austrian force, Dillon ordered a retreat; the retreat turned into a rout, with the French troops claiming they had been betrayed, and Dillon, having failed to rally his command, was first wounded and then conveyed back to Lille and brutally murdered by his own men. His body was burnt in the main square of the city on 29 April 1792, and his remains were probably buried in the communal cemetery in the faubourg St Maurice in Lille. 


@@@@@


doc= 7665


Dillon, Thomas, fourth Viscount Dillon (1614/15-1673x5), royalist army officer, was the second son of Sir Christopher Dillon (died 1624), Irish administrator, and Lady Jane, daughter of James Dillon, first earl of Roscommon. His father, of Ballylagham, co. Mayo, was president of Connaught. Thomas converted from Roman Catholicism to protestantism at the age of fifteen when he succeeded his nephew as Viscount Dillon in May 1630. Before 1636 he married Frances (died 1674), daughter of Sir Nicholas White of Leixlip and Ursula, daughter of Garret, first Viscount Moore of Drogheda. Frances brought him a portion of $3000; the couple had seven sons. 
In November 1640 the Irish House of Lords appointed Dillon as one of four delegates to Charles I. While in England and Scotland during the autumn of 1641 he may also have acted as an intermediary in a plan to bring an Irish army to Charles's assistance against the Scottish covenanters. This allegation rests primarily on a contemporaneous Scottish pamphlet of 1643 and the fact that Sir James Dillon, his uncle, one of the colonels licensed to recruit from Strafford's disbanded Irish army, became tangentially involved in a plot to seize Dublin Castle. 
On his return from Edinburgh in October 1641 Dillon was appointed to the Irish council and made governor of Roscommon. He was part of a moderate party that tried unavailingly to keep the Irish parliament in session and to defuse the recent rebellion. He left for England in late November 1641 on a secret mission to Charles I on behalf of the Catholic lords. Arrested by the English parliament, he and his brother-in-law Theobald, Viscount Taaffe, made their escape after four months, joined the emergent royalist party, and fought in the early part of the first civil war. 
Dillon returned to Ireland after the cessation of hostilities in September 1643 'to sit quiet tippling, gaming and working division and rent in his majesties subjects' (Gilbert, 1.76), according to a jaundiced confederate Catholic source. He was appointed governor of Athlone town and castle in February 1643 and joint president of Connaught in 1644. He accompanied Ormond, the king's lord lieutenant in Ireland, in August 1646 when he marched on Kilkenny and Cashel, in order to secure support for a treaty between the confederate Catholics and Charles I. When Ormond was forced to turn back, Dillon fled to Connaught. Meanwhile, in September 1643, his uncles George Dillon, a Franciscan friar, and Sir James Dillon, by then a colonel in the Leinster confederate Catholic army, captured Athlone Castle by a ruse. According to the hostile author of the 'Aphorismical Discovery' Dillon's subsequent public conversion to Roman Catholicism on 6 December 1646 was a gambit to secure the aid of Rinuccini, the papal nuncio, in regaining possession of Athlone Castle. Following his conversion and pledge of loyalty to the confederate Catholic cause, the confederate supreme council ordered that Athlone Castle be restored to him. However, the occupant defied the order and, early in the following year, Dillon rejoined Ormond. When the latter subsequently surrendered Dublin to parliament, Dillon joined the Leinster confederate Catholic army and led the cavalry contingent at the catastrophic defeat of Dungan's Hill in August 1647. Dillon personally commanded the reserve, which fled in the opening stages of the battle, 'never giving the least notice of such a base cowardly act' (Gilbert, 1.156). Following the split in the confederate Catholics between clericalist and Ormondist factions Dillon fought for the latter and was captured in an ambush but escaped soon afterwards. 
In 1649 Ormond returned to Ireland and secured a definitive alliance between the confederate Catholics and the royalist party. In July that year Dillon was reinstated as governor of Athlone. During the royalist siege of Dublin Dillon was left with a force of 2500 men to cut off the northern approaches while the bulk of the army encamped at Rathmines to the south of the city. On 2 August a surprise attack overran Ormond's camp; at some point in the battle Ormond sent a message ordering Dillon to march south and attack the rear of the parliamentary army. Dillon refused, probably because it seemed to him that it was too late to prevent a rout. 
In 1650 Dillon was tasked with the command of royalist forces in Offaly. In March that year Kilkenny was threatened by parliamentary thrusts from the south under Cromwell and from Dublin. Dillon's failure to hinder the thrust from Dublin was 'astonishing' (Wheeler, 13), and he refused Lord Castlehaven's appeal to help save Kilkenny from capture. In August 1650 he tricked Henry Ireton (who had replaced Cromwell as parliamentary commander-in-chief in Ireland) into believing that he would surrender Athlone in exchange for money and an assurance of personal safety, thereby causing Ireton to waste a crucial fortnight waiting for the expected betrayal. On the other hand, the following year in June he surrendered the castle without a fight because, he said, 'he desired to submit to the government of England, as being of English descent and extract' (Murtagh, 106). Charles Coote, parliamentary president of Connaught, received the surrender, promising to 'mediate with the parliament', for a pardon and a 'competency of land' (ibid.) for the support of Dillon's family but nothing came of this promise. Dillon retired to Hare Island on Lough Ree where he lived in relative poverty. In 1651 his wife was implicated in a failed attempt to recapture Athlone; this told against Dillon when he unsuccessfully sought relief from the government in 1652. Later petitions suggest that he may then have travelled abroad. 
Dillon's estates were confiscated by the protectorate but he recovered them following the Restoration. In 1661 he was one of those who stood bail for the marquess of Antrim, to whom he was related by marriage and who was then in the Tower on a charge of treason. In 1663 he signed the remonstrance of Irish Catholic nobles and gentry professing their loyalty in the hope of some measure of toleration of their religion. He died between 23 May 1673 when he wrote his will and 1675 when the will was proved in Ireland. His wife died on 20 December 1674. 


@@@@@


doc= 7666


Dillon, Thomas (1613-1690), Jesuit and scholar, was born in Ireland and was educated in Spain, where he entered the Society of Jesus at Seville in 1627. He was a teacher of the humanities at the Jesuit college of Cadiz, and later taught philosophy at Seville before becoming professor of theology at the College of St Paul, Granada. Also known as Thomas de Leon, he enjoyed a reputation among his contemporaries as a polymath and a linguist, with a knowledge of Hebrew and Arabic, but he left behind no learned work of any substance other than a manuscript commentary on 'Maccabees'. He died at Granada on 7 February 1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 7667


Dillon, Wentworth, fourth earl of Roscommon (1637-1685), poet, was born in Dublin, probably in St George's Lane, in October 1637. Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, then lord deputy, was his uncle, his father, James Dillon, third earl of Roscommon ('c'.1605-1649), having married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse, Yorkshire, and sister to the earl of Strafford. He was educated in the protestant faith, as his father had been 'reclaimed from the superstition of the Romish church' by James Ussher, primate of Ireland (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.389). For his early years we have only the doubtfully reliable information of Elijah Fenton, who in his memoir of 1730 says that when Dillon was very young, Strafford sent him to study under a Dr Hall at his own seat in Yorkshire. Upon the impeachment of Strafford, Fenton goes on, he was by Archbishop Ussher's advice sent to the learned Samuel Bochart at Caen in Normandy, where there was a long-established protestant university. During his residence there his father died at Limerick in November 1649. Aubrey states that Dillon, possessed by an 'extravagant fit', exclaimed 'My father is dead!' and that the news of the death arrived from Ireland a fortnight later (Aubrey, 162). 
After leaving Caen, Roscommon made a tour of France and Germany, accompanied by Lord Cavendish (afterwards duke of Devonshire), later a member of Roscommon's literary circle. This was in the late 1650s, when ardent royalists were unwelcome in England and Ireland. They also stayed a considerable time at Rome, and Roscommon was reputed to have learned the language so well as to be taken for an Italian. In Rome he also acquired great skill as a numismatist. 
Soon after the Restoration Roscommon returned to England, and had a favourable reception at the court of Charles II. An act of parliament restoring to him all the honours, castles, lordships, lands, and property in the possession of his great-grandfather, grandfather, or father on 23 October 1641 was read a first time in the English House of Lords on 18 August 1660, and received the royal assent on 29 December. By virtue of this statute he became seised of several estates in co. Meath, co. Westmeath, King's county, and counties Mayo, Galway, Sligo, Roscommon, and Tipperary. He took his seat in the Irish parliament by proxy on 10 July 1661 and began to re-establish his position. On 16 October 1661 he had a grant of the first troop of horse that should become vacant, pursuant to privy seal dated 23 September. In the same year he addressed to the king a petition in which he said that his father and grandfather being protestants, and having from the beginning of the rebellion constantly adhered to the royal cause, lost at least $50,000 or $60,000 for their loyalty to Charles I. Partly owing to the good offices of the duke of Ormond, the king promptly ordered a part payment of arrears. In April 1662 Roscommon married Lady Frances, eldest daughter of Richard Boyle, second earl of Cork (later also first earl of Burlington), widow of Colonel Francis Courtenay, and niece to Roger Boyle, first earl of Orrery, the well-known statesman and dramatist and thereafter a loyal friend to Roscommon. Shortly after the Restoration Roscommon had made friends who led him into gambling, then popular at court. His gaming led to duels, and he became famous as a duellist though he used to say that he was more fearful of killing others than of losing his own life. 
In 1662 Roscommon returned to Ireland, partly to pursue his land interests. To the ensuing years in Ireland belong the first substantial indications of his literary interests, though he had written accomplished verse in both English and Latin as a youth. Katherine Philips praised his early, as yet unpublished translations in a letter of 19 October 1662; Roscommon returned the compliment in more than one of his works and wrote the prologue for Philips's 'Pompey' of 1663 (his first published poem). There is evidence of the existence of a Dublin literary circle including both these figures in the years 1662-5. 
By 1665 Roscommon had recovered all the Irish lands to which he had a title, though he had still received only a fraction of the money promised him by the king in 1661. Through the late 1660s his military duties continued. He received a formal commission for a troop of horse in 1666. He was also involved in local and national government matters, until eventually, in the early 1670s, there was talk of his becoming a lord treasurer of Ireland. Instead, he raised an infantry regiment in Ireland in 1671 to serve the French against the Dutch. He accompanied the regiment, but it was disbanded by the French in Lorraine in 1672. He then returned to Ireland, but became a widower in 1673 or 1674, at which date he seems to have 'determined to leave his native country and join himself to the English court' (Niemeyer, 'Life and works', 73). He soon married again, in London, where on 9 November 1674 he wed Isabella (died 1721), youngest daughter and coheir of Sir Matthew Boynton of Barmston, Yorkshire. 
In 1676 Roscommon became a captain of the band of gentlemen pensioners, a small troop with largely ceremonial duties paid directly by the king; by 1679 he was on the continent again. This may or may not have been on state business, but he was still concerned with political matters. He is recorded as a companion of James, duke of York, later in 1679, and travelled with him during the duke's 'exile' to Scotland in 1679-80. Two political poems doubtfully attributed to Roscommon can be dated to 1679-81: 'Tom Ross's Ghost' and 'The Ghost of the Late Parliament'. 
In 1679 (though the title page gives 1680) appeared one of Roscommon's two most substantial literary works, 'Horace's Art of Poetry', a translation of Horace's 'Ars poetica'. The first English version of this famous poem to be published since Jonson's, its blank verse treatment of its original is freer and in several ways more attractive than its predecessors'. The following few years are Roscommon's most productive as a poet. Many of his productions have clear connections with the informal 'academy' he established about 1682 in conjunction with George Savile, marquess of Halifax, Richard Maitland (later earl of Lauderdale), the earl of Dorset, Lord Cavendish (later duke of Devonshire), Sir Charles Scarborough, Heneage Finch, John Dryden, and others. These names, as well as the term 'academy', are supplied by Roscommon's friend Knightley Chetwood, whose memoir also shows the circle's interests to have been extensively literary, with a special emphasis on translation from the classics, and not narrowly lexicographical as suggested by Fenton and some other later writers. Hence the clear relationship between the 'academy' and Roscommon's 'Essay on Translated Verse', published in 1684, in which specific allusion is made to works of verse translation from the Latin and Greek classics recently published by members of the circle. Three of Roscommon's own translations, from Virgil and Horace, appeared in Dryden's miscellany of 1684, and he contributed a commendatory poem to the 1683 issue of Dryden's 'Religio laici' (Dryden responding with one on Roscommon's 'Essay on Translated Verse'). The 'Essay', probably Roscommon's best-known poem and certainly his most distinguished, is in several ways his most unusual. It helped to usher in the great age of Augustan translation from the classics, drawing on the ideas of Dryden and influencing Pope, two of its greatest exponents. Yet it may also be said to be designed to promote the work of a small clique, Roscommon's translating 'academy'. The second edition of 1685, 'corrected and enlarged', includes a new ending in praise of 'Paradise Lost' which may well constitute the first printed commendation of the poem. 
Of the twenty to twenty-five works attributed to Roscommon, the most extensive of those not yet mentioned is his translation into French of Bishop William Sherlock's treatise 'The Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers'. This was undertaken in 1684 at the request of Roscommon's friend the duke of Ormond, and its purpose was evidently to show the French that the Church of England would no longer tolerate such defiance of the notion of divine right as was reflected in recent English history. Its anti-republican stance conforms with Roscommon's own conservative sympathies. 
During the 1680s Roscommon must have spent part of his time in Ireland. He was given a new troop of horse there in 1682, and sought the post of master of the ordnance in Ireland in 1684. But he had apparently also been master of the horse to the duchess of York for some years before his death; evidently he had duties in both London and Ireland. A few days before his death, which occurred at his home at St James's Park, St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 17 January 1685, he requested a friend, probably Chetwood, who recounts the story in his memoir of Roscommon, to preach a sermon to him at St James's Chapel. He went in spite of warnings, saying that, like Charles V, he would hear his own funeral oration. Returning home he wrote, Chetwood says (Chetwood, fol. 44), 'an excellent divine poem', which, however, the physicians would not allow him to finish. Fenton's less plausible account, in which Roscommon's death is brought about suddenly by a quack remedy for gout, has the dying earl pronounce with fervour two lines of his own version of the 'Dies irae': '
My God, my Father, and my Friend, 

Do not forsake me at my end. 

' He was buried with great pomp in Westminster Abbey, 'neare the Shrine staires', on 21 January 1685 (Chester, 212). 


@@@@@


doc= 7668


Dillon, Sir William Henry (1780-1857), naval officer, the illegitimate son of John Talbot Dillon (1734-1806) and Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Collins, was born in Birmingham on 8 August 1780. He claimed paternal descent from Logon Delome, son of O'Neill, monarch of Ireland. Entering the navy in May 1790, he served as a midshipman under Captain Gambier in the 'Defence', and was stunned by a splinter in Lord Howe's battle of 1 June 1794 in the north Atlantic. He was present in Lord Bridport's action off the Ile de Groix on 23 June 1795, and at the capture of St Lucia in May 1796, when he carried a flag of truce to take possession of Pigeon Island. Promoted lieutenant on 29 April 1797, he was serving in the 'Glenmore' in 1798 when he co-operated with the army at Wexford during the rebellion. Here he arrested the Irish chief Skallian. As senior lieutenant of the 'Africaine', he was sent with a flag of truce from Lord Keith to the Dutch commodore Valterbach, at Helvoetsluys, where he was made prisoner in breach of the truce, on 20 July 1803. He was then handed over to the French, and detained in captivity until September 1807. In the meantime (8 April 1805) he had been made a commander, and after his release he took command of an old, worn-out sloop, the 'Childers', carrying only fourteen 12-pounder carronades and sixty-five men. On 14 March 1808, on the coast of Norway, the 'Childers' drove off a Danish brig of twenty guns and one hundred and sixty men after a long action. Dillon was severely wounded, and his bravery was acknowledged by the Patriotic Fund at Lloyd's by the presentation of a sword valued at 100 guineas. After obtaining his post commission (21 March 1808) he served at Walcheren, on the coasts of Portugal and Spain, at Newfoundland, in China and India, and finally, between 1835 and 1838, in the Mediterranean, in command of the 'Russell' (74 guns), when he rendered great service to the Spanish legitimist cause. He was made naval equerry to the duke of Sussex, and obtained flag rank on 9 November 1846. He was nominated KCH on 13 January 1835, was knighted by his long-time friend William IV at St James's Palace, on 24 June of the same year, and in 1839 received the good-service pension. He became vice-admiral of the blue on 5 March 1853, and of the red in 1857. Dillon was a short, lightly built man, an accomplished linguist and a pronounced tory in politics. He was married three times, but had no children. His first wife, 'nee' Roberts, the widow of a man named Voller, he married on 22 September 1808; they separated in November 1813. In September 1832 he married Isabella (died 2 Nov 1842), daughter of John Willan of Hatton Garden, London, and on 6 June 1843 Elizabeth (died 1887), eldest daughter of J. T. Pettigrew of Savile Row, London. Dillon died at Monaco on 9 September 1857, leaving in manuscript an account of his professional career, with a description of the many scenes in which he had been engaged. This was subsequently (1953-6) published by the Navy Records Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 7669


Lee, Henry Augustus Dillon-, thirteenth Viscount Dillon (1777-1832), writer, eldest son of Charles Dillon-Lee, twelfth Viscount Dillon (died 1813), KP, and his first wife, the Hon. Henrietta Maria Phipps (died 1782), only daughter of Constantine, first Baron Mulgrave, was born in Brussels on 28 October 1777. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1795. 
Trained as a soldier in the Surrey yeomanry and the Oxford militia, he became colonel in the Irish brigade on 1 October 1794, and was colonel of the duke of York's Irish regiment (101st foot) from August 1806 until its disbandment in 1817. In 1799 he was returned to parliament for the borough of Harwich. At the last general election of 1802 he was elected to one of the Mayo county seats and was re-elected in 1806, 1807, and 1812. He continued a member of the House of Commons until 9 November 1813, when he succeeded to his father's title. He spent most of his political career in opposition, and was an active proponent of Catholic relief. 
Through his grandmother, Lady Charlotte Lee, daughter of the second of the extinct earls of Lichfield, Dillon inherited the estate of Ditchley Park, Oxfordshire, although latterly financial distress obliged him to live in Italy. In February 1807 he married Henrietta (1789-1862), daughter of Dominick and Margaret Browne and sister of the first Lord Oranmore. They had six sons and five daughters, among them Henrietta Maria Stanley (1807-1895), political hostess and campaigner for women's education. He died, after much suffering, on 24 July 1832, at Lower Brook Street, Grosvenor Square, London. 
Dillon is best-known for two pamphlets advocating Catholic emancipation, published in 1801 and 1805. He also wrote on military and political affairs, and published two novels, one of which was set in the seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 7670


Dillwyn, Lewis Weston (1778-1855), naturalist and porcelain manufacturer, was born on 21 August 1778 at St Thomas's Square, Hackney, the son of William Dillwyn (1743?-1824), merchant, of Higham Lodge, Walthamstow, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Lewis Weston of Highall, Essex. He was descended from a Welsh Quaker family who had emigrated to Pennsylvania at the end of the seventeenth century. His father, who was born and lived much of his life in America, was a prominent campaigner against slavery. He received his early education at a Friends' school at Tottenham, where he became acquainted with his lifelong friend, Joseph Woods (1776-1864), with whom he was sent to Folkestone on account of his then weak health. In 1798 he went to Dover and there began his study of plants. He became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1800 and subsequently reported to it on his observations. 
In 1802 Dillwyn's father bought the Cambrian pottery at Swansea, placing him at its head, and in 1803 he moved there from Walthamstow. He began publishing his principal botanical work, the 'Natural History of British Confervae' in 1802, and in 1805 he and Dawson Turner published the 'Botanist's Guide through England and Wales'. His interest in natural history was turned to good account in business, and his porcelain became celebrated for the true and spirited paintings on it of butterflies, flowers, birds, and shells, besides the beauty of the material itself. It attained its greatest renown about 1814, after which its production was abandoned for ordinary earthenware, the staple product of the works. 
In 1807 Dillwyn married Mary Adams (1776-1865), the natural daughter of John Llewelyn of Penlle'r-gaer, Llangyfelach, Glamorgan; she retained her mother's surname. They had three sons and three daughters. Their son John Dillwyn Llewelyn (1810-1882) was a photographer and experimental scientist, who worked with Sir Charles Wheatstone on the experiments on the submarine electric telegraph made in Swansea Bay in 1844. Their son Lewis Llewelyn Dillwyn MP (1814-1892) was a prominent Welsh Liberal. Amy Dillwyn, successful businesswoman and colourful feminist, was one of their grandchildren. Although Dillwyn obliged to leave the Society of Friends for marrying a non-Quaker, his younger son was seen as continuing in the tradition of Quaker political radicalism. 
Dillwyn was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1804. In 1809 he toured Killarney, Ireland. He kept a diary of his observations on natural history there. In the same year he completed his 'British Confervae'. Eight years later in 1817, he brought out 'A Descriptive Catalogue of British Shells'. He was a good friend of Sir Joseph Banks, whose library he used to prepare his book on shells. In 1823 his 'Index to the Historia conchyliorum of Lister' was printed at the Oxford Clarendon Press at the cost of the university, which on this occasion offered him the honorary degree of DCL, which he declined. In 1823 and 1824 he sent Sir Humphrey Davy, president of the Royal Society, his observations on fossil shells and his ideas about the 'relative periods at which the different families of testaceous animals appear to have been created' (Royal Society Archives, PT 17. 12). These were subsequently published in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
Dillwyn was returned in 1832 to the first parliament to sit after the 'Reform Act' as member for Glamorgan, of which he had been a magistrate for some years, and high sheriff in 1818. He supported the whigs and was not sympathetic to calls for further constitutional reform. The freedom of the borough of Swansea was presented to him in 1834, and from 1835 to 1840 he served as alderman and mayor. He gave up parliamentary duties in 1837. 
As a prominent local manufacturer and MP Dillwyn supported local causes, donating some of the profits from his 'Contributions towards a History of Swansea' (1840) to Swansea Infirmary. He cordially welcomed the British Association to Swansea in 1848, was one of the vice-presidents of that meeting, and produced for the occasion his 'Flora and Fauna of Swansea'. This was his last literary production; his health gradually declined, and for some years before his death he withdrew from outside pursuits. He died at his home, Sketty Hall, Glamorgan, on 31 August 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 7671


Dilly, Charles (1739-1807), bookseller, was born on 22 May 1739 at Southill, Bedfordshire, the third son of Thomas Dilly, a substantial yeoman farmer. The family had been based in Southill for at least two centuries, according to James Boswell. On 1 June 1756 he was bound as an apprentice to his elder brother Edward Dilly (1732-1779), a bookseller established at the sign of Rose and Crown at 22 Poultry, London, and was freed on 7 June 1763; he became a liveryman of the Stationers' Company on the same day. He made a short trip to America, visiting Philadelphia in 1764, but was back in London by spring that year when he became a junior partner in his brother's successful bookselling business. 
During the years of their partnership the Dillys produced a great number and range of titles, with a particular specialism in dissenting and 'American' literature, reflecting the brothers' whig and patriot political sympathies. The brothers were well known for their support of their authors -- they practically adopted James Boswell, who said they made him feel 'like blood relations' -- and Charles in particular was described as 'a kind and faithful adviser' to 'young and inexperienced authors' ('Boswell in Search of a Wife', 151; Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.191). Their premises in the Poultry, in which they both lived and worked, became an important nexus for social, political, and literary figures; Benjamin Rush described their shop as a 'kind of Coffee house for authors' (Rush, 'Autobiography', 62-3). In particular, the brothers threw legendary dinner parties, which attracted high praise from Nichols and Richard Cumberland among others. The company was varied -- Samuel Johnson was a frequent guest -- and was by no means limited to those who shared the brothers' religious or political beliefs. 
Charles Dilly remained very much the junior partner until Edward's death in 1779, after which he carried on the business in his own name. However, the character and volume of the firm's output did not significantly change. Nichols noted that, on his brother's death, Charles 'became the sole proprietor of a very valuable trading concern, which he continued to cultivate with that industry and application which... leads to opulence' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.191). Charles also had interests in the 'London Magazine' until its demise in 1787, and by 1792 had become a partner in the 'London Packet, or, New Lloyd's Evening Post'. Politically more moderate than his brother, he was a member of John Cartwright's Society for Constitutional Information, and was also one of the controversial 'pro-Americans' who supported the colonies during their campaign and eventual war for independence. This did not prevent him from being approached to serve as an alderman and as a sheriff of London, both offers he declined, the latter on grounds of his religious nonconformity. He did, however, accept promotion within the Stationers' Company during the 1790s, eventually serving as the company's master for 1802-3. 
At the end of January 1800 Dilly sold the firm to Joseph Mawman of York and retired to Clophill, Bedfordshire. However, he did not take well to his retirement, and returned to London life about 1802, living in Brunswick Row, Queen Square, in Holborn. A sudden 'oppression of breath' afflicted him on 3 May 1807 while visiting his friend Richard Cumberland at Ramsgate, at whose house he died the following day ('GM', 1807, 480). He was buried on 12 May in St George the Martyr, Queen Square, London. Like his brother -- and indeed like his two other siblings -- he was unmarried, and his substantial estate (estimated at nearly $60,000) passed primarily to maternal relations. Mawman succeeded to the business although the exact timing and terms of the handover are unclear. 
The third Dilly brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 7672


Dilly, Edward (1732-1779), bookseller, was born on 25 July 1732 at Southill, Bedfordshire, the second son of Thomas Dilly, a substantial yeoman farmer. According to James Boswell, the Dilly family had lived there for at least two centuries. He was the brother of John Dilly (1731-1806) ['see under 'Dilly, Charles] and Charles Dilly (1739-1807). Bound as an apprentice to the London bookseller John Oswald on 6 December 1748, he was freed by redemption on 11 June 1754. In the following year he succeeded to Oswald's shop at the sign of Rose and Crown at 22 Poultry near the Mansion House, which remained with the family until the 1800s. In 1756 he took on his younger brother Charles as an apprentice; in 1764 Charles joined him as a junior partner in the business. The firm's output was prodigious and varied, including religious, historical, medical, legal, philosophical, mathematical, and literary works; the Dillys also gained a notable reputation for promoting dissenting and 'American' material. Nichols described Edward as 'a Bookseller of great eminence... particularly in the line of American exportation; and in the Writings of the good old School of Presbyterians' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.190). He maintained commercial interests in a number of newspapers including both the 'Public Advertiser' and the 'London Magazine'. He also was a generous and effective literary patron, supporting James Beattie and Elizabeth Montagu among others. 
Edward was described by Charles as 'a good-natured and well-disposed man... the useful man in business', but lamented that he was 'dreadfully contaminated with false ideas in politics': 'to a stranger he must and does appear in a disagreeable point of view' ('Letters to Josiah Quincy', 492). This obsession was underlined in an account of him by Elizabeth Fothergill: 'Politics is his constant theme, and he will force one's attention whether one will give it or not' (J. J. Abraham, 'Lettsom; his Life, Times, Friends and Descendants', 1933, 94). He was a loyal supporter of John Wilkes and fiercely pro-American, and even proved himself to be a fairly competent political writer. None the less, the brothers were famed for their wide and remarkably diverse social circle, which included many 'patriots', 'true whigs', and crypto-republicans as well as a number of their political opponents. Notable friends included John Wilkes, Catharine Macaulay, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, Samuel Johnson (who first met Wilkes at a dinner party hosted by Edward), and James Oglethorpe, as well as clergymen and ministers from a wide variety of religious persuasions. Nichols underlined the brothers' trait of cheerful sociability when he famously observed that Edward was 'a man of great pleasantry of manners; and so fond of conversation, that he almost literally 'talked himself to death'' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.191). Fothergill went further: Edward was 'one of the greatest talkers I ever met with, tongue, hands, and head all moving at a time with so much rapidity that I wonder how his lungs sustain it' (Abraham, 'Lettsom', 94). 
The brothers, neither of whom married, lived upstairs from their shop in the Poultry; they also inhabited a country house near Hemel Hempstead, and were regular visitors to their native Southill. Edward's health declined from March 1778 and he died from consumption on 11 May 1779 at Southill, in whose churchyard he was buried. His will, dated 8 February 1779 and proved on 13 May 1780, named Charles as administrator and residuary legatee, and Charles continued the business until his own retirement. 


@@@@@


doc= 7673


John Dilly (1731-1806), gentleman, was born at Southill, Bedfordshire, in 1731, the eldest son of Thomas Dilly. He was known almost entirely on account of kinship to his bookselling brothers -- Boswell nicknamed him Squire Dilly (Tinker, 2.285). He 'cultivated the paternal inheritance' at Southill, and maintained the family image as 'of some consequence in the higher ranks of old English yeomen' (Bingham, 1-2). He was elected high sheriff of the county in 1783, and died a bachelor on 18 March 1806 at Clophill, Bedfordshire, while visiting Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 7674


Dimock, James Francis (1810-1876), Church of England clergyman and historian, second son in the family of three sons and five daughters of John Giles Dimock (1773-1858), rector of Uppingham, Rutland, and his wife, Sarah (1781/2-1851), daughter of William Humphries of Baldock, Hertfordshire, was born at Stonehouse, Gloucestershire, where his father owned land, on 22 November 1810. He was educated at Uppingham School under Dr Josiah Buckland, was admitted pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1829, and was elected Bell's scholar in 1830. He graduated BA as twenty-eighth wrangler in 1833, and MA in 1837. Having been ordained deacon (1836) and priest (1837) by the bishop of Lincoln, he published a commentary on the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' (1843) and a sermon on the holy communion (1844). In 1846 he was appointed minor canon of Southwell; he gave up the canonry in 1863 on his appointment as rector of Barnborough, near Doncaster, a living in the gift of Southwell collegiate church. In 1869 he was made prebendary of Lincoln, and he held the prebend with his rectory until his death. Dimock married in 1841 Caroline (died 1890), daughter of John Tatam of Moulton, Lincolnshire, with whom he had eight sons and six daughters. He died at Barnborough on 22 April 1876, and was buried there on 26 April. 
Dimock was deeply interested in ecclesiastical and medieval history; his earliest work was 'Illustrations of the Collegiate Church of Southwell' (1854). In 1860 he published at Lincoln an edition of the 'Metrical Life of St Hugh', and in 1864 he edited for the 'Rolls Series' the 'Magna vita S. Hugonis, episcopi Lincolniensis' (1864). This was the first complete text of the life of St Hugh to be published and, although later superseded, Dimock's work received favourable notice from the editors of a subsequent standard edition (2 vols., 1985; eds D. L. Douie and D. H. Farmer). His most important work remains his edition of part of the works of Giraldus Cambrensis (Gerald of Wales) for the 'Rolls Series'; the first four volumes were edited by J. S. Brewer, and volumes 5-8, which appeared between 1867 and 1877, by Dimock. The edition was completed with an eighth volume by Sir G. F. Warner. 


@@@@@


doc= 7675


Dimsdale, Thomas (1712-1800), physician, was born on 29 May 1712 in Theydon Garnon, Essex, the fourth son and one of the eight children of John Dimsdale, of Theydon Garnon, a surgeon and a member of the Religious Society of Friends. The family held property in Essex for many years. Dimsdale's mother was Susan, daughter of Thomas Bowyer, of Albury Hall, near Hertford. His grandfather, Robert Dimsdale, accompanied William Penn to America in 1684. Dimsdale was trained first by his father, and later at St Thomas's Hospital, London, under Joshua Symons and John Girle; he began to practise medicine at Hertford in 1734. He married in 1739 Mary (died 1744), only daughter of Nathaniel Brassey MP. There were no children. In 1745 Dimsdale offered his services to the duke of Cumberland, and accompanied the English army as far north as Carlisle, on the surrender of which he returned home. In 1746 he married Anne Iles (died 1779), daughter of John Iles, and a relative of his first wife; they had seven sons and two daughters. 
Dimsdale retired from practice on inheriting a fortune, but having a large family, he resumed practice and took the MD degree from King's College, Aberdeen, in 1761. In 1767 he published, 'The Present Method of Inoculating for the Small-Pox', which enjoyed great popularity, going through six large editions in five years. It was also translated into several foreign languages. In this work, Dimsdale described a safer, less invasive inoculation procedure, which had first been pioneered by Daniel Sutton. In 1768 he was invited to St Petersburg by the Empress Catherine the Great to inoculate herself and her son, the Grand Duke Paul. The empress seems to have been confident of Dimsdale's good faith, but she could not answer for her subjects, and therefore had relays of post-horses prepared for him so that his escape might be instant and rapid in case of disaster. Fortunately both patients did well, and Dimsdale was created a councillor of state, with the hereditary title of baron. He received a sum of $10,000, with an annuity of $500, and $2000 for his expenses. The empress presented him with miniatures set in diamonds of herself and her son, and granted him an addition to his family arms in the shape of a wing of the black eagle of Russia. The patent, embellished with the imperial portrait and other ornaments, was preserved at Essendon, the family seat in Hertfordshire. Dimsdale was admitted a fellow of the Royal Society in 1769. In 1779 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph Dimsdale, of Bishop's Stortford. 
In 1784 Dimsdale returned to Russia to inoculate the Grand Duke Alexander and his brother Constantine, and the empress presented him with her own muff, made of the fur of the black fox, which only the royal family were allowed to wear. On his first return journey he paid a visit to Frederick the Great at Sans Souci, and on his second, to the emperor Joseph at Vienna. When Prince Omai came to England with Captain Cook in 1775, he was inoculated by Dimsdale. 
Dimsdale wrote several additional works on inoculation, including: 'Thoughts on General and Partial Inoculation' (1776); 'Observations on the Plan of a Dispensary and General Inoculation' (1780); and 'Tracts on Inoculation', written and published at St Petersburg in 1768 and 1781. At Hertford he opened an inoculating house, and, about the same time, entered banking, eventually retiring from the business in 1776. Dimsdale was an independent whig and served as MP for Hertford between 1780 and 1790. Of his one speech to parliament it was said that he 'spoke for some time, but in so low a tone, that we could not distinctly hear him' (HoP, 'Commons'). He died at Hertford on 30 December 1800 and was buried in the Quakers' burial-ground at Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7676


Dineley, Sir John, fifth baronet (c.1729-1809), eccentric, was born at Burhope, Herefordshire, the younger of twin sons of Samuel Goodere (1687-1741), landowner and naval officer, of Burhope, and his second wife, a widow, Elizabeth, 'nee' Watts (died 1742). The claim that Dineley-Goodere once practised physic is unsubstantiated and probably derived from his regular purchases of medical books. Dineley-Goodere's father, Samuel, lived on bad terms with his elder brother, Sir John Goodere, third baronet, who adopted the name Dineley-Goodere as heir to his maternal ancestors. He married Mary Lawford but their only son died young and unmarried. Because of this bad feeling Sir John threatened to disinherit Samuel in favour of his nephew, John Foote of Truro. To prevent this threat being carried out Samuel, then in command of the naval vessel 'Ruby', caused his brother to be kidnapped at Bristol, and then to be strangled by two sailors on board his vessel. The murder took place on the night of Sunday 18 January 1741, and on 15 April following the fratricide Samuel was hanged with his two accomplices at Bristol. The precise status of the baronetcy thereafter is unclear. It is possible that Samuel's eldest son, Edward, succeeded as baronet, or was merely granted a courtesy title. On Edward's death in March 1761, aged thirty-two, the title of fifth baronet passed to his brother John, assuming that his father never inherited the title. What little remained of the family estates he soon wasted; about 1770 he was obliged to part with Burhope to Sir James Peachey and he lived for a time in a state bordering on destitution. At length his friendship with the Pelhams, coupled with the interest of Lord North, procured for him the pension and free residence of a poor knight of Windsor. From then on he seems to have used the surname of Dineley only. 
By the oddity of his dress, demeanour, and mode of life Dineley became one of the chief sights of Windsor. Each morning he locked up his house in the castle, which no one entered but himself, and went forth to purchase provisions. According to the 'Penny Magazine': 'He then wore a large cloak called a roquelaure, beneath which appeared a pair of thin legs encased in dirty silk stockings. He had a formidable umbrella, and he stalked along upon pattens. All luxuries, whether of meat, or tea, or sugar, or butter, were renounced... Wherever crowds were assembled -- wherever royalty was to be looked upon -- there was Sir John Dineley. He then wore a costume of the days of George II -- the embroidered coat, the silk-flowered waistcoat, the nether garments of faded velvet carefully meeting the dirty silk stocking, which terminated in the half-polished shoe surmounted by the dingy silver buckle. The old wig, on great occasions, was newly powdered, and the best cocked hat was brought forth, with a tarnished lace edging. He had dreams of ancient genealogies, and of alliances still subsisting between himself and the first families of the land.' Dineley's second preoccupation was his search for a wife whose wealth he hoped would allow him to establish his lineage: 'To secure for himself a wife was the business of his existence; to display himself properly where women most do congregate was the object of his savings. The man had not a particle of levity in these proceedings; his deportment was staid and dignified. He had a wonderful discrimination in avoiding the tittering girls, with whose faces he was familiar. But perchance some buxom matron or timid maiden who had seen him for the first time gazed upon the apparition with surprise and curiosity. He approached. With the air of one bred in courts he made his most profound bow; and taking a printed paper from his pocket, reverently presented it and withdrew. ('Penny Magazine')' More than once he paid court to some lad dressed up as a fine lady. His marriage proposals were crudely printed by himself. Occasionally he advertised in the newspapers. He also printed some extraordinary rhymes under the title of 'Methods to get husbands... with the advertised marriage offer of Sir John Dineley, bart., of Charleton, near Worcester, extending to 375,000'l'., to the reader of this epistle, if a single lady, and has above one hundred guineas fortune'. 
Although obsessed by his search for a wife and for his lost inheritance, in other matters Dineley was both sane and shrewd. Twice or thrice a year he visited Vauxhall Gardens and the London theatres, taking care to apprise the public of his intention through the medium of the most fashionable daily papers. Wherever he went the place was invariably well attended, especially by women. Dineley persevered in his addresses to the ladies until the very close of his life, but without success. When he failed to appear at chapel one morning his door was broken open. His passage was filled with coals, his sitting room with his printing materials; there was little furniture. Dineley was found in bed. He died a few days later, in November 1809, aged about eighty. On his death the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 7677


Dingley, Robert (1618/19-1660), clergyman, was born in Surrey, possibly in Chertsey, the second son of Sir John Dingley (died 1679) of London and his wife, Jane, daughter of John Hammond of Chertsey Abbey. He matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 10 October 1634 aged fifteen, graduating BA on 27 January 1638 and proceeding MA on 3 November 1640; he held a fellowship at the college from 1638 to 1644. If Wood is to be credited, he was at first 'a great observer of church ceremonies, and a remarkable bower to the altar when he came into the chapel' but cynically turned presbyterian (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.487). He was admitted by the House of Lords on 17 June 1643 to the rectory of Barnes in Surrey, in place of John Cutts, then absent at Oxford, on the petition of the leading parishioners. A Thomas Rutton is listed as having been appointed to the benefice three days later; the reasons are unclear, but Dingley did indeed serve as a minister at Barnes. In 'The Spirituall Taste Described' (1649) there appears a preface to Elizabeth, daughter of Daniel Oxenbridge, third wife of Oliver St John (died 1673), and her sister Mary, wife of William Langhorn (possibly father of the East India Company merchant of the same name), signed 4 November 1648, in which Dingley reveals that they had been 'members of my congregation' there, 'the fairest flowers in my garden'. The book also contains a portrait of the author. 
In 1648 Dingley was presented to the rectory of Brighstone near Newport on the Isle of Wight, close to Wolverton House, where his father Sir John, deputy to the earl of Pembroke, then had his chief residence. There he published three works, notably 'The Deputation of Angels, or, The Angell-Guardian' (1654). This contained an epistle to Colonel William Sydenham, councillor of state and governor of the Isle of Wight, Major Bowerman, the deputy governor, Lord Commissioner Lisle, and Colonel Robert Hammond thanking them for their 'many favours', and urging them to 'do worthily for sion; to undermine atheism, profaneness, and heresy'. Dingley attacks those who 'condemn the ministry and cannot endure sound doctrine' as also 'despisers of all superiority and government political'. In furtherance of these views he acted as an assistant to the Hampshire commissioners for ejection of insufficient or scandalous ministers and schoolmasters. In the preface to his 'Vox coeli' (1658) Dingley observed that Edward III, Henry VIII, and Sir Walter Ralegh were among the many who 'could equally handle both the sword and pen' and hoped to 'provoke our military worthies to the love of the muses'; he notes that the dedicatee, Captain Samuel Bull JP, captain of Cowes Castle, has been 'instrumental in carrying the gospel to a town [West Cowes] that never before enjoyed it; consisting of about a thousand souls; and have helped them to build a synagogue'. He died, possibly in Brighstone, on 12 January 1660 and was buried in the chancel of Brighstone church. 


@@@@@


doc= 7678


Dineley, Thomas (d. 1695), antiquary, was the son of Thomas Dineley or Dingley, controller of customs at Southampton. Having attended the school kept by the dramatist James Shirley in Whitefriars, London, in August 1670 he became a student at Gray's Inn, but in the following year joined the household of Sir George Downing, on his appointment as ambassador to the states general of the United Provinces. 
Thereafter Dineley travelled extensively in the British Isles and on the continent, recording his trips in manuscript journals illustrated by vigorous pen-and-ink drawings, such as 'Travails through the Low Countreys, 1674' and 'Observations in a Voyage in the Kingdom of France, 1675'. His work is typical of that of many antiquaries of the late seventeenth century, not only in that none of it was published during his lifetime, but also in its shift over time in perspective and choice of subject matter. His journey to Ireland in 1680, possibly undertaken in a military capacity, provided a very detailed description (written the following year) of what he saw there, which also records what Dineley clearly considered to be the outlandish customs and behaviour of its people. Less prone to his personal prejudices and more 'archaeological' in approach -- and thus more reliable from an antiquarian perspective -- is the account he wrote of Wales as he accompanied Henry Somerset, first duke of Beaufort, in his 1684 progress through the principality as lord president of the council in the marches of Wales. The information and drawings of churches, castles, country houses, and other historic sites contained in this diary formed the basis for Theophilus Jones's 'A History of the County of Brecknock', published in two volumes in 1805 and 1809, while a substantial part of Dineley's own journal was privately printed as 'Notitia Cambro-Britannica' for the eighth duke of Beaufort in 1864. 
Of equal antiquarian interest is Dineley's manuscript 'History from marble', the last observation in which is dated 30 April 1684, containing many fine drawings and short accounts of country houses as well as church monuments and inscriptions. In geographical spread it concentrates on Bath, Oxford, and the counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire, providing much of the material used in Richard Rawlinson's 'History and Antiquities of the City and Cathedral Church of Hereford' (1717) and Treadway Russell Nash's 'Collections for the History of Worcestershire' (2 vols., 1781-2). 
Virtually nothing is known of Dineley's personal life, other than that when not travelling he lived at Dilwyn, Herefordshire, and that he died at Louvain, Flanders, in May 1695. At this time he seems to have been unmarried: his heir was his niece, the daughter of his sister, Eliza, wife of William Melling. 


@@@@@


doc= 7679


Diodati, Charles (1609/10-1638), friend of John Milton, was born in Middlesex, probably in Brentford, the son of Theodore Diodati (1573-1651), a physician of Tuscan descent; his mother was an Englishwoman whose name is not known. By September 1618 he was living in London with his family (including his sister Philadelphia and his brother John) in the Castle Baynard ward of the parish of St Mary Magdalen, near St Paul's Cathedral and the home of Milton on Bread Street. Diodati was educated at St Paul's School and at Trinity College, Oxford. He was admitted to Trinity in late 1621 or early 1622, and matriculated on 7 February 1623, aged thirteen. He proceeded BA on 10 December 1625 and MA on 8 July 1628; his MA was incorporated at Cambridge on 7 July 1629. 
By 1630 Diodati was living in Geneva, the birthplace of his father and the residence of his uncle Jean Diodati, a distinguished protestant theologian. He matriculated as a student of theology at the Academy of Geneva on 16 April 1630; a later record shows that he was still at the academy on 15 September 1631 but it is not known how long he remained in residence. He subsequently decided not to enter the church, and instead followed his father into medicine. There is no record of Diodati having studied medicine at a university so he may have been apprenticed to his father. He practised medicine with his father in Chester and in the London parish of St Ann Blackfriars, where he lived with his sister Philadelphia in the house of a Mr Dollam. The evidence for his intermittent residence in Chester is contained in Milton's poetry, but the name of Theodore Diodati also occurs in the churchwardens' accounts of St Peter's, Chester. In the middle of 1638 Diodati's family buried three of its members in St Ann Blackfriars: Isabel, his brother John's wife since 28 July 1635, was buried on 29 June; his sister Philadelphia was buried on 10 August; and Diodati himself was buried on 27 August, having died at Mr Dollam's house in Blackfriars while his friend Milton was in Italy. The causes of these youthful deaths are not recorded but plague must be a possibility. 
Diodati's sole published work was an elegy in Latin alcaics on the death of William Camden, which was published in 'Camdeni insignia' (1624). Diodati's only other writings known to have survived are two light-hearted letters to Milton, now in the British Library (BL, Add. MS 5016, fols. 5, 71); the letters, which are undated, are written in Greek prose. The friendship between Milton and Diodati dated from childhood ('a pueritia', as Milton says in the headnote to 'Epitaphium Damonis'). Diodati wrote to Milton from Chester early in April 1626; the letter is lost but Milton's reply, in Latin elegiacs, was later printed as 'Elegia I'; similarly, 'Elegia VI' is Milton's response to a lost verse-letter by Diodati written on 13 December 1629. Milton also addressed an exuberant sonnet ('Sonnet 4') in Italian to Diodati, probably in late 1629. In 1637 he twice wrote to Diodati in Latin prose ('Epistolarum familiarium', 6 and 7); these letters allude to Diodati's nascent medical career, and the second letter glances at the fraught issue of Theodore Diodati's remarriage after the death of his first wife. 
After Diodati's death Milton wrote a commemorative poem, 'Epitaphium Damonis', which survives in a single printed copy in the British Library. The poem is a pastoral elegy which movingly conveys Milton's sense of loss; because it is in Latin it is less well known than 'Lycidas' but it is one of the greatest poems in the final flowering of Latin literature. 
The exchanges between Milton and Diodati depict Milton as a serious and austere student with a passion for learning, and Diodati as his light-hearted and playful friend with a great appetite for conviviality and the life of the countryside; the literary persona is not a reliable guide to temperament, but the portrait of Milton can be verified from other sources, so it is not unlikely that the literary image of Diodati was a faithful reflection of his character. 


@@@@@


doc= 7680


Diodati, Theodore (1573-1651), physician, was born in Geneva on 23 August 1573, the eldest of ten children of Carlo Diodati (1541-1625), a merchant banker, and his second wife, Maria Mei. The family was from the northern Italian town of Lucca, where they had been prominent in public life. Family tradition identifies Carlo's godfather and namesake as the emperor Charles V. Despite this tie Carlo Diodati was converted to protestantism and was settled in Calvinist Geneva by 1567. He prospered there in banking and silk manufacture, was a leader in the Italian reformed church, and a member of the Genevan town council from 1584 to 1619. 
Among other accomplishments some Diodatis had pursued the practice of medicine in Lucca. This tradition was carried on by Theodore Diodati who matriculated in medicine at Leiden, on 3 August 1594. He did not take a degree at this time but a 1596 thesis of his, on smallpox and measles, survives and was dedicated to his medical professor Peter Paaw, and to Marc Offredi, a Genevan physician who had encouraged his medical studies. Diodati remained at Leiden until 1598, at which time he accepted employment in England as a tutor to John Harington, the six-year-old son of Sir John Harington of Exton. Diodati was mentioned in this capacity in 1603 in John Florio's classic English translation of Montaigne's 'Essais', on which Diodati had assisted. 
Attendance on the Haringtons brought Diodati into the orbit of the court of James I. The care and education of Princess Elizabeth eventually became the responsibility of Sir John Harington, while his son became the boon companion of Prince Henry. Diodati was both tutor and physician to the royal children in 1609, although by this time he had his own house in Brentford, Middlesex. He was now also practising more widely and gained great fame by curing a 76-year-old neighbour with a heroic phlebotomy, taking 60 ounces of blood over a three-day period, without any ill effect to the aged patient. 
About this time, if not earlier, Diodati married an Englishwoman 'of good birth and fortune' (Dorian, 51). Their first child, Charles Diodati, was born in 1609 or 1610. The younger Diodati achieved eternal fame as the best and most intimate friend of John Milton, from their schooldays together in London until Charles Diodati's early death in 1638. It has been suggested that Milton found aristocratic patrons for his earliest poetry through the medium and connections of the elder Diodati. A son, John, and a daughter, Philadelphia, followed the birth of Charles. 
Diodati's medical practice continued to prosper and by 1612 he was well known enough as a physician to earn an epigram in print from the famous epigrammatist, John Owen, who played on the uniqueness of Diodati's Greek Christian name and his Latinate surname, both of which can be roughly translated as 'God's gift', and linking that meaning with the injunction in 'Ecclesiasticus' to honour the physician because he has been given to men as a gift from God. 
In the same year that Diodati received his epigram he was also reported to the College of Physicians for his unlicensed medical practice in London, suggesting that Diodati had moved that practice to the City of London proper. To strengthen his credentials Diodati returned to Leiden where, on 19 September 1615, he took his long delayed MD. He appeared before the London college, degree in hand, in 1616 and was eventually licensed by the college on 24 January 1617. Even then his relationship with the college was often less than cordial: on one occasion he flung French curses at a Huguenot physician and college fellow, Paul Delaune, who had questioned Diodati's use of a vomit in a case they both attended. In 1622 the college censors vindicated Diodati's medical judgement and practice, but severely reprimanded him for his disrespectful behaviour towards other fellows and the officers of the college. Differences with other fellows seemed to be over matters of professional judgement rather than medical philosophy. Many of Diodati's conflicts at the college were personal in origin and seemed to stem from his own aristocratic bearing, pride, and a temperament that was quick to anger at even the slightest criticism. Despite these occasional differences Diodati remained a college licentiate in good standing for the remainder of his life. 
Through all Diodati's tempests at the college he was always supported by the chief royal physician Theodore Turquet de Mayerne. Born in Geneva in 1573 within a month of each other, they were both descended from Italian protestant families of intellectual distinction. In 1622, during a typically nasty interchange at the College of Physicians, Diodati requested that Mayerne be present at the meeting. In 1628 Mayerne recommended Diodati in what turned out to be an unsuccessful petition for the office of physician to the Tower of London. Seventy of Diodati's bills or prescriptions can still be found among the Mayerne papers at the British Library. 
Diodati's movements are fairly easy to track after his licensing by the college in 1617. A census of strangers residing in London found him and his family in the parish of St Mary Magdalen, in September 1618. A similar census placed him in Christchurch and St Faith's under St Paul's parishes in 1625. He was naturalized as an English subject on 9 January 1628, just prior to his application for the physicianship to the Tower. On the evidence of the annals of the College of Physicians, he was still in London in 1630. Gradually Diodati had built up his patient list among the English gentry and aristocracy, treating the families of Sir Thomas Egerton, Sir Richard Anderson, the earl of Bridgewater, and the countess of Derby. 
Diodati's movements after 1630 remain something of a mystery. No longer in London, he seems to have been a travelling physician, serving the counties of England between Herefordshire and Lancashire, perhaps relocating his household to Chester, where his son Charles Diodati seems also to have practised medicine. During these years the elder Diodati added yet another prestigious family to his patient list, that of Sir Robert and Lady Brilliana Harley. By 1637 Diodati's first wife had died and he married a woman known only as Abigail. The marriage estranged Diodati from his children who, by 1638, had returned to London. In the summer of that year both Charles Diodati and his sister, Philadelphia, died and were buried in the parish church of St Ann Blackfriars. 
Diodati continued his provincial practice until at least 1641, at which time he too had returned to London where he took up residency in the parish of St Bartholomew by the Exchange. In 1643 Diodati was assessed for $100 by the parliamentary committee for the advance of money. Like most of those assessed, he settled for a lesser sum in 1644. He remained estranged from his surviving son, John Diodati, who had his own business in London. At least two of Diodati's nephews, Charles and Theodore Diodati, followed their uncle into the medical profession. The younger Theodore Diodati, along with the physician's wife, Abigail, were the principal legatees of Diodati's will, written in 1649. There was no mention in his will of his son, John Diodati. 
Diodati died in the parish of St Bartholomew by the Exchange and was buried in the body of the church on 12 February 1651. His loan of $1008 to the earl of Cleveland and his son was eventually repaid to his nephew Theodore in 1654 through the action of a parliamentary committee for confiscated estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 7681


Dircks, Henry (1806-1873), historian of technology, was born at Liverpool on 26 August 1806, the eldest son of Egbert Dircks, a bookkeeper, of 14 Burnswick Road, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Nightingale. As a boy Henry was apprenticed to a mercantile company in Liverpool. He educated himself in practical mechanics, chemical science, and general literature. Before the age of twenty-one he was lecturing on chemistry and electricity, and publishing articles in the 'Mechanics Magazine' and other journals. During the 1830s he was involved in the Liverpool Mechanics' Institute (established 1825), and urged such institutes to co-operate with literary institutions. Dircks was a friend of the instrument maker John Benjamin Dancer. In 1837 he became a life member of the British Association, and regularly contributed to its proceedings. He and his wife, Mary, who were married in the early 1830s, had at least one child. Their son William Egbert was baptized on 24 July 1835 at St Nicholas, Liverpool. 
Dircks left the mercantile company to become a practical engineer supervising railway, canal, and mining works, but by the early 1840s was settled in London, describing himself as a consulting engineer. Between 1840 and 1857 he took out patents for several inventions, but no engineering works of any significance are credited to him. 
Dircks is best-known for publications in the history of technology. In Liverpool he had disputed the claims of Thomas Spencer, a carver and gilder, to have invented electrotyping, which Dircks claimed had been plagiarized from a London printer, C. J. Jordan. Dircks used increasingly abusive letters in the 'Mechanics Magazine' to pursue his attack. He summarized his crusade in two books, 'Jordantype, Otherwise Called Electrotype' (1852) and 'Contributions towards a History of Electro-Metallurgy' (1863). Dircks's two-volume history of attempts to construct perpetual motion machines (1861 and 1870) is still useful. This interest in investigating the reality of invention was continued in three works on the inventions of the marquess of Worcester 
(Edward Somerset, 1601-1667)
, which were well received. Dircks invented his own optical delusion, intended as an illustration of Dickens's 'haunted man', which was exhibited at the London Polytechnic under the name of 'Pepper's ghost'; he described this in a notice to the British Association in 1858. Dircks sought to develop what he called nature study as a literary technique for improving poetry and sacred songs (1869, 1871, 1872). 
Dircks joined the Royal Society of Literature, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1867). In 1868 he procured the title of LLD from the so-called college of Tusculum in Tennessee, USA. Styled a gentleman on his death certificate, and leaving several thousand pounds, Dircks died in the New Ship Hotel, Ship Street, Brighton, on 17 September 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 7682


Dirom, Alexander (1757-1830), army officer, was born on 21 May 1757 at Banff, Banffshire, the son of Alexander Dirom of Muiresk, Banffshire, and his wife, Ann Fotheringham. His name occurs in the 'Army List' for the first time as a lieutenant in the 88th foot on 13 October 1779. He was promoted captain on 8 December 1780. 
From 1780 to 1784 Dirom served in the West Indies, first with the 88th foot, then with the 60th (Royal American), to which he transferred as captain on 10 August 1781. In 1783, while adjutant-general in Jamaica, he published there 'Thoughts on the State of the Militia of Jamaica'. After a period on half pay, Dirom obtained a commission with the 52nd (Oxfordshire) foot, stationed in Madras. From 1790 to 1792 he served as deputy adjutant-general of the forces engaged in the Third Anglo-Mysore War. He was made brevet major on 12 February 1791. During the voyage home he drew up 'A Narrative of the Campaign in India', which was published in London in 1794. 
After his return from India, Dirom served on the staff in England. On 7 August 1793 he married Magdalen, daughter of Robert Pasley of Mount Annan, Dumfriesshire, and they had five sons and two daughters. He became brevet lieutenant-colonel on 13 April 1795, full lieutenant-colonel on 6 June 1799, brevet colonel on 29 April 1802, major-general on 25 October 1809, and lieutenant-general on 4 June 1814. He was elected FRS on 10 July 1794. He died at Mount Annan, Dumfriesshire, on 6 October 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 7683


Disibod (supp. d. 674), holy man, is the subject of a life written 'c'.1170 by the abbess and visionary Hildegard von Bingen (1098-1179), which is the sole witness for his Irish origin. The judgement of Thomas Olden, who summarized its content for the 'Dictionary of National Biography', that Hildegard's work has no historical value, is sound. The life of Disibod is, rather, a visionary text, reflecting the significance of the mystical experience in medieval society; it does not justify Olden's characterization of Hildegard as 'scarcely sane'. 
Hildegard did not invent Disibod, however. At the age of seven, she herself had entered the community of nuns at Disibodenberg (now Disenberg, Rhenish palatinate, Germany). This had then been established recently as an adjunct of the male monastery at the same place, where the bones of the saint were said to be buried and which was founded 'c'.1000 by Archbishop Willigis of Mainz. By that time the cult of Disibod had already been current in the region for a century and a half, for his birth is recorded under 8 September in the martyrology of Hrabanus Maurus, archbishop of Mainz from 847 to 856. No historical evidence, therefore, indicates Disibod's Irish origin, though such claims were made of other continental saints whose cults first appear at this time (for instance Gall and Dympna). Reliable sources offer no description of his status, beyond Hrabanus Maurus's statement that he was a 'confessor', nor any indication of the date at which he lived. The notion that he died in 674 is highly unreliable, deriving from an entry in a set of annals, partly based on the chronicle of Marianus Scotus (died 1082), but partly also on many other works, which was compiled in the later twelfth century by a monk at Disibodenberg, where there was an obvious incentive to create biographical data for its patron. In the face of such uncertainty over his historical existence, Disibod is probably best regarded as a figure ultimately inextricably entangled with the place with which he shared a name. 


@@@@@


doc= 7684


Disney, John (1677-1730), Church of England clergyman and moral reformer, was born at Lincoln on 26 December 1677, the son of Daniel Disney (1656-1734) of Swinderbury and his wife, Catherine Fynes (died 1690). None of his four brothers and four sisters survived childhood. He was educated at grammar school and at a dissenting academy in Lincoln. On 20 May 1698 he married Mary Woodhouse (1677-1763), daughter and heir of William Woodhouse. They had nine children, including John Disney (1700-1771), father of the Unitarian minister, John Disney (1746-1816). 
On 19 November 1702 Disney entered the Middle Temple but, according to his biography by his grandson John Disney, published in Kippis's 'Biographia Britannica', his legal training was intended only to equip him for service as a JP. He served effectively on the commission of the peace for Lindsey, Lincolnshire, but was removed from the bench at least twice during tory purges in 1711-12. Active as a layman and as a clergyman in the work of the SPCK and the societies for the reformation of manners, he helped establish charity schools in Lincoln and wrote extensively in defence of reform. He published two essays exhorting JPs to enforce the laws against immorality and profaneness; he wrote 'A View of Ancient Laws Against Immorality and Profaneness' (1729) and planned a ''Corpus legum de moribus reformandis''. He also published several sermons, a genealogy of the house of Hanover, and devotional works in both prose and verse. 
Disney, who was brought up a dissenter, explained to Archbishop Wake in 1718 that, 'as soon as I came of age, I betook myself to the Church of England, and that upon principle and conviction' (Kippis, 5.257). He was ordained deacon on 15 March 1719 and priest on 20 September 1719 by the bishop of Lincoln, Edmund Gibson, and was immediately afterwards presented to the Lincolnshire livings of Croft and Kirkby-on-Bain. In 1720 he was admitted as a fellow commoner of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and became MA in 1722. In the same year he resigned his country benefices, and was appointed to the important living of St Mary's, Nottingham. He died at Nottingham on 3 February 1730 and was buried near the altar in St Mary's. 


@@@@@


doc= 7685


Disney, John (1746-1816), Unitarian minister, the third son of John Disney of Lincoln and his wife, Frances Cartwright of Ossington, Nottinghamshire, was born on 28 September 1746 at Swinderby in Lincolnshire. His grandfather John Disney (1677-1730) was rector of St Mary's, Nottingham, but his ancestors were zealous nonconformists. Disney was educated at Wakefield grammar school under John Clark, and then at Lincoln grammar school. He was intended for the bar, but his health broke down under preliminary studies and he turned to the church. He entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1764, and after graduation was ordained in 1768; in 1770 he proceeded LLB. His sympathies with the latitudinarians within the Church of England quickly became evident; he appeared as a writer in April 1768 in defence of Archdeacon Francis Blackburne's 'The Confessional' (1766). Immediately after his ordination he was appointed honorary chaplain to Edmund Law, master of Peterhouse, bishop of Carlisle, and a latitudinarian whig. In 1769 he was presented to the vicarage of Swinderby, Lincolnshire, and soon afterwards to the rectory of Panton, in another part of the same county; he held both livings, residing at Swinderby. On 17 November 1774 he married Jane (died 1809), the eldest daughter of Archdeacon Francis Blackburne. 
Disney became an active member of the Feathers Tavern Association formed on 17 July 1771 to promote a petition to parliament for relief of the clergy from subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' of the Church of England ['see also 'Feathers tavern petitioners]. The petition was rejected by the House of Commons on 6 February 1772. Disney did not immediately follow the example of his friend Theophilus Lindsey, who resigned his benefice in the following year (on his way to London in December 1773, Lindsey stayed for more than a week at Swinderby). Like some others, Disney chose to accommodate the public service to suit his special views. The Athanasian creed he had always ignored; he now omitted the Nicene creed and the 'litany', and made other changes in reading the common prayer. On 5 June 1775 the University of Edinburgh made him DD, through the influence of Bishop Law with the principal, William Robertson; in 1778 he was admitted a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Temporarily Disney found in secular duties and political action a sedative for his religious scruples. He was an energetic magistrate, and while staying at Flintham Hall, near Newark, the seat of his eldest brother, he joined in 1780 the Nottingham county committee for retrenchment and parliamentary reform. But in November 1782 he resigned his preferments, and offered his services as colleague to his friend Lindsey at the Unitarian chapel in Essex Street, London. At the end of December he moved to London with his family, having been engaged at a stipend of $150. He justified his decision in 'Reasons for resigning the rectory of Panton and vicarage of Swinderby, in Lincolnshire, and quitting the Church of England' (1782). In 1783 Disney became the first secretary of a Unitarian Society for Promoting the Knowledge of the Scriptures. On the retirement of Lindsey from active duty in July 1793, Disney became sole minister. The services at Essex Street had been conducted by means of a modified common prayer book, on the basis of a revision made by Samuel Clarke (1675-1729). In 1802 Disney introduced a new form of his own composition, but the congregation, on his retirement, immediately reverted to the old version. 
Disney's resignation of office was occasioned by a large bequest of property, which reached him in a curious way. Thomas Hollis (died 1774) had left his estates in Dorset to his friend Thomas Brand of The Hyde, near Ingatestone, Essex, who took the name of Hollis. Brand Hollis (died 1804), by a will dated 1792, left both estates, worth about $5000 a year, to Disney, who resigned his ministry on 25 March 1805 on the grounds of ill health, and in the following June left London and took up his residence at The Hyde. He was succeeded at Essex Street by Thomas Belsham. The rest of his life was spent in the literary and agricultural pursuits of a country gentleman. He took part in various representations to parliament which resulted in the act of 1813 'to relieve persons who impugn the doctrine of the Holy Trinity from certain penalties'. He continued to support political reform: in 1806 he declined to advise his Dorset tenants as to how they should vote in the county election, commenting only 'I know of no recommendation more important or pressing, or more constitutional than that of the candidate's being well disposed towards a legal reform in the constitution of that parliament of which they solicit to become members' (Disney to E. Patten, 29 Oct 1806, Wyvill of Constable Burton MSS). 
Disney was a prolific author, with some forty-five separate works to his credit; they included memoirs of latitudinarians such as Arthur Ashley (1785) and Edmund Law (1800) and Unitarians such as John Jebb (1787) and Michael Dodson (1800). Two volumes of his sermons were published in 1793 and two more in 1816: Socinian in their theology, they show his extreme anti-trinitarianism, which went as far as the denial of even the pre-existence of Christ. 
In his later years Disney lived for some time in Bath, attempting to recover his declining health and withdrawing from political involvements. He died at The Hyde on 26 December 1816, and was buried in the churchyard of Fryerning, Essex. He left three children, John Disney, Algernon, who entered the army, and Frances Mary, wife of Thomas Jervis. A collection of literature related to 'The Confessional' controversy, which had been arranged by Disney in fourteen volumes, was deposited at Dr Williams's Library, of which he had been a trustee from 1796 to 1806. As a minister, memoirist, and a religious and political writer Disney was an important, if secondary, figure in the development of English Unitarianism. 


@@@@@


doc= 7686


Disney, John (1779-1857), barrister and art collector, born at Flintham Hall, Nottinghamshire, the home of his paternal uncle Lewis Disney, on 29 May 1779, was the eldest son of seven children of the Revd John Disney DD (1746-1816), a Church of England, and later Unitarian, clergyman, and his wife, Jane (1745/6-1809), eldest daughter of the Ven. Francis Blackburne (1705-1787), rector of Richmond, Yorkshire, and archdeacon of Cleveland. The Disney family could trace its descent back to the Normans. The focus for the family was Norton D'Isney (Norton Disney) and Swinderby, both between Newark-on-Trent and Lincoln; Disney's father was vicar of Swinderby until he resigned his living in 1782. 
In December 1782 the Disney family moved to London, when the Revd Disney became the first secretary of the Unitarian Society for Promoting the Knowledge of the Scriptures. In 1783 he became minister of the Essex Street Chapel with the Revd Theophilus Lindsey. By 1785 the family had moved to Sloane Street in Chelsea, and Disney received his education at home. In April 1796 he was admitted, aged sixteen, as pensioner to Peterhouse, his father's Cambridge college; his younger brother Algernon (1780-1848) followed him to Peterhouse in October of the same year. Two years later, in April 1798, Disney was admitted to the Inner Temple, following a legal career which his father had been forced to abandon through ill health. In May 1803 he was called to the bar. On 22 September 1802 he married, at St George's, Hanover Square, his first cousin Sophia (1777-1856), youngest daughter of Lewis Disney-Ffytche (1738-1822) of Swinderby, Lincolnshire, and Danbury Place, Essex, and Elizabeth, daughter of William Ffytche, governor of Bengal; there were three children of the marriage, John (1808-1829), Edgar (1810-1881), his successor, and Sophia. 
Disney's family stayed in London until March 1805 when his father retired to The Hyde, near Ingatestone, Essex. The Hyde, designed by Sir William Chambers, had been bequeathed (in a will of 2 November 1792), along with land in Dorset at Corscombe, Halstock, and Netherstoke, by Thomas Brand Hollis (died 1804), the friend of the 'republican' Thomas Hollis (1720-1774). In this way the Disney family acquired a significant income from both estates (estimated at about $5000 a year) as well as the substantial collection of classical sculptures displayed at The Hyde which had been largely acquired, often through Thomas Jenkins in Rome, by Hollis and Brand during the grand tour in a series of journeys made from 1748 to 1753. The display included a portrait of Marcus Aurelius once in the Palazzo Barberini at Rome. Other pieces were acquired on their return to England, such as from the sale of Dr Richard Mead's antiquities. This Dorset interest may have influenced Disney's appointment in September 1807 as recorder of Bridport, a position he held until 1823; in 1818 he was appointed sheriff of Dorset. During this period he resided at Corscombe. 
On the death of his father, on 26 December 1816, Disney inherited The Hyde and its contents, as well as land in Dorset. One of his first actions was to dispose of the libraries of his father, Thomas Hollis, and Thomas Brand Hollis at Sothebys, on 22 April 1817. He also seems to have taken more interest in affairs in Essex and about 1820 sold part of his Halstock estate; in 1822 his wife inherited part of the estate of her father (and Disney's uncle). 
In 1818 Disney started work on a major catalogue of the collection of antiquities at The Hyde; an earlier catalogue of the collection, 'A Catalogue of some Marbles, Bronzes, Pictures and Gems, at The Hyde, Near Ingatestone, Essex' (1807), had been prepared by his father. A study by the Revd James Tate of the inscriptions in the collection was added to the second impression (1809) after a visit to The Hyde in August 1809. The collection itself was supplemented by small antiquities from Pompeii and Herculaneum acquired by a relative during a visit to Italy between 1795 and 1798. Disney's research was interrupted by a visit to Italy and in particular Rome in 1826 and 1827, during which time he made a number of purchases. He found Italy disappointing, writing to C. Rankin, his agent, from Rome, 'the country round the Eternal City is... as dreary and desolate as Hounslow heath was 30 years ago' (Disney to Rankin, 17 Dec 1826, Chelmsford, Essex RO, MSD/DQC 211). He also received gifts of antiquities from Charles Callis Western and James Christie. Among his acquisitions was a Latin inscription said to have been found in March 1821 on the site of the County Hospital at Colchester, but almost certainly purchased abroad. Disney was active in local societies. He was president of the Chelmsford Philosophical Society and instrumental in the creation of the Chelmsford and Essex Museum, which moved to new premises in 1843. He was the first president of the Essex Archaeological Society, founded in 1852. 
After relinquishing his position in Dorset, Disney continued to pursue his legal interests and published 'Outlines of a Penal Code' (1826). By 1832 he was chairman of the quarter sessions of the justices of the peace for the county of Essex. He seems to have had a long-standing desire to become a member of parliament. He edited a work entitled 'A collection of acts of parliament, relative to county and borough elections, with reference to several reported cases, containing the determinations of the House of Commons' (1811), and contested the constituencies of Harwich (1832) and North Essex as a Liberal candidate, but without success. During the 1835 campaign he had to defend himself against the accusation that he supported whipping as 'a fit punishment for females' ('The Times', 9 May 1835) as well as to suffer the re-airing of the celebrated 1815 scandal between his brother Algernon and Lady Cranstoun ('The Times', 1 May 1835). The expenses for these elections, as well as the upkeep of The Hyde, may have led Disney to dispose of the Corscombe estate in 1836. 
The catalogue of The Hyde, illustrated with engravings, appeared in 1846 as 'Museum Disneianum, being a description of a collection of ancient marbles, in the possession of John Disney, esq., F.R.S. F.S.A., at The Hyde, near Ingatestone'. A second edition followed in 1849 with supplements entitled, 'Specimens of ancient art' (dated on a separate title page, 1848) and 'Various ancient fictile vases' (dated on a separate title page, 1849). The volume subsequently appeared under a new title, 'Fitzwilliam Museum', reflecting Disney's donation of most of his collection of sculptures to the fledgeling Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge in 1850, initiating the Greek and Roman collection. Along with E. D. Clarke's collection of marbles, presented to the University of Cambridge in 1803, the Disney marbles continue to form the core of the Fitzwilliam's ancient sculpture collection. The remaining antiquities were left at The Hyde, and were subsequently dispersed at auction by Christies on 1 May 1884 and 28 January 1886 after the death of his son Edgar; in 1885 the Fitzwilliam acquired the marble 'Apollo of Miletus', restored under John Flaxman and Antonio d'Este. Adolf Michaelis commented that Disney showed 'more zeal than knowledge or criticism' and that the collection itself was 'trash rather than treasure' (A. Michaelis, 'Ancient Marbles in Great Britain', 1882, 159). Disney's generosity to the University of Cambridge continued when in 1851 he gave an endowment of $1000 to create a chair of archaeology, the first in Great Britain. The endowment was augmented to $3500 by bequest. Disney specified in a deed of trust of 28 May 1851 that the Disney professor should lecture 'on the subject of Classical Mediaeval and other Antiquities the Fine Arts and all matters and things connected therewith' (Clark, 224). Disney reserved the right in his lifetime to make the appointment, and J. H. Marsden of St John's College was the first holder. 
Disney was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 9 June 1832; his nomination was supported by the traveller W. M. Leake, whose collection of Greek pottery and cabinet of coins and gems were also to find their way to the Fitzwilliam Museum. This was followed on 20 June 1839 by Disney's election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries; he served on its council in 1845 and 1850, and acted as one of the auditors in 1850. He was awarded the honorary degree of DCL at the University of Oxford in 1854, and was incorporated with the degree of LLD at the University of Cambridge in the same year, an honour which he marked with the presentation of a bust of himself to the Fitzwilliam Museum. Disney died at The Hyde on 6 May 1857 and was buried with his wife in Fryerning churchyard, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 7687


Disney, Sir Moore (1765/6-1846), army officer, eldest son of Moore Disney of Churchtown, co. Waterford, one of the Irish descendants of the family of Disney of Norton Disney in Northamptonshire, entered the army as an ensign in the 1st Grenadier guards on 17 April 1783. He served in America for the last few months of the American War of Independence, and was promoted lieutenant and captain on 3 June 1791. He was with the guards throughout the campaign in the Netherlands under the duke of York from 1793 to May 1795, and was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel on 12 June 1795. He was promoted colonel on 29 April 1802, and served for a short time as a brigadier-general in the home district in 1805, but he resigned that appointment in July 1806, in order to go to Sicily in command of the 3rd battalion of the 1st guards. 
Disney was made a brigadier-general in Sicily in August 1807, and was commandant of Messina from January to July 1808, when he started home to take command of a brigade in England. On 6 October, however, his ship touched at Lisbon, and he was at once begged by General Cradock to land and take command of a brigade consisting of the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, and 50th regiments, which Cradock wished to send to join the army of Sir John Moore in Spain. Disney led the brigade safely through Abrantes before halting at Castelo Branco on 27 November, when he was ordered to hand over command to Major-General Alan Cameron, and to join the main army under Sir John Moore. 
Disney reached Toro in safety, and was at once put in command of a brigade of Edward Paget's reserve, consisting of the 28th and 91st regiments. The reserve had to cover the famous retreat of Sir John Moore, and Disney greatly distinguished himself both at the action at Betanzos on 11 January 1809, and in the battle of Corunna. For his services at that battle he received a gold medal, and was promoted major-general on 25 April. Later in 1809 he commanded the 1st brigade of guards, attached to Hope's division, in the Walcheren expedition, and on his return to England was given the command of the home district. 
In 1810 Disney went to Cadiz to act as second in command to General Graham (afterwards Lord Lynedoch), and in June 1811 he succeeded him in the chief command there. He handed over the command at Cadiz to Major-General George Cooke in November 1811, returned to England, and never again went on active service. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 4 June 1814, became colonel of the 15th regiment on 23 July 1814, was made a KCB in 1815, and was promoted general on 10 January 1837. 
Disney had married Mary (died 26 Jan 1831), widow of Ralph Sneyd of Belmont, and daughter of George Cooke Yarborough of Streetthorpe, Yorkshire. He died at his house in Upper Brook Street, London, on 19 April 1846, at the age of eighty. 


@@@@@


doc= 7688


Disney, William (1731-1807), Church of England clergyman, was born on 29 September 1731, probably at Cranbrook in Kent; he was the second son of the Revd Joseph Disney MA (1695-1777), vicar of Cranbrook and Appledore, and his wife, Ann Ross (died 1782), of Biddenden. He was descended from Lincolnshire stock, through whom he is almost certainly related to the twentieth-century American animator Walt Disney. 
William Disney was educated in London at Merchant Taylors' School under Dr Creech, and from there went on to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted pensioner on 26 January 1749. He matriculated and was admitted as a scholar on the Newman foundation in that year; he obtained his BA in 1753 and his MA in 1756. In 1754 he had been named a fellow of his college, and on 22 December had been ordained deacon in the Church of England by Matthias Mawson, bishop of Ely. He was ordained priest by Mawson on 19 February 1758. From 1757 to 1771 he held the post of regius professor of Hebrew in the University of Cambridge. 
Disney gained his BD in 1768 and in 1777 became rector of Pluckley in Kent, where he was to spend the rest of his life. He married Anna Maria Smyth ('bap'. 1736, died 1820), youngest daughter of John and Elizabeth Smyth of Chart Sutton, Kent, but there appear to have been no children of the marriage. 
Disney was made DD of Cambridge University in 1789 and on the occasion preached a sermon that was printed in Cambridge in the same year under the title 'A sermon preached before the University of Cambridge... with some strictures on the licentious notions avowed or insinuated in the three last volumes of Mr Gibbon's Roman history'. Disney shared the discomfort felt by many readers concerning Gibbon's account of the early Christian church and its effect on the Roman empire, which was widely interpreted as irreligious. 
Having left the academic world Disney devoted the last thirty years of his life to the duties of a clergyman. His brief correspondence with Edward Hasted, historian of Kent, shows him to have been the caring incumbent of a well-run parish, and Hasted, who outlived his near-contemporary, noted Disney's death in his commonplace book with the words 'rich in good works' (Canterbury Cathedral Archives, U11/5). Disney's obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' was therefore stating no more than the truth in saying 'his death will be sincerely regretted by all who had the happiness of being numbered among his friends, but more particularly by the neighbouring poor, who in him have lost a kindly friend, and a most liberal benefactor' ('GM', 77, 385). Mourned by his wife as a 'truly good man' (ibid.), William Disney died at Pluckley on 28 March 1807 and was buried in the family vault at Cranbrook on 4 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 7689


Disraeli, Benjamin, earl of Beaconsfield (1804-1881), prime minister and novelist, was born on 21 December 1804 at 6 King's Road, Bedford Row, London, the eldest son and second of five children of Isaac D'Israeli (1766-1848) and his wife, Maria (1775-1847), daughter of Naphtali and Ricca Basevi. From 1810 or 1811 he attended a school at Islington kept by a Miss Roper, and then, probably from 1813, one at Blackheath belonging to the Revd John Potticary, where he was given separate instruction in Judaism. However, he was baptized into the Christian faith (as an Anglican) on 31 July 1817 and thereafter attended a different school, Higham Hall in Epping Forest, run by the Unitarian minister Eli Cogan, until 1819 or 1820, after which he was taught at home. The family had moved to 6 Bloomsbury Square after the death of Benjamin's grandfather in 1816 had increased Isaac D'Israeli's means. That death also removed the family's last tie with the Jewish religion and led to the baptism of the children. Isaac was an easy-going Voltairean sceptic whose interests were those of a reclusive literary dilettante and whose friends tended to be London publishers and antiquaries. From an early age Benjamin was introduced to this circle and to his father's extensive and eclectic library, which left a much clearer stamp on his mind and tastes than the more disciplined classical training offered at Higham Hall. Benjamin had dropped the apostrophe in his surname by December 1822, though it was still widely used (for example, in 'Hansard') until the 1840s. 
In November 1821 Disraeli was articled at his father's arrangement to a solicitor's firm in the Old Jewry, and spent three years there. Subsequently (in April 1827) his name was entered at Lincoln's Inn, but though he ate dinners for a time, he had rejected the idea of a career at the bar some years before he withdrew his name in November 1831. He had, and retained, a strong dislike of the mundane lifestyle of the English middle classes: for them, 'often the only adventure of life' was marriage (Smith, 'Disraeli', 69). 'To be a great lawyer, I must give up my chance of being a great man' ('Vivian Grey', bk 1, chap. 9). An ardent admirer of Byron (whom his father knew), he dreamed instead of literary fame. The example of Byron -- and of Canning in politics -- showed him how men of unusual charisma and insight could win international admiration with the aid of the burgeoning media. Disraeli fell heavily under the influence of Romanticism. From the early 1820s he had adopted an appropriately eye-catching and narcissistic style of dress, with ruffled shirts, velvet trousers, coloured waistcoats, and jewellery, and he wore his hair in cascades of ringlets. It was on his first continental travels, to Germany in 1824 with his father, that he decided to try to escape from a legal career. The latter parts of his first published novel, 'Vivian Grey', were set in Germany -- the home of Goethe, whose 'Wilhelm Meister', translated into English in 1824, clearly influenced his early literary style. A longer tour of the continent in August 1826 included a stay at Geneva, where Disraeli engaged Byron's former boatman to row him on the lake. He reflected self-consciously, in Romantic fashion, on the sublime natural creations that he observed on his travels, and concluded that he loved 'trees better than men' ('Letters', 1.92). 
In May 1824 Disraeli submitted a manuscript to his father's friend John Murray, but it was not published. His attempt over the next year to establish the financial independence necessary for a literary career was a catastrophic failure. With a friend he sought to capitalize on the speculative bubble in South American mining companies. Disraeli also wrote pamphlets puffing the operations. By June 1825 they had lost $7000. A third partner took on much of this debt; Disraeli could not finally settle with him until 1849. Later in 1825 he urged a willing Murray to establish a new morning paper, 'The Representative', to compete with 'The Times'. He worked hard on this venture, impressing Murray with his energy and insight, but failed to persuade J. G. Lockhart to take up a major editorial role, and the journal collapsed after six months. Disraeli used this episode in 'Vivian Grey', the first part of which was published anonymously in two volumes in April 1826. It was publicized by the publisher Henry Colburn as a sensational 'roman-a-clef' in the then fashionable silver-fork style. It portrayed with intensity the desperate, unscrupulous ambition of a clever young man, and his come-uppance. It also set out a highly irreverent view of London society, exposing the egotism, superficiality, and charlatanism of its members. This combination of unmistakable self-exposure and reckless satire did Disraeli's reputation great and lasting damage -- for the identity of the author was soon revealed. The book also earned some damning reviews, which dwelt on its solecisms and general immaturity. Moreover, Murray and Lockhart, men of great influence in literary circles, were deeply offended by the sneering treatment of characters based on them. 
The financial disaster and literary abuse to which Disraeli was subjected in 1825-6 almost certainly contributed to the onset of a major nervous crisis that affected him for much of the next four years. He had always been moody, sensitive, and solitary by nature, but now became seriously depressed and lethargic. The 'cold, dull world', he later wrote, could not remotely conceive the 'despondency' of 'youthful genius' that was conscious of 'the strong necessity for fame', yet had 'no simultaneous faith in [its] own power' ('Contarini Fleming', pt 1, chap. 11). 
It was not until a lengthier journey, to the East in 1830-31 (financed partly by a fashionable but light novel, 'The Young Duke', written in 1829-30), that Disraeli finally acquired a strong enough sense of identity to sustain him in his search for fame. Between June and September 1830 he travelled with William Meredith in Gibraltar, Spain, and Malta, where they joined up with James Clay, an Oxford friend of Meredith. Clay's buccaneering temperament, raffish habits, and sexual experience fascinated Disraeli and made the rest of the journey more adventurous. Joined by Byron's former servant Tita, the three men toured the Ottoman empire experiencing Eastern lifestyles. Disraeli spent a week at the court of the grand vizier Redschid Ali in Albania, and, after visiting Athens, a further six weeks in Constantinople. The exotic, colourful splendour of Turkish courts appealed immensely to his imagination; he felt that the 'calm and luxurious' existence of the people accorded with his 'indolent and melancholy' tastes (Monypenny and Buckle, 1.159, 170). He loved the duplicitous intrigue of court politics and its distance from the puritanical moralism of the Western bourgeoisie; staying with Redschid, Disraeli wrote of the 'delight of being made much of by a man who was daily decapitating half the province' (ibid., 158). The travellers then proceeded to Jerusalem, where Disraeli spent a seminal week, before staying five months in Egypt. The tour was cut short dramatically by Meredith's death from smallpox in Cairo in July 1831. Disraeli had to be treated for venereal disease on his return to London. 
Like other nineteenth-century travellers to the East, Disraeli felt enriched by his experiences, becoming aware of values that seemed denied to his insular countrymen. The journey encouraged his self-consciousness, his moral relativism, and his interest in Eastern racial and religious attitudes. On his return he could strike others as insufferably affected: according to one account, he was much given to sticking his fingers in his lapels and drawling, 'Allah is great' (Bradford, 51). There is a malicious contemporary portrait of him in dandy mode, as Jericho Jabber in Rosina Bulwer's 'Very Successful' (1856). In 1833 he published a novel, 'The Wondrous Tale of Alroy', which concerned the dilemma faced by a twelfth-century Middle Eastern Jew who sought fame, but who faced conflicting ideals: between establishing a purely Jewish regime and a larger empire assimilating other religions. The moral of his failure was that a taste for action and the power of imagination were both needed in a leader. Though neither meritorious nor commercially successful, 'Alroy' shows Disraeli thinking about problems that were to concern him a great deal in the future; it portrayed 'my ideal ambition' (Monypenny and Buckle, 1.236). 
The other literary product of Disraeli's travels was 'Contarini Fleming' (1832). Subtitled 'a psychological autobiography', 'Contarini', like 'Vivian Grey', was a 'Bildungsroman' exploring the development of the artistic consciousness and containing much tortured reflection on Disraeli's destiny. It presents the dual nature of the eponymous hero, a man of mixed Mediterranean and northern background, a brooding artist but aspiring man of action, deeply imaginative yet energetic and courageous. Disraeli was very aware of these two sides of his personality. 'Contarini' ends on a new theme, the transition of Europe from feudal to federal principles (pt 7, chap. 2). In a diary of 1833 Disraeli claimed that his insights were 'continental' and 'revolutionary' (Monypenny and Buckle, 1.236), by which he presumably meant broad and original enough to encompass the intellectual and social forces that were shaping Europe. In 1834 he finished a heroic poem, on the scale of Homer and apparently conceived when standing on the plain of Troy; its object was to evoke the clash of feudal and democratic principles in Europe since the French Revolution. Entitled 'The Revolutionary Epick', it was not remotely a success, but it testified to Disraeli's enthusiasm for the fashionable continental conception that the progress of human affairs was realized through the interaction of individual will, ideas, and great social forces. Disraeli was fascinated by the creativity with which the greatest statesmen, such as Napoleon, moulded social change and thus won worldwide renown. 
It was in the early 1830s that Disraeli decided to begin a political career. In 1833 he recorded that he would 'write no more about myself' (Monypenny and Buckle, 1.236); certainly there seemed little prospect of fame through literature. His pride sought an existence independent of the literary pundits and titled and frivolous patrons who seemed to dictate fortunes in letters. Politics, he later wrote, offered the chance of 'power o'er the powerful' ('Letters', 4.250). It also offered therapeutic excitement: 'action may not always be happiness, but there is no happiness without action' ('Lothair', chap. 79). The reform crisis of 1830-32 opened the prospect of political realignments and quick fame for men of resource and vision. The Disraelite hero of 'A Year at Hartlebury', the novel he wrote with his sister and published anonymously in 1834 (and whose authorship was established in 1983 by Ellen Henderson and John P. Matthews), turned, 'at the prospect of insurrection... with more affection towards a country he had hitherto condemned as too uneventful for a man of genius' (p. 58). More mundanely, the cost of attempting to cut a dash in society, on top of his incompetent management of his previous debts, ensured that a long queue of creditors hounded him. A seat in parliament offered immunity from imprisonment for debt. 
Disraeli's first parliamentary candidature was at High Wycombe, the nearest borough to the house at Bradenham that his father rented from 1829. The two sitting MPs were whigs, and one was the son of the local landowner Lord Carrington. It was both necessary and congenial for Disraeli to declare himself an independent radical, opposed to whiggism and oligarchy, at a by-election in June 1832 and then at the general election held on the new franchise in December 1832. On both occasions he was defeated. His friend Edward Lytton Bulwer secured him letters of support from leading radicals O'Connell and Burdett. As the only opposition candidate, Disraeli naturally courted tory voters, and in 1833, excited by accusations that in doing so he was inconsistent, he published 'What is He?', in which he argued for a tory-radical coalition against the whigs. His background, ostentatious manner, and verbal pyrotechnics ensured that opponents would charge him with lack of principle, but in fact few politicians of the 1830s were more interested than he was in fashioning a coherent individual perspective on politics. Disraeli sought independence from faction and from condescension, and to be noticed; his rise would surely have been more rapid had he made more compromises with the system. 
Disraeli's political path began to clear when in 1834 he met one of the few leading tories colourful, indiscreet, and clever enough to appreciate his talents: Lord Lyndhurst. Disraeli was introduced to him by Henrietta Sykes, an older married lady with whom Lyndhurst had been having an increasingly public affair since the summer of 1833. She seems to have cured Disraeli of some immature affectations. It was suspected that he was happy to share Henrietta's affections with Lyndhurst. Certainly the triangular friendship expanded his political circle and lowered her social reputation. Disraeli loved Lyndhurst's gossip and taste for intrigue, and became his secretary and go-between. When he stood again at Wycombe at the 1835 election, once more unsuccessfully, and still as an independent radical, it was with the assistance of $500 from tory funds. The events of this period made it clear that the future lay with a two-party system, and in the spring of 1835 he fought the Taunton by-election as a tory. In March 1836 he was elected to the Carlton Club. Encouraged by Lyndhurst, and invoking Bolingbroke as an exemplar, he wrote some vigorous tory propaganda. The most important, his 'Vindication of the English Constitution', was published in December 1835. It used a historical perspective to claim the tories' sympathy with the people, to attack whig, Irish, and utilitarian views, and to assert the legitimacy of the House of Lords' opposition to government policy. More scurrilous were 'The Letters of Runnymede', nineteen anonymous pieces of satire on politicians of the day, which he published in 'The Times' in 1836. They included some abuse of the Irish. Disraeli used the whigs' increasingly pro-Catholic Irish policy to justify his toryism, as did the famous former radical Sir Francis Burdett, for whom he canvassed at the Westminster election of 1837. At Taunton in 1835 Disraeli had compared the proposal of Irish church appropriation to the spoliation of the monasteries by the whigs' ancestors. His misreported remarks about O'Connell led the latter to charge him with being a Jew 'of the lowest and most disgusting grade of moral turpitude' (Monypenny and Buckle, 1.288). As on other occasions, Disraeli's pride flared up at such language, and he provoked a public row with O'Connell and his son Morgan, whom he challenged to a duel. 
Disraeli was also taken up by Lady Londonderry in the 1836 season, a sign of his increasing reputation in tory circles. He was given a winnable seat at the 1837 election, when he became MP for Maidstone with the other tory candidate, Wyndham Lewis, who lent him money to pay part of the election expenses. Disraeli's debts had grown into a serious problem, and Henrietta's husband's solicitor had helped him to manage them. However, in late 1836 he terminated the affair with her; she was very demanding emotionally, and began a passionate romance with the painter Daniel Maclise (whose drawing of Disraeli in 1828 effectively recorded his dandyism). Shortly afterwards Disraeli published 'Henrietta Temple', a love story and social comedy, and followed it by 'Venetia' (1837), a portrayal of Byronic existence in the late eighteenth century, which was written quickly in order to raise money. 
When Wyndham Lewis died suddenly in March 1838, Disraeli consoled his widow, who had been left with an income of about $5000 per year, together with their house in London, 1 Grosvenor Gate. Mary Anne Lewis ['see 'Disraeli, Mary Anne (1792-1872)] was the daughter of a naval lieutenant and farmer, John Evans, of Brampford Speke, near Exeter, and his wife, Eleanor. She was coquettish, impulsive, not well educated, and extremely talkative, but also warm, loyal, and sensible. She shared something of Disraeli's love of striking clothes and social glitter while feeling, like him, an outsider in very high social circles. Her money, house, and solid position were undoubtedly attractive to him (though she had only a life interest in her husband's estate). But so also were her vivacity and her childless motherliness. All his life older women appealed to Disraeli, apparently in search of a mother-substitute more appreciative of his genius than his own stolid parent had been. Their courtship lasted most of a year, for much of which time she seems to have been unsure of his motives. In the end he convinced her of his genuine emotional attachment; he certainly pursued her ardently. As before when he was absorbed in passion, he wrote a poetic work, the blank verse play 'The Tragedy of Count Alarcos', which was only performed as a curiosity after Disraeli became prime minister. They were married at St George's, Hanover Square, on 28 August 1839. Their union thereafter presented a picture of remarkable mutual devotion and respect. She provided the domestic stability and constant admiration that he sorely needed. She also paid off many of his debts: she had spent $13,000 on these and his elections by 1842 alone. Like his father's, her payments would have been more effective had Disraeli straightened out his affairs, approached his debts rationally, and been straightforward with her about the sums owing; instead, his tendency was to renew his obligations at ruinous interest rates. At the 1841 election his opponent printed posters listing judgments in the courts against Disraeli to the extent of over $22,000, and alleged that he owed at least $6800 more than that. 
Disraeli made his maiden speech in parliament on 7 December 1837, in a debate on MPs' privileges. It was another challenge to O'Connell, the previous speaker, and was hooted down by jeering O'Connellite Irishmen, though not before its extraordinarily elaborate and affected language had caused much hilarity. After that unpropitious beginning Disraeli avoided publicity for most of the rest of the parliament, generally supporting Peel and attacking the free trade agitators. However, he did urge respect for the Chartist movement. Feeling unable to satisfy the financial expectations of the electors of Maidstone, he sought a cheaper seat for the 1841 election; his friend Lord Forester secured him the nomination at Shrewsbury. At this election his crest made its first appearance, with the motto 'forti nihil difficile' ('nothing is difficult to the brave'). 
When Peel became prime minister after the 1841 election, Disraeli sought office from him; unsurprisingly, he did not get it. He continued his support for Peel in 1842 and 1843, seeking fame by attacking the foreign policy of the late government. He blamed the economic depression partly on the whigs' warmongering extravagance and failure to sign a commercial treaty with France. He projected himself as an authority on the needs of British international trade, urging a reversion to the historical policy of commercial diplomacy and reciprocity. He went to France in late 1842 in order to make connections at the court there which would assist his claim to be promoting a new entente with that country. His contacts there -- supplied through Bulwer, Count d'Orsay, and Lyndhurst -- gained him an audience with Louis Philippe. 
In a memorandum to the French king, Disraeli talked of organizing a party of youthful, energetic tory back-benchers in pursuit of a policy sympathetic to France. Though nothing came of this notion as such, it showed his susceptibility to the excitement of high intrigue with a group of youthful men of independence and vision. A small group of such men was in fact forming on the tory benches, inspired by George Smythe, Lord John Manners, and Alexander Baillie-Cochrane. This trio had been at Eton and Cambridge together and had a romantic attachment to the ideals of chivalry, paternalism, and religious orthodoxy which had become fashionable in some landed and university circles in reaction to reform, utilitarianism, and political economy. Disraeli did not adopt all of the specific enthusiasms of Young England, as the group came to be known in 1843. But by the end of the session he was accepted as a fertile contributor to its activities in the house, and some of the group's enthusiasms rubbed off on him, especially a respect for historic religious ideals evident in 'Sybil'. Over the winter of 1843-4 Disraeli wrote 'Coningsby', his most effective and successful novel to date, a vibrant commentary on the political and social worlds of the 1830s. Featuring the three friends, it gave considerable publicity to the idea of Young England, contrasting its ideals with Peel's lack of principle. Published in May 1844, it quickly sold 3000 copies, for which Disraeli received about $1000. 
In 1843 Disraeli offended the Conservative leadership by his vote against the 'Canada Corn Bill' and his speech against Irish coercion. Early in 1844 Peel rebuked him by omitting him from the list of MPs to be summoned to the official party meeting at the start of the session. Over the coming months Disraeli made three speeches containing pointed and sarcastic criticism of the party leadership, such as his attack on its inability to tolerate dissent over the sugar issue. 
In October 1844 Disraeli, Manners, and Smythe made successful addresses to young artisans at the Manchester Athenaeum, testifying to the impact made by Young England. While in the north, Disraeli also collected observations about industrial life which he used in 'Sybil', the novel which he wrote over the winter of 1844-5 and published in May 1845, again to considerable interest; it too sold 3000 copies. But Young England broke up in 1845, partly owing to a difference of opinion on the government's proposals for the Maynooth seminary, and partly because of parental pressure on Smythe and Manners not to be disloyal to the party. Meanwhile, Disraeli's abuse of Peel was mounting. In late February he made a celebrated, extended, and neatly vindictive assault on Peel's shiftiness, described by one onlooker as 'aimed with deadly precision', yet delivered with Disraeli's normal 'extreme coolness and impassibility' (Monypenny and Buckle, 2.316). On 17 March he declared that a 'Conservative government is an organised hypocrisy' ('Selected Speeches', 1.80). His opposition to the Maynooth grant (11 April) was similarly based on the argument that Peel cared nothing for tory principles and sought to extend the 'police surveillance' of Downing Street to entrap Irish Catholics, when they required independence and respect (ibid., 88). By the end of the 1845 session Disraeli had become a celebrated orator. He undoubtedly helped to stimulate the questioning of Peel's trustworthiness on the back benches. Yet he stood essentially alone, without allies, and in such circumstances his capacity to tolerate abuse and short-term political injury is testimony to his remarkable self-confidence and self-reliance. 
Disraeli's position was transformed by the events of late 1845, which brought Peel to the Commons in January 1846 as an advocate of repealing the corn laws, in defence of which the vast majority of tory MPs had been elected in 1841. Disraeli seized the initiative against him with a stinging attack (22 January), accusing him of betraying 'the independence of party' and thus 'the integrity of public men, and the power and influence of Parliament itself' ('Selected Speeches', 1.110). Now, suddenly, he was no longer alone, as Lord George Bentinck and Lord Stanley took the lead in organizing party opposition to the repeal, while in the constituencies there was an active protectionist campaign. In his speeches on the subject in 1846 Disraeli reiterated his earlier arguments in favour of the historic policy of multilateral tariff reductions through treaty diplomacy. But his greatest contribution to the movement against Peel continued to be his scathing attacks on the latter's inability to uphold the principles of the territorial constitution on which toryism must rest. This was expressed most devastatingly in his famous denunciation of Peel's career as a 'great Appropriation Clause' in his speech on the second reading of the repeal bill on 15 May, which roused the back benches to extraordinary fervour (ibid., 170). Later in the month he lied to the Commons in denying Peel's charge that he had sought office from him in 1841, but Peel was unable or unwilling to capitalize on this, a mark of his powerlessness to deal with Disraeli's invective. As the session continued, Disraeli had hopes of a coalition between protectionist tories and some whigs and Irish MPs in defence of a compromise tariff. But corn law repeal passed the Lords in late June. On the same night the leading protectionists, including Disraeli, voted with the opposition to defeat Peel's 'Irish Coercion Bill', on the grounds that the lack of necessity for it had been demonstrated by the long delay in promoting it. Peel resigned, and Disraeli's fame -- for good and ill -- was assured. 
In the 1840s Disraeli wrote three major novels ('Coningsby', 'Sybil', and 'Tancred', 1847), worked on his biography of Lord George Bentinck (1852), and delivered many ambitious speeches. This output, together with his earlier political comment, helps to chart the progress of his ideas. 
Disraeli had begun political life as a proud Romantic individualist with radical leanings, standing 'for myself' rather than any party (Ridley, 112). This was a sign of his youthful arrogance, but also a typical declaration against what radicals saw as whig factionalism and falseness. Gifted with an ability to expose the selfish and hypocritical underbelly of the glittering social and political world, he shared the views of those who saw the whigs as frauds who had arrogated the title of the popular party when they were in fact a 'Venetian' oligarchy. After he had adopted tory colours, Disraeli continued -- especially in 'Sybil' -- to portray the whigs as a rapacious clique of great families, who had secured their hold on power by their canting claim to be protecting the civil and religious liberties of the people from attack in 1688-9. He asserted that popular liberties in fact rested on the territorial constitution -- on the land, the church, and other interests whose vitality prevented central government despotism. The Venetian instincts of eighteenth-century whigs had crippled the country with heavy indirect taxes levied in order to fight unnecessary wars and to siphon off rewards for themselves. The one man who might have moralized whig misrule -- the outsider-prophet Burke -- was refused a cabinet place by these snobs, and in his vengeance turned his eloquence against them, thereby helping to keep them out of power for forty-five years. It was only the blunders of Pitt's heirs that gave the whigs the opportunity to mount an audacious 'coup d'etat' in 1830 and once again to restrict power to an aristocratic clique by claiming to follow libertarian sentiments. Their true intentions were seen in their centralizing initiatives of the 1830s with regard to the poor law, education, and policing, all of which Disraeli criticized. They also had to be opposed for their exclusiveness, their incapacity, and their willingness to consort with destructive allies, particularly O'Connell. 
Here and on other subjects Disraeli derived his arguments from books -- mainly from Burke and tory historians, and Carlyle and Germanic writers -- and from the literary and religious interests of his father. But he assembled and developed his ideas in an inimitable confection, and with a degree of purpose rare among parliamentarians. He thought of himself as a prophet of deep insights who had arrived at his opinions by 'reading and thought' rather than having 'had hereditary opinions carved out' for him (Monypenny and Buckle, 2.371). As he commented with respect to Christ, all the great minds were formed in seclusion ('Disraeli's Reminiscences', ed. H. M. Swartz and M. Swartz, 1975, 8). 
For Disraeli historical and sociological awareness was necessary in order to govern men. In particular, 'all is race' (Disraeli, 'Bentinck', 331); the values of each race determined its past and prospects. Some races were superior; others were degraded (by interbreeding or luxury) and would be conquered. Conquest was a natural objective of races such as the Slavs. But Disraeli was most concerned with two other races: the Semites (especially the Jews) and the English. These were races that understood the essence of civilization: the Jewish values of 'religion, property, and natural aristocracy' (ibid., 497). 'A civilised community must rest on a large realised capital of thought and sentiment; there must be a reserved fund of public morality to draw upon.... Society has a soul as well as a body' (Disraeli, 'Inaugural Address', 15). The alternative to government in tune with indigenous traditions was a resort to a 'philosophic' or 'cosmopolitan' basis -- to abstract theories, such as 'cosmopolitan fraternity' and the equality of man, 'pernicious' doctrines that would 'deteriorate the great races and destroy all the genius of the world' (Disraeli, 'Bentinck', 496). Republicanism and socialism involved a relapse into 'primitive... savagery' (ibid., 509), though their vitality and appeal were all too comprehensible. One reason for their attraction was that men, who were 'made to adore and obey', had been failed by their political and religious leaders and left to 'find a chieftain in [their] own passions' ('Coningsby', bk 4, chap. 13). A nation that had 'lost its faith in religion is in a state of decadence' ('Selection from the Diaries of... Derby', 97). Modern Europe had fallen victim to materialism: it had mistaken comfort for civilization ('Tancred', bk 3, chap. 7). Disraeli drew two conclusions. A properly run society was necessarily elitist: 'the Spirit of the Age is the very thing that a great man changes' ('Coningsby', bk 3, chap. 1). And it must rest on the national, not the cosmopolitan, principle. 
It followed that England should venerate the Jews, who understood all this. They represented the 'Semitic principle -- all that is spiritual in our nature' (Disraeli, 'Bentinck', 496), being descended from the Arabian peoples to whom divine truth had been revealed and who had founded the great religions. The Christian church in particular was completed Judaism, a 'sacred corporation for the promulgation and maintenance in Europe of certain Asian principles... of divine origin and of universal and eternal application' ('Coningsby', preface to 5th edn, 1849). Jesus and the Virgin Mary were Jews. 'Half Christendom worships a Jewess and the other half a Jew.... Which do you think should be the superior race; the worshipped or the worshippers?' ('Tancred', bk 3, chap. 4). The Roman church had been founded by a Hebrew when the English were 'tattooed savages' (ibid., bk 2, chap. 11), and the crusades, by bringing medieval Westerners to Jerusalem, had renewed Asia's spiritual hold on Europe. The Arabs, 'Jews on horseback', retained much of the spiritual sense, social cohesion, and harmony with nature that the West so badly needed to rediscover. The hero of 'Tancred' goes to Jerusalem in an attempt to penetrate and draw spiritual sustenance from 'the great Asian mystery' (bk 2, chap. 11; bk 4, chap. 3). Disraeli convinced himself (wrongly) that he derived from the Sephardi aristocracy of Iberian Jews driven from Spain at the end of the fifteenth century. The English aristocracy, he pointed out, were descended merely from 'a horde of Baltic pirates' (Blake, 203). 
Presenting himself as Jewish symbolized Disraeli's uniqueness when he was fighting for respect, and explained his set-backs. Presenting Jewishness as aristocratic and religious legitimized his claim to understand the perils facing modern England and to offer 'national' solutions to them. English toryism was 'copied from the mighty [Jewish] prototype' ('Coningsby', bk 4, chap. 15). Disraeli was thus able to square his Jewishness with his equally deep attachment to England and her history. Hardly any nineteenth-century politician was more deeply enthused by the English past; he almost never made a significant speech without invoking it, and talked at length about local history to visitors to his house at Hughenden. Remodelling the house in 1862-3 'realised a romance' to restore its pre-civil war appearance, including a garden of terraces 'in which cavaliers might roam' (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.472). On leaving office in 1852 he disobeyed the custom of passing on the chancellor of the exchequer's gown to his successor (Gladstone); instead, he kept it until the end of his life because it had been worn by his hero Pitt. 
Disraeli believed that England's history explained her greatness, and that her future greatness depended on the maintenance of her constitutional traditions. In the aftermath of the 1848 revolutions England was the 'only important European community that is still governed by traditionary influences' (Disraeli, 'Bentinck', 555). These influences were 'bulwarks of the multitude' against the destructive despotism of an over-mighty central government ('Lothair', general preface to 1870 edn); they included the Church of England, the ancient universities, the principles of historic parties, and the 'noble system of self-government' ('Selected Speeches', 2.455). Local self-government and parliamentary government were essential aspects of England's strength; her uniqueness was that 'society has always been more powerful than the State', thus guaranteeing order and liberty ('The Times', 18 June 1868, 9). 
At times in the 1840s Disraeli argued that these constitutional and social traditions were collapsing, and with them the character of England as a community. In 'Tancred' he wrote that 'the people of this country have ceased to be a nation' (bk 2, chap. 1). Parliament no longer represented a 'disciplined array of traditionary influences' but a bundle of crotchets and ambitions, incapable of reaching agreement on an organic, spiritual, or elevating artistic policy ('Selected Speeches', 2.455). 'Tancred' in particular is very critical of the decay of the historic parliamentary ideal, reflecting the shortcomings, successively, of Peel's autocracy and Russell's minority government. (At this juncture Disraeli even played with the possibility that the monarchy, buttressed by a free press, might represent the national will better, a view raked up and used against him by his opponents at the 1880 election.) But the fundamental problem was social disorganization, with materialism and religious sectarianism following in its wake. The church is portrayed, in 'Sybil' and 'Tancred', as riddled with small-minded compromisers incapable of touching the heart of nations. 'Sybil' dwells on the immoral brutality of working-class life in manufacturing and inner-city areas untouched by upper-class guidance; this was the abnegation of civilization. He attacked the exploitation of labour, whether by selfish industrialists or by squires imbued with the doctrine of political economy; both reduced human relations to the cash nexus. Yet Disraeli was equally critical of the sybaritic and insular English aristocracy, ignorant, pampered, obsessed with trivialities, and instinctively exclusive and oppressive in their political responses. A return to the old feudalism was not possible. Manchester, he wrote in 'Coningsby', was the Athens of the scientific age (bk 4, chap. 1). It represented ideas which would not go away; politicians had to deal with them. 
The 1840s presented a further danger, an international one. Disraeli appropriated Burkean anti-Jacobin polemic in arguing that the difference between tory and whig/Liberal government was the difference between government on the national and on the cosmopolitan principle -- a view that he reiterated throughout his career. This analysis relied mainly on the fact that the whigs were allied to O'Connellite Catholics, dissenters, Cobdenite internationalists, and, later, a handful of republicans and atheists. In the 1840s the main 'cosmopolitan' threat presented by the Liberal forces in parliament came from the Cobdenite free-traders who naively claimed that their principles would promote 'peace and plenty' when the world was 'in arms' (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.97). Disraeli was profoundly alarmed by the insularity of commercial opinion in England, because it would prevent an intelligent European policy counteracting corrosive democratic principles. In 1848-9 he repeated the view of the 'Revolutionary Epick', that Europe was declining from feudal into federal, republican American-style politics (ibid., 166, 178). But he thought that the transatlantic model would not work there because of the debris left behind by traditionary influences, and that the resulting disturbances would have to be suppressed by military power, by vast standing armies (Disraeli, 'Bentinck', 554-5). Europe faced a future alternating between revolution and Russian-influenced militarism, unless Britain co-operated with France and/or Austria to defend traditional values. (He admired Metternich, with whom he had several conversations after 1848.) 'Once destroy the English aristocracy, and enthrone the commercial principle as omnipotent in this island', and nothing can stop 'the Slavonians conquering the whole of the South of Europe' (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.195). Paradoxically but crucially, Disraeli interpreted British isolationism as cosmopolitanism, and believed that a vigorous continental policy was necessary to prevent the triumph in Britain and Europe of cosmopolitan principles. 
There is no reason to doubt Disraeli's pessimism about the state of England in this crisis-ridden decade; many shared it. However, the crisis was also convenient, because it pointed up the need for leadership capable of making England a nation again. Ideally, such a man would have the insight and imagination of Sidonia, the Jewish sphinx of the novels, who could solve 'with a phrase some deep problem that men muse over for years' ('Coningsby', bk 3, chap. 1). He need not be personally religious, as long as he understood the importance of religion to the English. Many passages in 'Sybil' admire the medieval spirit -- of mutual obligation within a powerful religious framework. But these passages sought to make a point about the English character rather than to prescribe a particular religious solution. Disraeli himself, though interested in theological subjects and a practising Anglican, told the fifteenth earl of Derby in 1872 that he was 'personally incapable of religious belief' ('Selection from the Diaries of... Derby', 97). In 'Tancred' he defined faith as 'inward and personal energy in man' (bk 2, chap. 14). But though the novels were in one sense a personal manifesto of an ambitious man, this view gains from retrospect. Disraeli, a very marginal figure when he wrote 'Coningsby' and 'Sybil', believed that the natural leaders of society were 'the gentlemen of England' (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.101). The novels urged young men of property, energy, and vision to enter politics to defend their heritage. Disraeli always idealized such men, and 'Sybil' ends with a rallying cry to the nation's youth, 'the trustees of Posterity'. 
Disraeli's principles were general and intended to apply in a variety of circumstances; that is why they may appear insubstantial. He never diverged from his broad assumptions about tradition, leadership, cosmopolitanism, and national dissolution, or from his belief that politics involved applying the first two concepts to defeat the second two. But the form in which challenges to national harmony and greatness arose necessarily changed over time; and for Disraeli the art of politics was the settlement of specific problems as they emerged. In the 1840s the overwhelming difficulty was the unrest of the Chartists and the Anti-Corn Law League. In the 1860s and 1870s the greatest threat was to religion at home and abroad, from atheism and church factionalism. In the 1870s and 1880s the major danger was the international challenge to property. In foreign affairs there was a constant problem about British commercial isolationism and an intermittent one about the destabilizing effect on Europe of Palmerstonian Liberal interventionism. For most of his life, also, Disraeli was out of power, and confined to the luxury of criticizing the inadequate leadership skills of others. 'Coningsby' contains no definite solutions to the crisis of the 1840s, merely a demand for firm, responsive government to reduce social tension. None the less, in his attack on Peel can be discerned Disraeli's general conception of toryism -- which, he wrote in the 'Vindication', should embody 'the national will and character' (p. 193). 
To Disraeli historic toryism involved a defence of the territorial constitution and local independence against centralization; a hostility to Venetian borough-mongering (and therefore a Pittite willingness to contemplate parliamentary reform); a reliance on direct as well as indirect taxation; the pursuit of international commercial advantage by traditional tariff diplomacy; a peaceful but shrewd foreign policy; and the firm but inclusive government of Ireland, rescuing its Catholics from the Cromwellian/whig puritanical yoke. But the mistake of the long conflict with France had overtaxed the country and forced farmers into expensive mortgages; Liverpool, the 'Arch-Mediocrity', had rejected Pitt's youthful sympathy with the people and his support for Catholic emancipation, and had fallen back on repression; Wellington had fashioned an absurdly exclusive and arrogant image of government which had alienated the aristocracy and middle classes and had allowed the whigs to mount their 'coup d'etat' in 1830. His successor Peel had failed to demonstrate an understanding of history, a loyalty to party tradition, or any power of imagination. Lacking historical insight or intellectual independence, he had swallowed fashionable cosmopolitan ideas, which he disguised with displays of urbane plausibility and empty rhetoric. In assuming that men could be governed by adjusting tables of import duties and other expedients, he was a symbol of the artificiality and rootlessness of politics in a materialistic age. And, lacking real leadership skills, he had resorted to the 'intolerable yoke of official despotism' to retain power ('Selected Speeches', 1.97). This attempt to check dissent betrayed back-benchers' honour and party principle, the 'realised experience of our ancient society' (ibid., 2.455). The job of the tory party was to uphold the aristocratic settlement of the country in the impending struggle with the democratic principle (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.125, 134). 
Disraeli was equally definite in defending the idea of protection. But for him it was a great historic concept, a crucial aspect of constitutional, imperial, and foreign policy. He had consistently argued in favour of a policy of regulating tariffs by treaties of reciprocity; these also reduced foreign tension and allowed lower defence expenditure. As for the empire, relations with the white settler colonies were in flux in the 1840s as the idea of responsible government developed. Disraeli wanted them to be regularized on a coherent basis, with an imperial tariff, a code for colonial defence, and representatives attending a council in the metropolis. He spoke repeatedly in later years of his sadness that this had not happened. In December 1851 he proposed that in any scheme of parliamentary reform at Westminster the colonial chambers should elect their own representatives, on the lines of the United States senate; this might revive their affection for Britain. The failure to bring about that outcome led Disraeli to lament the collapse of real power over the self-governing colonies -- especially when he was chancellor of the exchequer, dealing with the consequences of the whigs' failure to get them to accept the burden of their own defence. He even remarked, impatiently, 'what is the use of these colonial deadweights which 'we do not govern'?' (Monypenny and Buckle, 4.476). (This remark has been misinterpreted by many critical commentators to indicate a general lack of commitment to empire.) It was crucial that India and Ireland did not go the same way; Britain must exercise firm but inclusive government over them. In 1844 Disraeli urged that Ireland needed a stronger, more comprehensive executive, just administration, and equality of treatment for all religions. In both places an amicable treatment of the diverse religious groups was the only way to prevent them from developing grievances that might lead them to coalesce against the governing power. 
Disraeli was obviously motivated by personal ambition in moving to the tories and in attacking Peel over the corn laws and Irish policy. Equally, he was no unprincipled charlatan. For him the fascination of politics was the simultaneous opportunity that it offered for intrigue as well as the formulation of high policy. The basis of his admiration for Burke was his ability to combine the two goals, to inspire men with ideals while manoeuvring for the advantage of his party connection. Disraeli's elitist conception of politics attached great importance to the role of individuals in making initiatives, patiently constructing alliances, holding parties together, and dividing opponents. The tension between intrigue and idealism is a major theme in 'Tancred', which is in part a dialogue between Tancred, an imaginative young English aristocrat, and Fakredeen, an emir of Lebanon. Tancred is an ingenuous idealist disgusted with the sordidness of British parliamentary life. Fakredeen has a deep understanding of human nature, honed by years of manoeuvre to evade his creditors. He is vain, reckless, and desperate for all Europe to talk of him. He uses his imaginative understanding in reckless intrigue. Tancred says that only faith, not intrigue, will conquer the imagination of public opinion; but he is too ingenuous for the modern world. Fakredeen argues that 'England won India by intrigue... intrigue has gained half the thrones of Europe' (bk 3, chap. 5); but he can also see the attraction of principles. The ideal statesman would be a combination of both. 
The resolution of the crisis of 1845-6 left Disraeli a leading figure in the Conservative Party, whose role as the defender of aristocratic ideals in British politics he henceforth upheld vigorously. Unfortunately, the protectionists were in a minority, needing to make alliances in order to exercise power, with the danger that those coalitions might swamp them or cause them to betray their principles. In September 1846 Disraeli wrote that an alliance between the protectionists and the 'real whigs' in defence of the territorial constitution and strong, inclusive government was the natural solution to the problems of Britain and Ireland ('Letters', 4.258). He was equally aware of the enormous obstacles to this solution, among them the instinctive protectionism and No Popery of the tory back benches. Could Conservatives -- could he -- manoeuvre towards power without damaging the party's independence and ideals? The rest of this book charts Disraeli's attempt to reconcile intrigue with imagination and ideas in that objective. It would be an absorbing task for a man of action. After 1846 Disraeli would not need to retreat into fictional worlds in order to find something to manipulate. 
The Conservative Party split elevated Disraeli to the front opposition bench in 1847. This completed a change of parliamentary image: colourful attire had by now given way to the black frock coat (sometimes blue in summer), grey trousers, plush waistcoat, and sober neckerchief which was to be his Commons uniform for the next thirty years. He worked hard on his oratory, mugging up blue books and spending all day memorizing figures so that his mastery of them in debate could seem as spontaneous as Peel's. He capitalized on his clear voice, great command of language, and extraordinarily retentive memory, and now began to learn the art of managing parliamentary debates tactically. Bentinck, the protectionists' leader in the Commons, regarded him as an indispensable lieutenant. And his new eminence in a landed party allowed him to abandon the vexations of a borough seat to become MP for Buckinghamshire at the 1847 election; he retained the seat, usually unopposed, until he became a peer in 1876. He had been a justice of the peace in Buckinghamshire since 1836 and a deputy lieutenant since 1845. 
Most significantly for his lifestyle, Disraeli acquired the small country house of Hughenden Manor, outside High Wycombe, in late 1848. The purchase was negotiated by Philip Rose, a lawyer and Buckinghamshire neighbour, whom Disraeli had placed in charge of his financial affairs in 1846. Hughenden was not a large house, and the estate ran only to 750 acres (later increased to 1400 by enclosures and purchases). None the less, it was way beyond his means when he agreed to buy it for $35,000 in March 1847; his wife's income was already heavily burdened by his debt repayments. The money was to come from his father and from Bentinck and his two brothers, who were anxious to establish Disraeli as a landowner MP. The purchase was delayed for over a year while the financial details were sorted out; in the event Disraeli's father and Bentinck both died before it was completed. Despite a small legacy from Isaac, the transaction ended with Disraeli owing Bentinck's brothers $25,000. In 1857 the outstanding money was called in by the elder brother, now duke of Portland, who disliked Disraeli's politics; he had to resort once more to moneylenders. Hughenden was an essential status symbol for Disraeli, but he also gained spiritual succour in this adopted homeland. His was not a typical 'arrivisme'; it was an affair of the inward imagination rather than one of outward snobbery. Though he liked to wear the clothes of a country sportsman (initially with excessive zeal), he neither shot nor hunted and disliked country-house visiting with its conventions, its 'constant dressing & indigestion' ('Letters', 5.210), and its masculine conversations. Mary Anne and he did not entertain very much at Hughenden, at least in the early years (though their Buckinghamshire neighbours the Rothschilds were frequent visitors). The house's attraction was that it gave him roots in England, allowing him to place himself in a tradition of defenders of property and civilization, and thus focusing his Burkean sentiments. Hence his love of his woods, a symbol of permanence; he prided himself on the number of trees he planted, persuaded visitors to add specimens, and carried a small hatchet on his estate inspections with which to strip ivy from the bark. His homely estate -- with its terrace of peacocks and its little pond presided over by the swans Hero and Leander -- and his spacious library (greatly enhanced by his father's death in January 1848) were appropriate settings for self-conscious reflection on the long continuum of English history and his own place in it. For all that, Disraeli frequently found the isolation of Hughenden stifling, especially at times of marital tension or political frustration. He needed the bustle and excitement of London public life in order to raise his spirits. 
Fervent protectionism and protestantism made the party difficult to lead. An early test of protestant feeling came with a Commons motion in December 1847 for the removal of Jewish civil and political disabilities. Disraeli took this opportunity to articulate his defence of the Jews as proto-Christians. This argument, met by silence and private anger on the protectionist benches, did his prospects little good. However, Bentinck's support for the same motion led to a rebellion against his leadership and his resignation in December 1847, which created a vacuum. Since it was impossible to find an alternative with the fervour and talent of Bentinck and Disraeli, the two men remained informally in charge of strategy throughout the 1848 session. When Bentinck died suddenly in September 1848, Disraeli was bereft of his strongest supporter; he showed the debt he owed to Bentinck by writing an eloquent and reverential biography, published in December 1851 (1852 on the title page). Yet Bentinck's death also left Disraeli unchallenged as the party's most vigorous debater. However, his status, reputation, and opinions prevented the protectionists from formally nominating him to replace Bentinck. Moreover, Lord Stanley in the Lords, the unquestioned leader of the whole party because of his great social position, ability, and experience, knew that Disraeli's behaviour to Peel had made him unacceptable to the Peelites, whose allegiance Stanley was trying to win. On the other hand, Disraeli refused to serve under any other protectionist, even had any been suitable. The upshot, in January 1849, was the proposal by Stanley of a committee of three: Disraeli, Granby, and Herries. Disraeli was too proud to declare his acceptance of this situation, but Stanley pointed out that he would in practice be leader, and this was generally recognized well before the end of the 1849 session; the committee maintained a shadowy existence until Granby resigned from it at the beginning of 1852. 
Disraeli recognized that a return to the corn laws was politically impossible, since too many mainstream politicians feared the radical social and political reaction that would follow their revival. Upholding protection would confirm the Conservatives' minority status in the country and scare off potential parliamentary allies. He sought a difficult balancing act, trying to find a broader fiscal strategy that would compensate the economic, social, and colonial interests that protection had benefited, yet which would also settle the fiscal question on a 'national' basis, terminating 'the unhappy quarrel between town and country' ('Selected Speeches', 1.323). He was also worried that, in the agricultural depression of the late 1840s, farmers were being wooed away from the landed interest by the appeals of financial reformers. Restlessly and experimentally, he proposed various fiscal remedies, principally rate relief for agriculture, but also malt tax reduction and income tax differentiation in favour of tenant farmers. He unsuccessfully opposed the repeal of the navigation laws in 1849 -- with the result that a grateful shipowner named a 400 ton vessel after him in the following year. He angrily attacked the 'thoughtless societies out of doors' which were agitating for the return of protection (ibid., 322). But Stanley rebuked him and declared uncompromisingly for protection, deeming it to be essential for the honour of himself and his party. In the short term Stanley's strategy was the only feasible one, on tactical and principled grounds, and Disraeli was forced to be more equivocal in his public statements. When the Liberal government was defeated in February 1851, no public man outside protectionist ranks would join Stanley, who felt that he must reject the queen's request to form a government -- to Disraeli's great annoyance. The following February the Liberals fell more conclusively, and Stanley, now fourteenth earl of Derby, formed a government on the basis that protectionist legislation would not be attempted unless a majority was secured at an election to be held in the summer. At that election (at which Disraeli made only the vaguest reference to protection) no majority was forthcoming, and protection was finally laid to rest in a debate in November 1852, marked by taunts and a crude antisemitic jibe levelled at Disraeli by the Peelite Sidney Herbert. 
Disraeli was leader of the House of Commons and chancellor of the exchequer in the 1852 government. Derby had little choice but to give him high office, though his view of him remained equivocal. He appreciated Disraeli's hard work and oratorical ability, but lamented his restlessness as a tactician, and did not invite him to Knowsley until late 1853 -- and then for a dressing-down. Disraeli waived his claim to the leadership in the hope of securing Palmerston's allegiance, but the latter refused to join the cabinet. Disraeli also professed unease that his first government post should be at the Treasury despite his financial ignorance, but Derby told him: 'You know as much as Mr. Canning did. They give you the figures' (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.344). He introduced a provisional budget in April 1852 which extended the income tax for a year; he hoped that a consensus would meanwhile emerge in favour of a more permanent settlement. There was little enthusiasm on the government benches for his speech, which made few concessions to protectionist ideas. 
Disraeli's major test came in December, when he was forced (by Peelite pressure) to introduce another budget in the light of the abandonment of protection. This placed him in an almost impossible position. He had to enthuse his back-benchers while not alienating the Liberal majority in the Commons. He made his task harder by opting for an ambitious budget which might give the government momentum for the session. Politically, he could not afford to give landowners rate relief, since this would open him to the charge of class favouritism. But this abandonment of proposals made in opposition, which he justified by pointing to the 20 per cent fall in the cost of poor relief since 1848, was unpopular with his back-benchers. Instead, he offered them a halving of the malt tax, which would also please the urban beer drinker, and coupled this with a staged reduction of the tea duty. In order to pay for this and what he hoped would be a popular reduction of the income tax, he extended the house tax (which had been reintroduced the previous year). This move, unattractive to urban voters, might have been mitigated by a reduction in income tax, but the war scare resulting from Louis Napoleon's imperial pretensions forced the government to increase defence estimates in the autumn and so prevented this. He fell back on the expedient of differentiating between categories of income, proposing to tax farmers and salary-earners at a lower rate, while at the same time bringing more people into the tax net and extending it to Ireland. This complex scheme offended too many interest groups. Opposition MPs had no difficulty in finding enough criticisms of it to justify combining in a negative vote. The government was defeated and resigned. 
Disraeli's ten-month spell in office was very important in his career. His ability had been widely recognized and he had become a national figure: he even earned a place at Madame Tussaud's shortly afterwards. (Gladstone did not appear until 1870.) In 1853 he took advantage of this fame to bring out a shilling edition of his novels (including a drastically revised 'Vivian Grey'); this sold 300,000 copies in a year. His leading position in the Conservative Party was more secure, now that protection had been abandoned and the Peelites had offended many Conservatives by their behaviour. Nominated by the new chancellor, Derby, he was made DCL at Oxford University in 1853, and his appearance was much cheered by tory undergraduates. However, this eminence had been achieved at a considerable cost to his reputation. Die-hard protectionists blamed the chancellor of the exchequer above all for the abandonment of their creed, while the Jewish issue prevented him from pleasing ultra-protestants even had he sought to do so. He told Lord Henry Lennox that both these old tory principles were 'exclusive and limited... clearly unfitted for a great and expanding country' (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.383). Yet he was also demonized by the Peelites and their allies in the press as a man of low birth who had goaded the squirearchy against the martyred Peel only to surrender to the wisdom of his policy. In 1854 a member of what Disraeli called 'the Peel school' (in fact, Thomas Macknight) anonymously published a long and venomous 'Literary and Political Biography' of him, which capitalized on the awkward incidents in his past (ibid., 3.531). Conservatives who sought reunion regarded him as the symbol of party disunity. Disraeli's reputation never recovered from opponents' interpretations of his political behaviour between 1846 and 1852, though his most visible political trait in these years was, arguably, excitable naivety rather than fiendish cunning. 
The Conservative Party was now to be in opposition for over five years, to Disraeli's frustration. He was furious when, on the fall of the Aberdeen coalition in early 1855, Derby gave up the queen's commission to form a government once Palmerston had declined to serve under him. Disraeli had concluded that, by taking office at that point, the party might get the credit for a satisfactory conclusion to the Crimean war and force the other conservative influences in politics -- principally Palmerston and Gladstone -- to accept its dominance. However, Derby thought that public opinion would demand Palmerston as minister, if only until disillusioned, and he was only too aware how opposed the leading Peelites would be to serving with Disraeli. 
Throughout these years Disraeli also encountered a lot of distrust from Conservative MPs, despite purging the old protectionist influence in the whips' office and appointing Sir William Jolliffe as chief whip. Derby -- hardly a sociable leader himself -- criticized his aloofness and unwillingness to court back-benchers. A good part of the unrest was due to Disraeli's insatiable enthusiasm for planning parliamentary sorties against the governments of Aberdeen and Palmerston in the company of other amenable factions, whether Irishmen, radicals, or opposition Liberals. Such tactics were temperamentally irresistible to him, but they were hardly unusual for an opposition leader, and were indeed inevitable in this decade of ideological confusion and ego-ridden intra-party factionalism. Disraeli bewildered his more unimaginatively stolid back-benchers by his sudden parliamentary attacks, which gave further ammunition to his party critics, for whom he remained 'the Jew' (Monypenny and Buckle, 4.44). He appeared to them to be consorting with dangerous radical opinion, at a time of widespread fear in propertied circles of the growing power of 'middle-class' 'Manchester' sentiment, which might undermine the social as well as the political position of the aristocracy. 
However, Disraeli was not just a tactical opportunist; his air of mystery helped to obscure his motives. On the four issues which most preoccupied him, he was working out a more or less coherent Conservative creed. His policies had the great merit to him of appealing beyond the party, but also of upholding a historically coherent position that was viable for a modern empire. Those four issues -- finance, foreign policy, India, and parliamentary reform -- need to be examined in turn. Though they added to disquiet about him, they also formed the basis of his position over the next fifteen years, especially during the minority government of 1858-9, when he was again chancellor of the exchequer and leader of the Commons. 
On finance and foreign policy Disraeli fell foul of the 'John Bull' wing of the party. He saw the political attraction of reducing taxation and appreciated that, if the Conservatives returned to office, a bold and popular budget would be the best way of strengthening their position in the Commons. Many MPs disliked the income tax, and after 1855 Disraeli sought, more assiduously than Gladstone, to uphold the latter's plans of 1853 for its progressive reduction and eventual abolition. Disraeli's own budget of April 1858 reduced income tax to 5died, while he postponed the reduction of the national debt. As a result, in the winter of 1858-9 he was a critic of the renewed war scare and of those Conservatives who advocated a large reconstruction of the navy. Unluckily, his plans for a tax-cutting budget in 1859, repealing the paper duties as well as lowering income tax, were scuppered by Derby's insistence on naval expansion but also, in the event, by the fall of the government before the budget could be presented. 
Disraeli's hostility to defence panics was in line with his dislike of emotional popular Francophobia (though he was flexible enough to be able to justify his vote against Palmerston on the Orsini affair in 1858, which brought the Conservatives into government). He made frequent attempts to ingratiate himself and his party with Napoleon III, as he had with Louis Philippe before 1848. To this end he used Ralph Earle, a young and unscrupulous employee of the British embassy at Paris who became Disraeli's private secretary (1858-66), and whom he sent for confidential negotiations of a highly impractical kind. Advocating a cordial relationship with France secured common ground with Peelites and radicals who criticized Palmerston's chauvinism (though Palmerston himself also upheld cordiality when it suited him). But Disraeli also defended the French entente on historical grounds. He adhered to it almost unvaryingly throughout his life, as a way of keeping defence expenditure low while allowing Britain influence in Europe and preventing a damaging general war, which threatened to undermine the balance of power and to unleash revolutionary influences on continental states. Disraeli had innate respect for Palmerston's active involvement in Europe in the teeth of commercial isolationism, and took a Palmerstonian line on the Russian danger in 1853. But he criticized Palmerston for his populist Liberalism, which had alienated continental leaders from Britain and encouraged disruptive nationalist sentiment in Italy. And after the spring of 1855 he became as critical of Palmerston's Crimean War policy as was politically sensible, by tentatively advocating an honourable peace and opposing the notion of an ideologically inspired extension to the war aimed at reshaping Europe in a liberal direction. As a result, in 1855-6, as at other times in the 1850s, many Conservatives felt that he was too ineffective against Palmerston, out of touch with popular patriotic sentiment, and too closely associated with some radicals. 
Disraeli's third sphere of concern was the inadequacy of British rule in India. In 1853 he opposed the renewal of the East India Company's charter on the grounds that its government was weak and careless; it had failed to provide effective finance, justice, public works, or education. 'Clear and complete responsibility' was needed and was badly lacking; if the Commons failed to insist on a searching inquiry in preparation for firm and just rule, it would lose India ('Hansard 3', 128, 1853, 1032). These arguments were too close to those of radical India reformers for the taste of many Conservatives, who wished to uphold the traditional ties between the East India Company and the party. Disraeli further alarmed party opinion by his response to the 1857 revolt, when he disparaged the vindictiveness, racism, and misrepresentations of the British media. (He was particularly amused by the consequences of the report that thirteen British ladies had had their noses cut off by the rebels, which had generated outraged cant from Lord Shaftesbury and an offer by a surgeon to supply artificial noses if the taxpayer would foot the bill.) Rather than meeting 'atrocities by atrocities', he called for a more philosophical approach by British rulers (Monypenny and Buckle, 4.99). Since 1848 British policy had taken a new and foolish path, alienating Hindu and Muslim alike by a lack of respect for native religions, a contempt for traditional property rights, and an ignorance of other laws and customs. The Indians had been goaded to do what in 1853 he had thought impossible: to sink their differences against the British. Disraeli urged, among other things, a greater symbolic role for the queen as a comprehensible, god-like embodiment of British interest and authority capable of engaging the oriental imagination. She should pledge to respect 'their laws, their usages, their customs, and above all their religion' ('Hansard 3', 147, 479). He attacked Palmerston's proposals of 1858 for Indian government on the ground that they involved another quick fix, in this case an entirely nominated council, selected by the home government, to advise the governor-general. A nominated body, reminiscent of Foxite corruption, would be unaccountable to parliament and unable to check the governor-general's despotism. A royal commission, sent out to India, was needed to investigate the practical failings of government and maximize its revenues. Palmerston fell and the new minority Conservative government had to settle the immediate question and to accept the principle of a council. Disraeli proposed 'a real Council', with half its members directly elected, five by the electors of major British towns, but the Liberal majority in parliament forced the government to remodel the bill on more conventional lines. The India issue demonstrated how Disraeli could be a committed supporter of empire, yet be distrusted for both his radical reformism and his distaste for populist chauvinism. 
The fourth issue was parliamentary reform. Disraeli's quixotic proposals for colonial representation demonstrated a willingness to experiment with the electoral system in order to consolidate the empire. In 1848 he had criticized the whig reformers of 1832 for their narrowness and ahistoricism in introducing a rigid property qualification for the borough franchise, while disparaging the factitious reopening of the question until there was a prospect of settling it ('Hansard 3', 99, 1848, 952). Once Russell had placed parliamentary reform on the agenda again, Disraeli saw that a blustering Conservative response risked uniting their opponents in favour of a bill, and leaving themselves typecast, as in 1832, as unthinking opponents of reform. Equally, the longer the issue remained unsettled, the more scope there would be for dangerous agitation in support of radical ends such as a major redistribution of seats, diminishing the number of MPs who would represent the 'realised experience of a nation' (ibid., 956). So it was sensible for the government of 1858-9 to attempt to settle the question, especially given the scope for party advantage in the detailed terms, and the momentum that a minority government would gain by carrying a prestigious bill. However, the proposals could not afford to upset Conservative MPs in case they formed an anti-reform cave in alliance with Palmerston. So the 1859 'Reform Bill' concentrated on equalizing the county and borough franchise. This conceded the principle of a lower county franchise to radicals who had campaigned for it, while crucially allowing the government to propose the exclusion of (largely Liberal) borough freeholders from the county constituencies, thus preserving their historic identity. But the government's failure to agree on any safe and definitive reduction of the borough franchise ensured the bill's defeat by Liberal MPs. Ministers dissolved parliament after the defeat, and gained seats at the 1859 election. 
In the 1850s Disraeli also spent much energy on disseminating these and other Conservative ideas in 'The Press', a weekly journal founded in 1853 on his initiative and that of Derby's son Lord Stanley, his close ally in these years. Disraeli conceived of this as a modern 'Anti-Jacobin', engaged in an urgent war of ideas with an overwhelmingly and previously unchallenged Liberal press. It was tolerably successful, with a circulation of over 3000 at its best. Disraeli and Stanley wrote many articles for it, as did some able young journalists; in the case of the second editor, D. T. Coulton (1854-7), it is known that Disraeli dictated a policy to him at the Commons each week (Kebbel, 3-4). Many Conservatives were annoyed at the way in which Disraeli used the journal to expound his opinions, and he severed his connection with it on taking office in 1858. 

'The Press' was merely one of the ways in which Disraeli sought to enhance the standing of the party in the 1850s. He took an active interest in the overhaul of party organization, and appointed his solicitor Philip Rose to handle it in 1853; Markham Spofforth, a member of Rose's firm, succeeded him as agent between 1859 and 1870. Yet the party could not break through to gain a majority, even in 1859. Nor could the government win supporters from outside Conservative ranks, though Gladstone and Graham were approached to join the cabinet in 1858. (Disraeli was willing to surrender the leadership of the Commons to the latter but not the former.) Disraeli also made various attempts to woo independent whig, radical, and Irish MPs in the last desperate days of the ministry in 1859. These failed, as did the attempt to persuade Palmerston to join the government. As a result, it was defeated in parliament on the question of Italy in June 1859. Disraeli was out of office once again. He had a pension of $2000 p.a. -- and praise from Bagehot, who argued that he alone had kept the government in power for sixteen months and that he had learned (unlike in 1852) to 'lead with dignity, and fail with dignity' ('Historical Essays', 485). 
Disraeli knew that it would be impossible to persuade enough Conservative MPs to mount a full-scale opposition to a reassuringly quietist Palmerston government. By manoeuvring against it, he would be forced into alliances that they found distasteful, which would further weaken his own position. His 'shameless' past tendencies in this direction were bitterly criticized in an anonymous article in the 'Quarterly Review' in April 1860 (written, as was quickly well known, by Lord Robert Cecil, the future marquess of Salisbury). Depressed, he offered to resign the Commons leadership in a letter to an influential senior back-bencher, Sir William Miles, written in June. This had the predictable effect of rallying support to him. But Disraeli learned his lesson and made few controversial initiatives during the next five sessions. Parliamentary reform was a dormant issue, while there was little scope to unite the party in criticism of government finance. 
Disraeli's main activity between 1861 and 1865 was on an issue on which he could develop his ideas while satisfying most Conservative prejudices and perhaps making common ground with Irish Catholic MPs: church defence. The abolition of church rates was one of the few principles on which Palmerston was willing to court advanced Liberal opinion, and in reaction the Conservatives were able to defend the rate successfully in divisions in 1861, 1862, and 1863. Disraeli, not previously a clerical politician, identified a 'real Church party in the House of Commons' for the first time in twenty years (Monypenny and Buckle, 4.291), and became interested in the wider potential of the issue. He held discussions with Bishop Wilberforce and addressed gatherings in the cause outside parliament. The most famous took place at Oxford in November 1864, when he asserted that the root question between the evolutionists and the church was, 'Is man an ape or an angel?', and declared himself 'on the side of the angels' (ibid., 374). Disraeli's epigrammatic and idiosyncratic language on religious matters was mocked by opponents and offensive to grave churchmen. He in turn criticized the factionalism of the high-church ritualists, a 'finical and fastidious crew' who were as corrosively subversive of church power as the radical dissenters (ibid., 358) and whose ceremonial symbolized doctrines that the church had been established in order to repudiate ('Letters... to Lady Bradford and Lady Chesterfield', 1.156). He made some serious proposals for greater lay involvement in church life and politics, maintaining that exclusive clericalism was damaging the church's ability to engage on a broad basis with the national imagination and to regain its position as the natural, safe, and patriotic depository of man's age-old religious instincts. 
Arguably that position was occupied by the Catholic church in most of Ireland, and by the papacy in its own dominions, hence Disraeli's fascination with the power of Catholicism. In the 1860s he sought to court Irish Catholic MPs at the same time as he upheld the Church of England. Indeed the successful Commons defence of church rates was assisted by the abstention of some Irish Catholic MPs, while a significant number of Irishmen supported the opposition's censure motion on Palmerston's foreign policy in 1864. Disraeli claimed to defend religion on an international basis against the modern decaying principles of republicanism and atheism. He upheld the temporal power of the pope -- 'an old man on a Semitic throne' (Disraeli, 'Bentinck', 509) -- against its circling opponents. At one stage he was alarmed that Napoleon III, mishandled by the British government, might incite nationalist and revolutionary movements against the papacy. Almost alone of major British politicians, Disraeli refused to meet Garibaldi on his visit of 1864. He thought that the religious principles of Irish Catholics should make them natural Conservatives. A shared defence of religion was also the only way of forming an alliance with the numerous group of Irish MPs without surrendering to separatist or anti-landlord principles. 
By the time of the 1865 election Disraeli had gained in position. The Conservatives, though still in a minority, won 290 seats at that election, and would doubtless have won more but for the popularity of Palmerston. Disraeli had become a more familiar figure in establishment circles, especially at court, where his ability to pay lavish public respect to the memory of Prince Albert won the queen's affection even more than his willingness to refrain from attempting to unseat her government. He was excited beyond measure by his reception there, particularly by a much coveted invitation to the wedding of the prince of Wales in 1863 (shrewdly arranged by Palmerston). In 1865 he was at last made a member of Grillion's, a socially select political dining club, and in 1866 of the Athenaeum, from which he had been blackballed in 1832. It was also now that he could finally put his debts behind him, owing to two strokes of financial good fortune. In 1862 Andrew Montagu, a landed Yorkshire bachelor who wished to assist the party, bought up Disraeli's debts in return for offering him a $57,000 mortgage on Hughenden, charging a rate of interest only 30 per cent of that asked by his previous creditors. In 1863 Disraeli inherited over $30,000 from Mrs Sarah Brydges Willyams, an aged Jewish lady of Torquay with whom he had struck up a close friendship in the early 1850s. He and she were united in the belief that they were descended from aristocratic Jewish Iberian houses, and Mrs Brydges Willyams's legacy -- given in 'approbation and admiration of his efforts to vindicate the race of Israel' (Monypenny and Buckle, 3.466) -- was accompanied by the hope that he would adopt the names and arms of the two families concerned, though fortunately this was not a condition of the bequest. She was buried at Hughenden (which she never visited), with the Disraelis beside her. 
Despite these advances, Disraeli was not much nearer power, and was frequently lethargic and depressed at this time. He was over sixty, still widely distrusted personally, and a leading member of a party that could neither win elections on its own nor attract parliamentary support from other potentially sympathetic factions. In this situation the death of Palmerston in October 1865 was both an opportunity and a danger. It made the radical forces in the Liberal coalition more undisciplined; it encouraged Russell and Gladstone to court them by resuscitating the issue of parliamentary reform. It was fairly clear that this initiative would restore a vigorous two-party system and allow a proper battle between conservatism and radicalism. It was far less clear that the Conservative Party would be able to dictate the tactics of the first of these two forces. This was evident from the events generated by the 1866 'Reform Bill', which was staunchly opposed by a faction of anti-democratic Liberals, the Adullamites, who eventually defeated it in alliance with the Conservatives in June 1866 and forced Russell's Liberal government out of office. The Adullamites then demanded a coalition with the Conservatives in which Derby and Disraeli should surrender the leading places to more centrist figures. Derby and Disraeli rejected this offer and formed a purely Conservative government, with Disraeli once again chancellor of the exchequer and leader of the Commons. In doing so, they were attempting to keep alive not only their own careers but also the Conservative Party. That remained their first objective throughout the following eighteen turbulent months, and does much to explain the history of the second 'Reform Act'. 
The history of the reform question, and of previous minority Conservative governments, held a number of crucial lessons for the new ministers. First, they had to consolidate their reputation as reformers by bringing in a bill -- a fact that became all the clearer as extra-parliamentary agitation, exploited by radicals, developed during the months after the Liberal defeat. Second, they had to satisfy urban agitators by lowering the borough franchise, which they had been condemned for not doing in 1859; they might mitigate the radical effects of this by establishing a principle broad enough to settle the question for a generation. Third, their proposals had to benefit the Conservatives electorally and uphold the territorial element within the constitution, by ridding the county constituencies of as many Liberal urban and suburban voters as possible. Fourth, they needed to establish a definite parliamentary identity which could keep the party in charge of the political situation and avoid an enforced subordination to Liberals and Adullamites that might last for years. Fifth, they could do this only by exploiting splits in the Liberal Party that would prevent it from asserting its natural majority. None of this need involve a breach of principle. 
The events that resulted in the 1867 'Reform Act' followed naturally from those points. Disraeli hoped originally to avoid introducing a bill in the 1867 session, and to proceed by resolutions instead, with the aim of establishing some sort of consensus; however, that was too unpopular in the Commons. It was decided to base the government proposal on the principle of household suffrage in the boroughs for those who paid rates personally (accompanied by qualifications such as a two-year residence requirement and various 'fancy franchises'). This was popular among Conservative MPs, politically attractive, and potentially capable of providing a defensible long-term resting place. When a minority in cabinet dissented, and forced the government to propose a more limited bill, large numbers of MPs on both sides disliked that idea and, in March, forced the ministry back on household suffrage, a decision that Derby and Disraeli welcomed (though it led to the resignation of three cabinet ministers, led by Cecil, who had become Lord Cranborne). A bill constructed on this basis, with the threat of a dissolution if it was defeated, placed the Liberal leadership in an awkward position. Disraeli exploited this effectively throughout the 1867 session, dividing Gladstone from radical MPs and showing up many Liberals as much less wholehearted reformers than their self-presentation as champions of 'the people' had suggested. A crucial influence on the outcome was that the main qualifications to household suffrage in the original bill did not survive the process of amendment in committee, because they were inconsistent with existing electoral practice or politically unattractive to a majority of the Commons. Disraeli accepted amendments when he considered them necessary to get the bill through, including, most importantly, the amendment proposed by Grosvenor Hodgkinson in mid-May, abolishing compounding. This increased substantially the numbers paying rates personally, with consequent effects for the size of the borough electorate (though it was generally assumed that many of those affected would not register). He refused to accept amendments proposed by Gladstone, in order to underline his loss of control over both wings of his party. Liberal discomfiture assisted Conservative support for Disraeli throughout the session, indeed made him generally popular on the back benches. Most Conservatives, including Disraeli, had no precise sense of the consequences of the bill for the borough electorate, but these were in any case almost impossible to predict. The essence of the matter was that the Liberals would continue to dominate in the large boroughs most affected by the bill, while the lack of large-scale redistribution prevented the destruction of traditional interest representation. The redistribution arrangements also altered some county boundaries so as to reinforce their rural and Conservative nature. One estimate suggests that the Liberal majority was reduced by twenty-five seats at the 1868 election as a result (Cowling, '1867', 344-5). 
The passage of the 1867 'Reform Act' added to the distrust of Disraeli felt by his critics in the party, most vehement among them Lord Cranborne (later Lord Salisbury). Elsewhere, however, it increased his reputation. The act had strengthened the government's hold over the Commons, given it a legislative success in the country, settled a difficult question quickly (to the pleasure, among others, of the queen), and made it impossible for Liberals to sustain their claim to a monopoly of electoral progressivism. It introduced a more democratic political era in which the most fundamental division would clearly be between conservatism and radicalism, but it destroyed the schemes of political reconstruction that might have prevented the Conservative Party from reaping the benefit of any Conservative reaction. Disraeli's tactical skill and courage in steering a bill through the Commons with a majority of seventy against him was remarkable, though he was by no means master of the situation, and his broad strategy was similar to that of many shrewd Conservatives. None the less the drama contributed to the myth of him as a mysterious, aloof manipulator, and consolidated both positive and negative sides of his public image. It made it even easier than before for his enemies to question his principles, but it also ensured that, when Derby's gout became so bad that he was forced to resign the premiership in February 1868, the queen turned to Disraeli to continue the government. He kissed hands at Osborne on 27 February, declaring 'In loving loyalty & faith' (Blake, 491). 
Little opposition to Disraeli's appointment was expressed within the party. However, he was hardly in a position to develop a new line of policy, even had he wanted to do so. He made little change to the cabinet. Having long been Derby's Commons manager, he seemed very anxious to continue to seek his protection; he consulted him frequently and in his election address of October 1868 wrote that he had carried out Derby's policy 'without deviation' (Monypenny and Buckle, 5.88). It was ironic that on expenditure, the issue on which he and Derby had most frequently failed to see eye to eye, Disraeli was not able to implement tax reductions: income tax, 4died in 1866, had to rise from 5died to 6died in 1868. Disraeli had finally succeeded in checking Conservative tendencies to increase defence expenditure, only to have to meet the bill for the Abyssinian expedition of 1867-8. The expedition was forced on the government, and certainly not undertaken for electoral popularity, but Disraeli none the less used its successful conclusion to make a point to commercial public opinion, the isolationism of which was beginning to irritate him. In two speeches he suggested that in an age accused, 'perhaps not unjustly, of selfishness, and a too great regard for material interests', it was a legitimate source of pride to have 'elevated the military' and 'moral... character of England throughout the world' ('Selected Speeches', 2.132; 'The Times', 18 June 1868, 9). 
Disraeli's first premiership was dominated by Ireland, but this was not his doing. Derby had controlled the government's Irish policy, together with the Irish secretary, Lord Mayo. They aimed to conciliate moderate Catholics without alienating protestant feeling by any major concession on the status of the Church of Ireland. Negotiations had taken place with the Irish hierarchy and Archbishop Manning about the possible grant of a charter to a Catholic university. On 10 March, Mayo announced this policy, which met with a lukewarm response from the Catholic bishops, who sought amendments. He proposed a small endowment for university expenses, and left open the larger issue of endowment for the denominational teaching colleges. Six days later Gladstone declared that an endowed university was a political impossibility and soon proposed the disestablishment and disendowment of the Irish church. This initiative united whig and radical wings of the Liberal Party, attracted Irish Catholic MPs away from the government, played to evangelical British protestants' visceral hatred of Catholic endowment, and placed the Conservative Party in the position of having to defend an institution which few British voters admired. Whatever other motives Gladstone had for this move, the desire to remove Disraeli from the highest office was widely assumed to be one of them. The future of the Irish church became the major question at the general election of November 1868. In speech after speech Gladstone ruthlessly charged Disraeli with favouring a policy of Catholic endowment, which he had not been able to persuade his party to support. Conservatives were indeed divided on an Irish church policy, and scarcely able to counter-attack. 
The election was delayed until fresh registers, including the new electors, were ready. This allowed Disraeli to cling to office, despite the indignity of several crucial defeats on the Irish church issue in April and May. He had little knowledge of electoral opinion nationwide, but county agents' reports suggested hostility to Catholic and high Anglican practices, and this confirmed his decision to base his campaign around the church defence policy that he had been maturing earlier in the decade. He accused Romanists and ritualists of forming an open confederacy in favour of disestablishment, from which each hoped to benefit. However, Disraeli's campaign was low-key; he made only one speech, on re-election to his seat, after most of the contests had been decided. Instead, he sought to use the church patronage that fell to him to rally evangelical protestant sentiment, by making the fiery Liverpool preacher Hugh McNeile dean of Ripon in an obvious bid for their votes. He also rejected the leading high-church candidate for the bishopric of London, Samuel Wilberforce. Disraeli did not seek to alienate traditional high-churchmen, and in fact made several low-key appointments from that party. Moreover, he was not sufficiently well informed about candidates for promotion to be able to dominate church patronage (he had to give way to the queen, for example, over the appointment of the new archbishop of Canterbury, A. C. Tait). His strategy of rallying churchmen to the party achieved little, partly because of the tension between church factions and between representatives of those factions in his own party. In any case, more important in explaining the election result was the attraction of Gladstone's policy to many evangelical dissenters and Celtic voters. The Liberals nearly doubled their majority, to 110 seats, and Disraeli resigned on 1 December 1868, without meeting parliament: a constitutional innovation that was generally approved in the circumstances. The queen granted his request to confer the title of Viscountess Beaconsfield on his wife. 
The defection of the Irish Catholics ended Disraeli's dream of combining them with Anglicans in defence of the Semitic religious legacy. He reflected on this in the light of stirring contemporary events outside Britain: the unification of Italy (and in particular the struggle for control of Rome), the papal declarations that culminated in the Vatican Council, the resurgence of the American republic in 1865, the emergence of the First International, and developments in biblical criticism and scientific materialism. To him all seemed evidence of an immense conflict between faith and ecclesiastical organization on the one hand, and free thought, republicanism, and secular nationalism on the other. This 'death struggle' was the theme of 'Lothair', the novel that -- to general astonishment -- Disraeli produced secretly for publication in May 1870. Lothair -- another Tancred -- is a young English aristocrat, heir to fabulous wealth, whose affections are engaged alternately by three charismatic young women, representing respectively his own caste, the Catholic church, and the secret societies (which Disraeli, true to his Romantic individualism, persisted in seeing as the fount of international radical agitation). Disraeli portrays the appeal of each value system with unmistakable affection; a part of him could see how each could appeal to a noble youth of ambition, and indeed the title-page quotation suggested that it was salutary for young men to experiment with them all. Catholicism offers tradition, a mother figure, imposing ceremonial, and an unshakeable faith with which to combat modern doubts and luxury. The various secular ideals described in the book are similarly hostile to contemporary selfish materialism and celebrate freedom of conscience, humanity, and the beauty of nature. The English landowning ideal reverences order, hierarchy, patriotism, and public service. None the less, Disraeli's intention is to show that the continent's two warring principles are flawed owing to their infidelity to the Semitic legacy. The Roman church is based on too narrow and conciliar a conception of religion, discourages mental liberty, locks beautiful young women in nunneries, and seeks power for itself by unscrupulous, casuistical deception. Secular ideals will end in the collapse of monarchies, law, and order and in an orgy of body-worship. Fortified by a meeting with a wise Christian in Jerusalem, Lothair chooses Anglicanism. The suggestion is that this is the best way because of its inherent capacity to unite the Semite and Aryan inheritance, the understanding of the spiritual nature of man with a reverence for human and natural beauty. As a symbol of the Anglican aristocracy, Lothair's duty is to supply leadership in this direction. But the more sober implication running through the book is that the English propertied world that he describes is too mundane, too uncultured, and too luxurious to succeed in this goal, because it is too much in thrall to the commercial spirit and to pagan leisure pursuits. It cannot compete with the intense ideals of its two external assailants, one of which will soon destroy it. Disraeli's satire was never finer than in 'Lothair', where he revealed with superb lightness of touch his persistent ambivalence about English political and social life, and, beneath his controlled urbanity, his sense of superiority to it -- which was his consolation on experiencing yet another rejection by it. 
The novel, the first ever published by a former prime minister, was a great success, and led Longmans to produce a collected edition of Disraeli's novels (including a 'General preface' in which he claimed that the attempt to reconstruct a national church had been undone by the behaviour of high-churchmen, one of whom, Manning, was satirized in 'Lothair'). Disraeli received over $10,000 from sales of the novel and collected edition. But at this point he may well have believed that he would never hold office again. The general political situation seemed as unpromising as ever, and his opposition to the government bills of 1869-70 was perfunctory. His wife was increasingly ill during these years, and by early 1872 it was evident that she was dying of cancer; Disraeli tended her devotedly, but she died on 15 December, leaving him desolate with grief -- and without a London house. During the session of 1873 he had to operate from lonely quarters in Edwards's Hotel. For most of Gladstone's government there was also muted internal party criticism of Disraeli's leadership, though as before he was saved by the lack of alternatives. The most obvious successor, Stanley, who succeeded as fifteenth earl of Derby on his father's death in 1869, even refused the leadership in the Lords in 1870, because he did not like to handle such a clerical party and preferred to be an 'eminence grise' steering it towards the middle ground. 
However, a change of political climate in the early 1870s went some way to justifying the forebodings expressed in 'Lothair'. The Vatican Council and the 'Kulturkampf' on the one hand, the fall of Rome and the Paris commune on the other, imparted a new intensity to the struggle between the papacy and secular nationalism, and brought home to Englishmen the disturbing foreignness of both ideals. Meanwhile the rapid outcome of the Franco-Prussian War, the unification of Germany, the Russian abrogation of the neutralization of the Black Sea, and the indignity of the Alabama claims settlement alarmed a domestic public opinion nurtured on Palmerstonian and free-trading confidence in Britain's global position. In such circumstances, the self-effacement of British foreign policy seemed weak and dangerous, while the government's concessionary Irish policy, the Liberal Party's republican fringe, and the radical demands for disestablishment and secular education could be presented as indications of Gladstonian unsoundness in the impending battle for the maintenance of the nation's institutions, religious establishments, property, and world influence. These themes badly damaged Gladstone's government. Conservatives needed no leading to press these points home, and Disraeli's contribution to the collapse of Liberal popularity was small. However, a major theme of the two extra-parliamentary speeches that he made in 1872, at Manchester and the Crystal Palace, was that England faced a crucial choice: whether to play a responsible world role befitting her imperial status, or to decay under the spell of cosmopolitan principles. The most important decision he took in these years was a strategic parliamentary one, not to take office in a minority when Gladstone's 'Irish University Bill' was defeated in March 1873, but to wait for an enfeebled Liberal Party to dissolve parliament. 
Even so, at the beginning of 1874 there was little reason to expect a rapid return to power. In fact, Disraeli was prime minister again before the beginning of the session, owing to Gladstone's unexpected dissolution and decisive defeat at the election. The Conservatives had over 350 seats. Disraeli took office on 18 February. At last he had achieved his great ambition, power with a majority -- something that had seemed impossible for most of his life. He certainly took pleasure in the position. He enjoyed the process of dispensing patronage, especially to deserving old connections, and was amused by the number of beseeching letters that he received. Patronage was very valuable for a party so long in opposition, and he asserted his right to appoint to a number of posts that the Treasury had tried to depoliticize. From now until his death he enjoyed a close proximity to the queen, to whom he reported political and social news with irreverent gusto; in 1868, for example, he had commented to her of his colleague Ward Hunt that, 'like St. Peter's no one is aware of his dimensions. But he has the sagacity of an elephant as well as the form' (Blake, 488-9). She responded with obvious marks of favour to him (including allowing him to sit during audiences), though he found her excessively demanding -- and sometimes 'very mad' ('Selection from the Diaries of... Derby', 290) -- and he needed all his tact to deal with her and especially with the affairs of the prince of Wales. 
Disraeli was a ceremonious, slightly remote, but patient and unassertive chairman of cabinet, which conducted its business with laxity. Its priorities were broadly agreed. On the one hand, it stood for the principle of 'not harassing the country' (Mitchell, 61), and was dominated by landowners and high-churchmen anxious to prevent assaults on property and religious institutions. Most formidable of these was Salisbury, who now returned to office. On the other, it reflected the great opportunity that the party had to become a centrist force, offering competent, sober government as uncontroversially as possible, leaving undisturbed the fiscal basis of mid-Victorian England, and offering the Liberals little chance of recovering the middle ground. This was the strategy associated particularly with Derby, and with R. A. Cross, the 'middle-class' Lancashire man brought in as home secretary at Derby's prompting, despite Disraeli's 'odd dislike' of men of that class ('Selection from the Diaries of... Derby', 416). Fiscal rectitude was signalled by the appointment as chancellor of the exchequer of Northcote, Disraeli's protege but also Gladstone's. The cabinet was reduced to twelve members, the smallest since 1832, to indicate the importance of efficiency, economy, and individual responsibility in government. 
Disraeli's election address had reverted to the theme of 'Lothair', the need to maintain England's influence as the defender of civil and religious liberty against the threat from Catholicism and atheism. In the 1874 session he capitalized on this protestant cry in such a way as to ensure that the Liberals remained split and listless. (He unsuccessfully offered one whig dissident, the duke of Somerset, cabinet office in 1874 and again in 1878.) 'I detest and disagree' with the Irish MPs, he told Henry Ponsonby, the queen's private secretary (Monypenny and Buckle, 5.211). But especially now that so many had declared for home rule, he needed to do little in that direction except to oppose the home rule idea staunchly. He exploited divisions in the Liberals most effectively by his handling of the 'Public Worship Regulation Bill', urged on the government by Archbishop Tait in order to provide the bishops with a way of disciplining ritualist excesses in parishes. Protestant feeling for such a measure was very strong, and some action was politically necessary. The government improved Tait's bill behind the scenes, but by delaying official support for it Disraeli kept the clerical factions in his cabinet united. When Gladstone opposed it, opening a rift with most of his party, he finally supported it and was influential in the subsequent compromise which carried the bill. He thus achieved the dual objective of damaging Gladstone (who subsequently retired as Liberal leader) and of settling a question that had the potential to antagonize all church parties. The church, he wrote, 'will be immensely strengthened' by the disciplining of such a controversial minority (ibid., 5.322), though the act itself was to cause tension inside the Anglican body. Another government act of 1874 abolished patronage in the Church of Scotland, in the hope of reducing the threat of a disestablishment agitation there. This terminated Disraeli's active involvement with church issues. Though they were very contentious in the 1870s, producing further squabbles between clerical factions within the party, these were kept in check. 
The strategy of concentrating on bipartisan social issues was developed by Cross and Derby in association with Disraeli in 1874 and matured in the six substantial bills passed in the 1875 session, which were intended to make an effective contrast with the Liberals' destructive hyper-activity. This was a strategy particularly attractive to the hard-headed practical Conservatism of northern MPs, and Disraeli was well advised to insert two paragraphs on sanitary reform in the long speech that he had been persuaded to make at Manchester in 1872. They bestowed extravagant praise on the 'practical' scheme to consolidate sanitary legislation then being proposed by his colleague Sir Charles Adderley. He accompanied this praise with a conventional warning against abstractions, against dreamily trusting too much to the state in social affairs rather than to private effort ('Selected Speeches', 2.510-11). That these paragraphs later spawned the exceptionally long-lived myth of Disraeli as social reformer is a great historical curiosity. In government Disraeli left his departmental heads to produce their own legislation and was no man for detail; indeed Derby felt that one of his shortcomings as cabinet chairman was that he 'detests the class of business which he is apt to call parochial' ('Selection from the Diaries of... Derby', 448). He did not mention his government's social measures in his only intervention at the 1880 election. What he especially valued in the legislation of 1875 was that by settling difficult questions it reduced the 'materials for social agitation' (Mitchell, 89). This was so particularly of the labour laws legislation and the 'Agricultural Holdings Act', which he saw as checking ill feeling between employers and employees and between landlords and farmers. In the financial sphere the large surplus inherited in 1874 made it easy to agree a policy for the first budget. Northcote pleased all the major interest groups by relieving the three categories of direct, indirect, and local taxation; income tax fell to 2died 
In the 1874 session and the first half of the next Disraeli was widely agreed to be in command of the Commons, demonstrating an 'easy confidence', a 'polite consideration' for MPs, and a refusal to cajole or hurry them (Lucy, 39, 46, 68, 82). However, his powers then seemed to wane. He was often ill -- with gout, asthma, and bronchitis -- and tired: he once fell asleep in cabinet in 1875. In 1876 he had to encounter persistent Liberal factionalism over the 'Royal Titles Bill', and the beginnings of obstruction from the home-rulers. The Conservative back-benchers were restive at the lack of achievement in the session. Despite having the 'most numerous and obedient majority since Pitt', he seemed unable to dispatch routine matters at ordinary times. That he lacked facility for business became apparent: 'an incessant and almost avowed inaccuracy pervades him' ('Historical Essays', 503). He perceived that his physical powers were not sufficient to continue to lead the Commons effectively. Though he volunteered to resign the premiership, neither he nor his colleagues seriously considered this step. In August 1876 the queen made him earl of Beaconsfield and from the session of 1877 he led the ministry from the Lords. 
In 1877 Derby, the sceptical and peace-loving foreign secretary, noted that one reason for the unbusinesslike habits of the cabinet was that Beaconsfield 'takes peculiar pleasure in turning over & discussing all sorts of foreign questions, on which action is not necessary, & often not possible' ('Selection from the Diaries of... Derby', 448). International issues excited the premier in a way that most others did not: 'these are politics worth managing', he wrote in 1876 (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.32). This was not just because of the attractions of continental intrigue. In 1871 he had hoped that public interest in foreign affairs might divert attention from the 'morbid spirit of domestic change and criticism' (ibid., 5.132). In 1875 he wondered whether the spirit of patriotism was dead or whether it could be rekindled. The attempt to do so became a -- perhaps the -- major goal of his government. 
However, an additional obstacle facing a spirited British policy was that German unification and the fall of France in 1870 had destroyed the European balance and forced Russia, Austria, and Germany to try to settle international questions by mutual agreement for fear of the alternative. Disraeli did not set much store by the French in their enfeebled state, and sought a good understanding with Bismarck, in accordance with his protestant declarations at the 1874 election. However, the war scare of May 1875 showed the impossibility of relying on Bismarck's goodwill, and the British participation in the protest against his threatening behaviour reassured the French. This paid important dividends in November, when news came of the wish of the khedive of Egypt to sell his large minority stake in the Suez Canal Company to French businessmen, thus making it entirely French-owned. The cabinet agreed on the importance of the British securing some stake, and the shares were bought without diplomatic awkwardness, with the assistance of a loan from the Rothschilds arranged by Disraeli (on extravagantly generous terms). Though the company had no control over the canal, and the shares were mortgaged and so had no voting rights, the impression was given that Britain had bought a controlling stake in the canal itself. The general public enthusiasm for this step was an encouraging sign of the popularity of an active international policy. 
When, in 1875, revolts began in the Balkans against Turkish rule, Disraeli suggested that the need of Russia, Austria, and Germany to work together to settle the Balkan question threatened to 'drive the Turk from Europe' (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.13). Always susceptible to racial interpretations of history, he feared that Russia would incite pan-Slav sentiment in what he later called a war of 'extermination directed equally against a religion and a race' ('Selection from the Diaries of... Derby', 442). Secret societies, he claimed, were operating in Serbia and elsewhere to stir up pan-Slav spirit, and this would end in a war that might have revolutionary implications. European Turkey would be partitioned into Russian and Austrian spheres, and Germany would seek compensation elsewhere, perhaps to the west, which would leave France, Belgium, and Britain in a disastrously weakened state. These sweeping notions made Disraeli suspicious of the early attempts by the three eastern powers to seek a limited settlement of the Balkan question; he feared that popular pressure would force the Russian and Austro-Hungarian governments into a partition of European Turkey. As a result, he wished to reject the Andrassy note (which demanded that the Ottoman empire should reform its European administration), which the three powers agreed and sent to Britain for support in December 1875. 
It was not easy for the British government to find an alternative to this policy, and Derby secured the acceptance of the note. However, when war between Serbia and Turkey seemed likely in May 1876, Disraeli and Derby agreed to reject a further communication from the three powers, the Berlin memorandum, which sought to pre-empt war by warning of great-power intervention in the Ottoman empire if reforms were not carried out. The British asserted instead the importance of the powers upholding the old treaty policy of guaranteeing the integrity and independence of the Ottoman empire. This was essentially an attempt to buy time for a better policy. Indeed, the government tried unsuccessfully to reach a settlement with Russia in June 1876 that would not only assert British influence in the region but, while revising Ottoman frontiers, would also avert a general partition. 
At this point news reached Britain of Turkish massacres of Bulgarian Christians in response to an uprising. This prompted a prolonged and virtuous agitation at home, into which Gladstone entered with relish. The Bulgarian agitation had three effects on the prime minister. First, he believed that it made Russia more likely to go to war against Turkey, with pan-Slavism aroused and sympathy for the Balkan Christians so strong in the British public that the British government could not object. Second, it delivered another and perhaps the greatest blow to his reputation with Liberal opinion, because he proclaimed his suspicion that many of the sensational details published in the newspapers were inventions of Slavonic intriguers. His remarks were seen as callous and flippant. Indeed in September 1876 he was famously and disastrously misunderstood when he described Gladstone's pamphlet on the atrocities as likely to cause 'general havoc and ruin' in the Balkans (by encouraging war) and thus 'worse than any of those Bulgarian atrocities which now occupy attention' ('The Times', 21 Sept 1876, 6). Third, it added to internal Conservative Party pressure for a change of policy, particularly from the section of high-churchmen led by Salisbury who sympathized with the persecuted Orthodox Christians. 
Neither Beaconsfield nor Derby believed it very likely that Russia could be stopped from declaring war on Turkey. However, Derby proposed an international conference at Constantinople in an attempt to reach agreement on increased self-government for parts of European Turkey, and the government sent Salisbury as its representative in an effort to show British and continental opinion that it was amenable to reform. The Turks resisted the conference proposals, as expected, and despite further attempts at a settlement, the Russians prepared for war in the spring of 1877; they declared it in late April. 
Until this point Beaconsfield had generally followed the policy laid down by Derby, though he embellished it with a few characteristically restless but fruitless initiatives and a general desire to make an impression in Europe. The Russian invasion of European Turkey changed the situation because the ultimate threat was now to Constantinople and thus to British interests in the eastern Mediterranean, Egypt, and Asia. The immediate consequence was a deeply damaging split in the Liberal opposition, which benefited the government temporarily. However, Beaconsfield was extremely aware of the disaster that would strike any government that appeared lax in safeguarding British interests. He was haunted by the experience of 1853 and the obloquy earned by Aberdeen's government for failing to prevent the Crimean War. Old and ill as he was, this was not how he wished to be remembered by posterity. From now until January 1878 cabinet politics were dominated by various attempts made by him to counter the Russian advance, all of which were frustrated by Derby and (usually) a majority of the cabinet. The situation was worsened by the Turkish resistance at Plevna from July to December 1877, which delayed the denouement. At various times Beaconsfield proposed to occupy the Gallipoli peninsula, with or without the sultan's permission (which was not given). However, this required money from parliament, for which he shrank from asking. It was also likely to offend the powers on whose goodwill Derby thought Britain depended in order to achieve a settlement of the crisis. Derby and some other ministers believed that the Russians' goals were moderate, that they would not occupy Constantinople permanently even if they entered it, and that the weight of European pressure on them would then ensure a fair solution. Derby (who was seen in cabinet as at least as plausible an interpreter of middle-class sentiment as Beaconsfield) also argued that, with trade worsening, there was little pro-war feeling in the country. Salisbury at this stage was similarly averse to strong measures. In an attempt to explain the absence of action Beaconsfield, continually harassed by the belligerent Victoria, traduced both these colleagues in letters to her. For many years these letters provided the main version of cabinet discussions and still influence many accounts, but it is now clear, from Derby's diary, that the cabinet as a whole was in charge of policy and able to rationalize it. 
However, the situation was altered in December 1877 by the fall of Plevna and the impending return of parliament. The first of these excited both the Conservative press, with which Beaconsfield's private secretary Montagu Corry was in daily contact, and the queen, who visited Hughenden on 15 December in order to show her support for her prime minister against his critics. Political society and the press became aware of splits in the cabinet. The balance within the cabinet was affected by the threat to British interests and by the imminence of the parliamentary session; Salisbury in particular became much more sympathetic to Beaconsfield's position. On 23 January 1878, with Russia menacing Constantinople, the cabinet supported Beaconsfield's proposal to send the fleet through the Dardanelles and to ask parliament for a vote of credit. Carnarvon and Derby resigned. The fleet was recalled almost immediately, because of reports that the sultan had agreed to peace, together with alarm in the City at the evidence of victory by the war faction in cabinet, and panic within the Conservative Party at the prospect of losing Derby's influence in Lancashire. Derby (but not Carnarvon) thus remained in the cabinet. This crisis lowered respect for the government outside Westminster, generating hostility to further vacillation and a widespread and often bellicose anti-Russian sentiment, christened 'jingoism' after a popular music-hall song. This was accompanied by the spread of ugly rumours about Derby in political society, including the allegation that he or his wife was telling the (surely unsurprised) Russian ambassador of cabinet divisions. These rumours, which Beaconsfield helped to publicize, conveniently disguised the extent of his own covert operations with secret agents and the Rothschilds. The combined effect of these developments was to create a strong climate of opinion within the party in favour of a policy of resistance to Russia. 
Part of the fleet was sent through the Dardanelles in early February, in response to exaggerated rumours of further Russian advances. This was a popular move at home, though of doubtful strategic value. Had it led to a Russian occupation of Gallipoli and Constantinople, as well it might have, the British were in a vulnerable position. Instead the Russians forced the Turks to sign an objectionable treaty at San Stefano, which at first they seemed unwilling to submit for ratification by the European powers at the congress that Austria now proposed. In response, on 27 March, Beaconsfield persuaded the cabinet to agree to call out the reserves, to bring Indian troops to Malta, and, if Russia was not sufficiently amenable at the congress, to seize the Turkish territory of Cyprus and Iskenderun as British naval bases. (Only the first of these measures was then announced and the third was not necessarily definitely adopted.) This policy had several advantages for him: it satisfied an expectant party, it met the desire of a majority of cabinet that Britain should increase her claim to influence in Asiatic Turkey, and it led to the final resignation of Derby and his replacement as foreign secretary by Salisbury. It also involved little risk, since Germany, Austria, and most Balkan politicians were similarly aggrieved at the treaty of San Stefano and were insistent that Russia must come to the conference table, at Berlin. 
Accordingly, Beaconsfield's policy of firmness appeared to lead to a triumphant diplomatic victory almost as soon as it was adopted. Salisbury negotiated a settlement with Russia in advance of the congress at Berlin. This settlement forced her to abandon the idea of a Mediterranean coast for the new Bulgarian state. However, it accepted most of her demands in the Near East; in compensation, Salisbury increased Britain's commitment to the region markedly. He gave the Turks a military alliance, in return for which he forced them to accept British control of Cyprus and the installation of British military consuls in Turkey's Asia Minor territories to guarantee administrative stability and British influence. In cabinet Beaconsfield envisaged that infiltration by British state servants would produce a steady growth of influence in Turkey and Egypt and argued that 'the virtual administration of the East by England was the only hope for the prosperity of those Countries and Peoples' (Howard and Gordon, 19). The public affirmation of Britain's increased weight in Europe came at the congress of Berlin itself, in June and July, at which Beaconsfield was the most prominent British representative. Despite frequent illness, he revelled in its great set pieces and social events, and the feeling that men of power like himself had assembled to remake the map of Europe. He was fascinated by Bismarck, with whom he enjoyed discussions about the preservation of the aristocratic system with which they both identified so strongly; Bismarck told him that there was no danger of socialism in England as long as upper and working classes were united by a love of horse-racing. On returning from Berlin, Beaconsfield and Salisbury encountered cheering crowds at Dover and Charing Cross, and Beaconsfield made a telling comparison with the failure of 1853 by remarking that he hoped he had brought back peace with honour. The queen offered him a marquessate or dukedom, which he refused; he and Salisbury accepted the KG. 
Beaconsfield believed that the events of 1878 had restored the prestige of England, both abroad and in the eyes of her own people. This was only one aspect of the story. What had started as a tentative and awkward reaction to isolation, and developed into a desperate avoidance of parliamentary humiliation, had ended in a controversial new line of policy, the occupation of Cyprus and the military alliance with Turkey, and a significant heightening of tension with Russia. This new policy instinctively appealed to Beaconsfield and Salisbury, by asserting Britain's power. But her position in the Near East was arguably unsustainable, at least without major extra military commitments at which a subsequent government would probably cavil. Meanwhile, the crisis of 1876-8 had divided opinion at home and had made Beaconsfield a demonic figure to many Liberals, exciting a lot of antisemitic and anti-alien sentiment. He knew only too well that public opinion was fickle and deeply unreliable, and it is unlikely that his policy in the Eastern crisis was driven largely by a search for electoral gain. The cabinet rejected the idea of a premature dissolution in the summer of 1878, as unconstitutional and unpredictable in its consequences, given the state of the economy, which would determine more votes than a foreign triumph. As far as elections were concerned, the major significance of the Eastern crisis was that its divisiveness gave an enormous fillip to party organization on both sides. Though in the long run the association of the Conservatives with the national cause was to benefit the party greatly, in the context of 1878-80 it ended their best chance at an election by undermining the bipartisan tone with which they had been wooing 'moderate' opinion. The crisis destroyed not only Derby's career in the party but also the centrist strategy for it that he had been promoting for thirty years. 
From 1878 until the election of 1880 Gladstone attacked Beaconsfield for pursuing a vainglorious policy of territorial aggrandizement, military display, imperial symbolism, and contempt for parliament, which was inappropriate for a modern commercial and Christian people. Though much exaggerated, these charges were effective because of the variety of evidence that appeared to support them. 
The word 'imperialism' was first applied to British politics by hostile newspapers during the debates about the government bill of 1876 to confer on the queen the title of empress of India. The title was said to be un-English and particularly resonant of the tawdry glitter of the regime of Napoleon III. The proposal of the measure also seemed to suggest an unhealthily close political relationship between Disraeli and the queen. The pressure for the bill did indeed stem from her. However, there was no obligation on Disraeli to accept it, and no reason to think that it did not appeal to him as a natural corollary of the suggestions that he had made in 1857 for a more direct, imposing, imaginative, and sympathetic tone to British rule in India. But it was more controversial than he had anticipated; from February to May 1876 it generated strong opposition from Liberal MPs, forcing him to make several parliamentary speeches in its defence. 
Disraeli had no strategy for imperial development, and most of the territorial expansion that took place during his ministry was minor and done in order to facilitate the maintenance of order by local British troops. However, he was extremely concerned about the threat to India apparently posed by the Russian advance in central Asia. Even before the outbreak of tension with Russia over the Balkans, he was anxious to secure the north-west frontier. When that tension arose, he and Salisbury toyed with a plan that the Indian army should occupy Afghanistan and rouse the Muslims of central Asia against the Russians. This was extremely impractical, and the only result was to increase the suspicion of Britain entertained by the emir of Afghanistan, Sher Ali. When the Russians sent a mission to Afghanistan in 1878, Bulwer-Lytton, the Indian viceroy, considered it essential to demand a similar privilege for Britain. Bulwer-Lytton, an appointee and admirer of Beaconsfield, sought to emulate his international achievements. Unfortunately, his headstrong and hectoring approach to Sher Ali met with a rebuff, in response to which Britain declared war against him in November 1878. Beaconsfield sought no war: Bulwer-Lytton ignored one set of cabinet instructions, while the cabinet's decision for war was dictated primarily by Cranbrook, the Indian secretary, after Beaconsfield had proposed a more moderate course, the temporary occupation of some territory. None the less, throughout the crisis Beaconsfield regarded the issue of war or peace as secondary to the maintenance of British honour. He consistently urged firmness to assert Britain's ascendancy, and to avoid the impression of vulnerability before the Muslims of Asia, the powers of Europe, and the Conservative opinion of Britain. In November he justified the war in public as facilitating the creation of a more 'scientific' frontier for India against Russia, and reminded his audience that the future of the empire would depend on whether the people of England had 'the courage and determination of their forefathers' (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.393). By early 1879 the war was won, Sher Ali had fled to die, and his son seemed willing to meet all the British demands, including the acceptance of a mission at Kabul. However, the mission was slaughtered in an uprising six weeks after arriving there. To Beaconsfield this was an opportunity to establish the scientific frontier beyond doubt. Kabul was occupied while a longer-term policy was worked out. Before the government's downfall in 1880 the only decision that had been taken was that to create a British sphere of influence in southern Afghanistan by installing a chieftain at Kandahar. 
When in February 1879 news reached London of a defeat for British forces in southern Africa at Isandlwana at the hands of the Zulu, Beaconsfield's main concern was that it will 'reduce our Continental influence, and embarrass our finances' (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.424). He had all but ignored southern African affairs since 1874, and had left them in the hands of successive colonial secretaries; they, in turn, were forced by the poor state of communications to cede much initiative to local British officials. Sir Bartle Frere, the new high commissioner, unwisely provoked a clash with the Zulu as part of his plan to consolidate British power in the region. Once this had happened, Beaconsfield's concern was with British prestige. The cabinet had already agreed to send out reinforcements in order to prevent domestic criticism. Beaconsfield, fearing the loss of face, prevented the recall of Frere, for which a majority of the cabinet wished. But he also showed his displeasure with Frere and the commander of the British forces, Lord Chelmsford, by sending out Sir Garnet Wolseley to exercise supreme power in the troubled area -- to the great annoyance of the queen. Beaconsfield later told her that without the fiasco in southern Africa Britain would have had the international respect necessary to settle her problems in the eastern Mediterranean more easily. In particular, he saw a connection between the African embarrassment and the protest made by the khedive of Egypt in March 1879 against British and French interference in his financial policy. Britain and France were forced to secure the khedive's abdication and to assume a dual control over Egyptian finance. As this shows, Beaconsfield and Salisbury were determined to assert Britain's influence abroad, which Beaconsfield proclaimed in November 1879 was a guarantee of continental peace. Shortly beforehand the government had reached an understanding with Austria and Germany to prevent British (and, it was also intended, French or Italian) assistance to Russia in the event of her attacking the central powers. The British thus hoped to prevent reconciliation between the three Eastern powers -- which would diminish British influence at Constantinople -- while maintaining good relations with France. It was in defence of an active European policy of this sort, and the search for a scientific frontier in India, that Beaconsfield sought to impress a spirit of patriotism on the British people in his Guildhall speech of November 1879, in which he proclaimed as his ministry's creed 'Imperium et Libertas' (ibid., 6.495). 
If continental influence was restored, financial health was not, and this became the government's major problem up to and at the election called in the spring of 1880. Beaconsfield later complained that it had been his misfortune to govern the country during six consecutive bad harvests, while farmers were not even compensated by high prices, because of cheap food imports. Already in the summer of 1879 he feared that agricultural bankruptcy would 'finish' the government (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.477), while by early 1880 there was considerable landlord-farmer tension, which was damaging Conservative prospects and morale. Industry was also depressed in the late 1870s, which increased urban unemployment and forced the government to look for extra revenue. The state of the economy is generally held to have been the prime cause of the Conservative defeat in 1880, a belief shared by Beaconsfield himself: 'like Napoleon, I have been beaten by the elements' (Gower, 349). Gladstone alleged that the government's costly foreign adventures and its lack of fiscal rectitude were worsening the economic climate. Income tax, 2died in 1874, had been increased to 5died in 1878, and in a desperate attempt to avoid defeat Beaconsfield refused to consider new taxes thereafter. Much of the money for the south African expedition was borrowed, while swingeing economies in defence were undertaken. 
Beaconsfield had little choice but to base the Conservative campaign on his record as defender of national interests. However, there was no clearly visible Liberal threat to those interests, and so he chose to make his point by focusing on the Irish issue. Ireland had been a marginal question for most of the parliament, though Beaconsfield claimed to have settled the Irish university question, which had upset two governments. However, Irish MPs were now obstructing business, with some prospect of encouragement from Liberal MPs. Beaconsfield launched the campaign with a letter to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, the duke of Marlborough, in which he claimed that influential Irishmen were attempting to sever the constitutional tie with Britain and that some Liberals might exploit this to 'challenge the expediency of the imperial character of the realm'. This prospect warranted a reminder that 'the power of England and the peace of Europe will largely depend on the verdict of the country' (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.515). His strategy was ineffective: the official leaders of the opposition were moderates whose presence reassured potential defectors; the Liberal Party remained united and the Conservatives lost the election conclusively, collecting only 238 seats. Beaconsfield resigned office on 21 April 1880 and had a farewell audience with the queen six days later, though he visited Windsor three more times that year and continued a confidential correspondence with her, which was more personal than political but by no means exclusively so. 
Beaconsfield was inevitably cast down by another rejection and by the new political climate. He was gloomy about the future of the landed interest and, consequently, the grand social world that had been sustained by its wealth: in 1879 he predicted the end of London seasons and of racing, that antidote to socialism (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.500). He disliked the tension between landlords and farmers and interpreted the new government's budget and 'Ground Game Bill' as an attempt to widen it. As Conservative leader in the Lords, he worked with whig dissidents to defeat the government's 'Compensation for Disturbance Bill', which he saw as 'not merely an Irish measure but as the opening of a great attack on the land' (ibid., 6.582). He foresaw a 'falling empire' (ibid., 6.596), and the absence of any will in foreign policy to keep 'the democrats of Europe in check' (Gower, 350). 
As after the rejection of 1868, he returned to fiction. 'Endymion', published in November 1880, had largely been written in the early 1870s; Longmans paid $10,000 for the rights, said to be the largest sum then paid for a fictional work. (This was the final step in Beaconsfield's financial rehabilitation; at his death he left a personal estate of just over $84,000, so that Andrew Montagu's mortgage could be paid off without embarrassing the estate.) It was a survey of British politics between 1827 and 1855, lovingly recreated and emphasizing the importance of aristocratic -- especially female -- social influence on political fortunes. That influence helps a colourless, conventional, well-mannered man to rise to the premiership; he is also assisted by not offending the insular prejudices of a commercial country. Beaconsfield then began what may have become a more direct commentary on his election defeat, a sequel to 'Lothair' that was unfinished at his death. It is known to posterity as 'Falconet', after its anti-hero, the devout, humourless, self-serving, self-righteous, ill-tempered politician of that name, who is manifestly a young Gladstone. One theme is Falconet's ability to exploit the religious sentiment of the constituencies to assist his political ascent. The other is the emergence of a powerful nihilist movement in Europe, fomented by secret organization, devoted to the overthrow of civilization, but aware that it can only achieve its ends by enlisting 'some religious faith in [its] resources' (Monypenny and Buckle, 5.556). It is irresistible to speculate that these two themes were to be brought together by Falconet's becoming, for career reasons, an unconscious promoter of the revolutionary cause who vainly justifies his actions on religious grounds. 
For most of 1880 after losing office, Beaconsfield was at Hughenden, writing either novels or a flood of letters, especially to the sisters Selina, countess of Bradford, and Anne, countess of Chesterfield. He had enjoyed an ardent friendship and remarkably revealing correspondence with both since 1873, and had often seemed to be completely dependent on their affection. He once proposed to marry the widowed Lady Chesterfield in order, as they well knew, to be nearer her younger sister, with whom he was clearly infatuated, but who was married to the master of the horse in his own government. He had not had a permanent house in London since giving up the residence in Whitehall Gardens (rented since 1874) in order to move into Downing Street during the Eastern crisis. In November 1880 he took a nine-year lease on 19 Curzon Street. Though he claimed to be searching for a leader to replace him in the Lords, he showed no sign of giving way to the obvious successor, Salisbury. In March 1881, having taken a drug to fortify him, he made his last significant speech in the Lords, in which he argued for the retention of Kandahar and reverted to the fundamental theme of his later years, that the prospects for India, as for Britain's world standing generally, would be determined by 'the spirit and vigour of your Parliament' ('Selected Speeches', 2.270). Later that month he caught a chill which, playing on his existing chest weakness, developed into severe bronchitis. He took to his bed in Curzon Street, became progressively weaker, and died there on 19 April 1881, having declined a visit from the queen; he is said to have remarked: 'No it is better not. She would only ask me to take a message to Albert' (Blake, 747). In his will he refused a public funeral and was buried at Hughenden on 26 April, with his wife and Mrs Brydges Willyams. Three royal princes, Derby, Hartington, and other leading Liberals (but not Gladstone) attended his funeral. The queen sent two wreaths, one of fresh primroses, which she claimed were his favourite flowers (she had sent him spring blooms regularly since 1868). She visited the grave four days later and subsequently had a monument erected to him above his seat in Hughenden church, a rare compliment from a British sovereign to a subject. The inscription was bowdlerized from 'Proverbs': 'Kings love him that speaketh right'. 
Disraeli's letters are to be found in most Victorian political collections. He was quite an assiduous preserver of his incoming mail and left a substantial archive. It was initially in the care of Monty Corry and later in that of the Beaconsfield trustees. It was then preserved at Hughenden and was not easily available for research. After the cataloguing of the manuscripts by Robert Stewart and the publication of Blake's biography in 1966, the papers were deposited in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, by the National Trust, which had acquired them when it took over Hughenden in 1947 through the generosity of the family of W. H. Abbey, who bought the estate in 1937, and the Disraelian Society. 
There have been several publications of Disraeli materials, notably Lord Zetland's edition of 'The Letters of Disraeli to Lady Bradford and Lady Chesterfield' (2 vols., 1929), Lady Londonderry's edition of 'Letters from Benjamin Disraeli to Frances Anne, Marchioness of Londonderry' (1938), 'Disraeli's Reminiscences', comprising autobiographical memoranda and edited by H. M. Swartz and M. Swartz (1975), and the comprehensive edition published from Queen's University, Ontario, 'Benjamin Disraeli Letters' (1982 onwards). 
Disraeli has always been of interest to foreign authors; of particular interest are the lives by Georg Brandes, the Danish literary critic (1879), and Andre Maurois (1927). The latter encouraged Alfred Green's American film 'Disraeli' (1929), starring George Arliss, appropriately one of the first talking films; it was based on a New York play by Louis Parker (1911), and was an extravagantly fanciful rendering of the Suez Canal affair. Arliss had earlier starred in a silent version directed by Henry Kolker (1921). Collected editions of Disraeli's novels were published in 1853 by David Bryce, in 1870-71 and 1881 by Longmans, in 1888 by Routledge, in 1904-5 (for subscribers only) by M. W. Donne, in 1905-6 and 1927-8 by the Bodley Head, and in 1926-7 by Peter Davies, with introductions by Philip Guedalla. 
Disraeli was an attractive subject for artists. Daniel Maclise's drawing (1828; Hughenden) depicts the young aesthete, but most portraits were designed to emphasize the gravity of the statesman rather than the wit of the author. The principal oils are those by Sir Francis Grant (1852; Hughenden), Heinrich von Angeli (1877; Royal Collection), and, much the best, Sir John Millais (1881; NPG). Von Angeli's portrait was commissioned by the queen, and was painted in her private dining-room, fitted up with the pagoda furniture from the Brighton Pavilion. Millais's was painted at the artist's request as Beaconsfield was dying, as a pair with Millais's 1879 portrait of Gladstone. The sittings were arranged by Lord Ronald Leveson-Gower at a meeting of the trustees of the National Portrait Gallery (both Leveson-Gower and Disraeli were active trustees). As a precaution, Millais used the same pose as the excellent carte-de-visite by Downie (1868; NPG). The portrait was finished posthumously and shown at the Royal Academy exhibition of 1881. It had several owners, including W. H. Smith, before it was acquired by the National Portrait Gallery. Millais painted a smaller replica for the queen. Cartoons of Disraeli often emphasized his Jewish ancestry, and especially during the Eastern crisis in the 1870s. 'Judy', the tory antidote to 'Punch', had a fine series, published later as a separate volume (1880). There are many photographs of Disraeli in the National Portrait Gallery archive, often of fine quality. The earliest bust is that by S. Frugoni (1827; Hughenden), followed by William Behnes's bust of 1847 (Hughenden), Lord Ronald Leveson-Gower's bronzed plaster bust and statuette (1878-9; NPG and Hughenden), and Count Gleichen's marble bust for the queen (1880; Royal Collection). Following his death, recorded by R. Glassby's death mask, statues in London were erected in Westminster Abbey (Sir Edgar Boehm, 1883), the Palace of Westminster (Count Gleichen, 1883), and Parliament Square (M. Raggi, 1883); there were also some in provincial towns, though on nothing like the scale of the memorials to Peel and Gladstone, and none in the other national capitals. Hughenden has a fine collection of Disraeliana. 
In a letter to 'The Times' just before the anniversary of Disraeli's death, the Anglo-Indian Sir George Birdwood suggested that those who admired his achievements and ideals should celebrate it by wearing a primrose. The gesture was repeated in 1883, by which time it had become popular -- especially among those who disapproved of the external and Irish policies of the Gladstone government. Accordingly, Drummond Wolff, an independently minded Conservative MP, suggested capitalizing on Disraeli's popularity by setting up a Primrose League, a cross-class institution celebrating monarchy, social hierarchy, chivalric values, and the volunteer spirit. This became a bulwark of local Conservative electoral organization and marked the beginning of Disraeli's extraordinary posthumous life as a Conservative icon. As both parties developed a professional organization, they needed attractive figureheads, which the burgeoning mass media assisted in projecting. A new Disraeli and Gladstone were invented, competing for commemoration on ashtrays and dishcloths. Disraeli has remained a Conservative Party hero ever since. His career had been colourful, while his sonorous, inclusive, but unspecific rhetoric was ambiguous enough to make him a useful symbol of a remarkable variety of policies. Accordingly, his name has often been invoked in support of ends that would have alarmed him, such as state welfare. 
The league's aim to attract middle- and lower-class members was part of a broader strategy of 'tory democracy' within the party, to reach out to the expanded electorate of the 1880s. Disraeli's achievement in 1867 could help in this, and an article in 'The Times' on 18 April 1883 suggested that he had been the first to discern 'the Conservative working man, as the sculptor perceives the angel prisoned in a block of marble'. Even more stress was placed on Disraeli's record as a social reformer, as the party realized the rhetorical attractiveness of a practical interventionist image. The interpretation of him as a man of the people, who had the insight to appreciate the merits of a policy of imperial consolidation and social reform, became widely held by Conservatives in the 1890s. It was underpinned by the conclusion to the six-volume biography of him begun by W. F. Monypenny and finished after Monypenny's death by G. E. Buckle in 1920. (However, buried in the rest of the work is a great deal of material about other aspects of Disraeli's ideas. It remains the only biography to treat those ideas with anything like the importance they deserve, in a conscious effort to answer Liberal and other criticisms of his lack of convictions.) This tory democrat myth did not survive detailed scrutiny by professional historical writing of the 1960s. Specific works by Paul Smith (1967) and Maurice Cowling (1967) demonstrated that Disraeli had little interest in a programme of social legislation and was very flexible in handling parliamentary reform in 1867. Meanwhile, Robert Blake's biography of 1966, written with enviable elegance and shrewdness, replaced the old interpretations with an insistent pragmatism. Blake paid little attention to Disraeli's ideas, and belittled his philosophy as 'romantic but basically unrealistic'. He described his views on foreign policy as 'out of touch with the realities of the day', his imperial notions of 1872 as 'casual' -- though he had been articulating them for four decades -- and the arguments of Young England as 'gothic rubbish' (Blake, 758, 570-71, 523, 172). Instead, he pointed up Disraeli's inconsistency, oddly suggesting that his willingness to take office under Peel in 1841 cast doubt on his sincerity in later attacking him, and that his later practice was 'essentially Peelite' (ibid., 759). This argument articulated an anachronistic but then fashionable view of nineteenth-century politics that saw Peel rather than Disraeli as the founder of the Conservative Party by basing its electoral fortunes on a 'constructive' appeal to the middle classes. 
More recent work on the changing electoral and ideological contexts of Victorian politics has underlined the pre-modernity of Disraeli's political world, while undermining facile comparisons of him with Peel. There has been comparatively little interest in Disraeli's political practice, but a great deal in his fiction, his ideas, his psychological orientation, and his Jewishness. These studies have revealed problems in Blake's interpretation, and drawn attention to Disraeli's uniqueness. Some scholars have begun the attempt to integrate his ideas with his practice, but in general scepticism still abounds about the latter. There has also been considerable speculation about Disraeli's private life, which was sanitized by Monypenny and Buckle (in whose biography there is not even any coherent reference to Henrietta Sykes). One biography of 1993 suggested that Disraeli had not just extramarital affairs (which seems likely) but also two illegitimate children in the mid-1860s: a boy, Ralph, with Lady Dorothy Nevill, and a girl, Catherine Donovan (Weintraub, 427-36). It is unlikely that such allegations will ever be proved, not least because Rose and later his son, as executors, deliberately destroyed many of Disraeli's letters. 
Throughout the twentieth century, then, interpretations of Disraeli revolved around two issues: the extent of his sympathy for democracy, and his assumed lack of principle. The decline of the 'tory democrat' interpretation, combined with the vitality of the notion that Disraeli sat loose to convictions, has had the effect of diminishing respect for his political achievement. Yet the suggestion that he was an unscrupulous charlatan was originally just as politically motivated as the heroic tory democrat interpretation (though assisted by his youthful self-exposure). It was first associated with his Peelite opponents and later with Liberals and with Disraeli's high tory enemies, who used his conduct over protection and parliamentary reform as their major examples. It also has to be said that Victorian snobbery and antisemitism, and Liberal moralism then and since, have played a large part in entrenching it. 
It is arguable not only that both these dominant interpretations are misconceived in themselves but that they have positively hindered the attempt to understand Disraeli by leading enquirers down side-tracks. There is surely no need to cast the career of such an egotist, elitist, and parliamentary intriguer in a populist light in order to understand it. Disraeli had fixed notions about the attractiveness of a few electoral cries, such as anti-Catholicism. But he had little detailed electoral knowledge, at any rate outside the home counties and Lancashire, and though on occasion he positioned himself in accordance with these fixed notions, on many others he did not do so. In any case, all his instincts were attuned to an era before that in which elections were won by national policy initiatives. He always talked of the tories as the national and popular party, but this was in contrast to whig exclusiveness and factionalism. He believed that leadership required imaginative insight into the popular psychology, and that historically inspired patriotic and monarchical language had the potential to appeal to the British public. But his rhetoric in these areas arguably aimed not so much to exploit existing prejudices for electoral gain as to tease out a rarely articulated patriotism from beneath a dominant complacency about continental affairs; this, he believed, was the job of leadership. As for his supposed inconsistency, to say that he had to abandon his original position on protection and parliamentary reform is to say little more than that he lived in the nineteenth century. Altered perspectives were imposed on all politicians of his generation; Gladstone made a virtue of them. He retained a studied flexibility on some difficult issues (such as Catholic endowment). He also habitually romanticized and exaggerated potentially humdrum affairs. However, that was because he viewed politics not as a legislative draftsman but as an artist and sociologist. He was exceptionally anxious to develop and adhere to an individual interpretation of social and political movements. He was a first-rate politician because he upheld that individual interpretation while demonstrating a necessary expediency in parliamentary manoeuvre. 
Disraeli's was not a trained university mind, and it is not surprising that more fastidious intellects have criticized his 'fatal facility in suggesting hazy theories' and his lack of 'the kind of practical sagacity which most easily inspires Englishmen with confidence' ('Historical Essays', 492, 486). But his haziness can be exaggerated. He had coherent ideas on the importance of the land, the church, and historic tory ideals in maintaining civilization and social cohesion, and about the threat posed to nineteenth-century society by the (in fact very gradual) decay of these 'traditionary influences'. This pessimistic analysis, natural in a romantic historian, was mitigated by a fascination with the interplay of social forces and with the human comedy of which he was an acutely ironic observer. His love of life and nature, his constant sense of wonder at new experiences, and his sanguine temperament ensured that -- when not affected by a self-obsessive melancholy -- he was in a good humour with the world. In any case, he had very limited power to arrest the development of Victorian political society: he could do nothing about the triumph of free trade, the decline of the old colonial relationships, and the waning of paternalism. For much of his life he had to accept the broad policy assumptions laid down by Liberal politicians. 
Notwithstanding all this, Disraeli's objective was clearly conservative: to frustrate radical initiatives which he saw as challenging national institutions and traditions. He disparaged the raising of contentious issues (and therefore premature declarations of opinion on them) unless there was a chance of solving them. All his major political moves were designed to settle questions, to take them out of the political sphere, to prevent destructive social or parliamentary agitation. When confronted with specific problems, he sought to reduce tension between town and country, landlords and farmers, capital and labour, and warring religious sects in Britain and Ireland -- in other words, to create a unifying synthesis. 'Practical' social legislation was useful to the extent that it reduced the threat of government on abstract 'socialist' and centralizing principles. Had he not made possible the 1867 'Reform Act', something similar would have been enacted, but it might well not have been as conservative in its social instincts and would certainly not have been as beneficial to the Conservative Party. 
It must also be remembered that one objective of the struggle of 1867 was to put the party on a better footing so that it might escape having to endure another minority government, in which there was always the danger of being forced to accept radical proposals. Before 1868 Disraeli believed that he had no choice but to work with radicals; he also believed, rightly, that he was skilful enough to do so on honourably Conservative terms. This is not to deny that he was addicted to conspiracy. Moreover, he was not an infallibly expert parliamentary operator: despite the mask of aloof imperturbability that he wore in the Commons, he was impulsive and sometimes short-sighted tactically, and his colleague Northcote remarked that he always spoiled his hand by 'overdoing something or other' (Monypenny and Buckle, 4.297). None the less, his long-term aim for the party was a position of independence. He believed that the only way in which strong government and Conservative ideas could be upheld, while constitutional and local liberties were secured, was by the maintenance of a two-party system in which parties were faithful to their ideals. The Conservative Party might easily have been swallowed in coalitions headed by whig grandees. Instead he sought Conservative leadership of a strong party that defended Burkean traditional influences against abstractions, novelties, and democratic enthusiasms. However, his theory that there should be a natural aristocratic and a natural democratic party was only partly realized in his lifetime, since propertied Liberals succeeded in keeping radicals on a tight rein. 
Disraeli certainly did not offer electors a programme of legislation, or even speak in public to any significant extent. In 1879-80 he was contemptuous of Gladstone's 'spouting all over the country, like an irresponsible demagogue', which was 'wholly inexcusable in a man who was a statesman' (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.524). After the 1880 election he asserted the right of politicians to challenge the spirit of the age, which was 'generally public sentiment' and 'frequently... public passion' ('Hansard 3', 255, 107-8). From the time of the Bulgarian agitation Disraeli believed that Gladstone had abandoned the politics of gentlemanliness: 'posterity will do justice to that unprincipled maniac Gladstone... with one commanding characteristic --... whether preaching, praying, speechifying, or scribbling -- never a gentleman!' (Monypenny and Buckle, 6.67). Disraeli's beliefs and political position required him to maintain that parliament was at the centre of public life and that the guiding principle of parliament was that it was a free assembly of gentlemen. He attached immense significance to its traditions and dignity, which he upheld with studious ceremony. He attached equal importance to his image in parliament: he dyed his hair, which he carefully arranged (with increasing difficulty) to preserve the trademark curl on his forehead; he resorted only to an inadequate eye-glass to remedy chronic short-sightedness; his figure was assisted by stays, of which a glimpse could occasionally be seen protruding from his frock coat (fortunately, he had a small appetite). The basis of his power was his parliamentary influence. His performance in the Commons was never without its critics; some detected a tendency to 'false melodramatic taste' ('Historical Essays', 486). His success there was due to his devastating capacity to discern his opponents' weak (and strong) points: his epigrammatic sarcasm increasingly intimidated them from attacking him, and dissuaded rivals from seeking to supplant him and banish him to a dangerous exile below the gangway. Disraeli held tenaciously to the party leadership in the Commons for twenty-eight years; but he did so by dint of rhetorical bravado and dextrous party management, not by exploiting his position outside parliament even to the extent that Palmerston did, let alone Gladstone. As late as 1876 Bagehot claimed that 'ten miles from London... there is scarcely any real conception of him' (ibid., 504). 
Disraeli had little time for demagogic politics because of his intensely individualistic conception of political leadership. Whatever the crisis, his letters were full of boasts that he was the man who had arranged affairs, that no one else was on hand to share the responsibility, or that no one else was competent (though in public he was nearly always very supportive of his disciples, earning their loyalty). His astonishing egotism sustained him through all the rejections of his career. It was all the more effective for being tempered by adversity, preventing the bumptious flamboyance of his youth from hardening into an inflexible arrogance. He had a remarkable capacity to learn from his mistakes. His tenacity and will-power allowed him to conquer his youthful lethargy and periodic depressions; they gave him courage when isolated and defiance in defeat. The conviction of his superiority to the fools and drones whom he observed occupying high positions in society and politics never left him. He disliked the company of intellectual equals: he preferred to be surrounded by idealistic young men and, especially, by sympathetic women who could caress his ego. He was never vindictive except when he thought his honour had been impugned; that he regarded as a heinous offence. 
As he despised the parochialism of little men, commercial opinions, and ecclesiastical factionalism, only his ardour for the political game saved Disraeli from being bored by most of what counted for politics in Britain. He sought a stage fit for a great man: he loved to philosophize about the fate of races, nations, and empires. Sometimes he fantasized; sometimes he stuck to outdated ideas; usually there was a kernel of real insight. He reflected at length on the conflicts and consequential radical dangers facing Europe in a way that distanced him from insular contemporaries. He believed it essential to alter blinkered and comfortable domestic views of the continent; he hoped that a more patriotic public voice would increase Britain's European clout while keeping defence expenditure low. He was helped by the alarms generated by the expansion of Germany and Russia and their emergence as rival 'empires', which encouraged acceptance of the word in British debate. When Disraeli talked of empire, he meant the historic and symbolic greatness of England, exemplified by its power in Europe and its global prestige. This certainly did not necessitate territorial acquisition, especially if that illuminated military weakness. It did require an active European policy and an attitude of resistance to Russia. Disraeli was innately attracted by the merits of an assertive international stance, but, true to character, he also saw the specifics of the Eastern crisis in terms of short-term parliamentary necessity on the one hand, and the long-term aim of sustaining the aristocratic European order against militarism or revolution on the other. 
Disraeli's grandiose ideas, cynicism about human motives, and his ability to marry high rhetoric with low intrigue, make him a difficult figure to read. Many of his enthusiasms and objectives would have been more familiar to continental politicians, or to those of an earlier period, than to his British contemporaries. The radical politician John Bright took exception to his candid declaration that the search for fame brought him to parliament, though this was an eighteenth-century commonplace. His egocentricity can be seen as that of an eternally maladjusted social-climbing adolescent, or that of an unprivileged outsider forced to endure watching the social and political prizes go to lesser men with better connections. His foreign policy can be seen as a gigantic castle in the air (as it was by Gladstone), or as an overdue attempt to force the British commercial classes to awaken to the realities of European politics. With Gladstone, Disraeli was one of the two most fascinating and complex politicians of the nineteenth century. He was hardly understood at the time, and it would be presumptuous to claim that he is fully understandable now. Neither Gladstone nor Disraeli communicated very clearly what he really felt; certainly neither understood the other. But they shared a rebelliousness against the complacency and materialism of mid-Victorian Britain. Disraeli used un-English insights to urge on England a world role befitting her power and traditional values. Given the weight of commercial, sectional, and isolationist opinion in the country, this was a task that was bound to involve more failure than victory. After his last election defeat he told the Social Democratic Federation leader H. M. Hyndman that England was 'a very difficult country to move... and one in which there is more disappointment to be looked for than success' (Blake, 764). Disraeli certainly suffered many disappointments and rejections in his courting of the British political classes. He wanted to play both the roles that he idealized in his novels, the artist-prophet and the man of action; political circumstances conspired to ensure that he had few chances to put his insights into practice. Even so, the conclusion must be that, though only intermittently, Disraeli still succeeded, infinitely more than anyone could have imagined, in realizing the object of political life that he set out in the poem he wrote for his wife's birthday in 1846: 'to sway the race that sways the world' ('Letters', 4.250). 


@@@@@


doc= 7690


D'Israeli, Isaac (1766-1848), writer, was born on 11 May 1766 at 5 Great St Helen's, London, the only child of Benjamin D'Israeli (1730-1816), merchant, and his second wife, Sarah Syprut de Gabay Villa Real (1742/3-1825). D'Israeli's father was born at Cento, Ferrara, emigrated to London in 1748, and began business on his own there in 1757 as an importer of Italian goods, especially the fashionable Leghorn straw hats. From 1776 he was also in business as a stockbroker, and in 1801 he became an English denizen and a founder member of the London stock exchange. On his death his estate was valued at $35,000. D'Israeli's mother was the daughter of one of her husband's business associates. His father seems to have been sociable and generous, and his mother withdrawn and difficult. 
Isaac was 'a pale, pensive child, with large brown eyes, and flowing hair... timid, susceptible, lost in reverie, fond of solitude, or seeking no better company than a book' (Disraeli, 'Life and writings', xi). He was sent to a school kept by a Scotsman named Morison, near Enfield, Middlesex, where his father had a country house. The elder D'Israeli hoped his son would go into business, and in 1780-81 sent him to stay with his agent in Amsterdam; but he showed no aptitude for business, began to acquire a wide knowledge of modern languages and literatures, and came home determined to be a poet and man of letters. His mother ridiculed his ambition, and his father urged him to join a commercial house at Bordeaux, so he wrote a satire on commerce, which he left at Bolt Court hoping for Dr Johnson's approval, but Johnson was ill and the manuscript was returned unread. D'Israeli's first critical article was a vindication of Johnson's character in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for December 1786. His first published poem was a panegyric on Richard Gough the topographer, an Enfield neighbour, in the 'St James's Chronicle' for 20 November 1787, to which Gough wrote a sarcastic reply. His father's patience was exhausted, and in 1788-9 D'Israeli was sent abroad again, to travel in France, Germany, and Italy. He became an enthusiast for French philosophy and, for a time, the French Revolution. In July 1789 he achieved some notoriety by publishing an anonymous satire on the popular satirist Peter Pindar (Dr John Wolcot) in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Wolcot attributed the satire to the poet William Hayley and published a counterblast, whereupon D'Israeli acknowledged the authorship and was befriended not only by some of Wolcot's earlier victims but also by Wolcot himself. The friendly intervention of Henry James Pye, the poet laureate, may have persuaded the elder D'Israeli to acquiesce in his son's adoption of a literary career; D'Israeli's first volume of verse, 'A Defence of Poetry' (1790), was dedicated to Pye. As a poet his most ambitious work was 'Narrative Poems' (1803). His neo-classical manner was by then hopelessly outmoded, but being a poet of sorts himself he had a sympathetic understanding of the poetical temperament. 
In 1791 D'Israeli inherited the whole fortune of his maternal grandmother Esther Syprut, and so became financially independent. He took rooms in James Street, Adelphi, then a haunt of literary men, and began to frequent the British Museum, where he met Francis Douce and other scholars. In the same year he published anonymously the first volume of 'Curiosities of literature, consisting of anecdotes, characters, sketches, and observations, literary, critical, and historical'. This compilation followed the fashion for biographical anecdotes, and was an immediate success. A second volume, with the author's name on the title-page, was added in 1793; a third in 1817; and a 'Second Series', in three more volumes, in 1823. The work was often revised (13th edn, 1843) and gradually became more like a collection of essays. Between 1794 and 1796 D'Israeli apparently suffered a nervous breakdown, certainly enjoyed a convalescence at Exeter, and wrote 'An Essay on the Literary Character' (1795), and 'Miscellanies, or, Literary Recreations' (1796), which he dedicated to his medical adviser Dr Hugh Downman. By now his books had made a name for him in London, and in 1796 he was the subject of a highly respectful 'Biographical sketch' in the 'Monthly Mirror'. Expanded versions of the 'Essay', under the title 'The Literary Character', appeared in 1818, 1822 (2 vols.), and 1828 (2 vols.). It developed into an influential study of the characteristics of men of genius, and a romantic assertion of their importance to society. Offshoots were 'Calamities of Authors' (2 vols., 1812) and 'Quarrels of Authors' (3 vols., 1814). 
D'Israeli for a time fancied himself as a writer of prose fiction. His 'Romances' ('Mejnoun and Leila: a Persian Romance', 'Love and Humility: a Roman Romance', and 'The Lovers, or, The Birth of the Pleasing Arts: an Arcadian Romance') were published in 1797 (3rd edn, 1807). 'Mejnoun and Leila' was the most elaborate of these, and its flowery orientalism had some influence on Benjamin Disraeli. D'Israeli's first novel, 'Vaurien, or, Sketches of the Times', also appeared in 1797. 'Flim-Flams! or, The Life and Errors of my Uncle' followed in 1805 (2nd edn, 1806) and 'Despotism, or, The Fall of the Jesuits' in 1811. 'Vaurien' was a satire on William Godwin and other English Jacobins; 'Flim-Flams!' in a more frivolous vein satirized various contemporary literary men, scientists, and inventors; 'Despotism' was a melodramatic historical novel comparing the despotisms of the Jesuits and Napoleon. D'Israeli pioneered types of subject-matter and modes of presentation which were more effectively used by Thomas Love Peacock, Benjamin Disraeli, and others, but his novels lacked interesting characterization and artistic unity. 
On 10 February 1802 D'Israeli entered 'the matrimonial state of literature' (a chapter heading in 'The Literary Character'). His wife, Maria Basevi (1774/5-1847), belonged to another Italian-Jewish family living in London, and was the aunt of the architect George Basevi (1794-1845). The marriage was a happy one. The D'Israelis went to live at 6 King's Road, Bedford Row, where their five children were born: Sarah (1802-1859); Benjamin Disraeli (1804-1881), the statesman and novelist; Naphtali ('b'. 1807, died in infancy); Ralph (1809-1898); and James (1813-1868). The children were named according to Jewish naming customs, and the boys were circumcised. D'Israeli was a member of the Bevis Marks Synagogue, and an annual contributor to its funds, but not a regular attender at its services. In 1813 the elders elected him warden, anticipating that he would refuse to serve and pay a fine. D'Israeli told them the office was 'repulsive to his feelings'; he could 'never unite in your public worship because, as now conducted, it disturbs, instead of exciting, religious emotions' (Picciotto, 297-8). He refused to pay a fine, and after a long quarrel withdrew from the synagogue in 1821. In a chapter in 'Vaurien', an essay on Moses Mendelssohn ('Monthly Magazine', 6, July 1798, 38-44), and especially in 'The Genius of Judaism' (1833), D'Israeli argued for the emancipation of the Jews rather than their conversion to Christianity, and for the Jews themselves to educate their children as 'the youth of Europe, and not of Palestine' (D'Israeli, 'The Genius of Judaism', 1833, 265). On the advice of his friend the historian Sharon Turner, all his children were baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, in 1817, but apparently membership of the Church of England was valued for its social advantages. In the same year the family moved to a larger house in Bloomsbury Square near the British Museum, and in 1829 they moved to Bradenham House near High Wycombe. This part of Buckinghamshire attracted D'Israeli by its many literary and historical associations. 
D'Israeli was well known in several literary circles. Pye introduced him to the poet Samuel Rogers, who enviously remarked, 'There is a man with only half an intellect; and yet he makes books that can't help living' ('Selections from the Letters of Robert Southey', 4.265). He was for a while on the fringe of the Jacobin group associated with the publisher Richard Phillips and the bookseller Joseph Johnson, and was one of the early customers for William Blake's illuminated books. But D'Israeli's own books were mostly published by John Murray II, and through him he met Murray's other authors and contributors to the tory 'Quarterly Review'. Among these was Sir Walter Scott, who at their first meeting is said to have repeated one of D'Israeli's poems, adding 'if the writer of these lines had gone on, he would have been an English poet' (Disraeli, 'Life and writings', xxv). Lord Byron greatly admired 'The Literary Character' and told Murray 'I don't know a living man's book I take up so often or lay down more reluctantly' (Smiles, 152). When a defence of the poetry of Pope appeared in the 'Quarterly' in 1820 Byron was delighted and recognized D'Israeli as the author by the style. Robert Southey thought D'Israeli 'thoroughly good-natured, the strangest mixture of information and ignorance, cleverness and folly' ('Selections from the Letters of Robert Southey', 3.352). D'Israeli dedicated the fourth edition of 'The Literary Character' to him, remarking that knowing each other primarily through their books they had long enjoyed 'an intimacy, without the inconvenience, often resulting from a personal acquaintance' (Ogden, 126). D'Israeli also met through Murray the poet Thomas Moore, the critic John Wilson Croker, and the antiquary Thomas Crofton Croker. Moore he also met at the Athenaeum, and Crofton Croker at the Society of Antiquaries. Murray quarrelled with the D'Israeli family in 1826 when with some reason the publisher thought himself caricatured in Benjamin's novel 'Vivian Grey'. But Benjamin introduced his father to another admirer, Edward Bulwer-Lytton, who dedicated to D'Israeli the fourth book, 'View of the Intellectual Spirit of the Time', of his 'England and the English' (1833). When he was in his seventies his son introduced him into Lady Blessington's circle, where he met Walter Savage Landor. D'Israeli, then, was a more sociable and forceful character than his son's memoir suggests. 
In his own time D'Israeli had a considerable reputation as a historian. In 1816 he published 'An Inquiry into the Literary and Political Character of James I', and between 1828 and 1830 the five volumes of 'Commentaries on the Life and Reign of Charles I'. 'Commentaries' marked an advance in historical research, as D'Israeli consulted many unpublished manuscripts, but his claims to objectivity were exaggerated. Both works defend the Stuart kings against the whig historians; he concedes that they had their faults, but argues that James was no fool and Charles was a man more sinned against than sinning. The effect was to support a tory view of history, and so to influence the ideas of Benjamin Disraeli and the 'Young England' group. 'Commentaries' was attacked for its implicit toryism by Lord Nugent in his 'Memorials of Hampden' (1832), and D'Israeli immediately replied with the pamphlet 'Eliot, Hampden, and Pym'. All three of these were reviewed by Robert Southey, who described 'Commentaries' as 'by far the most important work' on its subject in recent times ('Quarterly Review', 47, 1832, 470). It was as the defender of Charles I that D'Israeli was created honorary doctor of civil law by Oxford University later in the same year. 

'Commentaries' distracted D'Israeli from his ultimate project, a history of English literature. In 1833 he returned to work on it, but by January 1835 he feared the deterioration of his eyesight would prevent its completion. Another problem was a controversy with the antiquarian Bolton Corney, who in 'Curiosities of Literature Illustrated' (1837) exposed many of D'Israeli's mistakes in the original 'Curiosities'. D'Israeli replied with 'The Illustrator Illustrated' (1838), but Corney's attacks continued in further publications, and D'Israeli admitted that 'a voluminous miscellany, composed at various periods, cannot be exempted from slight inadvertencies' ('Curiosities', 11th edn, 1839, 'Preface'). Towards the end of that year he suffered 'a paralysis of the optic nerve' (Disraeli, 'Life and writings', xxxv), or acute retinal degeneration, and became almost blind. But with the help of his daughter he was able to publish 'Amenities of Literature' (3 vols., 1841), which he originally intended to call 'A fragment of a history of English literature'. In an unsystematic way 'Amenities' carries the subject down to the early seventeenth century. It includes much curious information, appreciative essays on Chaucer, Skelton, and Spenser, and in the essay on Shakespeare an early protest against bardolatry. D'Israeli's enthusiasm saves him from the pedantry and dogmatism of some later authorities. 'Amenities' was his last book, but he lived long enough to see his son's first successes in literature and politics. He found Disraeli's 'Tancred' (1847), a novel about the reconciliation of Judaism and Christianity, 'faultless in composition, profound in philosophy' (Monypenny and Buckle, 1.865). Isaac D'Israeli died at his home, Bradenham House, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, on 19 January 1848, a victim of influenza, and was buried in the churchyard at Bradenham. 
D'Israeli's reputation in the nineteenth century was founded on his talent for popularizing literary and historical research. He read widely and in some fields deeply, and Bulwer-Lytton remarked that often what looked like gossip was really philosophy, especially in 'The Literary Character'. Benjamin Disraeli edited new editions of 'Curiosities' in 1849, of 'Commentaries' in 1851, and of the complete literary and historical 'Works' (other than 'Commentaries') in 1858-9. 'Curiosities' and the 'Works' were frequently reissued in popular editions both here and in the United States. Before the development of secondary and higher education, these books were for many readers exciting introductions to new areas of knowledge and speculation. 


@@@@@


doc= 7691


Diss, Walter (c.1330-1403/4), prior of Norwich and theologian, as his name indicates, came from Diss in Norfolk. When he was ordained deacon at Ely, on 16 February 1353, he had already entered the Carmelite house in Norwich, and was appointed its prior in 1376. According to Leland he studied at Paris and Rome, but it is known for certain only that he was in the Cambridge house and became DTh there. By the 1370s Diss had already established himself as a scholar with a considerable reputation as a preacher. Bale credits him with several theological and philosophical works -- 'Ex Augustino et Anselmo', 'Lectura theologiae', 'Quaestiones theologiae', and 'Determinationes variae' -- and he is said to have published a commentary on the 'Psalms' and two volumes of sermons. He also wrote a tract 'Contra Lolhardos', and seems to have been one of the compilers of the material that eventually appeared as the 'Fasciculi zizaniorum'. The great schism stimulated a number of writings: 'Epistolae ad Urbanum et Bonifacium', 'Ad ecclesiarum praesides', and a poem, 'Carmen de schismate ecclesiae', of which some fragments were printed in the works of Nicholas de Clemangiis ('Opera', 31-4). He always strongly supported the English government in its recognition of the Roman papacy against that of Avignon. 
Diss was appointed confessor to Edward III's son John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (died 1399), and his duchess, Constanza of Castile (died 1394), in succession to William Badby, another Carmelite, and was instrumental in encouraging the duke's piety and his veneration for the Virgin Mary. On 12 January 1375 Gaunt granted 'nostre confessour' Walter Diss an annual payment of $10 while he remained in the duke's service (this annuity was doubled in 1380) to be drawn from the income of Gaunt's Norfolk manor of Gimingham, and a further payment was made on 12 October for administering mass at the Garter ceremony. Gaunt's register records similar payments regularly until the spring of 1382, and shows that Diss normally travelled with the duke. He was also a beneficiary in 1379 under the terms of the will of the Lancastrian retainer Sir Roger Trumpington. When Gaunt was obliged to sort out the complex case of the Lathom inheritance in Lancashire, in which one of the issues was the legality of the marriage of another retainer, Sir John Dalton, it was Diss who remarried the couple after the pope had sanctioned a divorce. Diss was replaced as confessor by yet another Carmelite, John Kenningham of Ipswich, in 1386, but remained closely connected with Gaunt. 
Diss was one of the group of friars who appealed to Gaunt on 18 February 1382 and persuaded him that it was dangerous for him to continue to support John Wyclif, and when Archbishop Courtenay summoned a council to the London Blackfriars in May of that year to condemn Wyclif's teachings, Diss was an obvious choice to be one of the distinguished panel of judges, and represented the University of Cambridge. He was subsequently a member of the smaller group that assembled to continue the process against Nicholas Hereford and Philip Repyndon in June and July. 
In the years that followed, Diss's fortunes continued to be linked with those of his patron. Prominent among the factors shaping English foreign policy in the 1380s were the competition of Rome and Avignon for the spiritual loyalties of western Europe, and the ambition of John of Gaunt to be king of Castile in the right of his wife, at the expense of Juan I, who was supported by both the French monarchy and the Avignon papacy. Diss was one of a group of papal nuncios for England, Gascony, and the Spanish kingdoms empowered by Urban VI in 1386 to raise money by the sale of indulgences and authorized to award fifty papal chaplaincies -- an act that considerably irritated the chronicler Thomas Walsingham, a long-standing adversary of Gaunt, who lamented that even the Benedictines of St Albans were being seduced by this opportunity to secure honour and preferment. Gaunt eventually led an army to Galicia in July 1386 in alliance with Joao of Portugal, but the campaign had virtually petered out by May 1387, although it took until the summer of the following year to arrange a general truce. Although he was appointed Carmelite prior provincial for Spain in 1387, there is no evidence that Diss accompanied the expedition. Walsingham suggests that he was detained in England by the scandal caused by the grant of one of the chaplaincies to the Lollard Peter Pateshull, a dubious story, although Diss may well have been involved in dealings with this renegade friar during 1387-8. He subsequently remained in contact with Gaunt, whom he is known to have visited in 1396, but he seems to have spent most of the last decade of his life in quiet retirement in Norwich, where he died in 1404 or possibly towards the end of the previous year. 


@@@@@


doc= 7692


Ditton, Humphry (1675-1714), mathematician, was born on 29 May 1675, in Salisbury, the only son of Humphry Ditton, gentleman, and Miss Luttrell of Dunster Castle, near Taunton, Somerset. He did not receive a university education; although his father was an ardent nonconformist Ditton was educated under a Dr Olive, a clergyman of the established church. Afterwards, and at his father's wish, he became a dissenting preacher at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, where he married a Miss Ball. After his father's death and in poor health he gave up the ministry. In 1706 he was appointed, through Isaac Newton's influence, as the first mathematics teacher at the New Mathematical School established in that year at Christ's Hospital, London. The school was discontinued as a failure after his death. 
Ditton's original mathematical work appeared mainly in two articles in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. The first was on tangents of curves deduced from the theory of maxima and minima (vol. 23, 1703). The second was on optics, and dealt with the reflection of light (vol. 24, 1705); this was republished in the 'Acta Eruditorum' of Leipzig and in the 'Memoirs' of the Academy of Science at Paris. However, Ditton's main work in mathematics was not in original research but in producing textbooks and expository articles. Newton had recommended him for the post at Christ's Hospital after being impressed with his contributions to John Harris's 'Lexicon technicum' (1704) and with his textbooks, 'The General Laws of Nature and Motion... being a Part of the Great Mr Newton's Principles' (1705) and 'An Institution of Fluxions... According to the Incomparable Sir Isaac Newton' (1706). In 1709 Ditton corrected and added to Joannes Alexander's 'A Synopsis of Algebra', which was intended for the use of the students at Christ's Hospital. His main remaining mathematical works were on perspective and on the shape assumed by a fluid between two contiguous glass plates. As well as teaching his students he also lectured publicly on mathematics in London at the Marine Coffee House in 1710, and in 1712 assisted at courses in experimental philosophy which were organized by the Hauksbees. 
Ditton's most important theological work was 'A Discourse Concerning the Resurrection of Jesus Christ', an event which he attempted to prove by taking a mathematical, deductive approach. The first of its four editions appeared in 1712 and it was also translated into French and German. It contained an appendix about the nature of thought, where he argued that thought could not be produced from matter and motion. He was, however, unable to complete his response to the various criticisms that this work received before his death. A diary of his religious meditations was published in the 'Gospel Magazine' (September 1777, 393-403; December 1777, 437-41). 
Ditton is best remembered for his pamphlet 'A New Method for the Discovery of Longitude at Sea' (1714), on which he collaborated with William Whiston. With the rapid expansion of British overseas trade the problem of determining a ship's longitude at sea was becoming acute. In May 1714 a number of sea captains and London merchants petitioned parliament to establish a prize for the discovery of a suitable method. A committee was set up to consider proposals and to consult technical experts including Newton, Halley, Cotes, and Samuel Clarke. A prize was offered varying from $10,000 to $20,000 depending on the degree of accuracy that a workable method achieved. The solution proposed by Whiston and Ditton was to establish a network of ships at known positions from which a rocket or cannon would be fired. From the difference in time between seeing the flash and hearing the sound of its explosion a seafarer could calculate the meridian distance from the signalling ship and (if the latitude of the passing ship were known) would be able to calculate its longitude. Newton was unenthusiastic about the proposal although he recognized that it had some merit in limited circumstances. The idea was submitted to the board of longitude but was subsequently rejected; indeed, it was widely ridiculed as useless for practical purposes, by Jonathan Swift among others. The preface to the German translation of his 'Discourse Concerning the Resurrection' suggests that Ditton developed a further method for determining longitude. Raphael Levi, a student of Leibniz, maintained that Ditton had corresponded with Leibniz about his invention of a clockwork mechanism which Leibniz had apparently approved of for use on land, although he doubted its usefulness at sea because of the motion of the ship. Ditton died on 15 October 1714, and was buried two days later at Christchurch Newgate. 


@@@@@


doc= 7693


Dix, John (b. 1811, d. in or after 1864), writer, was born in Bristol on 21 September 1811, of partly Scottish descent. His mother, he claimed, was taught by Mary Newton, the sister of Thomas Chatterton. He wrote poetry about Bristol sites, first published in the 'Bristol Mirror' and later collected in 'Lays of Home' (1829). He married, at Bristol on 22 March 1832, Susannah (1807/8-1888), daughter of William Moore, a Bristol soap boiler, and set up in business at Wellington, Somerset, where their two daughters were born; a son was born in Bristol in 1837. His shop failed, and his friends helped him to attend lectures at medical school, to qualify as a surgeon. He appears to have been in practice as a surgeon in Monmouth by 1841, though by his account this was not a success, and he took to writing in order to support his family. 
In 1837 Dix published 'The Life of Thomas Chatterton', praised by Leigh Hunt as 'heart-touching' ('DNB'). Chatterton pervades much of Dix's writing, but despite being the first to attribute and print some of Chatterton's early poems and political journalism, his biography displays a hopeless credulity towards anecdotes, and also misrepresents aspects of Chatterton's life and works -- ironically enough through forged documents and a suppositious portrait. Dix's work was later condemned by Moy Thomas, Buxton Forman, and Walter Thornbury, the last concluding Dix had 'muddied so many subjects with his wilful untruths' (Thornbury, 295). 
Dix's medical practice failed because of his alcoholism, which perhaps inspired him to write the poems that accompanied E. V. Rippingville's engravings, 'Progress of Intemperance' (1839). He also gathered his verse for 'Local Legends and Rambling Rhymes' (1839), and was rashly ranked alongside Wordsworth for 'The Church-Wreck' (1842). He illustrated his own poems and perhaps worked as an itinerant artist during the 1840s; later he claimed to have been a journalist, editing the 'Monmouth Beacon' between 1840 and 1842, an 'esquire and body guard' ('Pen and Ink Sketches', 70), and a European traveller. By 1843, when he applied to the Royal Literary Fund for financial assistance, he was imprisoned for debt in Cardiff gaol. Subsequently he became a ship's surgeon on an emigrant vessel to New York. A Boston edition of his 'Chatterton' appeared in 1845, and he wrote a handbook for Lake Memphremagog (1845) and 'Local Loiterings' (1846). The attribution to him of 'Jack Ariel' (1847), a novel on board an Indiaman, is dubious: none of Dix's other publications is written with the same verve, and he makes no use of India and China elsewhere. 
While in America Dix took the temperance pledge but resumed drinking on his return to London. He was apparently drunk for five years, during which time he was arrested for intoxication, but discharged. In a further application to the Royal Literary Fund, at the end of 1847, he was described as chronically ill and destitute. His adventures during this period, which include writing ballads and verses for St Valentine cards, are described in 'Passages from the History of a Wasted Life' (1853) -- although here, as elsewhere, everything Dix says must be treated with extreme scepticism. 'Pen and Ink Sketches' had appeared in 1846, in which Dix reminisced about his encounters with Hannah More, Feargus O'Connor, Felicia Hemans, Robert Southey, Joseph Cottle, and Ebeneezer Elliott, among others. Although most of these memoirs were drunken fantasies, he nevertheless followed it up in 1852 with the equally imaginary 'Lions: Living and Dead', which includes his accounts of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Lamb, Shelley, Hazlitt, and various other luminaries. 
Dix abandoned his family in Bristol, returned to America, took the name John Ross Dix, and lived in Newport, publishing 'Loiterings in America' in 1850. He continued to write poetry, and contributed the text to J. Wesley Jones's 'Amusing and Thrilling Adventures of a Californian Artist' (1854). He rejoined the temperance movement, publishing 'The Worth of the Worthless' (with illustrations by Hammatt Billings) under the Shakespeare Division of the Sons of Temperance in 1854, and his religious faith was also restored: between 1851 and 1854 he published three accounts of popular preachers. 'The New Apostles' (1860), an attack on the Catholic Apostolic church, has also been attributed to Dix; if so, it involved him in a theological dispute with Edward Wilton Eddis and John George Francis. John Dix's last works appear to be unionist civil war ballads, published in 1864; more than a dozen survive. 
A review of 'Wasted Life' described the author as 'rather slender -- of a nervous bilious temperament -- has black curly hair... a nose that would have suited Napoleon -- and his pale classic face is lit up with a pair of black eyes' (Dix, 'Wasted Life', preface). He was twitchy, and given to blinking rapidly when excited. Dix had at least one son, the hymn writer William Chatterton Dix. 


@@@@@


doc= 7694


Dixey, John (1763-1820), sculptor and modeller, was born on 19 August 1763 in Dublin but spent the vast majority of his life outside Ireland. Of his parents, nothing is known. As a young man he moved to London in order to study at the Royal Academy Schools, which he entered as a painter on 29 October 1784 at the age of twenty-one. His industry and talent earned him a Royal Academy visiting scholarship to Italy, where he was intended to finish his aesthetic education. In 1789, however, when he was about to leave for Italy, he was offered a position in the United States, which was sufficient to induce him to emigrate immediately, and he abandoned his prestigious scholarship. 
On arrival in the United States, Dixey settled first in New York city, where he worked as a carver and gilder, and then in Pennsylvania, where he became a leading light on the American aesthetic scene, devoting himself assiduously to the promotion and resurrection of the arts. He exhibited at both the American and Pennsylvania academies. In the early 1810s his manifold efforts were rewarded when he was elected vice-president of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts. Alongside his administrative endeavours he also worked prolifically as an architectural sculptor, principally employed in the ornamental and decorative embellishment of various important civic and private buildings, including New York city hall and the state house at Albany, New York, for both of which he executed a statue of Justice. While in the United States he also executed some free-standing sculptural groups. His copy of Giuseppe Ceracchi's bust of Alexander Hamilton, the secretary of the treasury, is in the collection of the New York Historical Society. Although scarcely known in England, Dixey had a quiet yet good reputation in both Ireland and the United States until the early decades of the twentieth century. His name was kept alive after his death in New York city in 1820 by his son George Dixey, who adopted his father's profession as a modeller, and his second son, John V. Dixey, who was both a modeller and a proficient landscape painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 7695


Dixie, Sir Wolstan (1524/5-1594), merchant and administrator, mayor of London, was the fourth son of Thomas Dixie, a husbandman of Catworth in Huntingdonshire, and of Anne Jephson. In 1547 he was apprenticed to a leading merchant adventurer and freeman of the Skinners' Company, Geoffrey Walkeden (whose daughter he subsequently married), and he secured his freedom in 1555. His own trading interests seem to have concentrated on northern France and the Low Countries, and he showed little interest in developing new trades (he did not follow his master's interests in the Russia trade). His subsidy assessments ($50 in 1559, $150 in 1564, $250 in 1577, $300 in 1582, and $400 in 1589) are an indication of his steady accumulation of wealth. He invested in property in London and the provinces, owning the manors of Southwick, Wiltshire, and Market Bosworth, Leicestershire. But he was a Londoner at heart, residing successively in the parishes of St Lawrence Jewry, St Christopher-le-Stocks, St Mary Woolchurch, and St Michael Bassishaw, while maintaining a suburban retreat at Ealing. 
Dixie was an assiduous member of his livery company, serving as master on no fewer than seven occasions. After service on the court of common council for Cheap ward ('c'.1559- 'c'.1570) and Cordwainer Street ward (1572-4), he was elected to the court of aldermen on 4 February 1574, serving for Broad Street ward (1574-93) and briefly for Bassishaw (1593-4). He was a committed alderman, attending 60 per cent of the court's twice-weekly meetings during his tenure. He was sheriff of London in 1575-6 and lord mayor in 1585-6. On 6 February 1586 he was knighted. Dixie assumed the mayoral dignity against the shadows cast by the outbreak of war with Spain and escalating prices. There were rumours of anti-alien disturbances in the spring of 1586, and the tension among the ruling group is evident in Dixie's reaction to a personal attack upon him made at a Paul's Cross sermon on 6 March. George Closse, the minister of St Magnus, had criticized the lord mayor for what he considered to be Dixie's partiality in a case with which Closse had been involved several days earlier. Although Closse submitted at a well-publicized sermon at Paul's Cross on Palm Sunday as ordered by the court of high commission, Dixie remained dissatisfied and complained to the privy council. Refusing to accept the proffered private reconciliation, he was forced to content himself with the matter being put in suspension during his term of office, a compromise which may well have tainted his reputation for the rest of his term. It was fortunate for Dixie that the attention of Londoners was diverted by the horrific revelation of the Babington plot, the news of the capture of the conspirators in July being greeted with scenes of extraordinary jubilation in the capital. 
Dixie married twice. His first wife was Agnes (died 1567), daughter of his master, Geoffrey Walkeden. In 1569 he married Agnes (died 1600), daughter of Sir Christopher Draper (died 1581), lord mayor of London. It was a marriage which connected him with other leading members of the aldermanic bench, for Agnes's sisters married William Webb and Henry Billingsley, who became close friends and colleagues of Dixie. Dixie died on 8 January 1594 in the parish of St Michael Bassishaw in London and was buried there the following day. Dying without children, he left half of his goods to his wife, and the bulk of his estates to his great-nephew, Wolstan, later a prominent Leicestershire gentleman. His widow (who had custody of young Wolstan) remarried shortly after his death, taking as her husband William Hickman, a gentleman and a long-standing family friend. 
Dixie's childless state helps to explain the extent of his charitable bequests totalling $4484 13's'. 0died, but his religious sympathies, which lay with the godly, also played a role. He left bequests to the strangers' churches in London and provided $600 for the establishment of two fellowships and two scholarships at Sir Walter Mildmay's godly seminary, Emmanuel College, Cambridge. He provided for an annuity of $10 to the support of a lecturer in the church of St Michael Bassishaw. Dixie counted among his friends William Ashbold, the conformist parson of St Peter Cornhill and chaplain to Archbishop Whitgift, Henry Holland, then lecturer at St Martin Orgar, and Thomas Crooke, the presbyterian-inclined lecturer at Gray's Inn and brother-in-law to Laurence Chaderton, master of Emmanuel. To Christ's Hospital, of which he had been president since 1590, he left the manor of Southwick. Other charitable activities were focused upon the manor of Market Bosworth which he had purchased from Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, in 1589. He left the Skinners a total of $700 to establish a school for fifty to sixty poor scholars in the town, from which also one of the Emmanuel scholarships was to be drawn. There were, however, difficulties in getting the school properly established. The executors delayed the handover of money to the Skinners' Company and withheld the interest which had accrued. As the company declined to take on the charity without full funding, the lord keeper decreed in 1605 that Wolstan Dixie junior should enjoy the nomination of the schoolmaster and scholars. 


@@@@@


doc= 7696


Dixon, George (1748?-1795), naval officer and fur trader, was born in Kirkoswald, Cumberland; further details of his upbringing are unknown, though he did practise as a jeweller before going to sea. He served as a petty officer and armourer in the 'Discovery' during James Cook's last voyage in 1776 and appears later to have had the command of a merchant ship. Dixon, always interested in the search for the north-west passage, wrote to Sir Joseph Banks in August 1784, urging the overland exploration of Canada from Quebec to the north-west coast of North America. In May 1785 he was engaged by the King George's Sound Company (headed by Richard Cadman Etches) for the development and prosecution of the fur trade of the north-west coast. Dixon was appointed to command the 'Queen Charlotte' and sailed from Gravesend on 29 August 1785 in company with the 'King George', whose captain, Nathaniel Portlock, had been his shipmate in the 'Resolution' and was now the commander of the expedition. Having doubled Cape Horn and touched at the Sandwich (Hawaiian) Islands, they sailed from there on 13 June 1786; on 18 July they reached the coast of North America, near the mouth of Cook Inlet, in latitude 59 degree N. They remained there for several weeks and then worked their way south towards King George's Sound (Nootka Sound), off which they were on 24 September. Prevented from entering the sound by baffling winds and calms they returned to the Sandwich Islands, where they wintered. 
On 13 March 1787 the 'Queen Charlotte' and the 'King George' again sailed for the north-west coast of North America, and on 24 April they anchored off Montague Island. Here on 14 May Dixon's ship separated from the 'King George', it being considered more likely to lead to profitable results if the two worked independently. During the next three months Dixon was employed as far south as Nootka Sound (in mid-August), purchasing sea otter pelts from the Haida, taking eager note of Native American manners and customs, as well as of the trade facilities, and making a careful survey of the several points which came within his reach. James Cook had already denoted the general outline of the coast but the detail was still wanting, much of which Dixon now provided. Of these additions the most important was the large archipelago that he named Queen Charlotte Islands and later described as having surpassed 'our most sanguine expectations, and afforded a greater quantity of furs than perhaps any place hitherto known' ('Voyage Round the World', 235). Though he sighted and named Queen Charlotte Sound, Dixon failed to discover that it was a southward passage. Since the first object of the voyage was trade, and as the Queen Charlotte Islands seemed to more than answer immediate wants, Dixon was perhaps careless of further discoveries and, 'while claiming to have made considerable additions to the geography of this coast', he contented himself with the remark that: 'so imperfectly do we still know it that it is in some measure to be doubted whether we have yet seen the mainland. Certain it is that the coast abounds with islands, but whether any land we have been near is really the continent remains to be determined by future navigators. (ibid., 235-6)' An examination of Dixon's chart shows in fact that most of his work lay among the islands. 
On leaving Nootka Sound the 'Queen Charlotte' returned to the Sandwich Islands, whence she sailed on 18 September for China, where it had been agreed that she was to meet her consort. On 9 November she anchored at Macau, and at Whampoa (Huangpu) on 25 November she was joined by the 'King George'. There they sold their furs, of which the 'Queen Charlotte' had a particularly good cargo. Having taken on board a shipment of tea they dropped down to Macau, and on 9 February 1788 they sailed for England. In bad weather off the Cape of Good Hope the ships parted company and, though they met again at St Helena, they then sailed independently. The 'Queen Charlotte' arrived off Dover on 17 September, having been preceded by the 'King George' by about a fortnight. 
When a rival trader and explorer, John Meares, published an account of his voyages of 1788 and 1789 Dixon wrote a pamphlet criticizing its many inaccuracies and false claims to priority of discovery. There followed a brief pamphlet exchange, from which Dixon emerged victorious. Thereafter he continued to advise politicians and promoters of British discoveries on the possibility of finding a north-west passage. Aspects of his later life are obscure. He may have taught navigation at Gosport and he may be the author of 'The Navigator's Assistant' (1791). Previously, in 1789, Dixon had published, with Portlock, 'A Voyage Round the World; but More Particularly to the North-West Coast of America'; aside from the introduction and appendix the text was actually written by the supercargo of the 'Queen Charlotte', William Beresford. Dixon's final years were spent in St George, Bermuda, where he arrived from New York with his family in February 1794; there Dixon opened a jewellery shop. His wife Anne died soon after (and was buried on 20 May 1794). Dixon returned briefly to London but died, and was buried, at St George in November 1795. 


@@@@@


doc= 7697


Dixon, George (1820-1898), educational reformer and politician, was born on 21 July 1820 at Gomersal, Yorkshire, the fourth son in the family of five sons and three daughters of Abraham Dixon (died 1850), merchant and inventor in the woollen textile industry, of Whitehaven in Cumberland, and his wife, Laetitia (died 1842), daughter of John Taylor of Gomersal. He was educated at Leeds grammar school (1829-37) and travelled to France to learn the language in 1837-8. He then followed his brother Abraham (1815-1907) into employment with Rabone Bros. & Co., foreign merchants of Birmingham. He became a partner in 1844 and succeeded his brother as head of the firm, on whose behalf he spent some time in Australia. On 11 September 1855 he married Mary (1832-1885), youngest daughter of Judge James Stansfeld of the Halifax county court, and sister of James Stansfeld. 
Dixon came to public attention as an active member of the Birmingham and Edgbaston Debating Society, in which local politicians learned and practised the art of public speaking. He was known for his donations to the poor, his promotion of the rifle volunteer movement in Birmingham (December 1859), and his generous lead in securing Aston Hall for the town in September 1866. He was president of the Birmingham chamber of commerce from 1867 to 1877, and again in 1886. He became a magistrate (1864), town councillor for the Edgbaston ward (1863), and, in November 1866, mayor of Birmingham. In June 1867 his decisive action averted sectarian disorder during Catholic riots against the protestant demagogue William Murphy. 
Dixon detested religious bigotry of all kinds. Early in 1867 he began a series of Birmingham conferences to represent various religious and political opinions on the state of education. It was resolved that the municipal corporation should levy a rate for education and curb the employment of uninstructed young children. Dixon, supported by Joseph Chamberlain, advocated a compulsory education system, but this was controversial in view of its proposed non-sectarian, and indeed secular, aspects. The Birmingham Education Society was founded by Dixon and others, using their own resources, to extend school provision and pay the fees of the poorer children. In 1869 Dixon was elected president of the National Education League, founded by himself, Chamberlain, John Sandford, George Dawson, and R. W. Dale, to press for a national education system in England and Wales. 
Dixon's educational interests assisted his election as Liberal MP for Birmingham in July 1867. In a maiden speech to the Commons ('Hansard 3', 12 March 1868) he asserted that three causes were uppermost in the minds of the working-class electorate which he represented: justice for Ireland through the disestablishment of the Irish church; justice for themselves through abolition of the rate-paying clauses relating to the recent Reform Act; justice for their children through the extension and improvement of national education. Dixon supported a 'Married Women's Property Act' (10 June 1868) and was concerned about the adulteration of food and drink, the powers of the board of guardians, election expenses, the provision of rifles for India, and the bankruptcy laws. He wished the 'Licensing Act' to be impartially administered ('Birmingham Biographia', 1872-5). He argued the case for representative government with radical working men ('Diplomatic Review', April 1872). 
Dixon's arguments for the improvement of national education were based on the need for a skilled workforce to meet overseas competition ('Hansard 3', 24 March 1868). On the introduction of W. E. Forster's bill in 1870, Dixon dropped his own proposals and generally voted in support, but, prompted by Chamberlain, he moved a hostile amendment to the second reading, opposing the provision that religious instruction should be determined by local authorities. On 5 March 1872 he pressed for the establishment of school boards in rural as well as urban areas. In 1874 he failed in an attempt to make school attendance compulsory, which he repeated with the support of the Agricultural Labourers' Union during 1875-6. 
Suffering from pressure of work and anxious about his wife's health, in June 1876 Dixon admitted his intention to resign his parliamentary seat knowing that it would pass to Chamberlain, whom he greatly admired, though his decision was forced by an announcement in the 'Birmingham Post'. He had served on the Birmingham school board since 1870 and now replaced Chamberlain as its chairman (1876), though the latter tried to maintain his influence over the board in favour of secularism. This caused a temporary estrangement between the two men, to Dixon's great regret. Himself a moderate Anglican, he came to support 'Bible' reading without comment in board schools, with religious teaching and prayer on a voluntary basis. He advocated compulsory attendance, better provision for basic literacy, and the growth of technical education in the upper standards VI and VII. In 1884 he equipped at his own expense the Bridge Street seventh grade school, which later perpetuated his name, and which served as a model of its type. He advocated a trained and fully qualified teaching profession through queen's scholarships, day training colleges, and rewards to certificated teachers. His speeches to the Birmingham school board were published as policy documents in 1881 and 1889. 
When the parliamentary boundaries of Birmingham were extended in 1885 Dixon returned to the Commons as MP for the Edgbaston division in November of that year. Although he expressed anti-imperialist views during the Suez Canal crisis of 1883, he separated from Gladstone on the issue of home rule for Ireland, which he opposed in 1885-6, falling silent on all but educational issues in parliament. He took a prominent part in the round-table conference of 1887, which unsuccessfully attempted to achieve Liberal reunion, and later pressed for Conservative concessions in return for Unionist support. His voyage to Cape Town and New Zealand in 1888 increased his concern for imperial trade, but he threatened resignation over rating reform and subsidy to the agricultural interest in his later years ('Birmingham Daily Post', 25 January 1898). He strongly opposed Sir John Gorst's 'Education Bill' on the grounds that it tilted financial provision towards voluntary agencies and away from school boards ('Hansard 4', 1 Feb 1897), and revived the National Education League to campaign against it. 
Dixon died of heart and kidney failure at his residence, The Dales, 42 Augustus Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 24 January 1898. He received no public honours apart from the freedom of the city of Birmingham on 4 January, shortly before his death. He protested that he wanted recognition only from those with whom he had worked for so long ('Birmingham Biographia', 941-2). His obituary in 'The Times' stressed his achievement as an educational reformer, his conscientious public work, and kindness of heart, while noting his lack of humour and limited power of oratory. Joseph Chamberlain's tribute to him as a vice-president of the Unionist Party in Birmingham referred to his services to education and strenuous opposition to home rule: 'a tower of strength to us' ('The Times', 26, 27 Jan 1898). Chamberlain's late colleague may, however, have been less 'simple-minded' than he supposed. Dixon's funeral on the 28th matched his importance, and its interdenominational character, Jewish as well as Christian, was noted ('Birmingham Daily Post', 30 Jan 1898). He was buried in Witton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 7698


Dixon, Henry Hall (1822-1870), sporting writer, was born on 16 May 1822 in Carlisle, Cumberland, the second son of Peter Dixon (1789-1866), a cotton manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah Rebecca, daughter of General Tredway Clarke. He was educated at Rugby School (1838-40) under Thomas Arnold and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1841-6), where he graduated BA in 1846. He would have obtained high honours in classics had he not had an attack of ophthalmia, a disease from which he suffered for over twenty-five years. In 1847 he moved to Doncaster, where his father had arranged for him to be articled to a firm of solicitors headed by Robert Baxter. 
No greater mistake could have been made, for Baxter detested horse-racing and campaigned for the abolition of Doncaster races, whereas Dixon had already become a lifelong devotee of the sport. At Rugby he saw Lottery, the greatest steeplechaser of the time, win the 1840 Dunchurch steeplechase, and reported this famous race to his form master as 'Lottery primus erat; Nonna secunda fuit' (Lawley, 79). While still at school, and later at Cambridge, he wrote on sporting subjects for 'Bell's Life in London and Sporting Chronicle', so it was natural that after he moved to Doncaster he should spend more time writing on the same subjects for the 'Doncaster Gazette' than studying for the law. In a short time he became editor of the paper, and from it was introduced to Vincent Dowling, editor of 'Bell's Life'; on Dowling's death in November 1852 he was offered, but refused, the editorship of 'Bell's Life'. He also declined the offer of a government post from Sir James Graham. 
Dixon married on 12 May 1847 Caroline ('b'. 1824), daughter of Thomas Lynes; they had thirteen children, many of whom died in infancy. Among those who survived into adulthood was Sir Alfred Herbert Dixon, cotton spinner. In 1850 they moved from Doncaster to London, where Dixon was reading for the bar, living first at St George's Terrace, Gloucester Road, and then at Kensington Square. The same year he began writing regularly for the 'Sporting Magazine', first under the pseudonym of General Chasse, and then as the Druid. Much of the material that first appeared in his articles in this and other sporting journals was later incorporated into his books 'The Post and the Paddock' (1856), 'Silk and Scarlet' (1859), and 'Scott and Sebright' (1862). These books are important sources for turf history; they rapidly became best-sellers, and have retained their position as classics of sporting literature to this day. He was also a regular contributor to reviews and magazines. For many years he wrote the columns 'National sports' and 'The farm' for the 'Illustrated London News'; he did biographies and leaders for the 'Sporting Life', wrote political verse for 'Punch' and 'The Examiner', and contributed articles to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and the 'Daily News'. Perhaps the two best articles he wrote were 'Cub-hunting' in the 'Daily News' and a memoir of the marquess of Hastings in the 'Sporting Life'. 
The Druid rarely hunted or betted on a horse-race, but he was an enthusiastic spectator of many kinds of sport, including coursing, cricket, and billiards as well as horse-racing; prize-fighting and rowing, however, had little appeal to him. He wrote 'rather for the amusement than the conviction of mankind' ('Baily's Magazine', 18, 1870, 119) and his style was regarded as 'quaint almost to oddity' ('Field Quarterly Magazine and Review', 1, 1870, 179). He collected an immense amount of information, to which he then gave a somewhat rose-coloured hue. Perhaps betraying their origins as magazine articles, and suffering from a lack of revision (which the Druid never cared to do), his books have a certain formlessness, and they contain a number of obscure allusions, but there is also a strong vein of poetry in many of his sporting recollections and landscape descriptions. Although many sporting journalists have tried to emulate him since, few have succeeded. 
Dixon was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1853 and practised for a time on the midland circuit. While writing 'Silk and Scarlet', he was also, to placate his father, compiling 'A Treatise on the Law of the Farm' (1858), which remained a standard work for over forty years. This awakened his interest in farming matters, and, following its publication, he began a series of articles on 'The flocks and herds of Great Britain' for the 'Mark Lane Express'. He visited over eighty herds, and towards the end of his life he became more interested in cattle and farming matters than the turf. 'Saddle and Sirloin' (1870) is his principal work on the herds and cattle of England. In 1865 he published 'Field and Fern', which brought together the results of a tour he made of all the principal Scottish herds. At the end of this tour he rode from the Orkney Islands back to his house in London on a half-broken mare to arrive home utterly exhausted in the middle of a snowstorm with the words 'Thank God for bringing me home to die with wife and children around me' (Lawley, 330). 
The Druid had a reputation for eccentricity, arising for the most part from absent-mindedness and introspection. He never kept regular meal times, and displayed a marked indifference to money. Perhaps as a result of his numerous tramps, he suffered from a succession of severe colds, which led to asthma and then to bronchitis, and his health deteriorated. Towards the end of his life he was in considerable pain, aggravated by a polyp in the nose, and he confided to his eldest son that he would be the happiest man at his own funeral. He died of heart disease and dropsy on 16 March 1870 at his home, 59 Warwick Gardens, Kensington, London. His wife survived him. Few of the journals for which he wrote paid him, and he died a relatively poor man. His eldest son, Henry Sydenham Dixon (1848-1931), became a noted writer on sporting topics. 


@@@@@


doc= 7699


Dixon, James (1788-1871), Wesleyan Methodist minister, was born on 29 October 1788 at King's Mills, a hamlet near Castle Donington in Leicestershire. After his conversion in 1807 and a period in local preaching, he became a Wesleyan minister in 1812. For some years he attracted no particular notice in the circuits in which he served. It was after his return from Gibraltar in 1825 that his remarkable gifts began to be observed, and he was soon regarded as among the leading preachers of the Wesleyan body. He was elected president of the conference in 1841, when he preached the sermon 'Methodism in its origin, economy, and present position' (subsequently published). In 1847 he was elected representative of the English conference to the conference of the Methodist Episcopal church in the United States, and also president of the conference of Canada. While in North America he preached and addressed meetings in many of the chief cities. His well-known work 'Methodism in America' (1849) was the fruit of this visit. 
Dixon remained in the itinerant Wesleyan ministry for fifty years, travelling in London, Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, Sheffield, and other large towns. His preaching was entirely original, and was marked by grandeur, thought, and impassioned feeling. His reputation as a platform speaker was equally high. His speeches at the great Wesleyan missionary anniversaries, and on the slave trade, popery, and other such questions as then stirred the evangelical party in England, were celebrated. He was selected several times to represent the Methodist church at mass meetings connected with these issues. Dixon belonged to the middle period of Methodism, the period with which are associated the names of Jabez Bunting, Richard Watson (whose daughter Mary he married), and Thomas Jackson. Dixon was author of a 'Memoir of the Rev. W. Edward Miller', the organist and tune writer, and of several published sermons, charges, and lectures. He also wrote occasionally in the 'London Quarterly Review', which he had helped to establish. But the great work of his life was preaching, and his sermons were among the most ennobling and beautiful examples of the modern evangelical pulpit. Because of his failing sight Dixon retired from the full-time ministry in 1862, spending his closing years in Bradford, where he died on 28 December 1871. Among his surviving children was the ecclesiastical historian and poet Richard Watson Dixon. 


@@@@@


doc= 7700


Dixon, Matthew (d. 1710), portrait painter, was a pupil of Sir Peter Lely. In her article 'Nicholas Dixon, limner, and Matthew Dixon, painter, died 1710', Mary Edmond noted that 'Vertue's 'Mr John Dixon' was... non-existent', and that 'Walpole added to the confusion by combining details given by Vertue about Nicholas Dixon the limner with those about 'John' Dixon, and attributing them to the latter' (Edmond, 611). Matthew Dixon 'drew in Crayons from the life... with great excellence.... There are several peices of Art of his performance in Crayons. the Dutches Cleveland, Portsmouth... after Lilly. & his own picture excellently well done in a fine manner' (Vertue, 'Note books', 4.50). Vertue noted further that 'he left London & the practice of painting & retir'd to a Small estate in the Country. at Thwaite near Bungay in Suffolk' (ibid.). Mary Edmond established that Dixon bought the 'farm at Thwaite after 1666 and by Feb 1691/2 was one of the principal inhabitants of the village. One month later he had married Mary, daughter of John and Alice Gosling, members of a fairly prominent Norfolk family'; Mary was described in the register as 'the last of the Goslings' and was married on her eighteenth birthday. She was born on 22 March 1674 and baptized five days later. Matthew and Mary had six children: Catherine ('b'. 1692), Mary ('b'. 1694), John Gosling ('bap'. 28 Jan 1696), Alice ('bap'. March 1698), and Anne ('bap'. 1708); there was also a younger son, Matthew. Matthew Dixon was buried at Thwaite on 2 November 1710. His will records that he bequeathed his own picture to his wife; Sir Peter Lely's picture to his elder son, John; and to his daughters pictures including those of the duchesses of Portsmouth and Cleveland (Edmond, 612). Whinney and Millar noted that Matthew Dixon was among the 'more shadowy figures in Lely's 'atelier'... of whose wooden imitations of the later Lely a good example was at Ecton in the portrait of James Sotheby (1679)' (Edmond, 612). 


@@@@@


doc= 7701


Dixon, John (c.1740-1811), engraver, the fourth son of Thomas Dixon (died 1758), a hosier, of Cork Hill, Dublin, was born about 1740, probably in Dublin. He trained at the drawing school of the Dublin Society and possibly then worked for his brother Samuel and on plates for the linen-printing works at Leixlip. In 1760 he engraved John Rocque's four-sheet map of co. Dublin and in 1761 he produced portraits of admirals Boscawen and Granby for the 'Dublin Annual Register'. In 1763, from Cork Hill, he published his first mezzotint, a portrait of Nicholas, Viscount Taafe, after Robert Hunter. This won him a premium of 5 guineas from the Dublin Society and also inspired admiring verses in 'Sleator's Public Gazetter'. 
Dixon arrived in London about 1765 and was proposed for a fellowship of the Society of Artists in May 1766, when he first exhibited there. This exhibited work (1766-75) was dominated by large portraits after Joshua Reynolds, but Dixon also showed subjects from old masters and after other contemporary painters. In 1769 he was one of those appointed to arrange models at the society's teaching academy in Maiden Lane. He was a director in 1770-71, and again from 1772 to 1775, and regularly attended meetings. His sympathy with the Wilkite cause was signalled by prints of its leading spokesmen: he engraved his own portrait of William Beckford and Robert Edge Pine's portraits of Wilkes and Sir Joseph Mawbey. 
Most of Dixon's early plates were published by William Wynne Ryland, among them five of the seven Reynolds mezzotints that he exhibited. His work was distinguished and included several of the most highly rated plates of the day, notably 'A Tigress', after George Stubbs (1772), 'An Incantation', after John Hamilton Mortimer (1773), Reynolds's most celebrated history painting, 'Ugolino' (1774), and two plates of David Garrick -- as Abel Drugger, after Johann Zoffany (1771), and as Richard III, after Nathaniel Dance (1772). When he published another political design, 'The Oracle', in 1774, Dixon was at the height of his powers and his fame. His style was distinctive -- featuring dramatic contrasts with marked use of etching and of drypoint burr to create rich blacks. Unusually, he signed his plates in the image, a self-conscious assertion of his prowess as an artist. He also designed and etched a few landscapes and such droll mezzotints as 'The Dentist, or, Teeth Drawn with a Touch' (1768). 
Dixon moved, in 1771, to Kempe's Row, Chelsea, and then, if not before, he must have made the acquaintance of his neighbour and landlord Nicholas Kempe, a bullion porter to the Royal Mint and one of the original proprietors of Ranelagh Gardens, and of his beautiful wife, Ann, the daughter of Henry Meriton of Chelsea. Kempe died in 1774, and on 15 July 1775 the tall, handsome artist married his widow at St George's, Hanover Square. He now enjoyed a life of leisure: in 1776 Johann Georg Wille, a celebrated German engraver living in Paris, noted in his journal that 'M. Dixon, formerly an engraver in London, but having become very rich through his marriage and having abandoned his art, came to see me while travelling for pleasure' ('Memoires et journal', 2.52). Dixon was on friendly terms with Edmund Burke and Garrick. In 1801 he joined the Society of Arts and wrote a series of pamphlets advocating the improvement of the fisheries in Ireland. He died in December 1811 at Phillimore Place, Kensington, and his will was proved in January 1812. His prints may be found in the British Museum and the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 7702


Dixon, Joseph (1806-1866), Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh, born at Coalisland, co. Tyrone, on 2 February 1806, entered St Patrick's College, Maynooth, in 1822. He was ordained priest in 1829, and after holding the office of dean in the college for five years was promoted to the professorship of sacred scripture and Hebrew. As a native of Armagh diocese, he was chosen as 'dignissimus' by the clergy of that diocese to succeed the primate, Archbishop Crolly, who died in 1849. As Dixon supported the policies of Archbishop Murray, the opponents of the Queen's Colleges sought to prevent his appointment by the pope. Accordingly they proposed Dr Paul Cullen, a stranger to the diocese, as more suitable. Cullen was appointed and steered the resolutions condemning the colleges through the Synod of Thurles. On the translation of Cullen to Dublin, Dixon was chosen to succeed him as archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland. His appointment by propaganda, on 28 September 1852, was confirmed by the pope on 3 October, and he was consecrated on 21 November. He was an excellent diocesan bishop but failed to live up to expectations that he might assume leadership of Murray's conciliatory party in the hierarchy. As a result, episcopal politics became polarized between the ultramontane Cullen and the ultranationalist archbishop John MacHale of Tuam. 
Dixon wrote 'A General Introduction to the Sacred Scriptures' (2 vols., 1852). This was a scholarly summary of the subject, but the implications of the new 'higher criticism' were dismissed. In 1855 he published 'The Blessed Cornelius, or, Some tidings of an archbishop of Armagh who went to Rome in the twelfth century and did not return', an interesting devotional work. 
Dixon died at Armagh after a short illness on 29 April 1866, and was buried in the grounds of the Sacred Heart Convent, Armagh. 


@@@@@


doc= 7703


Dixon, Joshua (bap. 1743, d. 1825), physician and biographer, was baptized at St Nicholas's Church, Whitehaven, Cumberland, on 12 August 1743, the son of Joshua and Elizabeth Dixon. He graduated MD from the University of Edinburgh in 1768, and thereafter practised medicine in Whitehaven. In 1775 Dixon married Ann Fletcher; they had three sons and a daughter. Dixon was instrumental in the establishment of the dispensary at Whitehaven in 1783, and acted as its physician and chief administrator. His medical career was characterized as 'one continued scene of usefulness and benevolence' ('GM', 185). Dixon died on 7 January 1825 in Lowther Street, Whitehaven, and was buried at St Nicholas's Church on the 14th. 
Dixon was the author of 'The Literary Life of William Brownrigg, M.D., F.R.S.' (1801). Brownrigg, of whom Dixon was a former pupil, was a Whitehaven medical practitioner and chemist who conducted important scientific research on salt making, mineral waters, and the effects of fire-damp. Brownrigg was noted for his diffidence in publishing, and Dixon wrote his biography to help publicize Brownrigg's findings, and also to idealize Brownrigg's character. 


@@@@@


doc= 7704


Dixon, Richard Watson (1833-1900), ecclesiastical historian and poet, was born on 5 May 1833 at Islington, London, the eldest of the six surviving children of James Dixon (1788-1871) and his third wife, Mary Watson (died 1856), the only daughter of Richard Watson (1781-1833). In the biography he wrote of his father, Dixon described his mother as 'an excellent Latin and Greek scholar, a perfect French and a sufficient Italian linguist, and an exquisite musician' (Dixon, 169). His father was a famous Wesleyan preacher, leader of his church, and president of the Methodist conference, who, said his son, 'lived upon a vast height of holiness' (ibid., 476). With such a father it is perhaps not surprising that Dixon was a diffident, solitary, reserved, and impressionable child. 
As his father was obliged by Methodist practice to change the circuit of his ministry every three years, Dixon's childhood was spent successively in Islington, Liverpool, Sheffield, Manchester, and Poplar, London, and he received his early education at home. In 1847 the family moved to Birmingham and he entered King Edward VI School, where his schoolfriends included Edwin Hatch and Edward Burne-Jones. On 3 June 1852 he matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, and in his time there was founder of and a contributor to the 'Oxford and Cambridge Magazine' (1856), modelled in part upon the Pre-Raphaelite journal 'The Germ' (1848). For a few months in 1857 Dixon joined William Morris, Burne-Jones, and Dante Gabriel Rossetti at their bohemian lodgings in Red Lion Square in London to study painting, but, lacking means, confidence, and ability, he soon returned to his first intention of preparing for Anglican orders. (As both his parents were conservative Methodists who did not renounce membership in the Church of England, they did not see their son's vocation as disloyal to their own communion.) 
Dixon was ordained in 1858, the year in which, redeeming his inglorious third class in Greats (1856), he won the Arnold historical prize at Oxford for his essay 'The close of the tenth century of the Christian era'. The three years following his ordination he spent as a curate in the populous working-class London parishes of St Mary-the-Less, Lambeth (1858-61), and St Mary's, Newington (1861). On 9 April 1861 he married a widow with three daughters -- Maria Thomson (1821-1876), daughter of Charles Sturgeon and the former wife of William Thomson of East Lothian. Later that year he became assistant master at Highgate School, Middlesex, where he talked of John Keats by the hour to his pupils, one of whom was Gerard Manley Hopkins. 
Dixon's first publication was a colourful Keatsian narrative, 'The Sicilian Vespers' (1852). His 'St. John in Patmos' (1863), another long narrative-descriptive prize poem, is more restrained. 'New Testament' or historical subjects are also prominent in his collections, 'Christ's Company' (1861) and 'Historical Odes' (1864), but the collections' most remarkable verse is found in dream lyrics exploring the psyche in terms of a private symbolism, or in brooding nature poems. This early verse was ignored or dismissed by reviewers and found so few readers that the print runs of the 1861 and 1864 volumes were not sold out until after 1935. 
Dixon moved from London for the sake of his health and became, in turn, second master at Carlisle high school (1862-8); minor canon and honorary librarian of Carlisle Cathedral (1868-75) and honorary canon from 1874; vicar of Hayton, near Carlisle (1875-83); and rural dean of Brampton, Cumberland (1879-83). He continued to write poetry and he published essays on ecclesiastical history. His piously eulogistic biography of his father appeared in 1874, and in that year he also embarked on his major scholarly undertaking: the 'History of the Church of England from the Abolition of the Roman Jurisdiction' (6 vols., 1879-1902). His wife died in 1876 and he had long been separated from his Oxford friends, but he was reinvigorated when, unexpectedly, in 1878, Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote in praise of his neglected poetry. Hopkins valued it so much, in fact, that he copied out three of Dixon's long poems ('St. Paul', 'St. John', and 'Love's Consolation') to keep when, as a Jesuit, he no longer owned books of his own. Hopkins introduced Dixon to Robert Bridges and the three friends formed, mostly by correspondence, a close, mutually comforting circle united by poetry. Dixon was a less skilled poet and critic than Bridges, but he perceived and appreciated the quality and power of Hopkins's innovative poetry more than Bridges could. On 9 February 1882 he married Matilda Elizabeth Routledge (1840-1922), daughter of the publisher George Routledge. Two grown-up daughters of his first wife continued to live at home, but he had no children of his own from either marriage. On 30 November 1883 he was inducted as vicar of Warkworth in Northumberland, and in 1884 he was appointed rural dean of Alnwick. 
Stimulated by Hopkins and Bridges, Dixon revised and completed 'Mano, a Poetical History of the Time of the Close of the Tenth Century', a long poem begun in 1875 and published by Routledge in 1883. A work of epic scale, more than 5000 lines long, it is written in well-controlled 'terza rima': its fictional action, a vain struggle of faith against fate, is placed within the historical setting of a savage and pious age when people lived in daily expectation of the end of the world (the age Dixon had first studied in his Arnold prize essay). Two slim volumes, 'Odes and Eclogues' (1884) and 'Lyrical Poems' (1887), handsomely printed by Bridges' friend C. H. O. Daniel on his private press at Worcester College, Oxford, contain Dixon's finest lyrics on nature and mutability. His verse was much clearer than in the early volumes: youthful themes of supernatural terror were replaced by more human concerns of advancing age. His third Daniel Press book, 'The Story of Eudocia and her Brothers' (1888), is a competent narrative poem in heroic couplets. 

'Mano' was admired by Algernon Charles Swinburne, who recommended Dixon for the poet laureateship after Tennyson's death in 1892; Bridges and Hopkins praised highly the imaginative penetration and freshness of 'Lyrical Poems'; and reviewers were kinder to Dixon in the 1880s than they had been in the 1860s. Dixon himself, however, suffered a mental depression in 1891-2 (following bouts of influenza, bronchitis, and pneumonia), which caused him to destroy his verse manuscripts and resolve to write no more poetry except on religious subjects. The only poem he subsequently sent to the press was a funeral elegy in Latin on his boyhood friend Edwin Hatch (1892). Bridges kept some manuscripts and, over the years, edited three selections of Dixon's published and unpublished poetry: 'Songs and Odes' (1896); 'Last Poems' (1905), with a preface by Mary Coleridge; and 'Poems: a Selection' (1909), with a fine, affectionate memoir by Bridges himself. 
Dixon's work on the 'History of the Church of England' continued, much interrupted by ill health. As the four volumes published by 1891 were well reviewed and his worth as an ecclesiastical historian was widely accepted, his friends were angry that he received no church preferment. He was proposed for two lay academic appointments, the Oxford chair of poetry in 1885 and the Dixie chair of ecclesiastical history at Cambridge in 1891, but in both cases, overcome with diffidence, he withdrew before the election. However, his historical labours received overdue recognition when in October 1899 he was admitted to an honorary fellowship at Pembroke College, Oxford, and when in December the university conferred upon him the honorary degree of DD. Soon afterwards he again contracted influenza: he died of influenza and heart disease on 23 January 1900 at the vicarage at Warkworth and was interred four days later in Warkworth burial-ground. He was survived by his second wife. 
The last two volumes (5 and 6) of the 'History of the Church of England', which brought the narrative to 1570, were published in 1902, bringing to completion a work planned on a massive scale and, in view of Dixon's parochial and decanal duties and his remoteness from good libraries, one executed with great determination and intellectual stamina. Although superseded by later scholarship, the 'History' remains highly readable. Dixon writes as if from the viewpoint of a fair-minded contemporary, observing a process without any view of an end which could distort the facts or excuse injustice in the light of ultimate benefit. His narrative is continually enlivened by an unobtrusive dry humour; his frequent character studies are serious but witty, charitable but acute. Some trace of these qualities appears also in the dozen articles he wrote for the 'Dictionary of National Biography' between 1886 and 1890. 
Dixon was fairly tall and was left-handed; he was dark-complexioned and full-bearded with a good head of hair which turned white in middle age; his voice was deep, slow, and melancholy; he was an inveterate pipe-smoker (a habit that may have contributed to frequent bronchial complaints in the last decade of his life). According to H. C. Beeching, 'it was often remarked that Dixon had a great look of Chaucer as he appears in Hoccleve's portrait, and the resemblance was more than external, reaching to a characteristic and humorous interest in all sorts and conditions of people' ('DNB'). Bridges was struck by Dixon's humility, which with strangers passed for shyness and gaucherie, thus disguising his eager, ingenuous temper. Hopkins found something of this temper in Dixon's best verse: 'an extreme purity, a directness of human nature, and absence of affectation which is most rare' ('Hopkins to Robert Bridges', 139). 


@@@@@


doc= 7705


Dixon, Robert (1614/15-1688), Church of England clergyman, was the son of James Dixon of Aldersgate, London, a member of the Cutlers' Company, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Walter Betson of Cambridge. He attended the Perse School in Cambridge and matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, on 22 March 1631, aged sixteen, by which time his father had died. He graduated BA in 1635 and proceeded MA in 1638. He was ordained on 21 September 1639 and afterwards seems to have obtained a benefice in Kent. He married Sarah Mabb of Bearsted; by 1663 they had three children, of whom the eldest was then aged seventeen. 
In 1644, returning from preaching a funeral sermon in Gravesend, he was arrested in the yard of The Crown inn, Rochester, apparently for his royalism and his refusal to take the covenant. According to his son James he spent fourteen months in close confinement in Knole House, near Sevenoaks, and, later, at Leeds Castle in Kent. In 1647 he was presented to the rectory of Tunstall in Kent, from which he was soon sequestrated for royalism. He was incorporated at Oxford on 12 July 1653. He was restored to the parish of Tunstall in 1660 and was made vicar of St Nicholas, Rochester, and a prebendary of Rochester Cathedral in the same year. In June 1661 his son Robert ('b'. 1646) entered St John's, Cambridge, as did his other son, James ('b'. 1648), in March of the following year. In March 1668 he dedicated 'The Doctrine of Faith, Justification and Assurance' to the royalist Sir Edward Hales of Tunstall Place, his 'first Benefactor and most liberal Patron of my Studies' (sig. A2'v'). Later in the same year he was created DD after the king wrote to the University of Cambridge on his behalf. In 1670 he became vicar of Stockbury in Kent. In 1674 he published 'The Degrees of Consanguinity, and Affinity'. This work was intended to inform readers as to which relationships were prohibited by God and which were not: the first page contains a quotation from 'Leviticus' 18: 6, 'None of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to him.' In 'The Nature of the Two Testaments' (1676) he attacked presbyterians and Catholics alike, and argued: 'I take them to be the best Divines... that preach the 'New Testament' and not the 'Old''. This work also contains a particularly striking eulogy of 'the most Excellent' Hugo Grotius (sig. B2'r'). In 1681 he published 'A Short Essay of Modern Divinity', and two years later a certain R. D. published 'Candida, or, The Witches', a 'crazy' and 'eccentric' ('DNB') verse satire on existing society. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' doubted the traditional attribution of this title to Robert Dixon, but it was printed and published by Samuel Roycroft and Robert Clavell, both of whom produced two titles for Dixon in 1681. In addition Samuel Roycroft's father, Thomas, had printed two pamphlets for Dixon in the 1670s. The likelihood is, therefore, that 'Candida' was indeed written by Robert Dixon. He died in May 1688, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7706


Dixon, Thomas (1679/80-1729), Presbyterian minister and college teacher, was probably the son of an episcopalian, but not, as formerly believed, of Thomas Dixon (died 1704), who was ejected from the vicarage of Kelloe, co. Durham, as a nonconformist. Dixon studied at Manchester dissenting academy under John Chorlton and James Coningham, probably from 1700 to 1704. While a student, he wrote to Edmund Calamy 'in a state of suspense between conformity and nonconformity' (McLachlan, 133). His first ministerial appointment was at Colchester in 1704. 
Before October 1705 Dixon had succeeded Roger Anderton as minister of a congregation at Whitehaven, founded by presbyterians from the north of Ireland and meeting in a 'chapel for the use of protestant presbyterian or congregational dissenters in the worship of God in their way, so long as the law alloweth thereof'. Having obtained a bond on 21 September 1708, he married Eleanor Stanger, daughter of the ruling elder at Cockermouth Independent Church, who no doubt subsequently acted as matron of the boarding establishment of his academy. In a trust deed of March 1711 he is described as 'Thomas Dixon, clerk'. The academy Dixon established at Whitehaven was for the education mainly of students for the ministry. He probably acted under the advice of Calamy, whom he accompanied on his journey to Scotland in April 1709. During his visit to Edinburgh, Dixon received (21 April 1709) the honorary degree of MA, with Calamy receiving a DD at the same time. Dixon took with him two students, including Jeremiah Sawrey of Broughton Tower, near Coniston, a grandson of Dr Richard Gilpin. The academy was in operation in 1710, and on the removal of Coningham from the Manchester academy in 1712, it became the leading nonconformist academy in the north of England. Mathematics was taught by John Barclay until 1714, when there may have been a partial suspension of activities due to the 'Schism Act'. Among Dixon's pupils were John Taylor, of the Hebrew concordance, George Benson, the biblical critic, Caleb Rotheram, who became head of the Kendal academy, and Henry Winder, author of the 'History of Knowledge'. In 1712 Dixon provided particulars of Cumberland and Westmorland congregations to John Evans, who recorded them in his manuscripts. During his residence at Whitehaven he was the leading nonconformist in the county, and secured aid from the Presbyterian Fund for many of his brethren. 
In 1722 or 1723 Dixon moved to Bank Street Chapel, Bolton, Lancashire, as successor to the minister Samuel Bourn (1648-1719). He still continued his academy, and educated several ministers, including Thomas Butterworth. On 20 May 1718 he had been awarded an MD by King's College, Aberdeen, and he is said to have attained a considerable medical practice in Bolton. Probably this accumulation of duties in a steadily growing town shortened his life. His congregation exceeded 1000, and was second only to Manchester in the county. He died at the manse, Bank Street, Bolton, on 14 August 1729, in his fiftieth year, and was buried in his meeting-house. There, a mural tablet erected to his memory by his elder son, Richard Dixon, also a medical practitioner, characterizes him as 'facile medicorum et theologorum princeps' ('easily chief amongst physicians and theologians'). 
Dixon's younger son, 
Dixon died on 23 February 1754 and was buried beside his father. Joshua Dobson of Cockey Moor preached his funeral sermon. His friend Seddon edited from his papers a posthumous tract, 'The sovereignty of the divine administration... a rational account of our blessed Saviour's temptation', which was published in a second edition in 1766. In 1810 William Turner of Newcastle had two quarto volumes, in shorthand, containing Dixon's notes on the 'New Testament'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7707


Thomas Dixon (1721-1754), Presbyterian minister, was born on 16 July 1721 and educated for the ministry in Caleb Rotheram's academy at Kendal, which he entered in 1738, having received a student grant from the Presbyterian Fund. His first settlement was at Thame, Oxfordshire, from 1743, on a salary of $25 a year. On 13 May 1750 he became assistant to Dr John Taylor at Norwich. Here, at Taylor's suggestion, he began a Greek concordance, on the plan of Taylor's Hebrew one, but the manuscript fragments of the work show that not much was done. He found it difficult to satisfy the demands of a fastidious congregation, and gladly accepted, in August 1752, a call to his father's former flock at Bolton. He was not ordained until 26 April 1753. With John Seddon of Cross Street Chapel, Manchester, then the only Socinian preacher in the district, he maintained a warm friendship, and is believed to have shared his views, though his publications are silent in regard to the person of Christ. According to Nightingale, his heterodox views led to a secession which assisted in the formation of the Duke's Alley Congregational Church. Dixon was also tolerant towards Methodism: Nightingale quotes a letter from Dixon, stating 'I think the Methodists behaving peaceably should not be molested' (Nightingale, 'Lancashire Nonconformity', 11-12). 


@@@@@


doc= 7708


Dixon, William Henry (1783-1854), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born at the vicarage house, Wadworth, Yorkshire, on 2 November 1783, son of the Revd Henry Dixon (1750-1820), vicar of Wadworth, and his first wife, Ann, daughter of the Revd William Mason and half-sister to the poet William Mason. Dixon later inherited Mason's estates in the East Riding, together with various manuscripts by Mason and Thomas Gray. He attended the grammar schools of Worsborough and Houghton-le-Spring, and in 1801 matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he studied music under Charles Hague. In January 1805 he graduated BA, proceeding MA in 1809, and in 1807 entered into orders. His first curacy was at Tickhill, Yorkshire. On 9 January 1809 he married Mary Ann (died 1830), daughter of James Fenton of Loversall, Doncaster. 
Dixon's first preferment was a canonry of Ripon, to which he was appointed in 1815 by the dean, Robert Waddilove. Thereafter he amassed Yorkshire benefices, mainly in the gift of the York chapter, including Mapleton (1821-4), Wistow and Cawood (1821-4), Topcliffe, and Sutton on the Forest, also holding the prebend of Weighton from 1825. In 1828 Edward Harcourt, archbishop of York, appointed him domestic chaplain, a position he also held under Harcourt's successor, Thomas Musgrave. He became a residentiary canon of York in 1831 and held the livings of Etton and Bishopthorpe, both in the gift of the archbishop, from 1837 until his death. He was considered an able steward of the church's temporalities, improving vicarage houses and rebuilding chancels, and was a supporter of public charities and church schools. As rural dean of York from 1842 he made a personal visitation of every church in his jurisdiction, and maintained good relations with dissenters. His role in the efforts to revive the convocation of York was controversial. Having attended the first such clergy meeting in November 1837, he was president of the next gathering in November 1847 as representative of the dean and chapter of York. In fulfilment of what he considered the wishes of the recently deceased Harcourt, who resisted a revival of convocation's powers, he prorogued the assembly, defending his actions in 'Synodus Eboracensis' (1848), a reply to criticisms by Robert Wilberforce, archdeacon of the East Riding. Dixon's stand was said to have brought him into conflict with many of his friends. 
Dixon was married a second time, on 2 February 1832, to Mary Anne, daughter of Rear-Admiral Hugh Robinson. An accomplished scholar, he devoted his leisure to antiquarian researches, mainly into church history. He was elected FSA in 1821. For several years he worked on extending James Torre's manuscript annals of the members of the cathedral of York. After Dixon's death it was proposed to publish these materials as a memorial to their collator and, after spending a further ten years working on the materials, James Raine (the younger) published a first volume of 'Fasti Eboracenses' (1863), including the lives of the first forty-three primates of the northern province, ending with John de Thoresby (1373). Dixon died at Minster Yard, York, on 17 February 1854, and was buried in the public cemetery at York, which he had helped to found. 


@@@@@


doc= 7709


Dixon, William Hepworth (1821-1879), journalist and writer, was born on 30 June 1821 at Newton Street, Great Ancoats, in Manchester, the son of Abner Dixon and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Cryer, of whom little is known. He grew up in Over Darwen, where he was tutored by his great-uncle, Michael Beswick. He later became clerk to a merchant named Thompson at Manchester. He married, on 16 September 1844, Mary Ann McMahon. Dixon began writing at an early age, beginning with a play called 'The Azamoglan', which was printed privately. Between 1842 and 1846 he wrote for both the 'North of England Magazine' and the 'Illuminated Magazine'. In 1846 he became editor of the 'Cheltenham Journal'. During his two months as editor he won two principal essay prizes in Madden's 'Prize Essay Magazine'. Later in the same year he moved to London, where he entered the Inner Temple. He was not called to the bar until 1 May 1854 and never practised law. 
After abandoning the law, Dixon began contributing to 'The Athenaeum' and the 'Daily News', in which he published two series of bold articles, 'The literature of the lower orders' and 'London prisons'; the latter led to his first serious works, 'John Howard and the Prison World of Europe' (1849, three editions) and 'The London Prisons' (1850). At about the same time he was appointed a deputy commissioner of the Great Exhibition of 1851, held at the Crystal Palace in London, and helped to start more than one third of the committees then formed. His 'Life of William Penn' was published in 1851, and this included answers to Macaulay's charges against Penn. Although Macaulay never responded to this work in print, a copy of Dixon's 'Life' was found in his possession at his death. 
In the same year, during a panic over fears of a French invasion, Dixon published an anonymous pamphlet, 'The French in England, or, Both Sides of the Question on both Sides of the Channel', which dismissed the possibility. In 1852 he also published a life, 'Robert Blake, Admiral and General at Sea, Based on Family and State Papers', which won popular acclaim but was not taken seriously by historians. After a long tour in Europe, in January 1853 he became editor of 'The Athenaeum'. 
In 1854 Dixon began researching the life of Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam. He published articles in 'The Athenaeum' in 1860 and these were republished as 'The Personal History of Lord Bacon from Unpublished Papers' in 1861. He also published 'A Statement of the Facts in Regard to Lord Bacon's Confession' (1861) and the 'Story of Lord Bacon's Life' (1862). 
In 1861 Dixon travelled in Portugal, Spain, and Morocco, and edited the 'Memoirs of Lady Morgan', who had appointed him her literary executor. In 1863 he travelled in the Middle East, and on his return helped to found the Palestine Exploration Fund, of which he eventually became chairman. In 1865 he published 'The Holy Land', a guide to the region then known as Palestine. In 1866 he travelled in the United States. During his trip he discovered in the public library at Philadelphia a collection of Irish state papers belonging to the English national archives, which had been missing since the time of James II and included the original manuscript of the memoirs of Ulick Bourke, fifth earl and marquess of Clanricarde, covering 23 October 1641 to 30 August 1643. At his suggestion, they were returned to the British government. 
In 1867 Dixon published his 'New America', which went through many editions, not only in England, but also in France, Russia, Holland, Italy, and Germany. He also travelled through the Baltic provinces. In 1868 Dixon's controversial work 'Spiritual Wives' brought accusations of indecency. He brought a libel action against the 'Pall Mall Gazette', which had made the charge, and obtained nominal damages of 1 farthing on 29 November 1872. 
At the general election of 1868 Dixon declined an invitation to stand for Marylebone. Although he spoke at many political meetings, he was not prepared to give up his career as a writer to go into politics. In 1869 he brought out the first two volumes of 'Her Majesty's Tower' (vols. 3 and 4, 1871). In August 1869 he resigned as editor of 'The Athenaeum' and soon afterwards was appointed justice of the peace for Middlesex and Westminster. In 1869 Dixon travelled for some months in the north, and wrote about his journey in 'Free Russia' (1870). During that year he was elected a member of the London school board. In direct opposition to Dudley Francis Stuart Ryder, Viscount Sandon, he succeeded in carrying a resolution which established drill in all rate-paid schools in London. He worked hard as a member of the school board during its first three years. He spent most of 1871 in Switzerland, and then published 'The Switzers' (1872). Shortly afterwards he was sent to Spain on a financial mission by a council of foreign bondholders. 
On 4 October 1872 Dixon was created a knight commander of the Crown by the Kaiser Wilhelm. While in Spain he wrote most of his 'History of Two Queens' (Katherine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn) (1873, 1874). Before starting upon his next journey he began a campaign to open the Tower of London to the public free of charge. He obtained the support of then prime minister, Benjamin Disraeli, and on public holidays Dixon personally conducted tours through the buildings. In September 1874 he travelled through Canada and the United States, which he described in 'The White Conquest' (1875). Later that year he returned to visit Italy and Germany. In the following year he wrote 'The way to Egypt' for the 'Gentleman's Magazine', as well as two other articles in which he suggested that the government should purchase from Turkey its Egyptian suzerainty. In 1877 he published his first romance, 'Diana, Lady Lyle'. The following year he published 'Ruby Grey' and the first two volumes of his four-volume work 'Royal Windsor'. A fall from his horse while in Cyprus in 1878 broke his shoulder bone; from then on his health deteriorated. 'British Cyprus' was published in 1879; he subsequently lost most of his savings, which he had unwisely invested in Turkish stock. 
On 2 October 1874 Dixon's house near Regent's Park, 6 St James's Terrace, was completely wrecked by an explosion of gunpowder on the Regent's Canal. He suffered more distress at the death of his eldest daughter and the sudden death at Dublin, on 20 October 1879, of his eldest son, William Jerrold Dixon. He was revising the proof sheets of the concluding volumes of 'Royal Windsor', and on Friday 26 December 1879 made a great effort to finish the work. He died in his bed on the following morning from a seizure. On 2 January 1880 he was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Dixon took a leading part in improving accommodation for the poor and labouring classes. He was a popular writer, but his work was sometimes questioned for its accuracy. He was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, the Society of Antiquaries, and the Pennsylvania Society. His wife survived him. Among their children was Ella Nora Hepworth Dixon, novelist and journalist. 


@@@@@


doc= 7710


Dixwell, John (c.1607-1689), politician and regicide, was the younger son of Edward Dixwell of Coton, Warwickshire, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Hawksworth), although he may have been brought up by an uncle, Sir Basil Dixwell of Brome in Kent. Dixwell was living at Folkestone when he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1631. He was called to the bar on 30 January 1638. His elder brother, Mark Dixwell, was an active parliamentarian during the early part of the civil war, and upon his death in February 1644 Dixwell succeeded to the sizeable estate which Mark had inherited from their uncle and became guardian of his brother's children. Having been active in promoting godly reformation during the early 1640s, and as a captain of the Kentish militia, Dixwell assumed a prominent role in organizing the parliamentarian war effort in the county and received numerous commissions from parliament. He was appointed to the committee for sequestrations in Kent and made a commissioner for the New Model Army. More importantly, he served on both the county committee and the commission of the peace. Such zeal for the parliamentarian cause resulted in his being elected to parliament as MP for Dover in 1646. His appearances at Westminster were probably rare, however, since he remained preoccupied with Kentish business, not least during the royalist rising of 1648. By the summer of 1647 it had become clear that he was aligned with the political independents and the army at Westminster, although it was only after Pride's Purge in December 1648 that he assumed a position of prominence in the House of Commons, where he was appointed to the committee for plundered ministers and the navy committee. Nominated as one of the commissioners for the trial of Charles I, he attended the majority of their meetings, as well as every day of the trial in Westminster Hall, and signed the death warrant on 29 January 1649 ['see also 'Regicides]. 
During the Commonwealth, Dixwell's political allies were committed republicans such as Edmund Ludlow, although he also remained active in the county as a militia officer and, after January 1652, as governor of Dover Castle. In November 1651 he was elected to the council of state, on which he served until November 1652, being particularly active in relation to admiralty business. Although he may have been opposed to the dissolution of the Rump and the establishment of the protectorate, he was not an active opponent of Oliver Cromwell, and remained willing to serve in parliament. He was returned as a knight of the shire for Kent in both 1654 and 1656, and member for Dover during the parliament of Richard Cromwell in 1659. He did not resume an active role in political events, however, until the recall of the Rump in May 1659, when he was elected to the council of state and confirmed as governor of Dover Castle. His allegiance was to civilian rather than military rule, and after the interruption of the Rump by the army in the autumn of 1659 Dixwell's control of Dover was important to the campaign against John Lambert and the Wallingford House party. 
Having recognized the drift towards a restoration of the Stuart dynasty in early 1660, Dixwell sold at least part of his estate and fled to the continent to escape arrest and execution for his role in the trial of Charles I. He travelled to Hanau with other regicides, but subsequently sought greater safety in New England, where he was recorded as having arrived by 1665. He eventually settled in New Haven, where he lived until his death under the assumed name of James Davids. Upon settling in New Haven, Dixwell married Joanna, widow of a Mr Ling, in November 1673, although she died almost immediately. In 1677 he married Bathsheba How (died 1729), with whom he had a son and two daughters. He made a settlement of his estate in 1682, although the deeds were not made public until after his death, in the interest of preserving his anonymity. A portion of his lands in England had successfully been concealed from the crown and had evaded confiscation by the government of Charles II. One of Dixwell's papers contained a comment which displayed his continued support for the policies and ideas which had forced him to flee England. He expressed his confidence that 'the Lord will appear for his people, and the good old cause for which I suffer, and that there will be those in power again who will relieve the injured and oppressed' ('N&Q', 5th ser., 9, 1878, 466). 
Although Dixwell's friends, including the old republican John Wildman, saw the revolution of 1688 as an opportunity for him to return to England, they were unaware that he had died on 18 March 1689 at New Haven, where he was buried, before the news of William III's arrival reached New England. In New Haven Dixwell and his fellow regicides Edward Whalley and William Goffe (whom he is known to have visited at their refuge in Hadley, Massachusetts, in February 1665) are commemorated in the names of streets which branch off from a common intersection. 


