@@@@@


doc= 7711


Dobbs, Arthur (1689-1765), colonial governor and writer on trade, was born at Girvan in Ayrshire on 2 April 1689, the son of Richard Dobbs, army officer and future high sheriff of Antrim, and his first wife, Mary (died before 1711), daughter of Archibald Stewart of Ballintoy. Richard Dobbs, a supporter of the protestant interest in Ireland, had sent his pregnant wife to Scotland to avoid the fighting which followed the revolution of 1688-9. Mary and her child returned to Ireland at the peace and settled in the family's residence, Castle Dobbs in co. Antrim. Prior to his father's death in 1711 Arthur Dobbs served in the British dragoons in Scotland. In 1719 he married Anne (died 1747), daughter of John Osburn, a London silk dyer, and the widow of Captain Norbury; the couple had three children. After inheriting his father's property, he became sheriff of Antrim in 1720, represented Carrickfergus in the Irish parliament in 1727-30, and in 1728 became deputy governor of Carrickfergus. In 1730 the archbishop of Armagh introduced Dobbs to Robert Walpole, who in 1733 appointed him engineer-in-chief and surveyor-general in Ireland. Although Walpole's fall from power in 1742 was a set-back, Dobbs secured other patrons, notably lords Hertford, Holdernesse, and Halifax, who helped secure his appointment as governor of North Carolina in 1754, a colony in which he was already a substantial landowner thanks to his association with Henry McCulloh. 
The quarter-century that Dobbs spent seeking preferment was uniquely creative. He made himself useful to Lord Halifax, president of the Board of Trade from 1748 to 1761, and Lord Holdernesse, a privy councillor and trusted protege of the duke of Newcastle, by drafting lengthy proposals about Irish and colonial affairs which combined scrupulous research with bold and candid advocacy of policies for strengthening and reforming the empire. His two-part 'Essay on the Trade and Improvement of Ireland' (1728, 1730) advocated relaxation of restrictions on Catholics and the benefits of free trade between England and Ireland. His unpublished 'Scheme to enlarge the colonies and increase commerce and trade' ('c'.1730) fused imperial energy with Anglican piety. Historically, Dobbs argued, empires had arisen from either 'thirst for dominion' or a more mature appetite for trade and commerce. Domineering imperialism tended to become self-destructive, and even commercial empire needed a mature metropolitan economy to absorb colonial wealth and free institutions (especially churches) to discipline and channel the energies and desires of the colonial populace. The British empire of the Augustan age, Dobbs warned, was in danger of degenerating from a commercial to a domineering regime because African slavery institutionalized human exploitation, and the dispossession of the Indians from their ancestral lands perverted Britain's civilizing mission and threatened a whirlwind of retaliation. In the long run both Africans and Indians would have to be incorporated into the colonial populace, but for the immediate future Britain should invest massive sums in Anglican missionary work so that both minorities could be converted to Christianity and brought under the protection and blessing of the Church of England: 'Shall we, who by the precepts of our Lord and Saviour, ought to love our neighbours as ourselves... instead... pride our selves by our superior knowledge in arts and sciences and despise them as an inferior race, not worthy of reclaiming? (Calhoon, 59-60)' Dobbs's Irish sensitivities, his personal stake in colonial development in the prosperity and development of North Carolina, and his career ambitions as a crown official were a volatile and potentially creative compound of attitudes, temperament, and ideology. His friend and early patron, Lord Hertford (who had introduced him to Holdernesse), frankly warned both Dobbs and Holdernesse that his visionary proposals for reforming English-Irish relations could wreck his career. The rebuke only spurred Dobbs to bolder advocacy for the reform of Irish policy. Dobbs's experience in Scotland, moreover, convinced him that free trade could effect the same social miracle in Ireland that it had in Scotland. Dobbs's encyclopaedic knowledge of Irish economic problems, especially the wool trade, were of a piece with his candour, eloquence, and sense of imperial urgency. He argued cogently for a strengthening of the North American colonies as the best preparation for the inevitable next war with France, and the implication that a distressed Ireland threatened Britain's national security lay just below the surface of his policy recommendations. Dobbs's ability to incorporate a radical indictment of exploitation and injustice into writings on Irish and colonial policy administration was typical of Anglican-Irish political discourse in the age of Swift and Burke, and he was one of the foremost Irish protestant 'commonwealth men' of the eighteenth century (Robbins, 149-51). 
Dobbs's governorship in North Carolina (1754-65) was one of the most significant in the colony's proprietary or royal history. No governor in any of the southern royal colonies worked as hard or manoeuvred as adroitly as Dobbs to curb legislative autonomy and maintain his own and the Board of Trade's influence over appointments and fiscal policy. He recognized that the assembly's control of the colony's accounts undermined imperial administration, and he waged a persistent and fruitless campaign to curb this crucial means of legislative supremacy. He regained royal control over the way the assembly spent the money reimbursed by the crown for provincial military expenditures during the Seven Years' War. He worked closely with the Board of Trade to influence the extension of legislative representation to new towns. He sought to limit the power of John Starkey, the colony's treasurer, a creature of the legislature whom Dobbs considered a 'professed violent Republican', and he resisted assembly efforts to make the office of colonial printer a legislative prerogative. But Dobbs also recognized that, by respecting custom and practice in the administration of the court system, he could most effectively serve the crown's long-term interests, and he risked censure in London for concurring with the legislature on issues of the independence of the judiciary. 
Dobbs's skill and patience in dealing with the assembly and his tenacity in seeking to curb legislative power set the stage for the pre-uprising struggle, between 1765 and 1775, over the ultimate location of authority. Neither a high-handed villain nor an ambitious careerist, Dobbs exemplified British administration at its best. His character and conduct taught North Carolina leaders that they would have to become more than a legislative opposition; they would need to become arbiters of the public good and defenders of both liberty and order. Dobbs died at his home in Brunswick, North Carolina, while packing to return to England, on 28 March 1765, and was buried in the town's St Philip's Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 7712


Dobbs, Francis (1750-1811), politician and barrister, was born on 27 April 1750, the third son of Richard Dobbs, Church of Ireland clergyman, of Lisburn, co. Antrim, and Mary (died 1775), daughter of William Young and widow of Cornet McManus; he was the nephew of Arthur Dobbs, sometime governor of North Carolina. As a young man he devoted himself to literary pursuits but soon became engrossed in military affairs. He purchased an ensigncy at the age of eighteen in the 63rd regiment and subsequently became lieutenant and adjutant. In 1773 he left the army and entered the Middle Temple, London. In the same year he married Jane Stewart, daughter of Alexander Stewart of Ballintoy, co. Antrim, and Acton, co. Armagh, and later settled on the Acton property as its agent. They had six sons and one daughter. In 1774 he wrote a play called 'The Patriot King, or, The Irish Chief', which was published in London and performed in the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, in Rathfarnham, co. Dublin, and Belfast. 
After being called to the Irish bar in 1775 Dobbs took a keen interest in the political life of Ireland and published a number of political pamphlets during the agitation for Irish legislative independence and parliamentary reform. He also kept a close eye on the activities of the reform movement in England and was in regular contact with leading English radical figures such as Major John Cartwright. He was an influential member of the volunteer movement in Ulster and was captain of the Tyrone's Ditches and Acton Volunteers. He believed that the extra-parliamentary pressure which the volunteers had brought to bear on the British government to grant a 'free trade' to Ireland in 1779 should be applied again to win legislative independence for Ireland. He was also a member of the Monks of the Order of St Patrick, sometimes known as the Monks of the Screw, a political and convivial society founded in September 1779, whose primary object was to win a constitution for Ireland. Dobbs pursued this goal with vigour and his activities soon came to the attention of British as well as Irish politicians. Indeed, his radical views on Ireland's legal right to make her own laws were commented upon by Lord George Gordon in the British parliament in January 1780. 
Dobbs later became a major in the southern battalion of the 1st Ulster regiment, which, in December 1781, called on every volunteer company in Ulster to send elected delegates to Dungannon on 15 February 1782 to propose and discuss resolutions in support of Irish legislative independence. The resolutions to be considered by the volunteer convention were drawn up in advance by Lord Charlemont, with the assistance of a few other patriots. However, parliamentary duties, or a wish not to influence proceedings unduly, led to the absence of the patriot parliamentarians, and it was Charlemont's close friend and political ally Dobbs who was the main spokesman at the convention. 
Dobbs's involvement with the volunteers continued after 'the constitution of 1782' had been achieved. He was one of a carefully selected group of volunteer delegates who met as a national committee in Dublin on 18 June 1782 and declared their support for Henry Grattan's view that the 'simple repeal' of the 'Declaratory Act' (6 Geo. I c. 5) was a sufficient guarantee of Ireland's constitutional security. But cracks were beginning to appear in the facade of volunteer unity. The Belfast volunteer companies took umbrage at this stage-management and declared that they would make up their own minds about the sufficiency of 'simple repeal'. Dobbs took this as an affront, and in a series of angry clashes with the Belfast volunteer companies brought the constitutional dispute down to the level of a personal confrontation. Henceforth the Belfast volunteers allied themselves with Grattan's rival, Henry Flood, who argued that Ireland would never be free until the British parliament renounced all rights to interfere in Irish legislation. Worse was to follow for Dobbs. He was refused admission to the third Dungannon convention, which met on 8 September 1783, because he had accepted a commission in the fencibles -- regiments of soldiers raised locally for home service that were commanded by local landowners and armed and paid for by the government. 
After the 'renunciation' dispute Dobbs turned for a time from politics and became consumed with a belief in the millennium. In 1787 he published four large volumes of a 'Universal history, commencing at the creation and ending at the death of Christ, in letters from a father to his son', in which he exerted himself to prove historically the exact fulfilment of the Messianic prophecies. He also published in 1788 a volume of poems, most of which had appeared in various periodicals. His interest in politics was renewed briefly in 1793 when he joined the Association of the Friends of the People, a political club founded by the second duke of Leinster, which sought to promote the cause of parliamentary reform. He also continued to pursue his career as a practising barrister with some success. His services were engaged regularly and he dealt with a wide range of cases. In 1798 he acted as a negotiator for some of the captured United Irishmen because, as Leslie Hale states, he was 'a barrister respected by both sides, whose political activities were always honourable' (Hale, 189). 
Dobbs made a decisive political comeback in 1797 when he was returned to the Irish House of Commons for Lord Charlemont's borough of Charlemont in co. Armagh. He delivered an important speech and submitted five propositions for tranquillizing the country which were published in 1799. However, the success of that speech was quite overshadowed by the enormous popularity of his great speech delivered against the bill for a legislative union with Great Britain on 7 June 1800, of which, it is said, 30,000 copies were immediately sold. The popularity of this speech was due as much to the eccentric nature of his arguments against the union as to its eloquence, for he devoted himself to proving that the union was forbidden by scripture, by quoting texts from 'Daniel' and the 'Revelation'. He took advantage of the attention he had attracted to publish in the same year his 'Concise View of the Great Predictions in the Sacred Writings' and nine volumes of his 'Universal History', under the title 'A Summary of Universal History'. With the passing of the union Dobbs sank into obscurity; he could not get any more of his books published, he became encumbered with debts, his eccentricities increased to madness, and he died in great pecuniary difficulties on 11 April 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 7713


Dobell, Sydney Thompson (1824-1874), poet and literary scholar, was born on 5 April 1824 at Cranbrook in Kent, the eldest son in the family of ten children of John Dobell, wine merchant and author, and Julietta Thompson, daughter of Samuel Thompson (1766-1837), a religious reformer, who founded the Freethinking Christians, a church based on primitive Christianity. He was also a descendant of Daniel Dobell ('b'. 1700), a Quaker of Cranbrook. Dobell's father, who had published a pamphlet entitled 'Man Unfit to Govern Man', moved from Kent to Cheltenham in 1836. Sydney inherited from both parents strong religious convictions, such as Judaic exclusiveness, with its insistence on separation from the world, which accounted for Sydney's extreme individualism. He was educated entirely at home, where he was given a sense of his uniqueness and brilliance. Schooling might have weakened his precocity, but lack of it might also have deprived him of effective external criticism. 
By the time Sydney Dobell reached adolescence he was already caught up in a sensitive analysis of individual experience and feeling. An ardent admirer of 'Manfred', Byron's exploration of the tyranny of reason, Dobell memorized whole sections of the poem which, his biographer claimed, he knew 'by heart' (Jolly, 1.37). Dobell is perhaps one of the most representative figures of the transition between Romantic and Victorian sensibilities. He seems to have had a deeper psychological grasp of the conflicting demands of Romantic self-consciousness and Victorian social earnestness than his contemporaries. 
As a dissenter, Dobell was well aware that religion was beginning to lose its hold. He felt that God designed each soul to find its own creed out of an individual experience of scripture ('Thoughts', 153). Dobell's was a deliberate attempt to concretize religious abstractions like love, purity, and freedom, and to enable poetry to embody states of mind like guilt, fear, national pride, and ambition. By means of the confessional mode he tried to dramatize in his poetry how divisions between people and nations, and especially divisions between the sexes (he was a believer in rights for women), could be assimilated into a new creation. 
Dobell became engaged to Emily Fordham in 1839 and married her on 18 July 1844. They had no children. Emily seems to have rescued Sydney from the burden of perfectionism, a harsh asceticism, and a rigorous work ethic that had been imposed on him by loving but stern parents. At some time after 1847 John Dobell gave his son the management of the Gloucester branch of his wine business, and the young Dobells lived at Lark Hay in the village of Hucclecote, where Sydney began work on his first major poem, 'The Roman'. In 1848 Dobell and his wife moved to Coxhorne House, near Cheltenham, where he met two avid enthusiasts for the Italian nationalist movement, Sir James Stansfeld and George Davis, who introduced Dobell to the Society of the Friends of Italy (Jolly, 1.195-8). In April 1850, under the pseudonym Sydney Yendys, 'The Roman' was published by Bentley. It revealed the interpretative power of the poet, the superiority of the intuition of the imagination over reason, and especially the use of associative metaphors to achieve epical unity. Particularly because the cause of Italian nationalism was such a stirring event of the time, the poem was enormously successful. 
In 1853 Dobell published 'Balder'. The poem was intended to be his master work in which he would demythologize a male-dominated culture, dramatize a divided consciousness, and invigorate epical poetry by metaphoric language which followed the untrammelled path of free association (Westwater, 65). Instead, he infuriated critics. William Edmondstoune Aytoun lampooned the hero in his uproarious drama 'Firmilian' (1854). Dobell was branded a 'Spasmodic' poet, a title Aytoun coined to satirize poetry which he considered to be extravagant and formless. He objected to the lack of plot, the exploration of profane subjects, the sensationalism, and the unintelligibility of Dobell's 'Balder, Part the First'. Aytoun effectively buried both the poem and Sydney Dobell's poetic reputation, and the poem has lain neglected. But despite all its problems, particularly that of its length, 'Balder' has unusual modern merit in its treatment of nature (perhaps Dobell's greatest gift), in its mythopoeic emphasis, and in its psychological realism. For instance, where Balder, the extreme individualist, the arrogant, chauvinistic intellectual, has to confront his own darkness, his neglected, deranged wife cries: '
Oh yes, thy glory! Yes -- he must have glory, 

Yes, he must have his glory; he can stand 

All day in the sun, but he must have his glory! 

He has walked up in the sunshine world, 

He has been in the wind and the sweet rain, 

And none cried 'Upset the cup o' the honey-time, 

Upset the cup o' the honey-time'. And I am empty and dry. 

' Dobell intended to redeem Balder in subsequent parts of the poem, but nothing was ever published. In 1854, seeking medical treatment for his wife, Dobell moved to Edinburgh. Here he befriended Alexander Smith, and in 1855 he collaborated with Smith, another victim of Aytoun's 'Spasmodic' label, in a collection of poems on the Crimean War entitled 'Sonnets on the War'. The book was not a success. Dobell recognized that he could never confine himself to the sonnet form which 'forbids anything like adequacy' (Jolly, 1.385). He wrote about seventeen of the thirty-five sonnets and showed how he could still master the startling image. In 'The Army Surgeon', for instance, the doctor goes about his duties on the battlefield where there 'bubbles a cauldron vast of many-coloured pain'. In 'Austrian Alliance' the speaker warns England of the Habsburg 'Vampyre' who was wrenched '
from the breathing throat 

Of living Man, and he leaps up and flings 

Thy rotten carcase at the heads of Kings. 

' In the summer of 1856 Dobell published 'England in Time of War', a collection of his short lyrics on the Crimean War. Because critics had condemned him for obscurity, in this new book Dobell laboured for simplicity. He did not write on the extraordinary hero, but on people in every segment of society. He maintained that the book was 'a collection of about forty ballads, exponent of the Home feelings of England on the subject of the War' (Jolly, 2.15). The favourable reviews far outweighed the unfavourable ones, and 'Grass from the Battlefield' was singled out as a poem 'which will be enshrined in memory along with the acknowledged masterpieces' of modern poets ('GM', 227). Certainly in this poem Dobell revealed an acute perception of the mind's ability to concentrate on something quite trivial when under unbearable pressure. The ballad 'Keith of Ravelston' was another much praised poem. 
On 8 April 1857 Dobell lectured before the Edinburgh Philosophical Society on 'The nature of poetry'. Although his theory of poetry revealed an extraordinary knowledge of scripture, nevertheless the poet relied not so much on God and the future life in heaven, but on life itself and a spiritual presence in that life. In Dobell's view truth belonged to the individual and could be wrested only from the shadowy depths of one's own psyche. (The intensity of his struggle to face up to the demands of the distinctive self can be seen in his depiction both of the disillusioned Monk in 'The Roman' and in the solipsistic hero of 'Balder'.) Scriptural events, Dobell argued, should be reinterpreted on an individual basis; they were metaphors for survival tactics in an increasingly complex world. For Dobell metaphors were the symbolic 'equivalents' of feelings; they reconcile the mind with the external world, the seen with the unseen; the metaphor was 'something more than a phenomenal similarity'. His ideas anticipate those of I. A. Richards, who called on critics to discover what a poem 'expresses' as well as what it states, and also T. S. Eliot's 'objective correlative'. However, these ideas were entirely neglected at the time. Even John Nichol, Dobell's contemporary critic and friend, when preparing the lecture for publication, did little to elucidate the 'clearly conceived theory', or to give an 'honest study' to the 'extraordinary view of poetry' taken by 'this singularly thoughtful man' ('Thoughts', viin.). Modern critics however have found the lecture to be 'an impressive and significant document for the literary historian and theorist' (Preyer, 163), and 'one of the most sophisticated accounts of metaphor' (Armstrong, 11). 
Dobell delivered his three-hour lecture on poetry while suffering from bronchitis. His already fragile constitution had been weakened by the strain placed on an overtaxed nervous system and the harsh climate of an Edinburgh winter. The Dobells returned to England and by 1858 settled at Detmore, where Sydney resumed the management of his father's wine business in Gloucestershire. Despite chronic illness Dobell did manage to publish some poetry in 1860, 'The Youth of England to Garibaldi's Legion' and 'The Magyars' New Year's Eve', but neither created any sensation. In 1862 he began a series of nomadic wanderings, in search of better health, to France until 1863, Spain until 1864, and Italy until 1866. In April 1865, while stopping at Puteoli, Italy, where St Paul had landed, he fell into an old open drain and injured his spine and brain (Jolly, 2.203); he was later treated for epilepsy. Although there was another trip to Italy in the following year, Sydney Dobell's health was broken. The next ten years were passed mostly in the pain and boredom of the sick-room in his homes in Gloucestershire. He died peacefully on 22 August 1874 at his last home, Barton End House, Horsley, near Nailsworth, and was buried in Painswick cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7714


Dobree, Peter Paul (1782-1825), classical scholar, was born in Guernsey, the son of William Dobree of Guernsey. He was educated under Dr Richard Valpy at Reading School before matriculating in 1800 at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA as fourth senior optime in 1804. Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1806, he lived there for the rest of his life, graduating MA in 1807, and being ordained deacon in 1812 and priest in 1813. Charles Burney gave him an introduction in London in 1805 to Richard Porson; so began an acquaintance which, although it lasted only three years until Porson's death, led to Dobree's becoming perhaps his most illustrious and devoted pupil. 
Dobree's first appearance as an author was in the 'Monthly Review' (52, 1807, appendix) to which he contributed an important review of Bothe's 'Aeschylus' in which he attacked its freedom of textual conjecture, while displaying the more conservative, informed, but penetratingly sharp style of criticism which he never abandoned. He contributed a few other reviews to the same journal, but these were less significant. On Porson's death in 1808 Dobree came forward as a candidate for the regius professorship of Greek at Cambridge, and was to have read his probationary lecture on Aristophanes; finding the electors unanimous, or nearly so, in favour of James Henry Monk, he withdrew from the contest. On Monk's resignation in 1823, Dobree was the only candidate, and was elected after a praelection on the funeral oration ascribed to Lysias (published in volume 1 of his 'Adversaria', 1831-3, repr. 1874). His health gave way almost immediately afterwards, and he died, unmarried, in his rooms at Trinity on 24 September 1825. He was buried close to Porson in the chapel, where at his sister's provision a bust and tablet to his memory were erected. The inscription emphasizes his candid but equable temper, affability, and moral concern, before extolling his scholarship; it is printed in the preface to the 'Adversaria'. 
Though a man of varied acquirements, Dobree spent his life on classical, chiefly Greek, literature. He laid up vast stores for future years: besides a large body of notes on the Greek dramatists and Athenaeus, he left very extensive collections on the historians and orators, and probably meditated an edition of Demosthenes. He gave a great deal of attention to Greek inscriptions, writing over the years a number of papers signed usually 'O.' (significance unknown) or 'Stelocopas' (stonecutter); he appears to have been one of the first editors of inscriptions to have used sublinear dots to indicate letters imperfectly read ('Miscellaneous Notes on Inscriptions', ed. J. Scholefield, 1835, 84). When the annotated portion of Porson's library was bought by Trinity College, he was selected, with two of his brother fellows, Monk and Charles James Blomfield, to edit the manuscripts. He was at first prevented by illness from taking a share in the work, and shortly after his recovery set out on a journey to Spain; thus the volume of Porson's 'Adversaria' was edited by his two colleagues. But all of the papers on Aristophanes were entrusted to his care, and in 1820 he produced 'Notae in Aristophanem', with the 'Plutus' prefixed, chiefly from Porson's autograph. In 1822 he edited the 'Lexicon' of Photius from Porson's transcript of the 'Gale MS' in Trinity College Library, which Porson had twice copied out, the first transcript having perished in the fire at the premises of Perry the bookseller; to this volume he added a fragment of a rhetorical lexicon edited from the margin of a Cambridge manuscript, and corrections and supplementary indexes to Porson's work. He had a share in the founding of his teacher Edward Valpy's 'Classical Journal' in 1810, and occasionally wrote in it, chiefly on inscriptions. To Thomas Kidd's 'Tracts and Criticisms of Porson' (1815) he added the brief 'Auctarium', and to Hugh James Rose's 'Inscriptiones Graecae' (1825) the letter on the Greek marbles in Trinity College Library. With the exception of the notes on inscriptions, everything he published in his lifetime sprang from his reverence for Porson (not least his perpetuating of Porson's own suspicion that Peter Elmsley had purloined some of Porson's conjectures). 
Dobree bequeathed 1000 volumes to the library of his college, but his books with manuscript notes to that of the university. From these his successor in the regius chair, James Scholefield, published his 'Adversaria' and 'Miscellaneous Notes on Inscriptions, with Addenda to the Adversaria' (1835), and he reissued the 'Lexicon rhetoricum Cantabrigiense' (1834) which Dobree had appended to Porson's 'Photius'. These amply justify Dobree's being classed in the first rank of English textual scholars. Julius Hare set Dobree on a par with his master, Porson, observing: 'his mind seems to have been of kindred character; [with] the same unweariable accuracy, the same promptness in coming to the point, the same aversion to all roundabout discussions, the same felicity in hitting on the very passage by which a question is to be settled... both [were] preserved by their wary good sense from ever committing a blunder; both... equally fearful of going beyond their warrant, equally distrustful of all theoretical speculations, equally convinced that in language usage is all in all. (Hare, 1.205-6)' Modern assessments agree in finding much of the master's 'spirit and something of the genius' (Brink, 112) in the pupil, but praise Dobree for his deliberate extension of the Porsonian method and tradition to Greek prose writers. A. E. Housman distinguishes between Porson's followers and characterizes Dobree as 'the shrewder emendator' and Elmsley as 'the subtler grammarian' (Housman, 'Classical Papers', 1972, 1006). 


@@@@@


doc= 7715


Dobson, George Edward (1848-1895), zoologist, was born on 4 September 1848 at Edgeworthstown, co. Longford, the son of Parke Dobson of Killinagh in co. Westmeath. He was educated at the Royal School of Enniskillen and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1866, MB and MCh in 1867, and MA in 1875. He was first senior moderator and first gold medallist in experimental and natural science, and was also awarded the gold medal of the Dublin Pathological Society for his 'Essay on the diagnosis and pathology of the injuries and diseases of the shoulder-joint'. He entered the army medical department in 1868, and retired in 1888 with the rank of surgeon-major. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 16 April 1874 and of the Royal Society on 7 June 1883. He was also a fellow of the Zoological Society and a corresponding member of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia and of the Biological Society of Washington. 
Dobson will be remembered chiefly for his investigation over a period of twenty years into the structure and classification of two groups of mammals, the Chiroptera and Insectivora, on both of which he became the chief authority of his time. While stationed in India ('c'.1868- 'c'.1875) he made a careful study of the bats of that country and published papers on the subject in the 'Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal', the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society', and the 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History'. In 1876 the trustees of the Indian Museum brought out his 'Monograph of the Asiatic Chiroptera', which led, on his return to England, to his being employed by the trustees of the British Museum to prepare the 'Catalogue of the Chiroptera in the Collection of the British Museum' (1878). It became a standard work on the anatomy, nomenclature, and classification of bats. 
Dobson was soon afterwards placed in charge of the museum of the Royal Victoria Hospital at Netley, where he extended his researches to other groups of mammals. His 'Monograph of the Insectivora, Systematic and Anatomical' (1882-90) was not completed at the time of his death. His important paper 'On the homologies of the long flexor muscles of the feet of Mammalia' was published in the 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology' in 1883, and he wrote numerous papers on zoology and comparative anatomy for British and foreign scientific journals. 
Dobson died on 25 November 1895 at his home, Malling Place, West Malling, Kent, and was buried on 29 November at West Malling. Besides the works already mentioned he wrote 'Medical Hints to Travellers', published by the Royal Geographical Society, which reached a seventh edition in 1893, and contributed several sections to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. These articles were afterwards used by William Henry Flower and Richard Lydekker in their 'Introduction to the Study of Mammals' (1891). 


@@@@@


doc= 7716


Dobson, John (1633-1681), Church of England clergyman, was born in Warwickshire, in which county his father, whose name is unknown, was a minister. He matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 9 December 1653, graduating BA in October 1656 and proceeding MA in 1659. Admitted as a fellow of Magdalen in 1661, he was ordained as deacon in the diocese of Lincoln on 21 December of that year. He soon became known as an eloquent preacher and the possessor of a remarkable memory, repeating at Easter 1663 four Latin sermons in St Mary's Church, Oxford 'to the wonder of the auditory' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.2). 
At this time the president of Magdalen was Thomas Pierce (1622-1691), 'a resolute maintainer of the ancient establishment of the Church of England' against 'specious and plausible pamphleteers', but also a domineering and vindictive character, who several times discommuned, and eventually expelled, one of the fellows, Dr Henry Yerbury, 'for which action most people cried shame' (Bloxam, 1.42, 46). A protest, in manuscript, provoked Pierce into print, and in August 1663 there appeared two lampoons, 'Dr Pierce his Preaching Confuted by his Practise', and 'Dr Pierce his Preaching Exemplified in his Practise'. These were purportedly directed against Pierce, but as it later emerged, had been issued anonymously by Dobson with Pierce's connivance, apparently with the objective of getting his opponents into trouble. The Magdalen register refers to Dobson as 'one of Pierce's creatures' (ibid., 46). For breaching the regulations, on 10 September 1663 Dobson was expelled from the university, but rapidly restored. In the same year he was incorporated MA at Cambridge, and in December 1667 obtained the degree of BD from Oxford. He had, on 24 September 1665, been ordained as a priest in the diocese of Peterborough, and on 20 May 1668 he was instituted to the rectory of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire; on the presentation of Sir William Farmor (his former pupil at Magdalen) of that parish, he was admitted on 13 July 1674 to the rectory of Cold Higham in the same county. From 1670 Dobson was also rector of Corscombe, Dorset, and seems to have divided his time between there and his Northamptonshire living. He died on 9 June 1681 at Corscombe and was buried there, where a monument was erected to his memory. In his will, signed on 22 May 1679, Dobson left money to a brother, Samuel, and sisters, Dorothy and Elizabeth; he seems never to have married. To Sir William Farmor he left 'several volumes of pamphlets published in the late troublesome times' (will). 


@@@@@


doc= 7717


Dobson, John (1787-1865), architect, was born on 9 December 1787 at The Pineapple inn, Chirton, North Shields, Northumberland, the only son of John Dobson (died 'c'.1827), a native of Stamfordham in Northumberland, and his wife, Margaret (died 1828). His father combined innkeeping with a substantial business as a market and landscape gardener, and his extensive fruit gardens at Chirton were ornamentally laid out with walks and arbours for the enjoyment of fashionable visitors. 
Dobson was the most eminent architect to be born and have worked in the north-east of England. He produced over 400 works of virtually every building type, most of them in Northumberland and co. Durham, some in Yorkshire and Cumberland, and a few further afield. He is especially linked with the city of Newcastle upon Tyne, where he practised for over fifty years and designed many public buildings; the majority of these have been demolished, but many of his numerous villas and country houses in the region survive. Perhaps most highly regarded as a classicist, Dobson was also, like most leading architects of his period, a highly competent exponent of what he regarded as the adaptable and picturesque Tudor Gothic style, and in the ecclesiastical field was a pioneer of the Gothic revival in the north-east. He also undertook a great deal of restoration work. 
Dobson's precocious talent for design led to occasional employment while still in his early teens as draughtsman to Mr J. McGlashan, a damask and linen weaver in the neighbouring village of Preston, and later to other local businesses. Although he had evidently been intended to follow his father's main profession, about 1802 he was allowed to begin artistic studies in Newcastle under Boniface Muss, an Italian emigre (the painter John Martin was a fellow pupil), and then to be instructed in architectural and mechanical drawing, and surveying, by Mr Hall of Stamfordham, bridge surveyor for Northumberland. About 1804 Dobson further confirmed his commitment to the architectural profession by entering into an apprenticeship, perhaps with Hall's recommendation, with David Stephenson of Newcastle, shortly to be appointed architect to the duke of Northumberland and at that time the leading practitioner in the north-east. 
After completing his clerkship with Stephenson in 1809 Dobson travelled to London, where he studied watercolour painting with John Varley, presumably in order to acquire the necessary facility in producing the kind of colour perspective with which architects were then presenting their designs. He had probably already met Varley during the latter's sketching and teaching tour of the north-east a year before, and Varley's painting 'Dobson's Dream', a landscape with buildings, wood, and water, appears to be the product of Dobson's early morning lessons; further evidence that their relationship matured into friendship is provided by another watercolour by Varley, in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, inscribed with Dobson's name. Other valuable friendships were with the painters W. H. Hunt, Mulready (both also studied under Varley), Turner, West, and, significantly, Robert Smirke. Smirke's architect sons Robert and Sydney were also important to Dobson; Robert Smirke the elder was one of the leading exponents of the newly fashionable Greek revival style, while Sydney was later to become his son-in-law. Indeed, useful though Varley's instruction was, it was the opportunity to become immersed in the London architectural scene that was crucial to Dobson's development and Sir John Soane, then commencing his Royal Academy lectures on architecture, may have been a further indirect influence. Contrary to the advice of his London friends, Dobson returned to the north-east in 1810. He set up practice in North Shields and soon afterwards in Newcastle, where he immediately introduced a more authentic Greek revival neo-classicism with his first building, the Royal Jubilee School in City Road (1810; dem.); this, however, had to be built with pilasters instead of the intended portico. 
From the outset Dobson insisted on his status as a professional architect in the modern sense. Following the precepts of Soane, he was careful to distance himself from the earlier generation of builder-architects in Newcastle and elsewhere, including Stephenson, and was at first a comparatively isolated figure who, in spite of some early commissions, had to work hard to create a demand for his services. In the intervals between employment he undertook study tours of England, Wales, and France, which reinforced his growing interest in medieval architecture, although unlike many of his contemporaries he never visited Italy or Greece. By 1815, however, Dobson was becoming involved in planning several residential developments in Newcastle and was able to take on as a pupil Thomas Oliver (who worked for him until 1821). He also had the beginnings of a useful villa and country house practice for the local gentry, designing, for example, the neo-classical Prestwick Lodge (1815), Doxford Hall (1817-18), both in Northumberland, and the Villa Reale, Newcastle (1817); at about this time he also produced, for Sir Jacob Astley, an elaborate though unexecuted scheme for the enlargement of Seaton Delaval Hall. 
In the mid-1820s Dobson married Isabella (1794-1846), daughter of Alexander Rutherford, a master mariner, and his wife, Isabella, of Gateshead. His wife was a talented amateur artist. Of their eight children (three sons and five daughters) the two eldest sons and two eldest daughters survived to adulthood. Isabella married the architect Sydney Smirke; Margaret Jane (1830-1905) is best known for her useful, if not entirely reliable, biography of her father, published in 1885. The Dobsons' second son, Alexander Ralph ('b'. 1828), showed considerable architectural talent, working for his father before and after a pupillage (1849-52) with Sydney Smirke, and being elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1850. He was clearly intended to take over the practice, but was killed in the Newcastle quayside fire of 1854. After this his elder brother John ('b'. 1827) was employed, but probably only in an administrative capacity since he had begun his career as a master mariner; possible hopes of an architectural dynasty were not to be. 
Major country house designs in Northumberland, both for established county families and for industrialists setting up as landed proprietors, followed during the next two decades. Mitford Hall (begun 1823), Longhirst Hall (1824-5), and Meldon Park (1832), beautifully sited and built with superb ashlar masonry, were influenced by two recent examples of Greek revival architecture in the county, namely Belsay Hall (1807-17), where its Graecophil owner, Sir Charles Monck, was his own architect, and John Shaw's Cresswell Hall (1821-4; dem. 1938). From the latter Dobson derived what became on both aesthetic and functional grounds his preferred country house and villa plan: L-shaped, having the principal rooms on the south (sometimes with a bay) and east, the entrance to the west, and a service wing running north, often linked at right-angles to a conservatory on the eastern side. This plan was also used in some of his Tudor Gothic houses, such as Lilburn Tower, near Wooler, Northumberland (1828-9). However, a later work in the same style, Beaufront Castle, near Hexham, also in Northumberland (1837-41), incorporating an earlier house, is a looser, more picturesque design. 
Dobson also undertook a small amount of landscape gardening. His work for Ralph Riddell at Cheeseburn Grange, Northumberland, of 'c'.1813 included not only the Tudor Gothic reconstruction of the house itself but also a scheme (partially implemented) for replanning the park, with ha-ha, serpentine paths, a 'primitive' cottage set deep in trees, and irregular areas of woodland coming right up to the house, reminiscent of Repton's picturesque style. His most important landscape commission was probably that for the Hon. W. H. Beresford at Bolam Hall, Northumberland, where in 1816 he laid out extensive areas of carefully variegated woodland and a substantial artificial lake. Dobson also revived, again in the manner of Repton, the use of formal elements such as borders, paths, and lawns in the immediate vicinity of a house. Meldon, in its elevated position with terrace overlooking and shading into the surrounding landscape, is a good example of this. 
Meanwhile, in Newcastle, Dobson had become sufficiently established and well connected to win the competition for the design of the gaol and house of correction in Carliol Square (1822-8; dem. 'c'.1929), which he planned according to the radiating principle (a year earlier he also designed the rather similar Northumberland county gaol at Morpeth, of which the gigantic, castellated gatehouse still survives). In 1827 he won a limited competition to build for the Newcastle corporation his first major church, that of St Thomas the Martyr, Barras Bridge, then on the northern extremity of the town and replacing a medieval chapel of the same name demolished in order to widen the entrance from the old Tyne Bridge. It is a typically late Georgian lancet-style design (completed 1830) without chancel, reminiscent of the 'commissioners' Gothic' of that time; its interior, however, is particularly spacious and elegant, having slender columns and vaulted roof, although slightly marred by the later insertion of galleries. 
Also in Newcastle, for the speculative builder Richard Grainger, Dobson laid out Blackett Street (1824; subsequently almost entirely redeveloped), Eldon Square (1825-31; largely dem., somewhat controversially, 'c'.1972), and the Royal Arcade (1831-2; dem. 1963-9), all of which reinforced the air of fashionable elegance Grainger was bringing to the town. But Dobson's plan for the redevelopment of Newcastle of 'c'.1824, involving the construction of a classical square and 'civic palace' on the site of the historic manor of Anderson Place (which, curiously, still occupied an almost vacant central site), was superseded by the more pragmatic, commercially viable scheme evolved by Grainger himself. This was largely carried out between 1834 and 1839, Dobson being responsible at this time only for the design of the 'Grainger' market and the lower east side of Grey Street. Another of Dobson's planning schemes which unfortunately remained largely unexecuted, although actually begun in 1828, was that for a new town at Seaham, co. Durham; this had been intended by the third marquess of Londonderry to complement the harbour he was building for the export of coal, but the original classical layout was soon abandoned because of financial constraints. 
Later, in Newcastle, Dobson added a substantial new wing to the old infirmary in the Forth (1852-5; dem. 1954) and in 1854 drew up plans for the rebuilding of the quayside, which had been devastated by a fire caused by an explosion over the river in Gateshead in October of that year; these were partially implemented a few years later, but with street elevations by different architects. Dobson's scheme, illustrated in a drawing in the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne, proposed a series of picturesque frontages in the more eclectic manner of his later years. His greatest public building was the Central Station, Newcastle, designed 1847-8 and opened by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert on 29 August 1850, albeit in an unfinished state. It has a fine, curving train shed of iron and glass, a model of which was exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and which won Dobson an honourable mention, and a facade in the grand style of Vanbrugh, even in the altered and reduced form in which it was finally completed in 1863. Much of the last five years of Dobson's career was taken up with the remarkable feat of underpinning and reconstructing Lambton Castle, co. Durham, an enormous building dating mainly from the early nineteenth century which was threatened with serious mining subsidence; his extensive additions to the house, begun in 1857 and completed after 1862 by Sydney Smirke, are, however, now largely demolished. 
Dobson also built up a substantial ecclesiastical practice, for all denominations, especially in the second half of his career, although this aspect of his work has been less admired in the twentieth century. However, it should be noted that in this context many of his designs were built to a limited budget in the growing urban and industrial areas of the north-east and as such had to be fairly plain and functional. Most of his churches after about 1825 are in the Gothic revival style, for which he had become an enthusiast and in which he steadily developed, under the influence of Pugin and the Ecclesiologists, a more archaeologically and liturgically 'correct' approach (also adopted in his restoration work). This can be seen in such late works as St John's, Otterburn, Northumberland (1855-7), a rather delicate Decorated design, and Jesmond parish church, Newcastle (1858-61). His occasional excursions into the briefly fashionable neo-Norman style are exemplified by St James's, Benwell, Newcastle (1831-2; subsequently much altered and enlarged), and St Cuthbert's, Bensham, co. Durham (1845-8; north aisle added 1875). 
By the 1850s and 1860s the spread of Ruskinian ideas meant that Dobson's rather thoroughgoing church restorations, admittedly usually encouraged if not demanded by incumbent clergymen, were becoming increasingly controversial. Nowhere was this more evident than at Hexham Abbey, Northumberland, where between 1858 and 1860 he replaced most of the late Gothic east end, including the Perpendicular lady chapel, with a rather over-academic lancet design based on that of Whitby Abbey, which he deemed to be contemporary with the building's basic form. Yet Dobson was also capable of sensitively reconstructing (for the duke of Northumberland) the Percy chapel at the east end of Tynemouth Priory, Northumberland, a highly decorative example of Perpendicular work; that this was no routine task is indicated by the fact that in the same year (1852) he gave a scholarly paper on the subject to a meeting in Newcastle of the Archaeological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, illustrated with large-scale drawings of the elaborately carved heraldic bosses of the chapel's roof. 
Dobson was elected FRIBA on 28 June 1845, proposed by W. Burn, T. L. Donaldson, A. Salvin, and S. Smirke, and was president of the newly formed Northern Architectural Association from 1859. His practice, possibly one of the last great provincial ones, was substantial, with clerks, draughtsmen, and pupils. Among his later assistants were Johnson Hogg; Gibson Kyle; George Ridley, later chief clerk to Sydney Smirke; E. R. Robson, a nationally known school board architect; and Thomas Prosser, who as architect to the North Eastern Railway Company completed the Newcastle Central Station after Dobson's career was terminated by an incapacitating stroke in 1862. Thomas Austin completed some of Dobson's works and, in partnership with his fellow Gothic revivalist R. J. Johnson, purchased his practice after his death. Dobson himself was a fine draughtsman but large numbers of his drawings -- and office records -- have disappeared. Of the drawings and watercolours that do survive, the largest collection is in the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne; a few other drawings are to be found in, for example, the RIBA drawings collection, London, and in the libraries of the Society of Antiquaries of London and of the University of Newcastle. 
Dobson was of middle height, with dark hair. A bust of him is reproduced in his daughter's 'Memoir of John Dobson' (1885). There are also two portraits of Dobson in the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne, one painted by J. Dixon ('c'.1820), in which the architect is seated at a desk, and the other, unattributed, showing him in late middle age. Of these the former is by far the better likeness. Although dedicated, determined, and industrious, and robust and vigorous in physique -- he enjoyed boxing and fencing in his youth -- Dobson had 'the fastidiousness of a retiring nature' (Dobson, 65) and may have lacked the ultimate degree of ambition necessary to promote himself fully; hence, possibly, his decision to set up in Newcastle rather than the metropolis. He published no treatises, although his 'Presidential address to the Northern Architectural Association' of 1859 (repr. in Wilkes, 99-110) does give some account of his career and approach. Nor did he enter any of the great national architectural competitions or, except on rare occasions, exhibit his work nationally. 
Dobson achieved a remarkable level of professional integrity and competence throughout his long career. He was noted for his technical and constructional expertise, and unusual sensitivity in the siting of his designs. He was not a stylistic innovator and avoided doctrinaire commitment to any single mode. However, his architecture almost invariably has a distinctive solidity and strength; this found its most appropriate expression in the Greek revival and neo-classical styles. After Dobson's enforced retirement through ill health he moved to Ryton, co. Durham, but returned to his Newcastle home at 15 New Bridge Street shortly before his death there on 8 January 1865. Dobson was buried in Jesmond cemetery, which he himself had laid out thirty years before and of which the monumental chapels and gates are among his finest works. 


@@@@@


doc= 7718


Dobson, Susannah (d. 1795), translator, was the daughter of John Dawson of the parish of St Dunstan, London. In 1759 she married Matthew Dobson (1732-1784), a physician and natural philosopher. They had three children: Susannah ('b'. 1764), Dawson ('b'. 1766), and Elisa (1760/61-1778). 
Susannah Dobson's first published work, in 1775, was an abridged translation in two volumes of 'Memoires pour la vie de Francois Petrarque', by Jacques Francois Paul Aldonce, abbe de Sade. According to Samuel Johnson, 'Mrs Dobson, the Directress of rational conversation, did not translate Petrarch; but epitomised a very bulky French life of Petrarch' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 249). De Sade's work was extremely controversial: he claimed to prove the true identity of Petrarch's Laura and identified her with the Laura de Noves, wife of Hugues de Sade, on the basis of a sonnet found in her tomb in the De la Croix Chapel in Avignon. His work attracted the attention of Horace Walpole and Alexander Fraser Tytler, Lord Woodhouselee. The latter rejected de Sade's theory in his 'Essay on the Life and Character of Petrarch'. 
Susannah Dobson might have become interested in the work through Baretti's praise of it in his 'Manners and Customs of Italy' (1768). Her reviewer in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' praised Dobson's translation for maintaining 'that pathos and spirit of the original' and for a preface by Dobson intended, now that Laura was revealed to have been a married woman, 'to guard against the impression which such an attachment might otherwise make on susceptible hearts' ('GM', 45, 1775, 186). Dobson's translation enjoyed long-lasting popularity, and by 1805 there had been one Irish and six English editions, many of which were illustrated with appropriate engravings. In 1780 she claimed to have earned $400 from it ('Diary and Letters', 1.369). According to Roderick Marshall, 'this book restored Petrarch, after a hundred and fifty years of banishment, to an active part in English literature' (Marshall, 124). 
In 1777 Susannah Dobson published a 'Dialogue on Friendship and Society'. She then translated two works by the French Academician Jean-Baptiste de la Curne de Sainte-Palaye (1697-1781): 'Literary History of the Troubadours' (1779) and 'Memoirs of Ancient Chivalry' (1784). In 1791 she published a translation of Petrarch's 'De remediis utriusque fortunae' as 'Petrarch's View of Human Life'. In the last year of her life she published 'Historical Anecdotes of Heraldry and Chivalry' (1795). 
In 1780 Susannah Dobson followed her husband to Bath, where he had retired on the grounds of ill health. The novelist Fanny Burney mentions her in her diary for the same year. According to Burney, Susannah Dobson had 'long been trying to make acquaintance with Mrs Thrale, but Mrs Thrale, not liking her advances, has always shrunk from them' ('Diary and Letters', 1.360). Eventually Susannah Dobson was introduced to Mrs Thrale, but does not seem to have succeeded in winning her friendship. While Fanny Burney admitted that, 'though coarse, low-bred, forward, self-sufficient, and flaunting, she seems to have a strong masculine understanding' (ibid., 1.370), Mrs Thrale wrote that 'Mrs Dobson... persecutes me strangely as if with violent & undesired Friendship; yet Mrs Lewis says She is jealous' ('Thraliana', 1.595). By this time Susannah's husband had become Mrs Thrale's practitioner. Susannah Dobson died in London on 30 September 1795 and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 7719


Dobson, William (bap. 1611, d. 1646), portrait painter, was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 24 February 1611 (City of London Guildhall MS 6667/1). His father was also called William Dobson (died 1626), and was probably the painter-stainer mentioned in the corporation of London court of common council records on 5 February 1622 (journal 31, fol. 393). John Aubrey described the artist's father as a gentleman who was assistant to the lord chancellor, Francis Bacon, helping him in the building and decoration of Verulam House, near St Albans ('Brief Lives', 1.78). In 1607 a William Dobson was paying taxes at 'The Villa, Albani'. Whether he was the same William Dobson who was master of the alienation office and 'clerk of recognizances for recovery of debts in the Courts of the Chief Justices of King's Bench and Common Pleas' (Spencer, xiv) remains speculative. William Dobson senior married Alice Barnes (died 1642x4?), a prosperous mercer's daughter, on 8 April 1605 at All Hallows, Honey Lane, London, and they had eight children. At her death in 1642, the artist's grandmother Katherine Barnes owned a number of pictures, including 'Judith and Holofernes' and two royal portraits (PROB 11/191/20). 
Facts about Dobson's life are few. He was married twice: in the first instance to Elizabeth (surname unknown, date of marriage unknown), who was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 26 September 1634, and secondly to Judith Sander on 18 December 1637 at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London (Guildhall MS 6537). After his death, Judith may have been married again, to one Henry Boulton in 1648, but, although according to Aubrey (2.318) she lived to see the Restoration, her death has not been traced. 
Dobson senior lived beyond his means, and when he died intestate in February 1626, the young Dobson was forced to think of earning a living. According to Buckeridge, Dobson spent his apprenticeship under William Peake, the Holborn picture dealer, printseller, and stationer (Buckeridge, 369). Elizabeth's death in St Martin-in-the-Fields suggests the young Dobsons had set up house there. Abraham van der Doort, surveyor of the king's pictures, would have been their neighbour in St Martin's Lane, which was close to the court in Whitehall. A haunting portrait, possibly by Dobson and traditionally said to be van der Doort, who committed suicide in 1640, now hangs in the Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg. Richard Symonds noted that Dobson then took further training under Francis Cleyn, the German engraver, decorative painter, and designer of Mortlake tapestries, whose work survives at Ham House, Middlesex (Symonds, fol. 89'v'). Cleyn's influence can be seen in Dobson's curious painting at Rousham, Oxfordshire, entitled 'The Civil Wars of France', made in preparation for the engraved frontispiece to the translation by Sir Charles Cotterell and William Aylesbury of D'Avila's 'Istoria delle guerre civili di Francia' published in 1647. 
During his formative years Dobson is said to have had 'the advantage of copying many excellent Pictures, especially some of Titian and Van Dyck' (Buckeridge, 369). Anthony Van Dyck had arrived in London in 1632, and later imported his private collection of paintings known as his Cabinet du Titien. According to Graham, Dobson's first biographer, it was through Van Dyck's encouragement that Dobson received royal favour (Graham, 340). Dobson plainly benefited from this contact with the king's principal painter, and with van der Doort's help, too, he would have been able to view the exceptional pictures (many Venetian) in the Royal Collection. 'The Four Ages of Man', now at Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire, and thought to be one of Dobson's rare subject paintings, is indebted to both Van Dyck and Titian. Copying may have provided him with a meagre living, but a paucity of surviving works from the 1630s shows that Dobson did not easily build a reputation. Rogers estimated that he set up independently by about 1640, not the most auspicious moment to start a career (Rogers, 12). 
The metropolis was seething with unrest, and the king and his supporters abandoned London in January 1642. Civil war skirmishing began in early summer, and in October the court settled in Oxford. The Dobsons moved to Oxford early in 1643, where in April 1644 William was listed as a parishioner of All Saints in the High Street. Here, in 1645, another Elizabeth Dobson was buried (perhaps a child of William's first wife). The Dobsons presumably remained there until the court left the city in June 1646. William found a workshop assistant, a priest called Hesketh, who also painted landscapes. There is a puzzling reference in Symonds's notebook (fol. 102) to a Mr Vaughan of the exchequer office releasing Dobson from prison by paying his debts, but this incident cannot be placed or dated. It proves only that Dobson received few financial rewards either in London or in Oxford. 
Van Dyck died in December 1641 and, without his towering shadow, Dobson could make more headway. He was called upon to paint not only the king (priv. coll.), the prince of Wales, the duke of York (both Royal Collection), and the palatine princes Rupert and Maurice (both priv. coll.), but many of the cavaliers who had flocked to Oxford. A fine 'ad vivum' study (NMM) of the elderly Inigo Jones dates from this period (second version, Chiswick House, Department of the Environment). Dobson built up a busy practice, and possibly took profile drawings of the king and the prince of Wales for the military award medals produced by Thomas Rawlins in Oxford. Rawlins wrote a collection of poems called 'Calanthe' (now lost) which contained a eulogy to Dobson. The title referred to Dobson's royal appointment as serjeant painter to the king and groom of the privy chamber, and the artist was hailed as 'the very Soul of Art, the Prince and Prime of Painters' (Vertue, BL, Add. MS 19027, fol. 43'v'). 
Apart from one drawing attributed to Dobson (see Brown, 70-71; Rogers, 11) there are no preparatory drawings by his hand. He usually worked 'alla prima', painting directly onto the canvas. His earlier Oxford portraits are rich in pigment, but towards the end of 1645 the paint begins to be brushed thinly onto visibly unprimed canvases, revealing the difficulty of getting materials during wartime. As royal hopes sank, his portraits took on a 'ghostly insubstantiality' (Rogers, 19). Three of Dobson's paintings were engraved by William Faithorne (another of Peake's trainees) and sold in London, but surprisingly few were copied by miniaturists. 
Dobson's portraits are distinguished by their directness. They glow with brightly coloured silks and rose-red royalist sashes, and often carry symbolic allusions to the sitter's role in life. Lacking the spaciousness of Van Dyck's portraits, Dobson's portraits fill the canvas, and he conveyed their individuality with force. He painted intimate head and shoulders compositions, such as the portrait of his wife, Judith (priv. coll.), or his good friend and patron Sir Charles Cotterell, master of ceremonies to Charles I (priv. coll.), which is counted among his finest personal tributes. His unfinished painting of the king is equally sensitive (priv. coll.). 
Dobson attempted full-length portraits but these are less successful. He also experimented with double and triple portraits, and whole families, though his skill at bringing individual studies together into one composition is doubtful. His group portraits have been described as 'inelegant', but some can be applauded for their vigour and novelty. His triple portrait of Prince Rupert and Colonel John Russell, with Colonel William Murray dipping his cockade into a glass of wine (priv. coll.), commemorated a particular historical moment. There is a mock-heroic analogy in the choice of Hercules behind another painting of himself with Sir Charles Cotterell, who appears to be shielding him from the pleasurable temptation offered by a third figure, almost certainly Nicholas Lanier (priv. coll.). 
By far Dobson's most successful portrayals are half and three-quarter lengths. Those painted between 1640 and 1644, such as 'Endymion Porter' (Tate collection), 'The Prince of Wales' (Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh), and 'John, first Lord Byron' (University of Manchester), brim with resplendent colour and rich impasto, as well as defiant confidence in the royal cause. Lord Byron's portrait, which is painted in flamboyant gold, scarlet, and crimson, was chosen to represent the visual richness of this era in the 'Treasure houses' exhibition at the National Gallery, Washington, DC, in 1985. The portraits of Sir Thomas Chicheley (priv. coll.) and Sir Richard Fanshaw (Valence House Museum, Dagenham, Essex) are perhaps the most Van Dyckian and confident of his works. Other likenesses, such as those of Colonel Richard Neville (NPG), the earl of Northampton (priv. coll.), the earl of Macclesfield (Dunedin Art Gallery, New Zealand), Lord Rockingham (priv. coll.), and Sir Charles Lucas (priv. coll.), reflect the anxieties of wartime and the sitters' fears for the future. The last two particularly show the raw weave of the canvas beneath the thin paint. Another late picture, signed and dated 1645, of an unknown girl from the Annesley or Hanbury families (Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery), demonstrates his sympathetic touch when painting women. 
Dobson painted several self-portraits. Buckeridge described him as: 'a fair middle-sized man, of ready wit, and a pleasing conversation, yet being somewhat loose and irregular in his way of living, he, notwithstanding the many opportunities he had of making his fortune, died poor at his house in St. Martin's Lane... (Buckeridge, 369)' His burial took place on 28 October 1646 at St Martin-in-the-Fields (Westminster city archives, St Martin's register, no. 3). His death was plainly unexpected for he had been nominated as a steward of the Painter-Stainers' Company on 5 August (Guildhall MS 5667/1, fol. 209). 
Considering that artists of standing at the English court until then (and indeed for the following seventy years) were, with the exceptions of the miniaturists Hilliard and Cooper, imported from abroad, it was astonishing that there should emerge such a striking home-bred talent, able to convey with penetrating sensitivity such psychological depths. As a gentleman, Dobson would have brought a personal insight into the values of the aristocracy when many were under threat. A very promising career, with only some sixty known paintings to his credit, was cut short at the age of thirty-five. His influence can be detected in the paintings of Sir Peter Lely, John Michael Wright (who also trained with Cleyn), Isaac Fuller, and John Hayls. For many years he was overlooked, but two exhibitions in the twentieth century (the exhibitions at the Tate Gallery in 1951 and at the National Portrait Gallery in 1983-4) established his reputation among the first rank of English painters. Other examples of Dobson's works are in the National Gallery, London; the Scottish National Gallery, Edinburgh; the Tate collection; the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich; the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool; and the Courtauld Institute. 


@@@@@


doc= 7720


Dobson, William (bap. 1820, d. 1884), journalist and antiquary, was the eldest son of Lawrence Dobson and his wife, Mary Bowe. His father was a stationer and part proprietor with Isaac Wilcockson of the 'Preston Chronicle'. William Dobson was baptized at Preston on 26 January 1820, and educated at the grammar school of that town. He afterwards pursued a career in journalism. On the retirement of Wilcockson his father purchased the remaining interest in the 'Chronicle', and took William into partnership with him. William was for some years the editor, until March 1868, when the proprietorship of the 'Chronicle' was transferred to Anthony Hewitson. Dobson's career as a journalist was at an end, but he continued, along with his brother James, to carry on the family stationery business at 23 Fishergate. 
Dobson was a Liberal in politics and in August 1866 he first sat on the town council, with the expressed intention of opening Dr Shepherd's library more fully to the public. He remained on the council until November 1872, and subsequently sat for a further term from 1874 to November 1883. On 18 June 1867 he married Esther, daughter of Job Hallmark, a hop merchant, and sister of Alderman Hallmark of Preston; they had no children. 
A member of the Chetham Society, Dobson had an extensive knowledge of local history and antiquities, especially the Preston area, and published nine books relating to the town. His keen interest in politics is evident from his writings, which include 'The Preston Municipal Elections from 1835 to 1862' (1862) and 'A History of Parliamentary Representation of Preston during the Last Hundred Years' (1856). Preston Guild was a subject which naturally drew his attention: he wrote an account of the 1862 celebrations and was the co-author with John Harland (1806-1868) of a history of the guild published in 1862. His other work of note is 'Rambles by the Ribble' (1864-83), originally published as a serial in the 'Chronicle'. 
Dobson belonged to the Independent Order of Oddfellows, Manchester Union, and served as provincial grand master to the Pleasant Retreat Lodge, Preston, in 1882. He was also on the council of the Avenham Institute in the town. At one time he was a large shareholder of various local and district companies, but lost money when some of them failed. A Unitarian initially, in later years he became a member of the Church of England. In 1882 he moved to Churton Road, Chester, where he died on 8 August 1884, aged sixty-four. He was buried on 11 August in Chester cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 7721


Dobson, William Charles Thomas (1817-1898), painter, was born in Hamburg, Germany, on 8 December 1817, the son of John Dobson, an English merchant, and a German mother. While Dobson's early years are obscure, it appears that financial concerns necessitated the family's move to London in 1826. Dobson's artistic training began under Edward Opie, the nephew of the portrait painter John Opie, and included diligent study in the gallery of antiquities at the British Museum by the age of fourteen. In 1836 Dobson entered the Royal Academy Schools and made sufficient progress to attract the attention and active encouragement of the academician and future president Charles Lock Eastlake. Dobson exhibited his work at the Royal Academy for the first time in 1842 and was soon appointed to a prominent position in the School of Design, recently established at Somerset House. 
In 1843 Dobson was appointed headmaster of the Government School of Design in Birmingham, a post which he resigned after two years in order to further his artistic training in Italy, particularly in Rome. In 1846 Dobson sent a genre piece entitled 'The Young Italian Goatherd' to the Royal Academy exhibition to advertise his Italianate training. He then made a less conventional choice and travelled to his native Germany, where he acquainted himself with the Nazarene school of painting, which may have given him the confidence to enter the 1847 Westminster Hall competition with two cartoons, 'Lamentation' and 'Boadicea'. While the precise length and timing of his continental sojourn is uncertain, Dobson exhibited a number of fanciful subjects such as 'Saul with the Witch of Endor' in the 1848 Royal Academy exhibition, and 'The Knight Huldbrand Relating his Adventures in the Enchanted Forest' in 1849, which sought to capitalize on his German experience. 
Possibly recognizing the limited appeal of such works, Dobson began to focus on religious subjects, which firmly established his reputation in the Victorian art world. One of his greatest successes was 'The Almsdeeds of Dorcas' (1855; Royal Collection) which was purchased by Queen Victoria as a present for Prince Albert on his birthday. Dobson's religious paintings combined the Raphaelesque roundness and finish of William Dyce and Charles Lock Eastlake with the 'primitive' backgrounds of the Nazarenes. About 1854 Dobson had at least one painting student, Edward Poynter, who would become a highly celebrated neo-classical painter. Dobson returned to Germany, residing from approximately 1858 to 1860 in Dresden, where he again sought to master the techniques and styles of German painting. In 1860 one critic wrote, 'We cannot afford to see such a painter spending even a portion of his time upon the heads of little children, beautiful as these pictures are; nor can we desire to find, as some of his latest pictures have shown, the influence of the German school pervading his works. Mr Dobson has been passing several months recently in Dresden; we shall look with some anxiety to see what effect has been produced by his residence there. (Dafforne, 139)' In 1878 Dobson served as a juror for the fine art department of the Paris Universal Exhibition, where he exhibited watercolour drawings. Throughout his career Dobson helped to bridge British and continental art. 
Dobson did not entirely give up secular subjects, and, as the above critic notes, was well known for his idealized depictions of children. From his sentimental genre subjects to his most ambitious religious paintings, children were prevalent in Dobson's work, and they were central to his moral message of purity and innocence. 
Dobson turned relatively late to watercolour, motivated by the desire to preserve it from the corrupting influences of body colour. Dobson attempted to preserve David Cox's transparent wash tradition, and this technical conservatism again allied him with the Nazarenes. This conservative tendency also applied to his oil painting technique where he used a restricted palette of ten pigments which went back to Sir Joshua Reynolds's working method. Dobson was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1870 and a full member in 1875. Dobson was also a member of the Etching Club, founded in 1842. 
Based on his success as a painter of religious art, Dobson was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1860 and a full academician in 1872. Exhibiting 117 pictures at the Royal Academy over the course of a fifty-two-year career, Dobson retired from the academy in 1895; he was apparently well liked by his colleagues. A resident of Langham Chambers, Oxford Street, London, by 1858, Dobson had by 1884 acquired a country house, Gentils, Lodsworth, near Petworth, Sussex. He died at Undercliff House, Ventnor, Isle of Wight, on 30 January 1898. He left a widow, Caroline, and a son, Edmund Arthur Dobson. 


@@@@@


doc= 7722


Docharty, James (1829-1878), landscape painter, was born at Bonhill, Dunbartonshire, the son of James Docharty, a journeyman calico printer, and his wife, Catherine. He was trained as a pattern designer at the School of Design in Glasgow, and thereafter he continued his design studies for some years in France where he may have seen the paintings of Gustave Courbet. On his return to Glasgow he began to practise on his own account, and was so successful that, in his early thirties, he was able to give up designing patterns and become a full-time landscape painter. 
Docharty's earliest works were views of the village of Ardenadam on the lower Clyde and scenes of the lochs of the western highlands, which he exhibited at the Glasgow (later Royal Glasgow) Institute of the Fine Arts. Afterwards he extended his range of subjects on the Clyde, working also in Perthshire and painting in the more remote highland areas, such as in western Ross-shire and the Hebrides. He treated his landscapes with vigour and a direct naturalism achieved without artifice. His mature works are distinguished by the quiet harmony of their colour. Most of his paintings were exhibited in Glasgow, but he was also a regular exhibitor at the Royal Scottish Academy between 1864 and 1878, and also at the Royal Academy in London between 1865 and 1877. Among the most popular were 'The Haunt of the Red Deer on the Dee, Braemar' (exh. RA, 1869) and 'The Head of Loch Lomond' (exh. RA, 1873). His last exhibited works were 'The Trossachs', in the Royal Scottish Academy show of 1878, and 'A Salmon Stream' in the Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts exhibition in the same year. 
In 1876, owing to his failing health, Docharty went abroad, making a lengthy tour through France, Italy, and Egypt, but without much benefit. Late in 1877 he was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy. He died of consumption at 7 Berlin Terrace, Pollokshields, Glasgow, on 5 April 1878 and was buried in Cathcart cemetery in that city. He was survived by his wife, Robina Bruce Lang. Most of his paintings entered private collections but he is represented in public collections in, for example, Aberdeen, Dundee, Glasgow, and Paisley. 


@@@@@


doc= 7723


Docking, Thomas of (d. c.1270), Franciscan friar and ecclesiastical writer, was born at Docking, Norfolk, and may have entered the Franciscan order at Norwich. He had certainly become a Franciscan by 1252-3, when Adam Marsh (died 1259) wrote a letter asking the provincial minister to assign Docking the 'Bible' of a deceased friar. In this letter Marsh described Docking as 'distinguished by good morals and pleasant manners, a clear hand, great learning and eloquence' (Brewer, 359-60). Docking was at various times among the pupils of Robert Grosseteste (died 1253), Adam Marsh, and Roger Bacon (died 1294), and went on to fulfil his earlier promise by becoming seventh lector to the Oxford Franciscans ('c'.1262-5), succeeding John of Wales (died 1285). Like John, he was not a philosopher, but rather a moralist and theologian. He remained in Oxford after his time as lector, and was among the speakers during the controversy between the Friars Preacher and the Friars Minor at Oxford in 1269. He was later warden of Norwich, and died 'c'.1270. 
Docking was a prolific writer, his works being both lengthy and numerous. Although enthusiasm for his works waned in the fourteenth century, being given rather to the Paris theologian Nicholas de Lyre, interest in Docking did revive in the fifteenth century. His commentary on the 'Sentences' (now lost) was well known in the middle ages, as was his 'Biblical grammar', also now lost. His commentary on 'Deuteronomy' survives in five manuscripts, his commentary on 'Isaiah' in two. He also left commentaries on nine of the 'Pauline epistles', and parts of commentaries on 'Corinthians', 'Luke', and 'Job'. 
Docking has been described as having a mania for encyclopaedic lore: this was an enthusiasm shared by a number of Oxford friars of his period. His lengthy commentaries show a wide range of interests. He commented extensively on social conditions, children, young people, physical sciences including optics, law, the beauties of natural scenery, and many other topics, quite apart from his theological interests. In many ways he tended to accept the social conditions of his time, but he did make some political comments that can seem pointed, considering that he was lecturing at Oxford in the 1260s, at the time of the barons' wars. When he wrote that 'it seems to me... that if some man who is prudent and well-fitted for the business of rule... should aspire to the dignity of ruling for... the benefit of the subjects, his aim is good' (Little, 'Grey Friars', 278 n.4), he may have been referring to Simon de Montfort. 
Docking showed himself acquainted with a wide range of sources. He quotes a number of classical writers -- mainly poets apart from Cicero -- many anonymous medieval verses, and Bernard Sylvestris. Philosophy was represented by Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Boethius, Ptolemy, Pliny, and Pseudo-Dionysius. Docking refers to very many ecclesiastical writers, together with John of Salisbury, Alexander Neckham, and, most unusually, the 'De prescientia Dei' of Bartholomew, bishop of Exeter (died 1184). Guillaume d'Auxerre and Robert Grosseteste are mentioned infrequently, and Adam Marsh not at all. 
Docking was first quoted by the Franciscan John Russel, who cited the 'Biblical grammar' in 1292. Later Franciscans who also quoted his works included William of Nottingham ('c'.1312), John Lathbury ('c'.1350), and William Woodford ('c'.1373), while William Gray, bishop of Ely (died 1478), had copies of Docking's works made for his library in the mid-fifteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 7724


Dockwra, William (bap. 1635?, d. 1716), promoter of the penny post and copper and brass manufacturer, was born in the parish of St Olave Jewry, London, and was almost certainly the son of John Dockrey (died 1646x50), armourer, and his wife, Margaret, baptized there on 26 April 1635. William was apprenticed in 1651 to Anthony Hatch of the Armourers' Company. He was probably the William Dockwra who, on 16 May 1661, married Rebekah Dukeson at St Clement Danes, London; his will mentions his wife Rebekah. They had nine children. The marriage of his niece, Mary Davies, to Sir Thomas Grosvenor of Eaton in Cheshire provided an influential contact with that family. 
In the 1660s Dockwra was able to secure an official position at the London custom house. His involvement in the African slave trade was later challenged by the Royal African Company in defence of its monopoly. As a consequence he suffered losses in 1676 when the 'Ann', a merchant ship in which he had the major share, was seized. On bringing an action against those responsible and petitioning for redress, Dockwra further alienated the company and its supporters. He suffered additional losses in other aspects of his African trade. 
In 1683, at a time when no adequate provision existed for the carriage of letters and parcels between different parts of London, Dockwra improved upon an idea suggested and partly implemented by Robert Murray (bap. 1633, d. 1725?) to establish a penny postal system in the city. He secured a patent allowing letters and parcels taken in at the receiving houses in principal streets to be carried by messengers at hourly intervals to six large 'grand offices'. When the letters and parcels were sorted and registered, other messengers delivered them six or eight times a day in central streets near the exchange. Within the city 1died was charged for delivery of letters and parcels not exceeding 1 lb in weight, or any sum of money, or parcels of not more than $10 in value. In the suburbs there were four deliveries daily at a charge of 2died for delivery within a given 10 mile radius. 
For Dockwra there was little benefit from this enterprise. Complaints resulted from city porters, who felt their interests were threatened, and legal action ensued from the duke of York, to whom revenue had been granted from the Post Office monopoly. This lawsuit resulted in losses of $2000 to Dockwra and the surrender of his patent. In 1690, in recompense for this treatment, parliament granted him a pension of $500 a year for seven years, which was continued on a new patent until 1700. In 1697 he was appointed as comptroller of the penny post, and in that year a poem on his 'invention of the penny post' is recorded in a volume entitled 'State Poems'. He later complained of the transfer of a number of his destinations in favour of the general post. He was then accused of removing the Post Office from Cornhill to a less central station, of detaining and opening letters, and of refusing to take parcels of more than 1 lb in weight, thereby injuring the trade of the Post Office porters. After an investigation by Sir Thomas Frankland and Sir Robert Cotton, postmasters-general, Dockwra was eventually dismissed from his post as a comptroller of the penny post in June 1700. 
Meanwhile, Dockwra had involved himself in the Armourers' Company, in 1688 becoming a member of the courts of assistants and master between 1692 and 1694. During the 1680s Dockwra had acquired other interests through association with the Grosvenors, owners of lead mines in Flintshire. Acting as London agent for sales of lead from these mines, he learned of new lead-smelting methods being developed at Bristol. The practical application of this work was largely due to John Coster, who was later responsible for extending similar coal-fired techniques to the smelting of copper. The old monopolies, whose failure to establish a lasting production in copper and brass had left the country dependent on expensive imported goods, were restricted by the 'Mines Royal Act' of 1689. This act, legalizing the formation of new enterprise in this industry, enabled the adoption of the new smelting methods under development. 
In 1689 Dockwra led a new partnership, formed to smelt copper ore. Cornish ore was carried by water to Redbrook on the Wye in Gloucestershire to be processed there by Coster. From Redbrook refined copper ingot was transported by Severn and Thames to Esher in Surrey, mainly for the production of brass and for manufacture to finished goods. The Esher works, established in 1690 under a separate partnership led by Dockwra, was convenient to supply the lucrative London market. Formerly the premises had been the brass works of Jacob Momma, who earlier in the century had struggled for survival against the old privileged monopolies and the price manipulation of imports. Under Dockwra brass was now produced in the traditional manner from refined copper and crushed calamine (the carbonate ore of zinc) from Mendip in Somerset. Brass and copper sheet was manufactured by water-powered rolling mills, believed to have been quite new to England. The resulting brass sheet was beaten under water-powered hammers to form pots, pans, and industrial vessels. Brass rod drawn to wire was used for pin manufacture in the first comprehensive works of its kind. By 1696 it was found that such advances in technical expertise provided only small profit margins. A newly introduced manager was dismissed after two years by a leading co-partner when Dockwra himself, now elderly, was withdrawing from practical involvement. The action precipitated a lawsuit, and compensation, culminating in a decline of the Esher works until, in 1709, it came under the control of the brass works at Bristol. 
Dockwra's fortune, reduced by his dismissal as comptroller of the penny post, was further depleted by diminishing profit from Esher and by litigation expenses. In 1702 he petitioned Queen Anne for compensation, stating that six of his seven surviving children were unprovided for. In his will, made on 26 October 1712, Dockwra described himself as being over seventy-seven years old and named his wife as his executor. He died on 25 September 1716, regarded implausibly by some contemporaries as 'aged near 100' ('Historical Register', 544). By the time his will was proved on 12 November his wife had died too. 


@@@@@


doc= 7725


Docwra, Henry, first Baron Docwra of Culmore (bap. 1564, d. 1631), army officer, was baptized on 30 April 1564 at Thatcham parish church, Berkshire, the second son of Edmund Docwra (died in or after 1590), politician and landowner, and his wife, Dorothy. Docwra's family owned the manor of Chamberhouse, Berkshire, but his father, an undistinguished MP for Aylesbury and New Windsor, fell into financial difficulties and was forced to sell. This situation may have influenced Docwra's decision to go into the army: he became a professional soldier serving under Sir Richard Bingham in the west of Ireland in 1585 and soon captained his own company. For the next decade he was actively engaged in warfare in Ireland. 
On 1 March 1586 Docwra was prominent in Bingham's siege of Cloonoan Castle in Thomond, one of the strongest fortresses in the present co. Clare, then held by Mathghamhain or Mahon O'Brien; on O'Brien's surrender all the warders were put to the sword without mercy. After this victory against the O'Briens Bingham turned his forces against the Mayo Burkes, besieging their castle of Annagh near Ballinrobe, sometimes called Annis, as well as their other stronghold on an ancient crannog towards the middle of Lough Mask known as Caislean-na-Caillighe (the 'hag's castle'). On refusing a parley to surrender, Bingham's men including Docwra's company burnt the boats which the Burkes had in dock at Castle Hag to prevent their escape but the first attack failed in a storm on the Mask, some soldiers were drowned, and the Burkes secured a number of boats to escape to the woods of Kilbride. Bingham also then abandoned the attack on Annagh Castle. In July 1586 Docwra's headquarters was at Ballinrobe whence he made sorties against the Burkes, and their allies the O'Malleys, Gibbons, Joyces, Philbins, and MacDonnells. 
Meanwhile a force of hired Scottish mercenaries was on the Erne waterways, advancing to ally with the Burkes; Docwra, under Bingham, marched north to Sligo to prevent their advance. Some of the O'Rourkes of Leitrim, the McGuires and supporters of Art O'Neill of Tyrone, who was later an ally of Docwra, joined the Scots on the Curlew Mountains. At first the invaders into Connaught were successful; Bingham and Docwra had to retreat, many men were drowned at the confluence of the Owenmore and Owenboy rivers near Colooney, and some of the enemy Scots escaped into the Ox Mountains. The decisive engagements, however, took place at Aclare, near modern Tobercurry, in co. Sligo, and on the River Moy outside Ballina at Ardnarea on 23 September 1586, where over 1000 fighting men and an equal number of attendants, women, and children, were slaughtered. Little was accomplished by severity and many of the Mayo Burkes continued in rebellion. In recognition of his distinguished military services Docwra was made constable of Dungarvan Castle, the chief administrative centre of co. Waterford, in 1594, which post he relinquished to Sir George Carey, treasurer at war, on 23 August 1599. On the decline of Bingham's fortunes Docwra transferred his allegiance to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex; Docwra gained his own command under the earl and fought with him at Cadiz, where he was knighted in 1596. When Essex was given the supreme command in Ireland he employed Docwra in the preparation and conduct of the seasoned troops who were to be transported from the Netherlands to Ireland in the winter of 1598-9. George Gilpin told Essex in a letter from The Hague that Docwra had 'fine prospects of advancement, being well thought of; but the importance of the war in Ireland, and his devotion to the queen and to you [Essex] have made him resolve to return' ('Salisbury MSS', 9.21), while Docwra himself assured Essex on 12 January 1599 of his 'unspeakable contentment' that he had been given this particular service (ibid., 22-3). Docwra's company, with that of Sir Charles Percy, was employed in reducing the rebellion in the Wicklow Mountains, where Docwra distinguished himself at Arklow in June 1599. 
In the winter of 1600-01, following Essex's disgrace, the government earmarked Docwra for 'the most desperate assignement', as he would later describe his task under Lord Deputy Mountjoy, Essex's replacement, of planting garrisons along the Foyle to divide the forces of O'Neill from those of O'Donnell. Over the winter and spring months of 1600 he gathered an army of about 4000 foot and 200 horse at Chester, and he landed the bulk of them at Carrickfergus on 25 April 1600; there they were reinforced by a further 1000 troops, before reaching the Foyle on 14 May. A landing was made at Culmore, where they dug in with earthworks and refurbished the remains of a castle abandoned by Colonel Edward Randolph in 1566. A detachment under Captain Lloyd fortified the ancient fort of Ellaugh, which commanded the southern approach to Innishowen, co. Donegal, and on 22 May Docwra's forces possessed the 'iland and the fort of the Derry' (McGurk, plate facing p. 222). In the building up of his forts, ramparts, houses, and the beginnings of the celebrated 'walls of Derry' as well as a military hospital -- a process which destroyed many ancient monastic and ecclesiastical buildings -- Docwra may be considered the founder of the modern city of Derry. He had accomplished his first major objective. 
Docwra's second project, and the wish of the government -- that he accomplish similar works at Ballyshannon, the key crossing point between Ulster and Connaught and much used by O'Donnell -- was greatly delayed for lack of resources. His forces in Derry were decimated by sickness and desertions, and he could not establish Ballyshannon by sea for lack of men and ships. His final strategy, slow yet certain (though subsequent events in the war rendered its completion unnecessary), was to continue his chain of forts connecting the Foyle and the Erne to reach Enniskillen, whence he could embark a force to Belleek, a mere 3 miles overland march to Ballyshannon. On 1 June 1600 he received the submission of Sir Art O'Neill, and on 28 June, with a force of 500 foot and 40 horse, Docwra fought a major battle against O'Dogherty and his allies at Ellaugh, Innishowen. His lieutenant Sir John Chamberlain was unhorsed and Docwra's own horse shot under him in rescuing Sir John. In these engagements the Irish captured horses and prisoners, and generally had the immediate advantage. Irish chroniclers lauded Docwra's personal courage in battle, calling him 'an illustrious knight of wisdom and prudence, a pillar of battle and conflict' ('AFM', 6.2193). 
At the end of July, O'Donnell, the McSwineys, and Scottish mercenaries made a major attack in which Docwra was wounded by Hugh Dubh (the Black) O'Donnell, son of Hugh Roe (Red Hugh). Docwra graphically described the incident: 'At the first encounter I was stricken with a horseman's staff in the forehead, in so much as I fell for dead, and was a good while deprived of my senses... but the captains and gentlemen that were about me enforced the enemy to give ground... by means whereof I recovered myself was set up on my horse and so safely brought of and conducted home... I kept my bed of this wound by the space of a fortnight, my chamber a week after, and then I came abroad to take view and muster of all the companies. ('Narration', 242)' Outbreaks of camp diseases reduced his soldiers to about one third of their complement, but they managed to repulse night attacks by the Irish.Docwra had some talent in weaning local support from his enemies, and he managed to bring over to his side Niall Garbh (the Rough) O'Donnell and his three brothers. Niall probably joined Docwra on the assumption that he would be given the whole of Tyrconnell, modern co. Donegal, as hereditary chief on the cessation of hostilities and by October 1600 he had secured the fortress of the Lifford, opposite Strabane on the Donegal side of the Foyle, for Docwra. 
During 1601 Docwra became convinced that the Spanish would invade in the north of Ireland, but few shared his fears; his letters and detailed reports with 'shopping lists' of requisite supplies greatly irritated the authorities. However, all was not inactivity, or 'dullness and difficulty' (Brewer and Bullen, 4.153), at Lough Foyle as Cecil claimed. In 1601 incursions were made into O'Cahan's lands around the present Coleraine and as far east as the Bann. The Innishowen peninsula was taken, providing Docwra with a granary as well as cutting off communication between O'Donnell and O'Neill and O'Cahan, a major objective of the expedition which allowed Mountjoy to attack south Ulster. And, from the Lifford, attacks were conducted by Docwra into Newtown and towards Omagh which he was able to fortify by July 1602. In that year too Dungiven in the Sperrin Mountains bordering north Tyrone and the present co. Londonderry was taken and fortified. In the final phase after Mountjoy's victory at Kinsale, Docwra commanded forces in the famous three-pronged pincer movement of Sir Arthur Chichester from the east, Mountjoy from the south, and Docwra from the west to hem in O'Neill in his final resistance in his homelands around Dungannon. 
On the conclusion of the war in 1603 Docwra's accustomed prudence and fair dealings with his Irish allies helped to prevent a rising when news of Elizabeth's death reached Ulster. He remained governor of Derry and devoted himself to the general improvement of the city. On 12 September 1603 he received a grant to hold markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays and monthly fairs, and on 11 July 1604 he was appointed provost of Derry for life, with a pension of 20's'. a day. In 1606 Docwra applied unsuccessfully for the presidency of Ulster. In 1606 in disgust at the government's treatment of his Irish allies he sold his house, appointed George Pawlett as vice-governor of Derry, and returned to England. By 1607 he had married Anne (died 1648), daughter of Francis Vaughan of Sutton upon Derwent, Yorkshire. They had at least three sons and two daughters. Two of their children, named Henry and Anne, were baptized at Bradfield, Berkshire, on 16 August 1607 and 2 May 1609, and Docwra bought the manor of Bradfield in 1610. While in England Docwra wrote up his 'Relation of the service done in Ireland', an account of his time with Sir Richard Bingham in the west, and in 1614 he wrote 'A narration of the services done by the army ymployed to Lough-Foyle, under the leadinge of mee Sir Henry Docwra knight... together with a declaration of the true cause and manner of my coming away and leaving that place'. Both were published in the nineteenth century. The majority of his Irish letters are printed 'in extenso' throughout the Irish state papers. Robert Pentland Mahaffy, the editor, commented:'Sir Henry Docwra writes in a style of verbose magniloquence which is remarkable even for this period... [and] makes the task of abstracting difficult and unsatisfactory' ('CSP Ire.', '1601-3', 53). Contemporaries objected to the verbosity and frequency of Docwra's letters. 
In 1616 Docwra sold Bradfield and returned to Ireland, where he was appointed treasurer-at-war, and created Lord Docwra, baron of Culmore, co. Derry, on 15 May 1621. On 15 July 1624 he became keeper of the peace in the provinces of Leinster and Ulster and on 30 May 1627 joint keeper of the great seal of Ireland in the absence in England of the chancellor, Viscount Loftus. At the trial of Lord Dunboyne for manslaughter Docwra was appointed one of the fifteen peers on 4 June 1628 and was the only one who voted for a conviction. Docwra died in Dublin on 18 April 1631 and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin. His eldest son, Theodore, succeeded him in the title but died without issue, whereupon the barony became extinct. 
Docwra was a respected soldier whose personal valour and generally honourable conduct won the admiration of his men and of the enemy. He resorted to battle only when negotiations failed and was consistent in his tactic of dividing the Irish, winning over Niall Garbh O'Donnell for the crucial years of the fighting, Donal O'Cahan, who disputed Coleraine (later Londonderry) with Hugh O'Neill, and Sir Cahir O'Doherty, who occasionally went over to the government side. Docwra was publicly minded and less greedy for advancement and emolument than was usual among Elizabethan officers in Ireland, and as treasurer-at-war he was solicitous for the welfare of the soldiers in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 7726


Docwra, Sir Thomas (d. 1527), prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England and diplomat, was descended from the Westmorland family of Docwra of Docwra Hall, Kendal, belonging to a cadet branch which had settled in Hertfordshire. His father, Richard Docwra, had married Alice, daughter of Thomas Green of Gressingham, Lancashire. Nothing certain is known of Thomas Docwra's education or early life, except that at some point he joined the order of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem. Claims that he took part in the successful defence of Rhodes against the Turks in 1480 cannot be confirmed, but he clearly enjoyed a successful career in the order. In October 1494 he was elected prior of Ireland, but resigned on 4 January 1495, when he was elected turcopolier; later that year he was made captain of the order's galleys. On 6 August 1501, still on Rhodes, he was elected grand prior of the hospital of England, following the death of John Kendall, and returned home. He remained head of the order in England until his death, carrying out substantial works at its principal house at Clerkenwell, where he had built its gatehouse by 1506. But he did not sever all links with Rhodes. He returned there in 1503, and further efforts to recall him to the island were made in 1510 and 1515, while in 1521 he only just failed to be elected grand master of the hospital. Perhaps his English preoccupations were held against him. 
In 1506 Docwra had entered the king's service as one of the envoys used by Henry VII to negotiate with Philip of Castile. Philip's ships had been driven by storm onto the English coast, and his enforced stay in England was put to some use. An economic and trade treaty with the Netherlands was negotiated by Docwra and other English commissioners with representatives of the Dutch merchants. Docwra's success here led to his appointment to negotiate Henry VII's proposed marriage to Philip's sister, Margaret of Savoy, and he soon became an indispensable diplomatic journeyman. In September 1507 he was one of a body of commissioners sent to Calais on a peace embassy, their purpose being to settle the terms of an alliance with Philip and a treaty for the marriage of Charles, prince of Castile (later the emperor Charles V) with the Princess Mary. Although Philip died on 25 September, these treaties were successfully concluded on 21 December. 
Docwra's career did not suffer as a result of the accession of Henry VIII, and he continued to be employed as a diplomat. Between 29 May and 23 July 1510 he and Nicholas West (later bishop of Ely) were dispatched as ambassadors to France in order to receive from Louis XII a formal acknowledgement of the sums he owed to the English crown for arrears of tribute. At about the same time Docwra's services were requested by the grand master of the knights of St John at their headquarters in Rhodes, as a result of Turkish military manoeuvres, but Henry would not spare him. As prior of St John's, Docwra was also employed on a number of more mundane domestic commissions by the king. These included gaol deliveries for Newgate and a commission of inquiry into alleged extortion by masters of the mint, and he was also appointed to inspect both the sewers of Lincolnshire (hospitaller interests were involved here) and of the River Thames between Greenwich and Lambeth. Then, on 4 February 1512, he was nominated as an ambassador to the Lateran council, set to start on 19 April. But these orders were subsequently revoked, and instead Docwra became caught up in the war with France of 1512. On 2 May of that year he was appointed to review and report upon the troops which were to be sent to Spain, under the marquess of Dorset, for an Anglo-Spanish attack upon Aquitaine, and further to this, on 22 February 1513, he was summoned to be ready by April to attend the king with 300 men at his own expense. His forces were incorporated into the army, under the command of the earl of Shrewsbury, which crossed into Calais in May and into France on 6 June. His order's contribution to the effort is noteworthy -- it included a ship of 'two hundred tons burden', placed under the command of Lord Edmund Howard. Among the badges borne in the standards of the expedition was that of 'the lord of St John's' (BL, Cotton MS Cleo. C.v, fol. 59). 
When the fighting ceased in the autumn Docwra soon resumed his usual diplomatic duties. He was sent to France again in August 1514, with the earl of Worcester and Nicholas West, to obtain Louis XII's ratification of a peace treaty and to witness his marriage to the Princess Mary. The envoys remained there to witness her subsequent coronation at St Denis, on 5 November. In February 1515 Docwra attended parliament, the prior of the hospitallers being 'ex officio' a peer of the realm. He was appointed a trier of petitions from Gascony, and the government clearly counted on his support against ecclesiastical attempts to prevent the renewal of the 1512 statute denying benefit of clergy to men in minor orders. But Docwra was equivocal on this issue, perhaps in consequence of his dual status as a churchman and an important baron, while he voted with the clergy on later bills relating to the 'cause celebre' of Richard Hunne. On 10 March it was decided that he should be sent to Rome, along with John Fisher (bishop of Rochester), Sir Edward Poynings, and Dr John Taylor. But although very large sums of money had been devoted to this embassy ($800 apiece to Fisher, Docwra, and Poynings and $266 13's'. 4died to Taylor), it was halted by Wolsey (as Polydore Vergil expected that it would be). Docwra is next recorded the following November, when he was among those present in Westminster Abbey when Wolsey received his cardinal's hat. Perhaps it was due to the king's, or Wolsey's, favour, that on 21 February 1516 he obtained for himself and the hospital there a licence to hold the prebend of Blewbury, Berkshire, in mortmain. In May 1516 he was recorded once again in a diplomatic context, attending on Scottish ambassadors and acting as interpreter in an interview between the Venetian ambassador and the duke of Suffolk. 
It would seem that there were only short periods when Docwra was not engaged in diplomacy, and these tended to be times of emergency. In late April 1517, for instance, he was in Therouanne on a commission concerning trade, but was almost immediately back in London during the May day riots; with Thomas Howard, George Talbot, and George Neville he drove off the rowdy apprentices through a timely appearance at St Martin's parish. Their troops blocked the surrounding roads and many arrests were made. This was a brief interlude, however. In September 1518, when French ambassadors arrived in England, Docwra was one of the lords appointed to meet with them, and in the following month he was a member of the return embassy sent to France to take the oath of Francois I to the new treaty of alliance, by which he was to marry Princess Mary. The embassy crossed from Dover to Calais in twenty-six ships in November, and received Francois's oath at Notre Dame on 14 December following. Docwra was also one of the commissioners who returned Tournai to the French in February 1519, for a payment of 50,000 francs. 
Another break in Docwra's usual diplomatic routine came about on 8 July 1519, when a search for suspicious characters was ordered for London and its suburbs, the districts in and about the city being parcelled out among different commissioners appointed to conduct it. As the prior of St John's, Docwra was made responsible for this investigation in Islington, Holloway, St John Street, Cowcross, Trille Mylle Street (Turnmill Street), and Charterhouse Lane, conducting it on Sunday night, 17 July, when two persons were apprehended in Islington and eleven in places nearer the city. Docwra's name also occurs about this time on a list of councillors appointed by Wolsey to sit at Whitehall and hear the causes of poor men who had suits in the Star Chamber. In 1520 he crossed with the king to the Field of Cloth of Gold, and accompanied Henry at his initial meeting with Francois I on 7 June. Later, he accompanied the king to Gravelines for his meeting with the emperor. In 1521 he was one of the peers who sat in judgment when the duke of Buckingham was condemned for treason. 
Later that year Docwra resumed his diplomatic career. In August he went with Wolsey to Calais, where the cardinal sat as umpire between the French and the imperialists, and afterwards he was sent with Sir Thomas Boleyn to the emperor at Oudenarde. But their efforts to arrange a truce were unsuccessful, and they returned to England in November. In 1522 Docwra accompanied the king to meet Charles V again, on his visit to England between Dover and Calais and, shortly thereafter, he was appointed one of the commissioners for raising a forced loan in the county of Middlesex; this was a regular assessment upon property, in which Docwra himself was assessed at $1000. In the parliament which convened in April of that year he was once again appointed a trier of petitions, while on 2 November 1523 he was appointed one of the commissioners for Middlesex to collect the subsidy granted in that same parliament. On 25 May 1524, following a commission from the king, he and the imperial ambassador, Louis De Praet, drew up a treaty for a joint invasion of France. Later, on 12 February 1525, he was again appointed to conduct a search for suspicious characters in the north of London. So much activity may well have been too much for him, as in early April 1527 it was reported that he had fallen ill, and he probably died within the month, in London, and was possibly buried at St John's, Clerkenwell. 
Docwra appears to have owned property in Hertfordshire, on the evidence of a sculptured stone, preserved in buildings of a later date at Highdown, the old family seat near Hitchin, bearing the arms of his family with the inscription 'Thomas Docwra, miles, 1504' ('VCH Hertfordshire', 3.46). This and his seal, appended to the receipt (preserved in the French archives) given to Francois I for the money agreed on in 1518 for the surrender of Tournai, is all that remains of him. The seal is in the form of a shield bearing the device of a lion issuant holding a pomegranate, with the initials T. D.. 


@@@@@


doc= 7727


Dod, Charles Roger Phipps (1793-1855), political journalist and author of reference works, was born on 8 May 1793 in Drumlease, co. Leitrim, the son of the Revd Roger Dod, vicar of Drumlease, and his second wife, Margaret, 'nee' Phipps. Dod's father's family came from Cloverley in Shropshire, his mother's from Spurrtown, co. Leitrim. For most of his life, until 1847, he preferred to spell his name Dodd. On 30 July 1816 he entered King's Inns, Dublin, with the intention of studying law, but he soon gave it up for literature and journalism. Between 1816 and 1818 he was part-owner and editor of a provincial journal. On 24 October 1814 Dod married Jane Eliza Baldwin, the daughter of John Baldwin of Cork; they had one son, Robert Phipps Dod ['see below']. 
Dod settled in London in 1818 and joined 'The Times' parliamentary reporting staff. He worked initially for John Tyas, the head of the press gallery staff, whom he eventually succeeded. Horace Twiss and Tyas had established a tradition of providing summaries of parliamentary debates for readers of 'The Times', a tradition that Dod continued. His summaries were generally regarded as highly accurate and clear, and soon became more widely read than the complete transcriptions of debates. Dod's other duty at 'The Times' was writing obituary notices and memoirs. An oft-repeated story was that he was so skilled at this, and so knowledgeable about the lives of public figures, that he was able to write 'The Times' obituary of Lord George Bentinck during a railway trip to London from Ramsgate (where he had been informed of Bentinck's death), without the aid of reference books or notes. 
Dod is best known for his own publications, most notably the 'Parliamentary Companion' and 'Dod's Peerage, Baronetage and Knightage'. The 'Parliamentary Companion' was founded in 1832 as an annual biographical guide to MPs and peers, and included a short description of parliamentary procedure and other aspects of political life in London. The first edition appeared in 1833. It was originally entitled the 'Parliamentary Pocket Companion', and was a small and thin volume, as its name suggests. It immediately became an essential tool for parliamentary journalists and editors, but politicians and the politically active also found it a useful reference book. Dod changed its name to the 'Parliamentary Companion' in 1841, and the series continued as 'Dod's Parliamentary Companion'. The 'Peerage, Baronetage and Knightage' began life in 1841 as a guide to the titled classes, and continued as a competitor to 'Debrett's Peerage' until 1960 when the peerage information was incorporated into the 'Parliamentary Companion'. Dod's other publications include 'A Manual of Dignities, Privileges and Precedence' (1852) and 'Electoral Facts from 1832 to 1852 Impartially Stated' (1852, 1853). Dod died at 5 Foxley Road, Brixton, London, on 21 February 1855. 




@@@@@


doc= 7728


Dod, Henry (fl. 1583?-1620), poet and merchant, was of the old family of Dod, or Doddes, the son of Peter Dod of Smithes Pentrey, Broxton, in Cheshire, and Anne, daughter of Hugh Carrington of Over, in Cheshire. He versified nine psalms 'into English meter fitting the common tunes', and at the request of certain friends, as he writes, he published them in 1603 as 'Certaine Psalmes of David in Meter'. The undertaking was sanctioned by James I, and the impression was quickly sold. Afterwards, at the request of some of the puritan clergy, Dod undertook a metrical recast of the entire psalter, published as 'Al the Psalmes of David, with Certaine Songes and Canticles'. It is dedicated to John Brewen (Bruen), John Dod of Tussingham, and John Dod of Broxon, all of Cheshire. It has no name of author, printer, or place. It is dated 1620, and the initials H. D. are appended to its 'Address to the Christian Reader'. It was perhaps printed abroad, and Wither, who is scornful of the quality of the verse, was possibly right when he said it was condemned in England by authority to the fire. With it Dod printed his metrical version of the act of parliament for ordering a Gunpowder Plot thanksgiving service. 
Dod is described as a 'mercer' ('Pedigrees') and Wither calls him 'Dod the silkman'. He is unlikely to have been the Henry Dod who was incumbent of Felpham, Sussex, in 1630: the record of matriculation of this particular Dod into Corpus Christi College, Oxford, gives his year of birth as approximately 1592. He may very likely be the 'H. D.' for whom Gregory Seaton printed 'A Treatise of Faith and Workes' in 1583. Nothing is known of his death; he had four sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 7729


Dod, John (1550-1645), Church of England clergyman, was born in March 1550 at Shocklach, Cheshire, and baptized there on 15 March 1550, the youngest of seventeen children. He was educated at Chester School and Jesus College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1576. In 1578 he was appointed a fellow; in 1579 he proceeded MA and in 1580 he was ordained priest at Ely. While under suspicion of fraud at college he fell ill and converted to godly religion -- or puritanism as his opponents would have described it. Calvinist predestinarianism was the prevailing norm, but puritans claimed to be able to achieve a degree of assurance of elect status. As Dod's contemporary hagiographer Samuel Clarke explained 'the Lord sealed to him that his sins were washed away' (Clarke, 'Generall Martyrologie', 404). He befriended the Elizabethan reformer Thomas Cartwright, who was later to make him and Arthur Hildersham his literary executors; Dod preached Cartwright's funeral sermon. He joined a conference of Cambridge academics dedicated to scriptural study -- William Fulke, Laurence Chaderton, and William Whitaker -- and commenced his preaching career first as university lecturer then as lecturer to a godly congregation at Ely. 
Dod was one of a handful of seventeenth-century puritan leaders with national standing. Cartwright described him as 'the fittest man in England for a pastoral office' (Clarke, 'Lives of Thirty-Two English Divines', 319), and Chaderton duly recommended him to Anthony Cope for his living of Hanwell, Oxfordshire. He resigned his fellowship in 1585, but always stayed in touch with his alma mater. At Hanwell, Dod practised a piety which treated parochial observances merely as the starting point for an entire evangelical puritan way of life. Preaching twice every sabbath was insufficient; he also read a lecture on Wednesdays, conducted catechism classes, and led a combination of ministers -- including Robert Cleaver, Robert Harris, William Scudder, and William Whately -- who preached at Banbury, ordered public fasts, and acted as a seminary. He enjoyed much godly kudos as a spiritual physician to assuage deathbed doubts about election -- performing this service for Thomas Peacock in 1611. Godly dynasticism is seen at work in Dod's choice of a bride, Ann Bownd, sister of the sabbatarian controversialist Nicholas Bownd, and stepdaughter of Richard Greenham. They had twelve children, two of whom, Timothy Dod and John, became divines. In 1604 puritan aspirations to national reformation under a new, Calvinist monarch suffered a serious set-back. James I placated moderate puritans, but Dod and other hardliners rejected the proffered compromise -- subscription to Whitgift's three articles as the price of latitude on the observation of ceremonial conformity -- and as a result Bishop Bridges of Oxford suspended him from Hanwell about 1604 and ejected him by March 1607. The tight collegiality of his following is shown by the seamless transition that was made to the ministry of his pupil Harris. 
On the run Dod tried to eke out a living at Fenny Compton, Warwickshire, before being invited to Northamptonshire by Sir Erasmus Dryden (the grandfather of the poet), who shielded him at Canons Ashby, which was little more than a private chapel. From here Dod and Cleaver evangelized the surrounding parishes between 1606 and 1611. Archbishop Abbot of Canterbury, who respected Dod, at first took no action, and this facilitated the production between 1605 and 1615 of Dod's and Cleaver's phenomenal 'oeuvre', although their most enduring work on the ten commandments ('A Plaine and Familiar Exposition of the Ten Commandements', which had nineteen editions between 1603 and 1635, and which led to Dod's being nicknamed Decalogue Dod) had been produced at Hanwell. Three of the works were dedicated to Dryden and a further one to Lord John Harrington of Rutland; several were edited by John Winston of Ashby. Their work constitutes the most cogent explication not only of the religious observances of the community of the saints but of a distinctly godly code of ethics pervading every aspect of life: marriage, the household, the calling, dealings with the unregenerate mass. The convert was to reject his previous values and rely on the godly: 'Vicinitie and neighbourhood will faile, and alliance will fail, but grace and religion will never faile' (Dod and Cleaver, 119). Their sabbatarianism was particularly uncompromising. In an age when the book trade was crucial to disseminating ideas, this output explains the great scope of Dod's influence: both John Bunyan and Nehemiah Wallington possessed a copy of his work on the decalogue. 
James I shattered this peaceful existence by requiring a reluctant Archbishop Abbot to interrogate Bishop Dove of Peterborough concerning Dod's unlicensed preaching in Northamptonshire and, under the wing of Lord Harrington, in Rutland. It was not until James's reiteration of the demand in 1614 that Dove took action and Dod was forced into hiding: the sympathy he aroused in Abbot and other moderates such as James Ussher was inadequate protection. (Dod, Ussher, and Ezechiel Culverwell had held a fast in 1612 on the day of Prince Henry's funeral, who was thought to be more sympathetic to the godly.) Dod was closely linked with London puritanism. On Ann's death he married a Miss Cleiton of Stratford-le-Bow at some date between 1607 and 1621. Before so doing he consulted the puritan minister Stephen Egerton of Blackfriars; and the ceremony was conducted by another godly friend, William Gouge. Dod also established contact with the Cambridge puritan leaders Richard Sibbes and John Preston, and in 1616 he approved Henry Jacob's formation of a semi-separatist church at Southwark. By the 1620s he was participating (with Preston and Thomas Hooker) in the quasi-exorcism of Joan Drake of Surrey. This backfired, initially at least, as the patient collapsed in gales of laughter comparing the heavily bearded Dod to Ananias, the fanatical puritan of Ben Jonson's 'Alchemist'. This was strangely appropriate, as the playwright had heard of Dod and had previously told a joke about a gentlewoman who longed for sexual intercourse with the preacher 'for the procreation of an Angel or Saint' but it proved 'an ordinary birth' (Collinson, 'Ben Jonson', 158). On James I's death in 1625 Abbot lifted Dod's suspension from preaching, but he was probably never required to subscribe, a singular favour. He now began to enjoy the patronage of the Drydens' godly neighbours, the Knightleys of Fawsley. Richard Knightley in 1625 installed him as the 'de facto' vicar while another minister was titular incumbent. Dod remained at this essentially private chapel for the rest of his life, free to practise his own brand of semi-separatism as the patriarch of a godly enclave. 
Through Preston and Knightley, Dod was now linked with a puritan network in the midlands centred on William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele, which led opposition to crown policies from the 1620s onwards. Dod demonstrated his opposition to prerogative taxation by preaching a sermon at London's Fleet prison to stiffen the resolve of Sir Francis Barrington, the first to refuse to pay the forced loan of 1626. Preston retired to Fawsley to die in 1628; Dod received a special mention in his will and preached at the funeral. In the same year Dod again served as spiritual physician -- this time for a dying minister called Throgmorton at Ashby. In 1630 Knightley set up a trust to support his protege; trustees included Fiennes, Christopher Sherland, John Hampden, John Pym, John Crewe, Sir Nathaniel Rich, Edward Bagshaw, and Sir Arthur Hesilrige. In 1630-31 Dod operated as an intermediary between Sir Erasmus Dryden and Sir John Isham during their attempted negotiation of a marriage settlement for Dryden's grandson John (not the poet) and Isham's daughter Elizabeth. The breakdown was chiefly the result of disagreements over finance, but Isham perhaps also baulked at Dryden's insistence that he employ a godly household chaplain approved by Knightley and 'worthely beloved Mr Dodd' (Northants. RO, Isham correspondence, 184). Dod's own response to the Caroline emphasis on ceremonial conformity was predictably resolute: in 1633 Bishop Lindsell of Peterborough reported that he was preaching heresy, and at Archbishop Laud's visitation of 1635 he was described as having refused to conform since 1607. He must also have supported Knightley's failure to set up an east-end railed altar at Fawsley in 1637. However, a variety of godly responses were tolerated: when John Cotton was harassed by the courts in 1632 Dod condoned the young man's emigration. Growing disillusionment with several bishops was balanced by concerns at the sectarianism of the New England churches, which was deemed to pose a threat to ministerial authority. In 1637 Dod led a gathering of midlands clergy including his son Timothy, Cleaver, and Winston, Julines Herring, Simeon Ashe, Ephraim Huitt, and John Ball which controverted several points of colonial ecclesiology. 
In 1637 Knightley appointed first John Wilkins, who was Dod's grandson by marriage, and then Dod himself as titular incumbent of Fawsley. Knightley, to whom Dod had dedicated a grateful printed work in 1634, died in the same year, but his son and namesake continued to harbour the ageing evangelist, as he confirmed to another patron, Sir Robert Harley, in 1639. He also received the support of Lady Mary de Vere of London. Dod was harassed by royalist forces during the civil war, but continued to comfort his fellow professors; at the last he longed to be 'dissolved and to be with Christ' (Clarke, 'Generall Martyrologie', 416) and died at Fawsley, where he was buried on 19 August 1645. 


@@@@@


doc= 7730


Dod, Peirce (1683-1754), physician, was born probably at Hackney, Middlesex, the fourth of the five sons of John Dod, citizen and mercer of London, and of his wife, Mary, daughter of Richard Thorowgood, alderman of London (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl., 4, fol. 276; D. Lysons, 'The Environs of London', 4 vols., 1792-6, 2.471). Dod matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 19 March 1697, and graduated BA on 14 October 1701. He was elected a fellow of All Souls in 1703, and graduated MA on 6 June 1705, MB on 22 March 1710, and MD on 29 October 1714. He was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1719, and a fellow on 30 September 1720; he was Goulstonian lecturer in 1720, Harveian orator in 1729 (his oration was published at London in the same year), and censor in 1724, 1732, 1736, and 1739. He was appointed physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital on 22 July 1725, and continued in that office until his death. He became a fellow of the Royal Society on 19 March 1730, and contributed two papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
Dod and his wife, Elizabeth, had four children, Peirce (died 1797), Jacky, Elizabeth (died 1802), and another daughter, who died in Dod's lifetime. The eldest son, Peirce, was vicar of Godmersham, Kent, from 1772 to 1778. 
Dod was a steady opponent of smallpox inoculation, and sought to discredit the new practice in a little work entitled 'Several cases in physick, and one in particular, giving an account of a person who was inoculated for the small-pox... and yet had it again' (1746). This pamphlet presents nine case histories, only one of which addresses inoculation. In that particular case, a boy of three was inoculated and two years later, at the age of five, he contracted natural smallpox. Dod concluded from this single incident that inoculation did not provide effective protection against smallpox. Dod did not witness this case personally; it was reported to him in a letter from a Dr Brodrepp, a name which came to be satirized in 'A letter to the real and genuine Pierce Dod, MD, exposing the low absurdity of a late spurious pamphlet falsely ascrib'd to that learned physician: with a full answer to the mistaken case of a natural small-pox, after taking it by inoculation, by Dod Pierce, MS' (1746). According to Munk, the authors of this letter -- which is said to have done considerable damage to Dod's professional reputation and practice -- were Dr J. Kirkpatrick, author of 'The Analysis of Inoculation', Dr W. Barrowby, and Dr I. Schomberg. They dismissed Dod's narrative first by pointing out that occasionally an individual succumbed to natural smallpox twice, and by contending that the boy's illness at the age of five was probably not smallpox. They implied that Dod opposed inoculation because it cost him business, and described Dod as 'This delirious Scribbler... violently infected with the itch of Authorism' (Lawrence, 223). 
Dod died at his house in Red Lion Square, London, on 6 August 1754 (Munk wrongly gives the date as 18 August). He was buried in the ground of St George the Martyr, Queen Square. In the church is an altar tomb to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 7731


Robert Phipps Dod (d. 1865), political editor, was educated at King's College, London. Afterwards he entered the 54th Shropshire regiment and became a captain, a title he held until his death. He worked on the 'Parliamentary Companion' and 'Peerage' until his father's death in 1855, when he took over the editorship of both. He also wrote 'Birth and Worth, an Enquiry into the Practical Uses of a Pedigree', which was privately published in 1844. On 9 February 1859 he married Catherine Emma Kinchant, the daughter of the Revd John Kinchant. Dod died at his residence, Nant Isa Hall, Selattyn, near Oswestry, Shropshire, on 9 January 1865 from the effects of a shotgun wound to his foot, an accident which occurred while hunting in December 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 7732


Dod, Timothy (d. 1665), clergyman and ejected minister, was a son of John Dod (1550-1645), clergyman, and his first wife, Ann Bownd. He matriculated in 1612 from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1616 and proceeded MA in 1619. He, or a namesake, was admitted to the University of Leiden on 3 June 1620. He was married to Jane Combes, widow of the London haberdasher Richard Combes, some time before 1642. It is likely that he was a lecturer in Daventry, Northamptonshire, in the 1630s as Mr Samuel Sutton of the town, who died in 1636, left him 10's'. in his will to preach his funeral sermon. In mid-1637 Timothy was one of the signatories of a document containing nine questions to the clergy of New England concerning church government. It is reported that Dod was publicly ordained in Daventry some time after 1640. He became the afternoon lecturer and because he was a very popular preacher the residents of the town contributed $40 per annum to his income. 
Some time in 1644 Dod went to London. On 25 July 1644 he was admitted interim rector of St Peter Westcheap and in October was appointed by the Westminster assembly to the examining body of twenty-three City presbyterian ministers responsible for approving and ordaining candidates for the ministry, set up in response to a parliamentary ordinance and the perceived lack of properly educated and competent ministers. On 20 March 1645 he became vicar of Daventry, but was removed in 1646, when in January he was confirmed as rector of St Peter Westcheap, where one John Dod was among the ruling elders. His stay in London proved to be short because he informed his congregation in June 1646 that he was returning to Daventry, although he remained at St Peter's until Easter 1647. During the years of the protectorate Dod remained active in Northamptonshire and in August 1654 became an assistant to the commissioners responsible for ejecting 'Scandalous, Ignorant and Insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters' (Firth and Rait, 2.982). The famous and much-repeated story told about Dod is that he was so corpulent in his later years that he could not mount the pulpit, so had to preach either from a pew or sitting behind a desk. 
In 1662 Dod seems again to have been officiating as lecturer in Daventry. His wife died there that summer and was buried on 26 August. Simultaneously, as the 'Act of Uniformity' was enforced, Dod was ejected from his place. He became very ill with gout and other ailments. He eventually moved to Everdon, where he died on 12 December 1665 and was buried. His son John, a clergyman of Hinton, was granted administration of his estate the following month. 


@@@@@


doc= 7733


Dodd, Charles (1672-1743), Roman Catholic priest and historian, was born Hugh Tootel at Durton in Broughton, near Preston, Lancashire. He was confirmed in the Roman Catholic church at Euxton Burgh Chapel, the property of the Dalton family, on 13 September 1687, by Bishop John Leyburn, vicar apostolic of the London district. After studying with his uncle, the Revd Christopher Tootel of Ladywell Chapel at Fernyhalgh, Lancashire, he was sent to the English College at Douai, where he arrived on 23 July 1688, and studied philosophy. On 16 July 1690 he was matriculated and took the college oath. While a student in France he adopted the name Charles Dodd to protect his father from a fine levied on Catholic families who sent their sons to continental schools and colleges. On 22 September 1690 he received minor orders at Cambrai from James Theodore de Bayes. Dodd then studied divinity under Dr Hawarden at Douai for three years until 1693, when he was admitted into the English seminary of St Gregory at Paris, where after four additional years of theological study he took the degree of BD. He then returned to Douai, where he stayed until May 1698, when he came upon the English mission, and had the charge of a congregation at Fernyhalgh, Lancashire. Before 1718 Dodd had decided to write a church history of England, presenting a view more favourable to the Catholic case as an antidote to the protestant history of Bishop Burnet. He left for Douai in 1718 to begin his researches, and spent the next four years travelling in Europe visiting various Catholic institutions in search of material. He was assisted by the Revd Edward Dicconson, vice-president of the college of Douai, and Dr Ingleton of the Paris seminary. 
On his return to England, John Talbot Stonor, vicar apostolic of the midland district, recommended Dodd in August 1722 to Sir Robert Throckmorton, bt, as a suitable assistant to Mr Bennett, in the charge of the congregation at Harvington, Worcestershire, to which Dodd succeeded on Bennett's death in September 1726. While living at Harvington, Dodd arranged his materials, and finished his great work, 'The Church History of England from 1500 to 1688' (1737-42). The cost of its publication was in a great measure met by Edward, duke of Norfolk, Sir Robert Throckmorton, Cuthbert Constable, and bishops Stonor and Hornyold. This history bears the imprint of Brussels, but was believed to have been printed in England, as both type and paper are English made. The attribution to Brussels may have been motivated by the prohibition against the printing of Catholic material which operated in Britain at the time. The work was favourable to English Catholics, but hostile to the regular clergy, and it involved Dodd in controversy with both the Jesuits and the Church of England. 
Dodd died on 27 February 1743 at Harvington and on 1 March was buried at Chaddesley Corbett, Worcestershire. The Revd James Brown, who attended him in his last illness, made a solemn protestation in writing to the effect that Dodd on his deathbed expressed an earnest desire to die in charity with all mankind, and particularly with the Society of Jesus, of whom he had been critical. Dodd is said to have left some sixty-four written works both published and in manuscript. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries plans for continuation of his history were made by the Revd Thomas Eyre, the Revd John Kirk, and the Revd Mark Tierney, but none of these projects was completed. 


@@@@@


doc= 7734


Dodd, Daniel (fl. 1752-c.1780), painter, principally of portraits and fashionable scenes, also produced subject and flower paintings. He is first mentioned in the 'Daily Advertiser' of 28 November 1752, as having etched a portrait of Mr Leveridge in the style of Rembrandt. 
Dodd was a member of the Free Society of Artists, first exhibiting there in 1761. He continued to contribute many works to the same exhibition up to 1780 from various London addresses. His works were mainly portraits in crayon or oils on a small scale. Among them may be mentioned a portrait in crayon of 'Garrick between Tragedy and Comedy', portraits of 'Mr. Darley', 'Mr. Fielding', and of Buckhorse, the pugilist, 'the notorious bruiser' ('Anstey, Christopher', 'DNB'), of whom he exhibited both a crayon and a mezzotint portrait in 1769. 
Dodd was also known for his large scenes of fashionable life, crowded with figures, such as 'A View of the Ball at St. James's on Her Majesty's Birthnight' (engraved by Tukey), 'A View of the Exhibition of the Royal Academy at Somerset House' (engraved by William Angus), and 'The Royal Procession to St. Paul's', among others. He also provided grey wash illustrations for the 'Bible', the 'Novelist's Magazine', published by J. Harrison & Co., G. F. Raymond's 'A new, universal and impartial history of England... embellished with upwards of 120 beautiful copper-plate engravings, taken from the original drawings of Messrs. Metz, Stothard, and Samuel Wale esq.' ('c'.1786), and other similar publications. 
A pastel portrait by Dodd of Sir Watkin Lewes is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. The Victoria and Albert Museum possesses a wash drawing of Joseph George Holman, the actor. D. P. Dodd and Miss Dodd, who both exhibited with the Free Society of Artists, were his son and daughter. A 'Master Smart' exhibited as his pupil at the Free Society of Artists in 1780 and the miniaturist Thomas Day exhibited from 'Mr Dodds, Great Portland St' from 1768 to 1771 (Foskett, 'Miniatures', 525). Both are believed to have been his pupils. 


@@@@@


doc= 7735


Dodd, George (bap. 1782, d. 1827), civil engineer, was baptized in Stepney, London, on 4 September 1782, the son of Ralph Dodd, civil engineer, and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' Lambert. His father trained the boy in his own profession, and George served as his assistant on his Thames and Medway and Grand Surrey Canal schemes. George Dodd invented a form of gun lock in 1802, which he patented in 1805 and which was adopted by the Board of Ordnance. 
About 1806 he began to promote a new crossing of the Thames, which was to become Waterloo Bridge. His design was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1810. He was for a short time employed by John Rennie, but seems to have withdrawn from the project before the foundation stone was laid in 1811, the design and engineering work being handled thereafter by Rennie himself. From 1814 Dodd became involved with steamboats on the Thames, but after some initial success the fierce competition drove him out of the business. 
Much depressed by this disappointment, and by the lack of interest in his patent for a means of extinguishing fires at sea, he took to drink and by September 1827 he was destitute. At his own request he was committed to the Giltspur Street compter and he died there on 25 September 1827. Nothing is known of his marriage, but he left a son and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 7736


Dodd, George (1808-1881), writer, was a journeyman author employed in supplying Victorian publications with the type of factual article for which there was a vast demand. Nothing is known of his parentage and education. During nearly half a century he was known as an industrious and painstaking writer. An aptitude for presenting statistics in an attractive form made him a useful assistant to the publisher Charles Knight. He wrote numerous articles on industrial art in the 'Penny Cyclopaedia', the 'English Cyclopaedia', and supplements. He edited and wrote much of the 'Cyclopaedia of the Industry of All Nations' (1851). He contributed to the 'Penny Magazine', to 'London', to 'The Land we Live in', and to several other of Knight's serial publications. Some of his papers were collected and published in volumes, under the titles of 'Days at the Factories, or, The Manufacturing Industry of Great Britain Described' (1843; repr. 1967) and 'Curiosities of Industry' (1852). For Knight's 'Weekly Volumes' he provided an account of 'The Textile Manufactures of Great Britain' (6 vols., 1844-6). The work by which he was probably best known was an elaborate volume on 'The food of London: a sketch of the chief varieties, sources of supply... and machinery of distribution, of the food for a community of two millions and a half' (1856). On Knight's retirement as a general publisher, Dodd joined Messrs Chambers, contributing to their serial publications. He also compiled 'Chambers's Handy Guide to London' (1862) and 'Chambers's Handy Guide to the Kent and Sussex Coasts' (1863). For over thirty years he contributed one or more papers annually to the 'Companion to the [British] Almanac'. He also wrote on locks (1853), the Crimean War (1856), and the Indian 'revolt' (as he unusually called it) (1859), and he published two useful summaries of economic progress: 'Railways, Steamers, and Telegraphs: a Glance at their Recent Progress and Present State' (1867) and 'Dictionary of Manufactures, Mining, Machinery, and the Industrial Arts' (1871). Dodd was found dead at his home, 133 Torriano Avenue, Kentish Town, London, on 20 or 21 January 1881; his death was, the coroner noted, 'accelerated by cold weather'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7737


Dodd, James Solas (1720/21-1805), surgeon and actor, was born in London, the son of Jago Mendozo Vasconcellos de Solis, and his wife, Rebecca, daughter of John Dodd. John Dodd was in 1719 commander of the 'St Quintin', a merchantman trading from London to Barcelona. At Barcelona he became acquainted with Don Jago, who, having had a duel with the son of the governor of Barcelona and left him for dead, took refuge in Dodd's ship, and sailed in it for London the same evening. Don Jago lodged at Captain Dodd's house and in 1720 married his host's daughter. On his marriage Don Jago took the name of Dodd in order to bequeath to his children a small estate near Newcastle upon Tyne. In 1727 Don Jago died in London, having failed to reconcile his father, Don Gaspard de Solis, to his marriage with a protestant, by which he lost his patrimony and commission. 
Young Dodd received a good education, as it was his mother's wish that he should enter the church, but, in 1742, 'on some family reasons' he was apprenticed to John Hills, a surgeon practising in the Minories, London. In 1745 Dodd entered the navy as surgeon's mate of the hospital ship 'Blenheim' and served until the end of the war in the 'Devonshire' and the 'St Albans'. He continued for some months after the peace in the 'St Albans', then stationed at Plymouth. Dodd took up his diploma as a member of the Company of Surgeons, London, in 1751, and practised in Gough Square, Fleet Street, and afterwards in Suffolk Street, Haymarket. In 1752 he published 'An Essay towards a Natural History of the Herring', written to promote the industry on the behalf of the Society of the Free British Fishery. He was indebted to Dr Thomas Birch for assistance in his literary projects (Dodd, his letter to Birch, 14 April 1752, BL, Add. MS 4305, fol. 2). The next year he took part in the great Canning controversy by publishing 'A physical account of the case of Elizabeth Canning, with an enquiry into the probability of her subsisting in the manner therein asserted' (1753), in which he argues strongly for the truth of the girl's story. Towards the close of January 1754, 'on account of some deaths in his family', Dodd set out for the continent, returning in the following May. In 1759 he again entered the navy: 'came as supernumerary in the 'Sheerness' from Leghorn to Gibraltar'; there he went on board the 'Prince', and served on her until June 1762. In the same year he qualified at Surgeons' Hall as master surgeon of any ship of the first rate, and was warranted for the 'Hawke', in which he served until she was paid off at the peace in February 1763. He then settled once more in London, 'chiefly', as he says, 'in the literary line'. 
One of Dodd's literary undertakings was a series of lectures first delivered in 1766 in the great room of Exeter Exchange, and afterwards published with the title 'A Satyrical Lecture on Hearts, to which is Added a Critical Dissertation on Noses' (1767). The reviewer of the book in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (37, 1767, 73-4) attributes to Dodd the authorship of a periodical essay published some years before under the title of 'The scourge'. On 7 February 1767 the house in which he lodged, adjoining the gateway of the Saracen's Head inn on Snow Hill, suddenly collapsed, but he and his family escaped with the loss only of their belongings. His wife's health being affected by this accident, Dodd left London and went to Bath and Bristol in order to hasten her recovery; from there he wandered to Ireland, where he 'followed his business and literary employments' in Dublin. In Ireland, Dodd published his 'Essays and Poems' (1770) which claimed to contain 'A collection of all the Airs, Catches, Glees, Cantatas, and Roundelays... performed at Stratford upon Avon, on occasion of the Jubilee... in honour of Shakespeare' in 1769. The book also contains a first-hand account of the jubilee. On 9 October 1769 Dodd was engaged by William Parsons, manager of the Birmingham Theatre, to re-read Garrick's 'Jubilee Ode to Shakespeare' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). In March 1779 Dodd was invited to return to London. He brought with him a play, 'The Funeral Pile' (originally entitled 'Gallic Gratitude'), based largely on 'Le naufrage' of Joseph de Lafont, which had just two performances at Covent Garden (30 April and 19 May 1779). 
In 1781 Dodd became friendly with a Major John Savage, who styled himself Baron Weildmester, and had, he alleged, a number of claims on Lord North. Savage, on promising to defray all expenses, persuaded Dodd and his family to travel with him to Russia, where, he said, he had a plan to propose to the empress from a foreign power to enter into a treaty of alliance, and that he and Dodd were to act as ambassadors; Savage also proposed 'that Mrs. Dodd, &c. should remain under the czarina's protection, and that on their return they would be decorated with the order of St. Catherine & have 1,000'l'. a year pension'. Charmed with this proposal Dodd cheerfully bore the expense until Riga was reached, where he learned Savage's true character. Dodd soon joined a ship bound for Bowness on the Firth of Forth. He landed at Leith in December 1781 almost penniless. In the following year he appeared at Edinburgh as actor and lecturer. David Stewart Erskine, eleventh earl of Buchan, was interested in him, and among Buchan's manuscripts is a paper in Dodd's handwriting relating the story of his career from his earliest years. A verbatim transcript is given in 'Notes and Queries', 6th series, 7, 1883, 483-4. In 1786 a marriage licence was granted to Dodd and Ann Hurley Mason. Dodd died in Mecklenburgh Street, Dublin, in the spring of 1805, aged eighty-four. John O'Keeffe wrote in his 'Recollections' that Dodd's 'learning and general knowledge were great; and though he had but small wit himself, [he] delighted to find it in another. He turned actor but was indifferent at that trade. He was a lively smart little man, with a cheerful laughing face' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 


@@@@@


doc= 7738


Dodd, James William (c.1740-1796), actor, was born in London, reportedly the son of a hairdresser. A successful appearance in a school play turned him towards the theatre, and at the age of sixteen he became a strolling player. His first part was said to be Roderigo in 'Othello', at Sheffield. There is firm evidence of his being a member of the Norwich Company of Comedians early in 1759, when he was already married and living in Bury St Edmunds, one of the towns on the company's circuit. He and his wife, Martha (died 1769), also in the company, had four children before 1765. 
In Norfolk, Dodd played a wide range of parts, from George Barnwell to Hamlet, and was also a singer and dancer. Tate Wilkinson, who appeared there in 1763, described him as 'the reigning favourite' of Norwich (Wilkinson, 'Memoirs', 3.114). But it was in comedy that he came to excel. He began to specialize when in 1764 he and his wife moved to the Bath theatre and came under the influence of John Arthur. A year later Garrick recruited them both for Drury Lane. 
Garrick needed an urgent replacement for William O'Brien, whose secret marriage to Lady Susan Strangways had forced him to quit the stage, but with his usual caution he first sought opinions from various talent scouts. The letter from his friend John Hoadly is a model of what such a report should be (Thomas, 255). In spite of his distaste for 'Strolers', Garrick engaged them. Dodd was to remain at Drury Lane for over thirty years. His forte was the fop, in the tradition created by Cibber and Vanbrugh; he was 'the prince of pink heels, and the soul of empty eminence' (Jenkins, 81) and he chiefly excelled in those roles where the fop is sinister as well as comic. '
The insect tribe Dodd paints with nicest art 

And gives a double edge to satire's dart. 
('The Drama: a Poem', 1775)' After Sheridan had succeeded Garrick at Drury Lane, Dodd created a number of important roles for him: Sir Benjamin Backbite in 'The School for Scandal' (1777), Lord Foppingham in 'A Trip to Scarborough' (1777), and Dangle in 'The Critic' (1778). He also played many other types of part in his long and successful career. In the 1780s he was regularly the Drury Lane Caliban; he played Richard III, once; and he was one of a notable trio of witches in 'Macbeth'. Charles Lamb praised his Sir Andrew Aguecheek especially: 'Dodd was 'it', as it came out of nature's hands... In expressing slowness of apprehension the actor surpassed all others' (Lamb, 159). 
In the long summer closures of the patent theatres, London actors worked in the provinces and occasionally undertook provincial managements. In his second year at Drury Lane, Dodd helped to open the new theatre in Bristol. He appeared there again in 1767, with his wife, and in 1768, without her. In 1769 he lost the favour of Bristol audiences through his notorious association with Mary Bulkley (1747/8?-1792), of Covent Garden, who was also spending the summer in Bristol. His marriage had long been stormy, and in that year Martha, after a quarrel, took an engagement at Richmond rather than in Bristol. Dodd's angry attempts to retrieve her cost him two nights in gaol. Martha died in September of that year, and Dodd found it wiser to stay away from Bristol for a year or two. 
In summer 1772 Dodd returned to Bristol as manager, succeeding Tom King. While recruiting his company in London he tried to seduce the young Elizabeth Simpson (later Inchbald), who was seeking a first engagement, but she threw hot water over him and escaped. The season itself went badly. Dodd changed the playbills too late and too often, while the local actresses complained of his public rudeness and resented the best parts' going to Londoners. He never tried management again. 
In summer 1774 Dodd went on tour with Mary Bulkley to York (where a quarrel with John Moody disturbed Garrick when he heard of it) and to Dublin, where their season ended disastrously through public disapproval of their behaviour. Dodd was stranded in Ireland and had to be rescued by Garrick, and Bulkley returned temporarily to her husband. The couple had a far more successful season in York four years later, by which time they had set up house together. But after a year or two the relationship collapsed again. 
Physically, Dodd was very small, with 'a white, calf-like stupid face' (Thomas, 255), on which he could register all the comic emotions. He was sprightly when young, but grew slow and portly. He was respected by audiences and by colleagues who acknowledged his professional skill, but he never challenged King as the principal Drury Lane comedian. In his last season, 1795-6, he was criticized for a poor Roderigo; his Mercutio was too fat, too old, and too slow; and he was made a scapegoat for the fiasco of 'The Iron Chest', a play by George Colman the younger with music by Stephen Storace. Colman himself attached greater blame to the leading player, John Philip Kemble, but Dodd bore the brunt of audience hostility. He retired at the end of the season, and during his last summer would take the air in Gray's Inn garden, where Lamb once met him. He died at his home, 8 Southampton Row, Bloomsbury, on 17 September 1796. He left an extensive library, which was auctioned by Sothebys in 2435 lots over nine days. He was survived by his son the Revd James Dodd (died 1818), fellow of King's College, Cambridge, rector of North Runcton, and for many years an usher at Westminster School. 


@@@@@


doc= 7739


Dodd, Philip Stanhope (1775-1852), Church of England clergyman, was the son of the Revd Richard Dodd (1735/6-1811), rector of Cowley, Middlesex, author of a translation of Formey's 'Ecclesiastical History', and his wife 
('nee' Wynant; died 1802)
. He was educated at Tonbridge School, and, having entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1792, was elected a fellow, and proceeded BA in 1796 and MA in 1799. In 1796 he published anonymously 'Hints to Fresh-Men, from a Member of the University of Cambridge', of which the third edition was printed in 1807. He was ordained by the bishop of London in 1797 and was for some years curate of Camberwell, Surrey, which he exchanged in 1803 for the ministry of Lambeth Chapel, retaining the afternoon lecture at Camberwell. 
In 1806 Dodd was chaplain to the lord mayor, Sir William Leighton, and published five sermons preached in that capacity. The fourth of these, 'The Lawfulness of Judicial Oaths and on Perjury', preached at St Paul's Cathedral on 31 May 1807, produced a reply by Joseph Gurney Bevan. He was rewarded for his civic services by the valuable rectory of St Mary-at-Hill in the City of London in 1807, where he was one of the most popular clergymen of the metropolis. 
In 1812 Dodd was presented by his college to the sinecure rectory of Aldrington in Sussex, the church of which had been destroyed. Sir J. S. Sidney, bt, in 1819 gave him the rectory of Penshurst, Kent, worth $766 per annum, and he became rural dean of Malling in 1846. He married on 4 August 1814 Martha, second daughter of the late Lieutenant-Colonel Wilson, deputy treasurer of Chelsea Hospital. In 1837 Dodd wrote 'A View of the Evidence afforded by the Life and Ministry of St Paul to the Truth of the Christian Revelation'. He died at Penshurst rectory on 22 March 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 7740


Dodd, Ralph (1756?-1822), civil engineer, was probably born in 1756 in South or North Shields, one of three known sons of Alexander Dodd. After some education in practical mechanics he studied at the Royal Academy for about five years, and in the 1780s, like his brother Robert Dodd, attempted to make a living from painting. He married Fanny Lambert on 16 February 1778; she and their three sons and a daughter survived him. His earliest connection with engineering was the trial of an excavating machine on the Grand Junction Canal near Hayes in 1794. The same year he carried out a survey of the River Wear, and a succession of reports followed relating to canals and harbours in the north-east. His short historical 'Account of the Principal Canals in the Known World' (1795) was largely plagiarized from J. Phillips's 'General History of Inland Navigation' (1792). He then promoted tunnels beneath the Tyne and the Thames from Gravesend to Tilbury. Work began on the latter in 1799 but was abandoned in 1802. In 1798 he proposed to construct the Thames and Medway Canal, from near Gravesend to Strood, which was eventually completed by W. T. Clark. In 1799 he published 'Letters on the Improvement of the Port of London without Making Wet Docks', and became involved with proposals for a new London bridge. In 1804 he turned his attention to the water supply of London, and became involved in the establishment of the South London, West Middlesex, East London, and Kent waterworks companies. As with almost all of his proposals, Dodd's active involvement with these schemes was short-lived. 
Dodd's sons George Dodd and Barrodall Robert assisted him in many of his schemes, including the Grand Surrey Canal, from which they were all dismissed in 1802. They all became heavily involved in the development of steam navigation. Dodd was involved in the initial plans for Vauxhall Bridge, and almost certainly assisted George in his proposals for Waterloo Bridge. 
In 1815 Dodd issued his 'Practical Observations on the Dry Rot in Timber'. The same year he took out a patent with George Stephenson for a steam locomotive. He then began advocating iron bridges 'of tenacity', and built one over the Chelmer at Springfield (1819-20). In April 1822 Dodd was injured by the bursting of a steam vessel at Gloucester. He was advised to go to Cheltenham for his health and, with virtually no money, had to walk there. He died there on 11 April 1822. 


@@@@@


doc= 7741


Dodd, Robert (1748-1815), marine painter and engraver, was one of the three known sons of Alexander Dodd; Ralph Dodd (1756?-1822) was his younger brother. He began his career as a landscape painter, achieving some recognition by the age of twenty-three. He soon developed as a painter of marine scenes, having ample opportunity to study the busy shipping life of London. On 1 November 1772, when he was living in the parish of St John-at-Wapping, London, he married Mary Fulton ('b'. 1748), a spinster of the parish of St Marylebone. He first exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1780. In 1782 he exhibited three paintings at the Royal Academy and continued to exhibit there regularly until 1809. 
Much of Dodd's work records specific battles and actions of the French Revolutionary Wars and the American War of Independence. He painted a large canvas of the battle of the First of June, 1794 (1795; NMM). In 1797, during a trip to Sheerness to 'get a plan of the action' of the battle of Camperdown, he was described as 'the nice Mr Dodd' for his diplomatic behaviour (Edwards). A painting of HMS 'Victory' sailing from Spithead (1791; NMM) illustrates his skill at ship portraits. His work also includes scenes of the River Thames and naval dockyards. Many of his paintings were reproduced in line or aquatint by engravers such as Robert Pollard, Frances Jukes, and Robert Laurie. 
From about 1783 Dodd himself engraved and published over 100 aquatints of his work. Of interest are his views of the naval dockyards, including those at Chatham, Woolwich, and Deptford, and sets of engravings of the battles of the Nile, 1798 (1799), and Trafalgar, 1805 (1806). In his engravings as in his paintings his strength lies in the depiction of water and in accuracy of the details of ships' rigging, masts, and sails in different conditions. In particular he depicted storm scenes and rough seas with great realism, including a set of five paintings showing the loss of the 'Ramillies', September 1782 (1783; NMM). His prolific work is significant as a historical record, along with that of several contemporary marine painters working on the same subjects. He is sometimes confused with his brother, the painter Ralph Dodd ('c'.1756-1822), who also lived and worked in London. Towards the end of his life Robert Dodd was living at Lucas Place, Commercial Road, east London. He died in 1815 and was buried on 20 February at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. 


@@@@@


doc= 7742


Dodd, Sir Samuel (1652-1716), judge, the son of Ralph Dodd, was from a Cheshire family settled at Little Budworth, but was born in London. He was probably the 'Samuel Dod' who entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 11 September 1664. He entered the Inner Temple in 1670, was called to the bar in 1679, and became a bencher in 1700. On 11 March 1686 he married Isabel (died 1722), daughter and coheir of Sir Robert Croke of Chequers, Buckinghamshire. They had two sons, only one of whom survived his father. Dodd was employed in 1693 and 1700 for the bankers against the government over the long-drawn-out case of the crown's liability for interest on loans made to Charles II. Commercial cases seem to have been something of a speciality, for Dodd was one of the lawyers chosen in 1694 to prepare the by-laws for the Bank of England and he played an important role in matters appertaining to the East India trade. In February 1700 he was counsel for the new company against a bill to incorporate the old company, and counsel for the new company again in June 1700. In October 1701 he acted for the new company in negotiations for uniting the two East India companies. He also appeared as counsel in cases before the House of Lords, such as representing the duchess of Norfolk against the divorce bill promoted by her husband. 
In February 1710 Dodd was assigned as counsel for Dr Henry Sacheverell in his impeachment before the Lords. His speech on the first article of the impeachment followed that of Sir Simon Harcourt and was notable only for its length. Once Harcourt had been removed from the defence team following his return to parliament, Dodd usually took the lead in the defence team. However, his part in the trial did not damage his relations with the whigs. Indeed, he reached the apogee of his career shortly after the Hanoverian succession. When Lord Cowper advised George I on the appointment of the judges at the start of his reign he remarked that for the exchequer 'Mr Dodd, an ancient practiser of this court, is the fittest person to supply the place of Chief Baron, now void, and I must confess experience is requisite for this post above all others' (Holmes and Speck, 65). Dodd was knighted on 11 October 1714, appointed a serjeant-at-law on 26 October, his patrons on the latter occasion being lords Wharton and Somers, two of the leading whigs of the day, and created chief baron of the exchequer on 20 November. Dodd died on 14 April 1716 'after a long indisposition, leaving behind him the reputation of a learned and eminent lawyer, and a plentiful fortune to his only son' (Boyer, 11.505). He was buried in the Temple Church on 20 April. There is a volume of his manuscript reports in the British Library's Hargrave collection; an edition by W. Hamilton Bryson appeared in 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 7743


Dodd, Thomas (1771-1850), printseller and author, was born in Spitalfields on 11 July 1771, the eldest child of Elizabeth Tooley, tailor, and her husband, Thomas Dodd, also a tailor. At the age of five he moved with his family across London, to settle in Paradise Row, Chelsea, where he attended a local dame-school. Although his family were humble, this must have been a period of prosperity, as shortly afterwards the young Dodd was transferred to a private academy at Shooters Hill to study under a tutor named Dufour. He remained there until his father, who had habitually absented himself for lengthy periods, finally abandoned the family in 1781, leaving Dodd's mother to provide them with a meagre living. In such straitened circumstances, Dodd was sent to work with the flamboyant American impresario Colonel de Vaux, who planned to establish a juvenile band and taught the boy the clarinet. Under the protection of Vaux, this ensemble travelled through England, stopping to perform in various town squares; the experience must have encouraged Dodd's willingness to travel in later life. 
Within a year Vaux had given up this enterprise, leaving Dodd to lodge with a butcher named Chapman where he was ill-treated; within another year the boy ran away to Liverpool in pursuit of his charismatic master. After wandering, penniless, he eventually found Vaux and travelled with him to Llanrwst where he was again abandoned; this time, however, he was left in the care of an itinerant harp player who, although he neglected Dodd's well-being, did teach him to play the harp. Ever resourceful and seemingly hardened to such set-backs, Dodd earned his board by performing for a local Welsh innkeeper and then for the Revd John Royle. These teenage exploits were later recorded, though probably in a romanticized form, in an autobiographical manuscript (now lost) entitled 'A narrative of incidents and adventures in my progress of life', which Dodd eventually presented to his friend Joseph Mayer. 
By 1788 Dodd had returned to London, where he accepted a menial post in the house of an uncle before taking up service as a footman, first for 'Mrs Stuart [of] 48, Weymouth Street, Portland Place' ('GM', 481), and then for Timothy Mangles of Suffolk Lane. Finally, these domestic positions afforded Dodd sufficient security to pursue his new desire for self-education. Between 1790 and 1793, with access to Mangles's library, he read voraciously, particularly favouring treatises on drawing; he also taught himself to copy engravings. In 1794 he married Miss Mangles's maid and then took up employment as a clerk at the chancery court. This position exploited his draughtsmanship and writing skills and allowed him further time to indulge his passion for prints and to frequent auctions where he would buy miscellaneous lots of prints and cheap books. 
On the basis of these activities, in 1796 Dodd opened his first print shop, in Lambeth Marsh, where he came under the influence of William Henry Ireland, the infamous forger of Shakespeare, who encouraged him to excise flyleaves from the many old books in his stock; this was to supply Ireland with suitably aged paper for his own counterfeiting activities. Dodd apparently remained unaware of Ireland's ulterior motives and his own comments on this period describe his intense and devoted study of the history of engraving. After such a chequered start, Dodd had finally fixed on his vocation and by 1798 he had moved his print shop to the more fashionable and competitive location of Tavistock Street, Covent Garden. 
With his charismatic personality and his remarkable knowledge of prints, Dodd's shop soon became a resort for many of the leading printmakers, collectors, and connoisseurs of the day. By 1806 his stock had grown so large that he moved to premises in St Martin's Lane, where he also began to hold auctions; by 1809 he had established his reputation with the auction of General Dowdeswell's celebrated engraved portrait collection, which raised sums far in advance of those paid by their original collector. He also held successful auctions in Portsmouth, Liverpool, and Manchester but by 1817, in the aftermath of Waterloo, Dodd lost his London business and so relocated to Manchester where the competition was not so great. Between 1817 and 1825 he continued to hold auctions; he also played an active part in the northern intellectual and art worlds and was influential in the formation of the Royal Manchester Institution in 1823. 
During a prolonged illness in 1818-19 the largely self-taught Dodd started to write pieces on the history of engraving and the lives of engravers. The first was his 'Dissertation on the origin of the art of engraving', a lecture delivered in Liverpool in 1819. This was followed by a long-term project to compile a biographical history of the arts; it began publication in 1824 under the title 'The Connoisseurs Repertory', and it was in the interest of research that Dodd returned to London in 1825. The book, however, was quickly discontinued as its publisher went bankrupt. Consequently, although he continued to conduct some independent sales, Dodd was forced to take up the position of foreman for his former rival, the auctioneer Martin Colnaghi, for only $4 per week. This job was not without benefits: after he had catalogued Lord Yarborough's collection for sale by Colnaghi, the Bodleian Library invited Dodd, as a now renowned authority, to catalogue the 50,000 prints left to them on the death of Francis Douce; however, the catalogue was found inadequate and was never printed. In 1842 he was invited to catalogue Horace Walpole's collections at Strawberry Hill for the auctioneer George Robins. 
Undeterred by this change in fortunes, during his final years Dodd continued to compile notes on the history of engraving and his most important contribution to the history of art is his extensive manuscript 'Memoirs of English engravers, 1550-1800' (now in the British Library, London), which he is said to have completed two days before his death. He died at the home of Joseph Mayer, in Lord Street, Liverpool, on 17 August 1850 and was buried in St James's cemetery in Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 7744


Dodd, William (1729-1777), Church of England clergyman and forger, was born in Bourne, Lincolnshire, the eldest of the six children of the Revd William Dodd (1703?-1757), vicar of Bourne. He was probably born on 29 May 1729 (Howson), though the parish register for Bourne shows that a William Dodd, son of William Dodd, was baptized at Bourne on 23 May 1728 ('IGI'). His mother was possibly Elizabeth Dickson or Dixon, who married a William Dodd on 3 April 1726, perhaps at Bourne (or at Norton Disney or Surfleet in the same county). 
Dodd entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1746 as a sizar, and in 1749 he was entered in the first tripos list as a wrangler. He was made MA in 1759. On leaving Cambridge in 1749 he went to London, where he lived for the rest of his life. There he sought to pursue a literary career which had begun at Cambridge with 'Diggon Davy's Resolution on the Death of his Last Cow' (1747), a poem on foot-and-mouth disease. In London he rapidly produced a co-authored student crammer of philosophical texts and wrote both a farce on Sir Roger de Coverley, which was apparently never staged, and 'A New Book of the Dunciad'. In 1751 he married Mary Perkins (died 1784), the daughter of a verger of Durham Cathedral, and his initial literary success encouraged him to lease an expensive house in Wardour Street. The fatal pattern was thus established of over-extending his limited financial resources in pursuit of advancement. It quickly became clear that his writings would not support him so he returned to Cambridge, he was ordained at Gonville and Caius College on 19 October 1752, and he became curate at All Saints', West Ham. He continued to write and, while his talent for originality was limited, he did have a facility for extracting from the work of others, most successfully in 'The Beauties of Shakespeare' (1752), a collection of quotations which stayed in print well into the twentieth century. This book proved a boon to those who wished to demonstrate erudition without the inconvenience of actually having to read the plays, although it did provide Goethe with his first exposure to Shakespeare. Dodd also tried his hand at fiction and published 'The Sisters' (1754), a novel whose dullness at least conceals its limp eroticism. During the 1760s he concentrated on theological writing; he published a 'Commentary of the Bible' in monthly parts from 1764 and became almost solely responsible for the 'Christian Magazine' (1760-67), some articles from which were collected in 'Dodd on Death'. 
Meanwhile Dodd's reputation as a preacher was growing. He was appointed to a lectureship at All Saints' in 1752; this was followed by lectureships in the City of London at St James Garlickhythe, in May 1753, and St Olave, Hart Street, in April 1754. He also delivered the Lady Moyer lectures at St Paul's Cathedral from 1754. In 1764 he attacked John Wesley for allegedly claiming that Methodists were perfect and for failing to control his followers. Wesley at first ignored the attack but then silenced his opponent with a fierce response in 'Lloyd's Evening Post' (3 April 1767). In 1765 Dodd became tutor to the heir of Philip Dormer Stanhope, earl of Chesterfield, so he reluctantly turned schoolmaster and opened a small private school; he also graduated LLD in 1766 in the hope of attracting other wealthy pupils. His precarious finances received a boost when his wife received an inheritance and a lottery prize. With the money he opened Charlotte (or Pimlico) Chapel in Charlotte Street, behind Buckingham House, in July 1767. The aim was to attract royalty and thereby the cream of London society through his reputation as a preacher. Initially aristocracy joined his congregation and newspapers printed his sermons but the chapel struggled to attract members of the royal family. Dodd failed to obtain the vacant livings of either All Saints', in 1762, or St Olave, in 1769, although in 1772 he was preferred to the rectory of Hockliffe, Bedfordshire, to which was joined the vicarage of Chalgrove. His debts continued to mount as his lifestyle outstripped his income and he was forced to assign some of his literary works to the publisher of the 'Christian Magazine', to whom he owed money. Then, in 1767, he was sacked as its editor, and in 1771 his school, which had never been a financial success, collapsed when Philip Stanhope departed on the grand tour. Another attempt to rescue his finances, by leasing Bedford Chapel, Bloomsbury, in 1770, failed and he gave up the venture the following year. 
In spite of all these difficulties Dodd supported a number of charities. While such endeavours were undoubtedly a means of mixing with influential people the fact that he was often the initiator of several successful schemes suggests a generous nature. He was instrumental in the establishment of the Society for the Relief and Discharge of Persons Imprisoned for Small Debts (later the Discharged Prisoners' Society) and of the Society for the Resuscitation of Persons Apparently Drowned (later the Royal Humane Society), and he was connected to the Magdalen Hospital for the reformation of penitent prostitutes. In 1767 he preached in favour of inoculation against smallpox and he wrote in support of the campaign against the death penalty in 1772. However, when in that year he and his wife were passengers in a coach that was robbed they were the only ones who appeared as witnesses against William Griffiths, who subsequently was convicted and hanged. It is worth remarking, however, that Dodd was equivocal in his evidence and interceded on Griffiths's behalf after his conviction. 
There can be no doubting that Dodd worked hard, both as a writer and as a clergyman. Horace Walpole described his preaching style as 'haranguing entirely in the French style, and very eloquently and touchingly', by which he seems to have meant that he spoke rapidly, with emotion and in a high-pitched tone (letter to George Montagu, 28 Jan 1760, Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.274). Walpole noted that some of the congregation were moved to tears, and this effect was presumably the result of Dodd's method of delivery since his printed sermons were similar in content to those preached by less popular colleagues. Dodd was certainly careful to cultivate the aristocrats among his congregation, even to the extent of sending them 'odes', the sycophantic tone of which says as much about their expectations as about his character. He enjoyed a degree of success both as a writer and a preacher but, while his income was not small, it was never adequate to maintain the impression of a successful clergyman, which he needed to promote in order to advance his career and to satisfy his own vanity. He kept a carriage, and his fashionable dress earned him the less than complimentary sobriquet the Macaroni Parson:'In the streets he walked with his head erect and with a lofty gait, like a man conscious of his own importance, and, perhaps, the dignity of his sacred calling' (Taylor, 2.250-52). Yet, according to the accounts of those who knew him, while he might have been vain he was not as pompous as this description suggests; Sir Philip Thicknesse said that he was 'one of the best-tempered men I ever knew', good company, generous, although, significantly, 'void of all prudence' (Thicknesse, 1.220-30). This popularity among fashionable society, however, brought little financial reward and even that was subject to the vagaries of fashion. 
By the early 1770s Dodd's popularity had begun to wane as the fashion in preaching styles changed. His creditors became more pressing and this may have led him to live for a time near Hounslow Heath. But he needed to maintain his connection with wealthy society and so he took a house in Queen Street, Mayfair, about 1774. This made him more accessible to creditors, who besieged the house. To make matters worse his wife tried to bribe Lady Apsley so that her husband might present Dodd to the living of St George's, Hanover Square. Although Dodd seems to have been ignorant of his wife's efforts Lord Apsley was furious and had him removed from the list of royal chaplains. All hope of preferment in the church had gone and such reputation as Dodd had enjoyed went with it. Ridiculed in newspapers and satirized by Samuel Foote in 'The Cozeners', he fled to Geneva to join his old pupil Philip Stanhope, now earl of Chesterfield. On his return to England Chesterfield gave him the living of Wing in Berkshire and some money to pay off his most pressing creditors. Dodd continued to write and became editor of the 'New Morning Post'. Unfortunately his absence abroad gave the governors of Magdalen Hospital the excuse to sack him, and in 1776 he relinquished the Charlotte Chapel, which had failed to bring the expected preferment and wealth. 
By 1777 Dodd was living in Argyle Buildings, Argyle Street. Then came the final incident of his life. On 1 February he discounted a bill of exchange allegedly drawn by the earl of Chesterfield through Lewis Robertson, a broker. Dodd obtained $4200 but the bill was a forgery and he was arrested on 5 February. He immediately confessed, exonerated Robertson, and arranged for repayment. Promises that the matter would not be pressed further were not honoured and he was taken before Sir Thomas Halifax, the lord mayor, at Guildhall, London. Both Halifax and Chesterfield's solicitor pressed forward the prosecution with enthusiasm, arguing that such offences threatened financial stability and deserved the severest punishment. Dodd was remanded to the Wood Street compter, where, at his request, he was visited by John Wesley, who also saw him when he was moved to Newgate prison. He was convicted of a capital forgery at the Old Bailey on 22 February 1777 but the jury recommended mercy. The passing of the death sentence was delayed while the judges decided that it had been correct to admit Robertson as a witness for the prosecution. Meanwhile a popular campaign began with the aim of obtaining mercy for Dodd. Newspaper coverage suddenly became sympathetic to him: no longer the Macaroni Parson he was now the 'unfortunate divine'. Dodd approached Dr Johnson to assist him in seeking mercy, and, while Johnson disliked Dodd's lifestyle, he thought the penalty harsh and agreed to help him. The two men did not meet at this time, although they may have done so briefly some years previously. Johnson devoted a considerable amount of time to writing the speeches and prayers that were published under Dodd's name, including the one that he delivered to the court when he was eventually sentenced to death in May 1777 and a speech he was to have given, but did not, at the gallows. A large number of petitions were presented, including one with 23,000 signatures and others from Oxford and Cambridge universities, the trial jurors, and the common council of the corporation of the City of London. This support seemed to lead Dodd to believe that he would not be executed but it may have had the opposite effect by moving the lord chief justice, Lord Mansfield, to speak against mercy in the privy council from a belief that it might be dangerous to give in to such pressure. On 27 June 1777 Dodd was taken to be hanged at Tyburn. The crowds lining the streets along which he passed were said to have stood in silence. Efforts by the physician John Hunter to revive him failed and he was interred at St Lawrence's Church, Cowley, Middlesex, where his brother was vicar. A plaque on the church wall commemorates him, and according to local legend he is buried in the grounds of the modern rectory. Dodd, in his work, life, and death, exemplified some of the main concerns of the period: the fickleness and extravagance of London society, the decline of literary patronage, the dependence of individuals on wealthy patrons for their advancement, and the excesses and controversy surrounding capital punishment. 


@@@@@


doc= 7745


Dodderidge, Sir John (1555-1628), judge, was the eldest of eight children of Richard Dodderidge, a merchant of South Molton in Devon, and his wife, Joan Badcock ('nee' Horder). Although seemingly not born to wealth, his father took advantage of the economic growth of north Devon in the second half of the sixteenth century and became a prosperous shipowner, trader, and privateer. He established himself in Barnstaple, where he was alderman in 1583 and mayor in 1589. His wife having died in 1604, he survived until 1619. Tradition has it that John Dodderidge attended the grammar school at Barnstaple; he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1572, graduating BA in 1577. After a period at New Inn he was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1577 and called to the bar in 1585. In 1593 and 1602 he was appointed reader at New Inn, where he lectured on the law of advowsons. One year later, in 1603, he delivered his first reading at the Middle Temple and was created bencher. In 1604 he was created serjeant-at-law, having been proposed one year earlier. Only nine months afterwards, however, he was discharged from his serjeanty in order to take up the office of solicitor-general. He occupied this office for three years, resigning in 1607 to allow the promotion of Francis Bacon, whereupon Dodderidge resumed the coif and was immediately appointed king's serjeant and, later the same year, knighted. In 1612 he was appointed judge of the court of king's bench, retaining his place on the bench until his death in 1628. 
Dodderidge retained his connections with Devon. He represented Barnstaple in the parliament of 1589, acted as counsel for the borough in 1611, and in his later life took an active interest in local administration in Barnstaple and South Molton. Perhaps because of his Devon antecedents he took an interest in the early settling of the American colonies, serving as a member of the king's council for Virginia in 1606. His family continued to live in the vicinity of Barnstaple, and all three of his wives were from Devon. First of these was Joan, daughter of Michael Jermyn, who was mayor of Exeter in 1591. On her death Dodderidge married, probably in 1604, Dorothy Hancock ('nee' Bampfield) (1582-1614), the widow of Edward Hancock, the member of parliament for Barnstaple who had committed suicide in 1603 after the fall of Walter Ralegh. Three years after her death Dodderidge married Anne (died 1630), daughter of Nicholas Culme of Canon's Leigh in Devon and widow of Giles Newman of London. Although he is said to have preferred to live near London, and in his later years had a substantial mansion near Egham in Surrey, Dodderidge's main properties were in Devon. He kept up his family home at Bremridge, South Molton, causing it to be rebuilt in 1622, and through his second wife came into possession of Mount Radford, near Exeter. His second wife was buried in Exeter Cathedral and in his will (written one month before his death) he expressed the wish that he too should be buried there. 
Dodderidge played a full part in public affairs. He was one of the more active members in the parliament of 1604-11, where he represented Horsham. He spoke with great learning and sense in the debate on the lawfulness of royal impositions, though his lack of rhetorical flourish meant that his speech was less effective than it might otherwise have been. In the debate on the naturalization of the Scots, where the House of Commons was in danger of clashing both with the king and with the judges, he spoke with considerable wisdom in favour of a workable compromise consistent with common-law principles. He was a faithful servant of the crown, more royalist in his leanings than were many contemporary common lawyers, though his primary concern was with legal propriety. In Peacham's case, when the judges were asked to give their opinions in secret to the king, Dodderidge was said to be perfectly willing to oblige: as a judge he had taken an oath to give counsel to the king, and there was therefore no constitutional impediment to his obeying the royal demand. On the other hand, when directed by royal warrant not to enforce the statutes against recusancy in 1623, he is reported to have said that some lawful means should be discovered whereby the statutes could be dispensed with: the strong inference is that he did not believe that an instruction from the king was sufficient. 
As a lawyer Dodderidge was -- rightly -- immensely well respected. He was known as the Sleeping Judge, not because of any shortcoming on his part, but because of his habit of concentrating on legal argument with eyes firmly closed. Recommending him for appointment as a serjeant-at-law in 1603, Cecil described him as 'a very great learned man' ('CSP dom.', '1601-3', 285), and about the same time Francis Bacon is said to have described him as 'shooting a fair arrow' ('Diary of John Manningham', 100). Dodderidge got to the heart of matters very quickly, and his arguments -- as advocate, as judge, and as parliamentarian -- had a compelling lucidity. His writings show the same quality: his reading on advowsons, published in 1630 as 'The Compleat Parson', is marked by its clarity of structure; and his 'The English Lawyer' (1631; earlier printed from an imperfect copy as 'The Lawyers Light' in 1629) was a creditable attempt to impose some order on the depressingly haphazard common law of his day. Other legal works plausibly attributed to him are 'The Lawes Resolution of Womens Rights' (1632), and perhaps 'The Office and Duty of Executors' (1641, also ascribed to Thomas Wentworth). Long tradition has associated Dodderidge with the 'Touchstone of Common Assurances', published by William Sheppard in 1648, but this cannot withstand serious scrutiny. Nor is it likely that he wrote the 'Treatise on Estates', printed with later editions of William Noy's 'Maxims', which was once attributed to him. 
Dodderidge's scholarship reached far beyond that of most contemporary lawyers. His knowledge of the civil law, though not profound by continental standards, extended into the modern commentaries on the 'Digest' of Justinian: his manuscript commonplace book, now in the British Library, and his 'English Lawyer' have many references to civilian works, and a paper discussing the question whether a nation had the right to appropriate parts of the high seas to its own exclusive use displays a familiarity with continental lawyers' discussions of the prescriptibility of rights over the sea. Nor was his learning limited to the law. He was a member of the fledgeling Society of Antiquaries -- tradition has him as one of its founders -- and he is known to have given papers to it on a variety of subjects, including one on the antiquity of parliament, published by his nephew in 1658. He wrote a history of Wales, Cornwall, and Chester, published in 1630, and a work on the degrees of nobility published in 1642 as 'The Magazine of Honour'. As well as being renowned for his learning, Dodderidge had a reputation for integrity, for loyalty, and for ample hospitality. He died at his home at Forsters, Egham, Surrey on 13 September 1628 and his remains were transported to Exeter and interred in the cathedral there on 14 October beneath a fine effigy of him in his judicial robes. He is said to have died with great cheerfulness. His nephew John Dodderidge ('bap'. 1610, died 1658) practised as a barrister, represented Barnstaple in the Long Parliament, founded a free library in Barnstaple, and left money in his will to Harvard University. 


@@@@@


doc= 7746


Doddridge, Philip (1702-1751), Independent minister and writer, was born on 26 June 1702 in London, the last of the twenty children of Daniel Doddridge (died 1715), an oilman or dealer in oils and pickles, and his wife, Monica Bauman (died 1711). His father was a son of John Doddridge (1621-1689), rector of Shepperton, Middlesex, who resigned his living after the 'Act of Uniformity' and became a nonconformist minister, and a great-nephew of the judge and MP Sir John Doddridge (1555-1628). His mother was the daughter of John Bauman (died 'c'.1668), a protestant refugee who fled from Prague in 1626; after spending twenty years in Germany he moved to London in 1646 and set up a school at Kingston, Surrey. Doddridge inherited his grandfather's German 'Bible', and recorded in it his flight from persecution (Deacon, 29). Only one of Doddridge's siblings survived infancy, his elder sister, Elizabeth (died 1735), who married John Nettleton, a schoolmaster at Hampstead and then a dissenting minister at Ongar, Essex. On both sides of his family Doddridge was descended from men who had suffered for their religion, and he was obviously proud of this inheritance, but he was also conscious of the social position of his Doddridge forebears. His lawyer uncle Philip Doddridge (died 1715), some of whose books he inherited, was steward to the first duke of Bedford. The place of evangelical religion in polite society was a question that was to concern his nephew greatly. 
When very young, Doddridge was taught 'Bible' stories by his mother from the Dutch tiles in the fireplace. He was sent first to a private tutor, Mr Stott, and then in 1712 he was put under the Presbyterian minister Daniel Mayo at the school in Kingston founded by his grandfather. He spent his holidays on the Bedford estates with his uncle, and kept up his friendship with the Russell family in later life. At the age of eight he lost his mother; at the age of thirteen, after the deaths of his father and uncle, he was made ward to a Mr Downes, who moved him to a school at St Albans run by another dissenter, Dr Nathaniel Wood. In St Albans he boarded in the same house as the Presbyterian minister Samuel Clark, who was to become one of the three most important influences on his intellectual and religious development. Though not a master, Clark took charge of his education. In the dedication of his funeral sermon for Clark, 'Meditations on the Tears of Jesus', preached at St Albans on 16 December 1750, Doddridge described him as 'my ever honoured friend and father' ('Works', 3.382). Downes, on the other hand, proved to be an utterly unsuitable guardian: in 1718 he lost his ward's inheritance through speculation. Many years later Doddridge described himself as 'an Orphan quite defrauded & stripd of all by those that should have been my Guardians' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 1016). As a result he left St Albans to stay with his sister and brother-in-law in Hampstead while he made up his mind about his future. The duchess of Bedford offered to provide for him at Oxford or Cambridge so that he could take orders in the Church of England, but he was already, at sixteen, considering the dissenting ministry. The dissenting historian and spokesman Edmund Calamy, from whom he sought advice, told him to think of another profession. He was offered the opportunity to train as a lawyer, but instead Clark undertook to give him a temporary home in St Albans and find him a place at a dissenting academy. In October 1719, at seventeen, he became a student at the academy of the Independent minister John Jennings, first at Kibworth Harcourt, south-east of Leicester, and then from July 1722 at Hinckley, about 10 miles west of Kibworth. On 24 January 1723 he was satisfactorily examined by three neighbouring ministers; he left Hinckley on 1 June, having completed the four-year course shortly before his twenty-first birthday. Jennings died of smallpox on 8 July 1723, and the academy closed. 
After Clark, Jennings was the second person decisively to shape Doddridge's way of thinking and his future career. Invaluable information survives about his studies and Jennings's methods, in the form of his letters to Clark (who paid most of his bills), Nettleton, and others, books he owned while a student, and Jennings's manuscript notebooks. He told Clark on 22 September 1722 that Jennings encouraged 'the greatest freedom of inquiry' and did not follow 'the doctrines or phrases of any particular party' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 35); he told Nettleton on 27 February 1723 that Jennings 'furnishes us with all kinds of authors upon every subject, without advising us to skip over the heretical passages for fear of infection' ('Correspondence', 1.198). On 16 November 1725 he wrote a long letter to Thomas Saunders, minister at Kettering, with a detailed account of the range of topics covered in the eight halves of the course; in October 1728 he completed the 64-page manuscript 'Account of Mr Jennings's method of academical education with some reflections upon it in a letter to a friend'. During his period at the academy he read very widely, in divinity, philosophy, classical and French literature, and history (he read sixty books in one half-year in addition to the parts of books to which Jennings referred in his lectures). He told Nettleton in February 1722 that Tillotson was his particular favourite. He also developed the habits of intense self-discipline and husbandry of time that were to prove essential for the demands of his later career. The 'Rules for the direction of my conduct while a student' written in his copy of the 'New Testament' include the warning, 'Never let me trifle with a book with which I may have no present concern... [L]et me continually endeavour to make all my studies subservient to practical religion and Ministerial usefulness' (ibid., 1.97). 
Doddridge preached his first sermon at Nuneaton on 30 July 1722, while still a student. In April 1723 he was invited to Kibworth, which had been without a minister since Jennings's removal to Hinckley; the congregation, consisting mostly of farmers and graziers, numbered fewer than 250, and the salary was only $35 p.a. Advised by Clark to accept, in the meantime Doddridge was tempted by the prospect of an invitation to Coventry, with a very large congregation of 1200 members. By May he had accepted Kibworth, as support for him at Coventry was not unanimous. On 1 June he moved to a village near Kibworth called Little Stretton, where he boarded with a farmer called Thomas Perkins; later he moved to Burton Overy, another nearby village, to the house of William Freeman, whose daughter Kitty rejected him after a long courtship. As his situation with the Freemans had become difficult he moved in September 1725 to Market Harborough (inconveniently further from Kibworth), where he boarded with John Jennings's widow and turned his attentions, again unsuccessfully, to her daughter Jenny. He remained with Mrs Jennings until December 1729. 
The work at Kibworth was not onerous: Doddridge was required to preach twice a week in winter and once in summer, though after moving to Harborough he also preached there for the minister, David Some, who had been one of his examiners. He described himself in December 1723 as 'moderately inclined' to the Congregational form, 'our method of discipline at Kibworth, as it was in the time of Mr Jennings' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 91). He told Clark on 17 February 1725 that he liked the Kibworth ministry because 'I may have an Opportenity of dealing very plainly in the pulpit, wch perhaps amongst a nicer People I might not at these years have ye Confidence to do' (DWL, LNC MS L1/10/5). His biographer Andrew Kippis, who heard Doddridge read these carefully prepared Kibworth sermons in later years to his students, thought them 'far superior' to those he then had time for (Kippis, 271). In his rural solitude, in which he lived 'buried alive' or 'like a tortoise shut up in its shell' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', nos. 129, 144), Doddridge spent most of his time continuing his programme of study. He received money for books from both the Presbyterian and the Congregational funds -- he told Nettleton on 5 August 1725 that he had bought $20 worth of books in two years ('Correspondence', 2.57); he also belonged to a book society, had access to the libraries of neighbouring ministers, and borrowed from his Kibworth congregation the books they had in their houses, chiefly seventeenth-century works of practical religion. His great love was Richard Baxter: he received a set of his 'Practical Works' (1707) in 1724 (now in Dr Williams's Library), and observations in his letters and resolutions in his diaries indicate how carefully he read them. Reading Baxter's 'Gildas Salvianus: the Reformed Pastor' made him think he should spend more time among his people and less on his studies. He was not ordained at Kibworth (which meant that he could not administer the Lord's supper), though there are several references in his letters from 1724 to 1728 to his intention to be so. His reputation was obviously increasing, and he received several further invitations during his Kibworth years from other congregations: Coventry again; Pershore, Worcestershire -- 'a very rigid set of people' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 84); Girdlers' Hall, London, which Clark was keen for him to accept (ibid., no. 89); Bradfield, Norfolk; New Court, Carey Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London; and two separate Nottingham congregations, Independent at Castle Gate and Presbyterian at High Pavement. He refused partly because of emotional ties, partly because the Kibworth congregation would be in difficulty without him, and partly because, having been taught by Jennings 'that latitude of expression which the Scriptures indulge and recommend', he could not accept the obligation 'to talk in the phrases of the [Westminster] assembly's catechism' at Girdlers' Hall or the high orthodoxy of some members of Castle Gate (ibid., nos. 108, 315). 
Meanwhile a new career was opening up. According to Job Orton, his biographer and close friend, Jennings had asked Doddridge when he left Hinckley to add to and improve his course of lectures, and Doddridge later learned that Jennings thought him 'the most likely of any of his Pupils, to pursue the Schemes which he had formed' (Orton, 'Memoirs', 48). He was fully responsible for bringing up Jennings's son John. In November 1726 he began going through some of Jennings's course with a pupil who had started it just before his tutor's death, and in December 1727 Thomas Saunders asked him to take his brother Joseph as a pupil, boarding with Mrs Jennings, to which Doddridge agreed in early 1729. Late in 1728 Doddridge's 'Account of Mr Jennings's method' (originally written for Thomas Benyon, who died just as Doddridge was finishing it) was shown to Isaac Watts, the leading educational theorist among the dissenters. Watts, who was to become the third key influence on Doddridge's development after Clark and Jennings, was impressed by the account and thought him a suitable person to continue the academy. On 10 April 1729 at a meeting of ministers in Lutterworth, Some proposed the establishment of the new academy at Market Harborough under Doddridge. Though he had initially refused Saunders's request, after seeking advice from Calamy among others Doddridge began teaching a small group of students at Whitsuntide 1729. This was the beginning of what was to become the most influential of eighteenth-century dissenting academies. 
Not long after he had established himself as a tutor at Market Harborough, Doddridge received an invitation from a local congregation. Castle Hill Church, Northampton, had been without a minister since Thomas Tingey's departure for Fetter Lane, London, at the end of 1728. On 28 September 1729 the congregation, having heard Doddridge preach to them occasionally, formally invited him to preach among them as a candidate for a month, 'in order for whole Satisfaction' (Deacon, 59). Clark, Some, and Doddridge all hesitated because of the double burden of a new academy and a large church on a young man, but the congregation were persuasive. On 21 October they applied to Clark, earnestly asking for Doddridge to settle among them, and agreeing to facilitate the transfer of the academy and recompense Mrs Jennings. Doddridge, having twice in November sought the advice of Watts and other London ministers, finally accepted the invitation on 6 December, and despite his distress at leaving the Jennings household moved to Northampton on Christmas eve 1729. His salary was $70 p.a. On 19 March 1730 he was ordained, with Clark giving the charge. He was to remain based in Northampton as pastor and tutor for the rest of his working life. 
The meeting-house at Castle Hill was built in 1695, but the church, Presbyterian in origin, was in existence in some form by 1674. The Independent Samuel Blower, ejected from Woodstock, Oxfordshire, after the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662, became its first minister. He was succeeded in 1694 by Thomas Shepherd or Shepard, under whom the church building was erected, and then in 1699, after a three-year gap, by John Hunt (like Shepard a hymn writer), and in 1709 by Doddridge's predecessor, Tingey. In the 1690s Castle Hill had an uneasy relationship with what was to become in 1697 College Lane Church (later College Street), the Baptist church in Northampton associated with the Congregationalist Richard Davis of Rothwell. Under Doddridge these denominational differences, which had been the cause of much bitterness, ceased to be significant. His ministry became the source of a new and eclectic kind of dissent in which seventeenth-century puritanism and eighteenth-century freedom of thought fed into the evangelical revival. 
Soon after moving to Northampton, Doddridge set out his views on what the distinctive character of modern dissent should be in the anonymous pamphlet 'Free Thoughts on the most Probable Means of Reviving the Dissenting Interest' (1730), his first important publication, written in answer to Strickland Gough's 'Enquiry into the Causes of the Decay of the Dissenting Interest' (1730), also anonymous. Gough blamed the falling membership of dissenting congregations on neglect of the fundamental dissenting principle of liberty of conscience, and attacked dissenting ministers for their anachronistic adherence to the manners of their puritan forebears. Doddridge agreed with Gough on the damage caused by 'unscriptural impositions' (it was for this reason that he had turned down invitations from several congregations), but he insisted that the crucial issue was the revival of practical religion. The minister should be in the fullest sense popular: 'he who would be generally agreeable to dissenters, must be an evangelical, an experimental, a plain and an affectionate preacher'. Where Gough emphasized liberty and politeness, Doddridge's key terms were 'piety and catholicism'. He claimed that these methods, as practised by his 'fathers and brethren', had brought about an increase in membership in the Northampton region in the last twenty years ('Works', 4.202, 204, 213, 219, 220). 
Information about Doddridge's activities as a minister in Northampton and beyond can be gained from his diaries, letters, and published sermons, the church book still held at Castle Hill (drawn on by Deacon), and the biographies by his former pupils Orton and Kippis. In his diaries (transcribed by Thomas Stedman from shorthand) he habitually considered himself 'in the treble view, of a Pastor, a Tutor, and a Student'; as pastor he devoted every afternoon from 2 to 6 to visiting members of the congregation, especially 'servants, young people, children, and those under serious impressions', and to catechizing ('Correspondence', 5.273, 281). He encouraged the young men to form religious associations. He preached twice on Sundays and administered the Lord's supper once a month, reviewing his activities in his diary each sacrament day. He also preached in surrounding villages to outlying members of his congregation. From 1741 he had four elders (including Orton) and six deacons to help him with administration and pastoral visits. He kept a close eye on the numbers at Castle Hill: on 13 May 1741 he told Watts that the congregation (or church attenders) totalled about 800, and the church members about 240, of whom about 180 had been admitted since he came; in December 1742 and December 1743 he reported a further increase in church membership, but in 1749 the congregation had fallen by 500 since 1741, partly through defection to the Moravians, though he was hopeful of new members. He was also active outside his own church, preaching for ministers in nearby towns and often taking part in ordinations. Early in 1741 he helped form an association of Northamptonshire ministers. Every summer he travelled to visit ministerial and other friends and former pupils, often to London, but also in different years to East Anglia and the south-west, and on these journeys he was much in demand as a preacher, however exhausted he found himself. At the beginning of 1744 he recorded having preached over 140 sermons the previous year, more than ever before. He continued to refuse invitations from prominent churches to be their minister, for example Princes Street, Westminster (Calamy's church), in 1733. 
Doddridge's sermons (usually extempore) were often followed by his own hymns, based on specific biblical texts, which epitomized what the congregation had just heard. In his lectures on preaching (first published 1804) for his ministerial students in the academy he emphasized that the preacher should avoid topics such as the doctrines of natural religion and the evidences of Christianity, and concentrate on the covenant of grace, the operations of the Spirit, and the love of Christ. This emphasis is apparent in his published collections of sermons preached at Northampton, which include 'Sermons on the Religious Education of Children' (1732), 'Sermons to Young Persons' (1735), 'Ten Sermons on the Power and Grace of Christ' (1736), and 'Practical Discourses on Regeneration' (1741). He also published several separate sermons for ordinations, funerals, and public occasions. 
Doddridge was brought up by Clark and Jennings to deplore the movement among orthodox dissenters to demand subscription to the doctrine of the Trinity, and he frequently spoke disparagingly in his letters of orthodoxy and bigotry. Clark was therefore surprised and disappointed when Doddridge denied his pulpit to the Arian James Foster in 1737: 'we cant be too careful not to give any Countenance to that narrow Spirit, which has done so much Mischief in the Christian Church' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 480). Doddridge's usual spirit was anything but narrow; his ecumenical evangelicalism caused concern and embarrassment to many dissenters, including Watts and the trustees who administered William Coward's fund. In the late 1730s he took a keen interest in the activities of the Moravians, corresponding with James Hutton, though after meeting their leader, Count Zinzendorf, in 1741 he began to have doubts. He was welcoming to the Methodists: in July 1743 he preached at George Whitefield's London Tabernacle, and in October Whitefield reciprocated at Northampton; John Wesley visited him in September 1745, and at his request took his place in expounding scripture to his students; he dedicated 'Christ's Invitation to Thirsty Souls' to James Hervey (1748), with a preface stressing that though they disagreed about conformity and nonconformity, they preached the same doctrine; and his sermon entitled 'Christian Candour and Unanimity' (1750) was inscribed in adulatory terms to the countess of Huntingdon. 
As a young minister Doddridge had for some time been looking for a wife. In the summer of 1730 he found her. She was Mercy ['see 'Doddridge, Mercy (1709-1790)], daughter of Richard Maris, a baker and maltster of Worcester, and his second wife, Elizabeth Brindley, who was then living at Upton upon Severn, the home of her mother's half-brother, Ebenezer Hankins, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Avenant. Doddridge met Mercy at the house of her great-aunt in Coventry in July 1730, and they were married at Upton on 22 December. Their income at first consisted of about $120 p.a. ($70 from the church, $30 from the academy, and $20 from the dissenting funds), but Doddridge had hopes of an income of $56 p.a. from land in Hounslow and ground rent in London, which he inherited in 1743. A full and delightful picture of their married life emerges from the playful and passionate letters they exchanged when he was on his regular tours or she was away at Bath for her health (September 1742 to April 1743). They had nine children. The first, Elizabeth or Tetsey (1731-1736), died just before her fifth birthday; Doddridge preached her funeral sermon under the title 'Submission to Divine Providence' (1737), but he found such submission very hard, and rebuked himself in his diary for doting on her. Their four children who survived to adulthood were Mary or Polly (1733-1799), who married John Humphreys of Tewkesbury; Mercy (1734-1809); Philip (1735-1785); and Anna Cecilia or Caelia (1737-1811). Mercy Doddridge had several miscarriages and gave birth to four other children who died as infants: Samuel (1739-1740), named after Clark; Sarah and Jane, twins who lived for two days (1746); and William (1748), who lived for six. 
In January 1730 Doddridge set up his academy in his house in Marefair, Northampton; in 1740, in order to accommodate increasing numbers, he moved it to a substantial house in Sheep Street, rented from the earl of Halifax. A great deal of information about the academy survives in various forms: letters about principles and organization and the problems of individual students, and diary entries about teaching preparation; his description of his teaching methods in 'Some account of the life and character of the Rev. Thomas Steffe', prefixed in 1742 to the 'Sermons' of Steffe, a former student who died in 1740; 'Constitutions orders & rules relating to the academy at Northampton', agreed between tutors and students in 1743 (Deacon, appx 9); the idealized portrait of the academy of Euphranor in 'Dialogues Concerning Education' (1745-8) by his friend David Fordyce, the Aberdeen moral philosopher; his posthumously published 'Course of Lectures on the Principal Subjects in Pneumatology, Ethics, and Divinity' (1763) and 'Lectures on Preaching' (1804); and the biographies of Orton and Kippis. Doddridge originally wanted to take students for the ministry only, but he was roundly rebuked for this in a letter of 9 December 1732 by his ministerial friend David Jennings, his former tutor's younger brother: 'The Support of our Interest comes from the Layity, and they will not be obliged to bring up all their sons ministers or Dunces' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 382). In November 1733 he was prosecuted at the instigation of the chancellor of the diocese of Lincoln, George Reynolds, son of the bishop of Lincoln, Richard Reynolds, for teaching without an episcopal licence. He sought legal advice with the help of his Northampton patron Lord Halifax and prominent London dissenters, and was supported in his refusal to take out a licence by Sir Robert Walpole and the attorney-general. He told his wife on 31 January 1734, 'The Judges [in Westminster Hall] order'd a prohibition to be issued which secures me from all further Trouble' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 400), and Reynolds failed in his attempt to challenge the prohibition in June. This case, of great importance for the cause of dissenting education, may have helped recruitment to the academy. 
According to Orton, in his twenty-two years as tutor Doddridge educated over 200 students, of whom 120 became ministers (Orton, 'Memoirs', 120). At a high point in July 1737 he had forty-four students; the numbers dropped in later years, but he was confident of their quality: he told the Connecticut minister Daniel Wadsworth in an important letter of 6 March 1741, 'I have at present a greater proportion of pious & ingenious Youths under my care than I ever before had' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 663). The students paid $16 p.a. for board ($14 if they were assisted by one of the dissenting funds), and $4 for tuition; they also paid a guinea ($1 1's'.) for a closet (or small study), another for the library, and another towards the cost of the scientific apparatus, and they brought their own sheets and paid for their own candles and laundry. 
As a tutor Doddridge owed the basic framework of his course to Jennings, but he considerably enlarged its content. Among his surviving books and manuscripts in Dr Williams's Library are his annotated copies of Jennings's text books, 'Logica' (1721) and 'Miscellanea' (1721), and Jennings's interleaved divinity lectures, 'THEOLOGIA'. His own lectures were in continuous process of revision and expansion. He provided an invaluable summary for Wadsworth: 'Most of the Lectures I read are such as I myself draw up, specially in Algebra; Jewish Antiquities; Pneumatology, Ethicks, Divinity, & the Manner of Preaching, & the Pastoral care in its Several branches.' He also lectured on texts such as Watts's 'Logick', Keill's 'Anatomy', Desaguliers's 'Philosophy', Buddeus's 'Compendium historiae philosophicae', and Lampe's 'Ecclesiastical History', 'besides Severall Miscellaneous Lectures on other Subjects the Number of which I shall be continually increasing. I have also every Morning an Exposition of a Chapter of the 'Old Testament' and in the Evening in the 'New' they are reading the Chapter from the Original. I also give them once a week critical notes on the 'N: T' which they transcribe as they do my other MSS Lectures generally in short hand, which I teach them as soon as they come under my care. (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 663)' The course lasted four years, with a fifth year for ministerial students. All students were required to have a reasonable standard of Latin and Greek on arrival, and they continued the study of classical literature for the first two years. They began Hebrew in the first year. Kippis queried Orton's statements that they were taught natural and civil history, civil law, mythology, and English history, but they were in agreement that the lectures on pneumatology, ethics, and divinity formed the most important part of the course (manuscript copies survive at Dr Williams's Library, Harris Manchester College, Oxford, and Doddridge and Commercial Street United Reformed Church, Northampton). The 230 lectures in ten parts begin with the faculties of the human mind, continue with natural religion (the being of God, the nature of moral virtue, and the immortality of the soul), then turn to the evidences for revelation, and conclude with Christian doctrine. Doddridge used an idiosyncratic structure derived from Jennings: 'axioms, definitions, propositions, lemmata, demonstrations, corollaries, and scholia, just in the method which mathematicians use' ('Account of Steffe', 'Works', 4.253n.). Watts had criticized this aspect of Jennings's course when he read Doddridge's 'Account of Mr Jennings's Method', but Doddridge was certain of its value: 'It is with the humblest Deference to the vastly superior judgement of Dr Watts that I still think Mr Jennings's Method of Treating Logical & Ethical subjects of all others the most proper for Academical Lectures' (DWL, MS 24.180.3). 
In practice the lectures must have been much more exciting than they at first appear on paper. Doddridge's method clearly illustrated his principle of free enquiry: he assembled from various authors arguments for and against a particular position, discussed their merits, and indicated his own position; the students followed up the references in the library, and at the next lecture were questioned on their reading and conclusions. He introduced them to a very wide and heterogeneous group of philosophical and theological authors, ranging from dissenters and churchmen to deists and freethinkers. In his treatment of Christian doctrine, according to Kippis, 'though he stated and maintained his own opinions, which in a considerable degree were Calvinistical, he never assumed the character of a dogmatist.... The students were left to judge for themselves; and they did judge for themselves, with his perfect concurrence and approbation. (Kippis, 280)' The remarkable library which made this wide reading possible contained several thousand volumes, many presented to the library by Doddridge's friends, some bought by him with the guinea of each new student, and inscribed 'In Usum Academiae' with the date and the donor's name. They also had access to his own collection. Kippis warmly remembered Doddridge lecturing on the use of the library, going over the shelves in order and giving the character of each book and author. (About 200 of the academy books and about 500 of his own survive in Dr Williams's Library, brought together by G. F. Nuttall.) 
Doddridge could not sustain unaided the burden of the academy and church, his writing, his correspondence, and his engagements outside Northampton, so he employed a succession of assistants from among his former students to help him with teaching: Orton, Thomas Brabant, James Robertson, and Samuel Clark, the son of his early mentor. Students who went on to make their mark as ministers, educators, or men of letters included, in addition to these, Risdon Darracott, Benjamin Fawcett, Fordyce, Kippis, John Aikin, and William Rose. The academy attracted not only English dissenters but Scottish Presbyterians, members of the Church of England (Steffe, the son of a clergyman, became a dissenting minister), and some students from the Netherlands. 
Doddridge's status as one of the foremost educators in England was widely recognized: he received the degree of DD from Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1736 with the support of Fordyce and Thomas Blackwell, and from King's College, Aberdeen, the following year; he was consulted in January 1744 by Richard Newton, principal of Hertford College, Oxford, who was grateful for his summary of his methods in the life of Steffe; he was asked by John Wesley for help with 'A Christian Library', and on 18 June 1746 he sent Wesley a long and important letter of suggestions (based on his 'Lectures on Preaching'), characteristically emphasizing that 'a young minister should know the chief strength of error' ('Correspondence', 4.484-95). 
Doddridge's publishing career began in February 1728, when he was asked to review books for the 'Present State of the Republick of Letters'; he offered to review Isaac Newton's 'Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended' and Francis Hutcheson's 'Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and Affections'. A lengthy abstract of Newton appeared in the journal in April 1728 (pp. 253-352). It is not possible to determine which reviews he wrote (they were all anonymous), but Kippis refers to 'papers' in the plural (Kippis, 292). In 1742-3 he published 'An Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Intitled, Christianity not Founded on Argument', in the form of three letters to the anonymous author Henry Dodwell, a freethinker masquerading as a Methodist. Doddridge had long been interested in the attacks by freethinking writers on natural and revealed religion and in the importance of mounting a rational defence of Christianity. His copies of several freethinking works survive in Dr Williams's Library, notably Toland's 'Letters to Serena' (1704) and 'A Collection of Several Pieces' (2 vols., 1726, with a record of the names of students among whom these circulated in 1733-5, including Aikin and Orton), Collins's 'The Scheme of Literal Prophecy Considered' (1727), and Tindal's 'Christianity as Old as the Creation' (1732, annotated in shorthand). He recommended in his 'Answer' to Dodwell his own sermons on the evidences of Christianity (the last three of 'Ten Sermons', 1736), and pointed out that in several dissenting academies, 'to my certain knowledge, the rational evidences of natural and revealed religion, with such a view of the objections against both, are as regularly, and as methodically taught, as logic or geometry' ('Works', 1.490, 499). This material forms parts 5 and 6 of 'A Course of Lectures'. 
Doddridge's most influential publications in his lifetime were 'The Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul' (1745), 'Some Remarkable Passages in the Life of the Honourable Col. James Gardiner' (1747), and 'The Family Expositor' (1739-56). The subtitle of 'The Rise and Progress' indicates that it is 'a Course of Serious and Practical Addresses, suited to Persons of every Character and Circumstance: with a Devout Meditation or Prayer added to each Chapter'. The dedication to Watts describes it as 'a book, which owes its existence to your request, its copiousness to your plan, and much of its perspicuity to your review' ('Works', 1.211). Watts had originally envisaged 'a small Book for the Poor, like Baxters 'Call to the Unconverted'', and he did his best, after trying out the manuscript on his servants, to make Doddridge 'reduce the Language into easier Words and plainer Periods' (10 April 1744, Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 963). Nevertheless Watts was certain of its usefulness: 'I am not ashamed, by what I have read, to recommend it as the best treatise on practical religion which is to be found in our language' (13 Sept 1744, 'Correspondence', 4.356-7). Doddridge partly attributed Dr James Stonhouse's conversion to it. Both this work and the next were widely distributed and translated into Dutch, French, and German. The 'Life of Gardiner', an exemplary biography and conversion narrative of the close friend whom Doddridge regarded as a 'Christian hero' ('Works', 4.104), had the dual aim of persuading the doubting reader that Gardiner's experiences were not the product of enthusiasm and the devout reader that religious rapture must have a rational basis, and as a result it had a mixed reception from his friends. He was attacked in an anonymous 'Letter to the Reverend Dr. Doddridge' (1747, possibly by William Wishart) for suggesting, after criticizing Gardiner's excessive doctrinal zeal, that ministers of the established churches of England and Scotland subscribed to formularies that they did not believe. Orton thought he did not reply because of the delicacy of the issue of subscription. 

'The Family Expositor, or, A Paraphrase and Version of the New Testament', the longest of Doddridge's works and the one to which he attached most importance, had its origin in his habit of expounding the 'New Testament' in the evening to his students, though he had told Samuel Clark as early as 1724 that he was drawing up 'but only for my own use, a sort of analytical scheme of the contents of the epistles' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 149). The 'Expositor' was arranged in four parts: the Authorized Version in the margin; his own version, in italics, interwoven with his paraphrase; notes to the text; and the improvement (suggested prayer and meditation) at the end of each section (usually part of a chapter). The paraphrase and improvements unfortunately illustrate his reluctance to check his own fluency. He wrote the work in shorthand and then transcribed it for the press, the process taking much longer than he intended even though he worked on it daily. Volumes 1 to 3 (1739-48) appeared in his lifetime; volumes 4 to 6 (1753-6) were edited by Orton, who transcribed part of the sixth volume with help from some of Doddridge's students. According to a letter in the 'Monthly Repository', much of the introductory material in the fifth volume was written by Sir Philip Furneaux and others ('Monthly Repository', 13, 1818, 734-5). In the preface to volume 1, dedicated to the princess of Wales, Doddridge explained that his aim was 'chiefly to promote 'family religion'' and that he wrote for those without a learned education who did not have access to commentators ('Works', 6.9). The lengthy lists of subscribers prefacing volumes 1, 4, and 5, about 2800 in all, indicate a very wide readership, among members of the established church as well as dissenters, and among the aristocracy (many of them women) as well as academics and ministers. It had reached its eighth English edition by 1799. 
Doddridge also edited the works of others and gave literary help to his friends. For example, he made an abstract of the second volume of Warburton's 'Divine Legation' and corrected Whitefield's 'Journals' and Fordyce's 'Dialogues' at their authors' request, wrote a prefatory letter to Joseph Williams's 'Abridgment of Mr. David Brainerd's Journal' (1748), edited Robert Leighton's 'Expository Works' (1748), and as Watts's literary executor together with David Jennings edited Watts's posthumous 'The Improvement of the Mind', part 2 (1751) and his 'Works' (6 vols., 1753). 
Until a few months before his death Doddridge continued to do all he could to further the cause of protestant dissent and evangelical Christianity at home and abroad. Anxious letters from his friends urged him to slow down; after his recovery from a serious illness in early 1745, his friend the London minister John Barker warned him, 'may not a Man be intemperate in Labour as well as in liquors?' (Nuttall, 'Calendar', no. 1048). His additional labours in Northampton included starting a charity school in 1738, founding the county infirmary together with Stonhouse in 1743-4, and raising a volunteer force, together with Halifax, during the Jacobite rising of 1745. He was an active member of the Northampton Philosophical Society, founded in 1743, and supported inoculation against smallpox. 
Outside Northampton, Doddridge became widely regarded as Watts's heir as the leading representative of the dissenting interest. Watts wrote a recommendation for him to David Longueville, minister of the English church at Amsterdam, as a preface to the Dutch translation (1746) of 'Practical Discourses on Regeneration', in which he stated: 'if there were any Man, to whom Providence would permit me to commit a second Part of my Life and Usefulness in the Church of 'Christ', Dr. 'Doddridge' should be the Man' (Orton, 'Memoirs', 150). Doddridge had friendly meetings with the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Herring, in the summers of 1748, 1749, and 1751, at the first of which he discussed the possibility of comprehending dissenters in the Church of England. In the spring of 1751 he intervened unsuccessfully with the bishop of London, Thomas Sherlock, over the case of the harassment of the Presbyterian minister Samuel Davies in Virginia. He took a keen interest in the development of New Jersey College, later Princeton, evident in letters to him from the president, Aaron Burr, from 1748 to 1750. In a sermon preached at a meeting of ministers in Kettering in 1741, 'The Evil and Danger of Neglecting the Souls of Men', he had asked 'Whether something might not be done, in most of our congregations, towards assisting in the propagation of christianity abroad, and spreading it in some of the darker parts of our own land?' ('Works', 2.232), and in April 1751 he was still trying to promote missionary activity among the American Indians. Unsurprisingly, his correspondence became increasingly demanding, and though he sometimes coped by dictating his letters to his students, Kippis among them, he had to leave many unanswered. 
From August 1750 Doddridge suffered from a violent cough, which became worse when he went to St Albans to preach Clark's funeral sermon in December, and badly affected him on his annual travels in June 1751. In July he set out with his wife from Northampton for the last time, leaving the younger Clark in charge of the congregation and academy, and staying for a month with Orton in Shrewsbury. In August it became apparent that he was dying. His doctors sent him to the Hot Wells at Bristol, and then advised that if he were to have any chance of survival he should go to Lisbon for the winter. His many friends, including the countess of Huntingdon, his congregation, and the Coward trustees, raised $300 for the fruitless journey. The Doddridges sailed from Falmouth on 30 September, reaching Lisbon on 13 October; he died just outside the city on 26 October, aged forty-nine. When his body was opened his lungs were found to be heavily ulcerated. He was buried in the cemetery of the British Factory. A monument with an inscription by Gilbert West was erected in Castle Hill church, but with an error in his age at death. 
According to Kippis Doddridge was tall and thin, though his portraits show him plump-faced; in character he was sociable, open, and affectionate. He had an extraordinary capacity for work and for dividing his time between his ministerial, educational, and literary activities -- as can be seen from the detailed 'schemes of business', meditations, and reflections recorded in his diaries from 1729 to 1751 ('Correspondence', vol. 5). Kippis, who admired him greatly and inscribed his biography 'to the memory of my benefactor, my tutor, my friend, and my father', thought him ostentatious in describing his many commitments and too fond of applause (Kippis, 308). Doddridge was vain of his standing in the intellectual and social worlds, seen in his haughty reaction when the University of Glasgow would not award Clark the degree of DD on his testimony alone. More significant was the charge that he was a trimmer, made by those who were unsympathetic to his lifelong attempt as a moderate Baxterian Calvinist and opponent of subscription to steer between the extremes of old Calvinist orthodoxy and new rational dissent. Both Orton and Kippis strongly defended him against the charge. According to Orton: 'He used to take Comfort in this, that he was no worse treated, than those four excellent 'Divines', whose Writings, above all others, he admired, the Arch-bishops 'Leighton' and 'Tillotson', Mr. 'Baxter' and Dr. 'Watts'' (Orton, 'Memoirs', 257). Kippis acutely pointed out that the rational dissenters 'could not easily persuade themselves that a man of such abilities, and general liberality of mind, could entertain very different opinions from their own; and they wished to have him rank more explicitly among them' (Kippis, 307). 
In his will Doddridge left his manuscripts to Orton, and his library (except for 100 books) to the Coward trustees in perpetuity for the use of the academy; he hoped that Caleb Ashworth, minister at Daventry, would take on the academy (in place of his original choice of Orton, who had left to become minister at Shrewsbury). His most important posthumous publications, in addition to volumes 4 to 6 of 'The Family Expositor', were his 'Hymns', his 'Course of Lectures', and his 'Lectures on Preaching'. He had awkwardly drawn attention to his unpublished hymns by describing Gardiner's delight in them ('Works', 4.68, 92-4). Orton edited 'Hymns Founded on Various Texts in the Holy Scriptures' (1755, corrected 1776); a few have long been popular, notably 'O God of Jacob', 'O happy day', 'Hark the glad sound!', and 'Ye servants of the Lord' (nos. 4, 23, 203, 210). There were several editions of 'A Course of Lectures': by Clark (1763; repr. 1776), Kippis (1794; repr. 1799), and Edward Williams in volumes 4 and 5 (1803-4) of his and Edward Parsons's edition of the 'Works'; the editions of Kippis and Williams have a large number of updated references. The lectures, used as textbooks in several academies, were described by Williams as 'the most complete syllabus of controversial theology, in the largest sense of the term, ever published in the English language' ('Works', 4.282). The 'Lectures on Preaching', to which Doddridge attached great importance, were published in volume 5 of the 'Works' following the divinity lectures (as he had requested in his will) and separately in 1821. In addition to the 'Works' (10 vols., 1802-5), the most important addition to the corpus was 'The Correspondence and Diary' edited by his descendant John Doddridge Humphreys (5 vols., 1829-31), though Humphreys was a very cavalier editor, even by nineteenth-century standards. His scholarly fortunes have been transformed following the bicentenary of his death in 1951 thanks to the important work of G. F. Nuttall. 


@@@@@


doc= 7747


Dodds, James (1813-1874), public lecturer and poet, was born on 6 February 1813 at Softlaw, near Kelso, Roxburghshire, the illegitimate son of Christian Dodds. James was brought up by his grandfather, a member of the Secession church, for whose humble, pious, and proselytizing character he had a lifelong admiration. From his earliest years he showed great abilities, a very impulsive and imaginative nature, and a daring, and sometimes adventurous, spirit. He was enabled through the sponsorship of friends to attend the University of Edinburgh, where he became well known among his companions for his remarkable powers of speech. He was, in succession, an actor in an itinerant theatrical company; schoolmaster at Sandyknowe; apprentice for five years to a Melrose lawyer, who seems to have experimented how to extract from a clerk the largest amount of work for the smallest amount of pay; then, in 1841, a lawyer's clerk in Edinburgh. 
In Edinburgh Dodds served in the office of a firm of which John Hunter, writer to the signet, a connection of Lord Jeffrey, and well known in the literary circles of Edinburgh, was a member. Mr Hunter treated Dodds as a friend, and introduced him to many literary men. Thomas Carlyle, to whom he wrote regularly, gave him advice about his professional and artistic decisions. This friendship continued for many years, and when, in 1846, Dodds moved to London to become a parliamentary solicitor, he regularly visited Carlyle. From 1845 to 1847 he wrote the 'Lays of the covenanters'. These historical and biographical sketches of the victims of seventeenth-century religious persecutions appeared in different journals in Edinburgh, and were gathered into a volume in 1880. Dodds was also very close to Leigh Hunt whom he met in London. Hunt being constantly in pecuniary and other difficulties found in Dodds a most valuable friend. 'More than once he took the management of his affairs, giving him legal advice, conferring with his creditors, and arranging about the payment or partial payment of his debts' (Dodds, 80). 
In the 1850s Dodds delivered many lectures on the subject of the Scottish covenanters; usually these were given in Scottish towns, but occasionally to metropolitan audiences; one of his lectures, in which he combined prose and poetry, lays and lecture, was given to an enthusiastic London assemblage of 3000 people. These lectures were composed with scrupulous historical care. When they came to be published in 1861 as 'The Fifty Years' Struggle of the Covenanters, 1638-1688', renewed pains were taken to make sure of accuracy. During this period, he also helped to secure the erection of the Wallace monument in Stirling. It was his intention to give another series of lectures on the Scottish Reformation, but of these only two were written. His natural eloquence, and his way of throwing his soul into the delivery, gave him great popularity and power as a lecturer. A lecture on Thomas Chalmers, for whom he had an intense admiration, developed into a volume of great interest. Dodds died of heart disease at Gordon Street, Lochee, Dundee, on 12 September 1874, and was survived by his widow, Janet, 'nee' Pringle. 


@@@@@


doc= 7748


Dodds, James (1812-1885), Free Church of Scotland minister and author, was born at Hitchell Yett, Cummertrees, near Annan, Dumfriesshire, on 13 August 1812, the eldest son of William Dodds and his wife, Helen Irving, a relative of Edward Irving. He was educated at parish schools in Annan and Ruthwell, before attending the University of Edinburgh, where he gained the highest distinction in the class of Professor John Wilson. For a brief time he was tutor in the family of Henry Duncan, the well-known minister of Ruthwell. After studying for the ministry in the Church of Scotland, Dodds was licensed to preach in 1839 and assisted at Inveresk, Musselburgh, before his appointment to Humbie, East Lothian, in 1841. In 1843, after he had joined the Free Church, he was called to Dunbar, where he remained for the rest of his life. On 3 February 1843 he married Duncan's only daughter, Barbara Anne. 
Dodds devoted his leisure time to literary pursuits: he was a frequent contributor to various periodicals, including the 'Christian Treasury', 'Sunday at Home', and 'Leisure Hour', and was an early editor of the 'Dumfries and Galloway Courier', which belonged to his father-in-law. In 1846 he published 'A Century of Scottish Church History', an outline of Scottish religious history from the Secession of 1733 until the Disruption in 1843. He wrote a biographical sketch of his friend Patrick Fairbairn, which was published in the latter's 'Pastoral Theology' in 1875, as well as a memoir of the Revd Thomas Rosie, entitled 'Coast Missions' (1862). His taste for biography was further indulged in 'Famous Men of Dumfriesshire' (n.d.), a collection of sketches of well-known figures from his native region. He also wrote a memoir of his cousin James Dodds, which was published with the latter's 'Lays of the Covenanters' in 1880, and a novel about the Disruption, 'Jeannie Wilson, the Lily of Lammermoor' (1876). The 'Dictionary of National Biography' claimed that Dodds was a regular correspondent of Thomas Carlyle, another native of Dumfriesshire, but this contention is not borne out by the sole letter addressed to him in Carlyle's collected letters. Dodds died on 3 September 1885 at Dunbar. 


@@@@@


doc= 7749


Dodgson, Charles Lutwidge (1832-1898), author, mathematician, and photographer, was born at Daresbury parsonage, Cheshire, on 27 January 1832, the eldest son and third of eleven children of Charles Dodgson (1800-1868), curate of the parish, later rector of Croft-on-Tees, Yorkshire, examining chaplain to the bishop of Ripon, archdeacon of Richmond, and canon of Ripon Cathedral, and his wife and first cousin, Frances Jane, 'nee' Lutwidge (1803-1851). 
For eleven years the Dodgsons lived in 'complete seclusion from the world', during which time Charles's precocity and uncommon nature emerged: he 'invented strange diversions for himself', made pets of 'odd and unlikely animals', and implored his father to explain the meaning of logarithms (Collingwood, 11). In later years Dodgson reminisced about: '
An island-farm -- broad seas of corn... 

The happy spot where I was born. 
('Faces in the Fire')' In 1843 Peel, the prime minister, appointed the elder Dodgson to the more lucrative living at Croft-on-Tees, and at this bustling spa and hunting centre the young Dodgson grew and blossomed. At thirteen he inaugurated a series of family magazines and produced single-handedly the first one, 'Useful and Instructive Poetry', containing fifteen verses, a prose piece, and numerous drawings, altogether a remarkably gifted performance, adumbrating the infectious wit and literary ingenuity that would later bring him fame. He went on to edit and compose most of the seven later family magazines. He wrote plays for a marionette theatre that the family and a local carpenter built; he dressed up in a brown wig and white gown and as Aladdin nimbly performed conjuring tricks. 
Dodgson was educated at home by his parents until he was twelve; then he entered Richmond School, 10 miles from home, and two years later, Rugby, where he spent almost four unhappy years. At both schools he distinguished himself and took numerous prizes. In 1851 he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, where his father had taken a double first. His mother's death, a few days after he arrived at university, affected Dodgson deeply and is thought by some to have inhibited his emotional growth. He none the less did well in his studies, won a Boulter scholarship, and with his BA (1854) took first-class honours in mathematics and a second class in classics. 
In 1852 E. B. Pusey nominated Dodgson for a studentship (life fellowship) of Christ Church and in 1855 he became mathematical lecturer there. Christ Church dons were at that time required to take clerical orders and remain unmarried. Dodgson was ordained deacon on 22 December 1861, but never took priest's orders. His lifelong stammer and a deaf right ear may have contributed to that decision, but it is more likely that he did not see eye to eye with church doctrine. Influenced by the works of S. T. Coleridge and F. D. Maurice, whom he knew and admired, Dodgson veered from his father's high-church and ritualist faith to embrace the less pretentious broad church. He was genuinely devout, relying on inner instinct perhaps more than external teachings as a basis for divine truth; he rejected eternal punishment as a doctrinal certainty; with an ecumenical outlook, he embraced the whole of humanity, even those who had never heard of Christ, as children of God; and he was convinced that all sinners could find salvation through repentance. 
In spite of his infirmities, Dodgson preached from various pulpits, impressing congregations with his religious fervour. He also lectured away from his college, to children and older students, particularly at girls' schools and colleges, on mathematics and logic. He often gave private tuition to youngsters as well, and observers could not help noticing the stream of young females arriving at Christ Church and mounting Tom Quad staircase 7 to be taught and photographed by Mr Dodgson. Remarkably, Christ Church actually allowed him to break through the roof above his rooms and build a glasshouse where he could photograph his protegees in daylight. 
Dodgson wrote and published voluminously, mathematical and literary works and a good deal else. From his early days as lecturer he brought out mathematical broadsheets to help students meet Oxford's requirements. Opinions of him as a lecturer were divided: ''unwilling men' found him a very uninspiring lecturer', a niece of his wrote, 'dull as ditchwater' (V. Dodgson). One of his students recalled, however, that 'his methods of explaining the elements of Euclid... [were] extremely lucid, so that the least intelligent of us could grasp at any rate 'the Pons Asinorum'' (Pearson). A sixth-form student at the Oxford High School for Girls remembered that he: 'compelled me to that independence of thought I had never before tried to exercise.... gradually under his stimulating tuition I felt myself able... to judge for myself, to select, and... to reject.... Mr Dodgson at the same time bestowed on me another gift.... He gave me a sense of my own personal dignity. He was so punctilious, so courteous, so considerate, so scrupulous not to embarrass or offend, that he made me feel that I counted. (Rowell)' Dodgson worked assiduously at his mathematics. His first book appeared in 1860, when he was twenty-eight: 'A syllabus of plane algebraical geometry, systematically arranged, with formal definitions, postulates, and axioms', a 154-page effort to translate some of Euclid into algebraical terms and to claim for analytical geometry a greater role in developing reason and logical thinking than was generally conceded. He went on to publish major works which have earned fresh analysis and new appreciation a century and more after he died. Dodgson revered Euclid. Euclid dominated his professional work, and he devised fresh approaches to the master, refusing to tamper with his texts, since he insisted that Euclid had to be seen plain. Instead, he sought to clarify difficulties and to make Euclid more accessible to modern minds. In 'Euclid and his Modern Rivals' (1879), engagingly built as a four-act comedy and a Platonic dialogue enhanced by Dodgson's trump card, his whimsy, he presented a forceful argument against all who had meddled with Euclid's text. From that point on esoteric work followed esoteric work, virtually always embellished by his hallmark, that characteristic Dodgsonian wit; even a century later, when professional mathematicians see a reference to some of the examples that Dodgson used to illustrate his arguments -- for instance 'What the tortoise said to Achilles' or 'The barber-shop paradox' -- they chuckle. Some try to imitate his method of leavening serious labours with lively jests, but they invariably lack his remarkable inspiration. In 'Condensation of Determinants' (1866), according to one specialist, it 'is possible that Dodgson produced the first proof in print of... [a] fundamental theorem on rank' (F. Abeles, 'Determinants and linear systems: Charles L. Dodgson's view', 'British Journal for the History of Science', 19, 1986, 331-5); another writes of 'Dodgson's startling contribution to linear algebra and to the theory of determinants' (Seneta). Other important works included 'The Fifth Book of Euclid Treated Algebraically' (1868), 'Euclid, Book V' (1874), 'Euclid, Books I, II' (1875), and 'Curiosa mathematica' (3 pts, 1888-99). 
From 1854 onwards, when two of his poems appeared in the 'Oxonian Advertiser', Dodgson produced a steady flow of creative works. Poems and prose pieces, games, and puzzles appeared in the 'Whitby Gazette', the 'Comic Times', 'The Train', 'College Rhymes', 'Temple Bar', Dickens's 'All the Year Round', 'Punch', 'Fun', 'Vanity Fair', the 'Educational Times', the 'Monthly Packet', 'Aunt Judy's Magazine', and 'The Lady'. For his poem 'Solitude' ('The Train', March 1856), he created his famous pseudonym by inverting 'Charles' and his metronymic, 'Lutwidge', translating them first into Latin and then back into English. 
Dodgson's elevation from undergraduate to don coincided with the arrival at Christ Church of a new dean, Henry George Liddell, and his family, an event that only briefly preceded Dodgson's purchase, on 18 March 1856, of a camera and lens to allow him to take up photography. It was through photography that, on 25 April 1856, he first became acquainted with the Liddells' three daughters, including the middle one, Alice Liddell ['see 'Hargreaves, Alice Pleasance], not quite four years old, when he and a friend went over to the deanery to photograph Christ Church Cathedral. 'The three little girls were in the garden most of the time, and we became excellent friends,' Dodgson wrote; 'we tried to group them in the foreground of the picture, but they were not patient sitters' ('Diaries', 83). Thus began one of the most exceptional friendships, indeed love affairs, of all time. 
We can only imagine the exhilaration that Dodgson experienced at the coalescence of these events, all three occurring within a mere six-month period, but surely they worked together to help generate the instantaneous fulguration that we know as 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland'. The tale flashed into Dodgson's mind on 4 July 1862, on that memorable river picnic when he responded to the girls' eager plea for 'a story'. 
Dodgson's visits to the deanery became frequent, his emotional attachment to Alice grew and ripened, and for some seven years he lived the charmed life of a cherished friend and sometimes consort to the beautiful, impetuous child. In late June 1863, however, some event that he recorded on a page in his diary, but which a Dodgson heir later razored out, caused a breach in the relationship, and Dodgson was 'sent to Coventry'. Although he and the Liddells managed again to be civil to one another, the romance was over. Dodgson kept a formal distance from his 'ideal child friend' ('Letters', 561), and Alice went on to marry a suitor her parents judged more acceptable, Reginald Hargreaves. She lived out her life in a large, dull country house in the New Forest, where she sought to emulate her mother's social success at the Christ Church deanery. She named her third son Caryl. 
For his part, Dodgson had other strings to his bow. As a don, cleric, and successful photographer in the age when everyone sought to be photographed, he had access to the best homes and to troops of attractive children, particularly the female of the species. He doted on them, took them on outings, bought them gifts, fed them, clothed them, carried them off on railway journeys, gave them inscribed copies of his books, wrote poems for and to them, told them stories, paid for their French and art lessons, took them to the theatre and to the seaside, sat them on his knees, hugged them, kissed them, and, of course, photographed them, in all manner of poses, in a variety of dress and costume, and even 'sans habillement', as he put it (unpublished diary, 21 May 1867, BL, Add. MSS 54340-54348) -- all this with their parents' approval in that unsuspicious pre-Freudian heyday of Victorian innocence. Only after Dodgson's death, when psychoanalysts began to pry into what they imagined to have been Dodgson's subconscious, did serious suspicions arise about his motives. But if Dodgson did harbour deep unconventional desires he certainly reined them in, severely, never violating Victorian propriety, because, as a deeply, genuinely religious man, he knew that he could not endure any transgressions. Unremitting self-recriminations and dire pleas to God for help in self-improvement and control appear frequently in his diaries, signifying a troubled conscience, particularly when they occur in conjunction with his meetings with child friends. One of his poems in particular, 'Stolen Waters' (1862), an allegory written in the first person, tells the tale of a sinning youth who, in the end, manages through repentance to find salvation. 
Dodgson's repressed nature took its toll; matched with his quick mind and his genius, it made him sharp and fractious at times. But many who knew him attested to his magnanimity and to his winning, spontaneous wit. Even in carrying out the humdrum tasks of curator of senior common room (which tedious job he held for almost ten years), he introduced wit into his frequent memoranda and three reports ('Twelve Months in a Curatorship', 1884: 'at once financial, carbonaceous, aesthetic, chalybeate, literary and alcoholic'; 'Three Years in a Curatorship', 1886: 'Airs, glares and chairs'; and 'Curiosissima curatoria', 1892: 'A curatorial parting gift'). 
Dodgson harboured artistic aspirations from his youth; he enjoyed drawing, later from live models, particularly nudes. The Dodgson family magazines contain a varied sampling of his early efforts. He illustrated the story of 'Alice's Adventures under Ground', the original version of 'Alice's Adventures', which he gave Alice Liddell as a Christmas gift in 1864. Many of his letters contain sketches, and a number of stray drawings survive. The art critic John Ruskin told him, however, that his talents as an artist were severely limited (Collingwood, 102), and he knew enough to seek out professionals to illustrate his books. Still, he continued to enjoy sketching sessions, and he moved freely among artists. He was acquainted with many, including Arthur Hughes, Holman Hunt, J. E. Millais, Alexander Munro, V. Princep, D. G. Rossetti, J. Sant, C. A. Swinburne, Mrs E. M. Ward, and G. F. Watts. He lionized them and got most of them to sit for his camera. Others who sat for him included Frederick, crown prince of Denmark; Prince Leopold, youngest son of Queen Victoria; George MacDonald and his family; F. D. Maurice; Tom Taylor, the editor of 'Punch'; Tennyson and his family; Henry Taylor and his family; the famous Terry family; Charlotte M. Yonge and her mother; and Mrs Humphry Ward as bride with her sister bridesmaids. 
What Dodgson could not achieve in sketching, he did achieve in photography in those early days of the art, when sittings had to last some 45 seconds and the process of taking and developing the glass negatives was extremely difficult. He had an eye for the beauty around him and a good sense of composition, qualities amply evident in his photographs, many of which he proudly inscribed 'from the Artist'. When he first began to experiment with photography he took pictures of adults (his family, friends, and Oxford colleagues), and tried some architectural photographs, some landscapes, and still life. But in time he focused on his child friends, dressing them up in costumes -- often genuine stage costumes that he had collected and kept in a wardrobe, and sometimes costumes he borrowed from Oxford museums, including the Ashmolean. His greatest achievement with his camera was in photographing the young. Helmut Gernsheim, the historian, called his 'photographic achievements... truly astonishing' and proclaimed him 'the most outstanding photographer of children in the nineteenth century' (Gernsheim, 28). Edmund Wilson wrote in the 'New Yorker' that 'in the posing, the arrangement of background, and the instinct for facial expression... [Dodgson's photographs] show a strong sense of personality'. He finds 'a liveliness and humor in these pictures that sometimes suggest Max Beerbohm' and says that they anticipate Beerbohm's volume of drawings 'Rossetti and his Circle'. 'As for the pictures of children,' Wilson continues, 'they, too, are extremely varied and provide a... revelation of Lewis Carroll's special genius for depicting little English girls that is as brilliant in its way as 'Alice'' (E. Wilson, 'New Yorker', 13 May 1950). 
Dodgson's writing meant a great deal to him; writing was the main course by which he could do something for others, to fulfil a deep religious desire to contribute something to humanity -- it was his offering to God. After resigning his mathematical lectureship in 1881, at the age of forty-nine (he retained his studentship and resident privileges at Christ Church to the end), he devoted himself primarily to his writing. Often standing at his upright desk (he calculated that he could stand and write for ten hours a day), he turned out a myriad of works. 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland' was followed in late 1871 by its sequel, 'Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There', and in 1876 by that longest and most revered nonsense poem in English, 'The Hunting of the Snark'. While these are the works that have made Lewis Carroll a household name, his bibliography contains over 300 varied items, many of them highly specialized, even arcane, the mass characterized by facility and punctilious care. 
Dodgson sought always to provide his readers with books of the finest quality, and because of an unusual relationship with his publisher, Macmillan, he achieved exceptional results. Macmillan arranged for printing and distribution of his books in exchange for a 10 per cent commission, but Dodgson paid all costs of printing, illustrating, and advertising, retaining control and making all decisions. He was, consequently, able to suppress the first edition of 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland' in 1865 because his artist, John Tenniel, was not satisfied with the printing of the illustrations; and, dissatisfied himself for one reason or another, he disposed of an inferior edition of 'The Game of Logic' in 1886; in 1889 he condemned the entire first run of 10,000 copies of 'The Nursery 'Alice'', and in 1893 scuttled the sixtieth thousand run of 'Looking-Glass'. 
Dodgson collected his poems in three anthologies: 'Phantasmagoria and other Poems' (1869), 'Rhyme? and Reason?' (1883), and 'Three Sunsets and other Poems' (1898). His verse falls into one of three categories: the nonsense poetry for which he is world famous; his narrative verse, which is undervalued; and, least memorable, his serious poems. These last were strongly influenced by Romantic conventions and Victorian sentimentality, but are none the less important for an understanding of him because here, in fact and in symbol, he reveals his emotional travails. 
Dodgson invented and published a cascade of puzzles and games, some in verse, for what he imagined to be a world of child friends, even though many of these high-spirited exercises elude solution by mature and experienced minds. Among these efforts are: 'Castle-Croquet' (1866), 'Doublets' (1879), 'Lanrick' (1880), 'Mischmasch' (1881), 'A Tangled Tale' (1885), 'The Game of Logic' (1886), 'Circular Billiards' (1890), 'Syzygies' (1891), and 'Arithmetical Croquet' (first published 1953). 
Dodgson was an inveterate gadgeteer, collecting all manner of contrivances and trinkets, and he invented a good many himself. His own inventions included an ''in statu quo' chessboard' ('Diaries', 249) with holes into which the chess pieces could be secured when travelling; any number of card games; an early form of what was later to be known as Scrabble; a rule for finding the day of the week for any date; a means of justifying the right margins on the typewriter; a steering device for a tricycle; a new sort of postal money order; rules for reckoning postage; rules for a win in betting; rules for dividing numbers by various divisors; a cardboard scale for Christ Church common room, which, held next to a glass, insured the right amount of liquor for the price paid; a substitute for gum, 'for fastening envelopes..., mounting small things in books, etc. -- viz: paper with gum on both sides' ('Diaries', 526); a device for helping a bedridden invalid to read from a book placed sideways; and at least two ciphers. 
Three other inventions are remarkable. In 1877 Dodgson produced his 'Memoria technica', a significant improvement on Dr Richard Grey's system (1730) for memorizing dates and events, with which Dodgson must have struggled as a schoolboy. Dodgson's method assigns two consonants to each number from 0 to 9, fills in vowels to make words, and sets the words in rhymed couplets that help one remember not just dates but other facts as well. The rhymes turn the process into a game. Here is how he prods the reader to remember 1492: '
Columbus sailed the world around 

Until America was FOUND. 

' The consonants F N D represent 492; the prefix 1 is always assumed. 
In 1888 he designed, and later published, 'The Wonderland Postage-Stamp Case', with slots for different denominations of postage stamps and containing a miniature pamphlet, 'Eight or Nine Wise Words about Letter-Writing', an entertaining, tongue-in-cheek set of prescriptions and proscriptions for how to write letters. 
In 1891 he invented the 'nyctograph', a description of which he published in 'The Lady' (29 October), offering it freely to the general public. It is a small device that he used for composing and recording in the dark, while lying awake, 'a few lines, or even a few pages, without even putting the hands outside the bed-clothes'. 
Dodgson's concern with fair voting practices at a time when the franchise was being extended more and more drove him to contribute significantly to the theory of parliamentary elections. In 1873 he published his first pamphlet, 'Discussion of Procedure in Elections', intended to alter voting methods at Christ Church. He sought to replace majority principles by a system of awarding marks or points. Always keenly interested in British politics, he took his arguments beyond the university into the public forum with a number of other publications, including his pamphlet 'The Principles of Parliamentary Representation' (1884). His work on voting theory and redistribution remained significant throughout the twentieth century. It 'presents the longest connected chain of reasoning in Political Science', wrote the mathematician F. Abeles in 1970. 'Dodgson showed a grasp of ideas on the intuitive level that were not formalized until 1928'. In 1996 it was noted that 'few... [voting theorists were] capable of expressing their principles clearly and only two [succeed] -- G. C. Andrae, a Danish mathematician... and C. L. Dodgson -- trained in axiomatic reasoning' (McLean and Urken, introduction). Another twentieth-century critic deeply regretted that: 'Dodgson never completed the book that he planned to write [on voting theory].... Such were his lucidity of exposition and his mastery of the topic that it seems possible that, had he ever published it, the political history of Britain would have been significantly different. (Dummett, 5)' Dodgson devised a new system for conducting lawn tennis competitions to improve upon the rules in use, which he deemed inherently unjust: he did not think it fair that players should be knocked out of competition after only one loss. In 1883 he published four letters on the subject in the 'St James's Gazette' and a pamphlet, 'Lawn Tennis Tournaments: the True Method of Assigning Prizes'. His system, while complex, is still considered more equitable to players than current practice. 
Contrary to some myths, Dodgson was anything but a shy recluse sequestered behind college walls. He travelled frequently throughout Britain, sometimes with his cumbersome camera in tow; he was often to be seen in London theatres and art galleries, and even in corridors of power; and he hobnobbed with artists, writers, and actors. He left Britain once, accompanying his friend H. P. Liddon across Europe on a mission to Russia, where Liddon explored the possibilities of 'rapprochement' between the Eastern church and the West. He went regularly to Guildford in Surrey, where his unmarried sisters and brothers lived after their father's death in 1868, and he spent summers at the seaside, usually Eastbourne, on writing holidays. 
Dodgson was about 6 feet tall, slender, had either grey or blue eyes, wore his hair long, and 'carried himself upright, almost more than upright, as if he had swallowed a poker'. He dressed customarily in clerical black and wore a tall silk hat, but when he took Alice and her sisters out on the river, he wore white flannel trousers and a hard white straw hat (A. and C. Hargreaves, 'Alice's recollections'). He ate frugally when he ate at all, disliked tea but enjoyed a glass of wine. He had a pleasant speaking voice, but left no recording of it, and a tolerably good singing voice which he did not mind using. He sometimes talked to himself. 
Dodgson was interested in many branches of science, particularly medicine, and was a member of the Society for Psychical Research. Art and music were two of his delights; he was fond of quotations. He disliked physical sports but was known to play croquet. He went on long walks, sometimes covering 23 miles in a day. He was orderly in all things and kept extensive records. While many attested to his kind, considerate, courteous nature, he could be rude and was known suddenly to walk out of tea parties. Certainly he stomped out of theatres when he found anything on the stage irreligious or otherwise offensive. He once reprimanded the bishop of Ripon for including in a Bampton lecture an anecdote that elicited laughter. He planned but never completed a volume of Shakespeare plays especially for girls, out-Bowdlerizing Bowdler. He so resented Shakespeare's lines at the end of 'The Merchant of Venice' requiring Shylock to abandon his faith and become a Christian that he wrote to Ellen Terry, after seeing her and Henry Irving perform the play, asking her to delete the lines from future performances: 'it is... entirely horrible and revolting to... all who believe in the Gospel of Love' ('Letters', 365). He was an anti-vivisectionist and denounced blood sports. He valued his privacy and hated the limelight, jealously concealing the true identity of Lewis Carroll from strangers. He was by many accounts unselfish and generous. He helped to support his sisters and brothers, other relatives, friends, and even strangers. He was always willing to take on new students, and he was ready, though in all humility, to try to help young and old with spiritual problems. He claimed generally to be happy, but at least one observer guessed that he was a 'lonely spirit and prone to sadness' (Rowell). When he realized that his children's books would yield a modest income for the rest of his life, he asked his dean to reduce his lecturing responsibilities and his salary accordingly. 
Dodgson was constantly involved in extramural (if not worldly) affairs. Essentially conservative -- and in politics definitely so -- he none the less fought for reforms that won for him and his fellow Christ Church dons a voice in college matters. He inundated members of his college and university with frequent broadsheets and pamphlets, in prose and verse, on a multiplicity of subjects that ranged from opposing cricket pitches in University Parks to a spoof, dripping with irony, of the wooden cube that Dean Liddell had erected atop Tom Quad's Great Hall staircase to house bells removed from the cathedral. He also sent off, from his Christ Church eyrie, letters and articles to a string of periodicals, including 'The Times', the 'Pall Mall Gazette', 'Aunt Judy's Magazine', the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'St James's Gazette', 'The Observer', and 'Mind', on widely varying subjects ranging from Gladstone and cloture to vivisection and hydrophobia, and from education for the stage and an Oxford scandal to a logical paradox and the spirit of reverence on the stage. 
Dodgson's private letters, usually written in purple ink, were more than occasionally works of art; when addressed to his young friends, they were fanciful creations, self-contained microcosms of Wonderlands. In them he created puzzles, puns, and pranks; he teased, feigned, fantasized. He sent letters in verse, sometimes set down as prose to see if his correspondent would detect the hidden metres and rhymes; letters written backwards so that one has to hold them up to a looking-glass; acrostic letters, rebus letters, letters written from back to front. By his own confession, he wrote 'wheelbarrows full almost' ('Letters', 355); 'one third of my life seems to go in receiving letters', he wrote, 'and the other two-thirds in answering them' (ibid., 336); and 'I'm beginning to think that the proper definition of 'Man' is 'an animal that writes letters'' (ibid., 663). A letter register he kept for the last thirty-seven years of his life recorded that he sent and received 98,721 letters over that period. 
Late in life Dodgson published 'Sylvie and Bruno' (1889) and 'Sylvie and Bruno Concluded' (1893), two long, complicated novels depicting three realms of being. Essentially love stories, they contain some imaginative flights that sparkle, but, where Dodgson in the 'Alice' books eschewed any moral lesson, here he set himself a mission to edify and instruct, suggesting 'some thoughts that may prove... not wholly out of harmony with the graver cadences of Life' (L. Carroll, 'Preface', 'Sylvie and Bruno', 1889, xiii); his Victorian sentimentality and heavy messages become burdens. 
Dodgson's most exacting efforts of the 1890s went into a three-layered work on symbolic logic, beginning with elementary concepts and reaching ethereal, theoretical heights. He published 'Symbolic Logic: Part I, Elementary' in 1896, and when he died in 1898 he had much of the other two volumes fleshed out and almost all of the second volume set in type. His family, compelled to clear his Christ Church rooms soon after his death, disposed as best they could of the enormous quantity of his possessions, burning many seemingly unimportant papers. No doubt parts of the two advanced logic books went up in flames. But, miraculously, much of the second volume survived, along with bits of the third, and in the mid-1960s a proof of the second volume was found at All Souls, Oxford, Dodgson having sent it to another don for comment. Its publication brought Dodgson fresh professional attention and regard. 
Had Dodgson never written the 'Alice' books, he would have earned a nod or a paragraph in various specialized histories: mathematics and logic, photography, parliamentary voting systems, and games and puzzles. But the 'Alice' books have earned him a place in the firmament of the great, for they are not only acts of imaginative genius but they also revolutionized writing for children. Children's books after Carroll grew less serious, more entertaining, and sounded less like sermons and more like the voices of friends than earlier prototypes. It follows that the influence of the 'Alice' books upon children as they mature has been considerable, and it is difficult to think of a great writer in recent times who has not declared or demonstrated that influence. 
Although the wheels of an 'Alice' 'industry' did not begin to whirr fiercely until well into the twentieth century, Dodgson reaped some satisfaction at their modest record in his lifetime. Six years before he died, he was able to write to Alice herself that 'your adventures have had a marvellous success. I have now sold well over 100,000 copies' ('Letters', 561). Translations into foreign languages had already proliferated, and the 'Alice' characters were even then inspiring art and commercial enterprises. Imitations and parodies burgeoned, sequels appeared, and Dodgson gave his blessing to the manufacture of a 'Looking-Glass' biscuit tin. Poems that he never wrote were attributed to him. He did not garner a fortune by any means, and left under $5000, but he must have gleaned considerable satisfaction from the popularity of these books. 
The 'Alice' books and 'The Hunting of the Snark' have had an impact upon the English language as well, and after Shakespeare and the 'Bible' are the most frequently quoted round the world. These works grow more popular with time even as the fascination with the life of their begetter increases. Dodgson died, unmarried and celibate, on 14 January 1898, of pneumonia, in his family home, The Chestnuts, Guildford, and was buried in Guildford old cemetery, The Mount, on 19 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 7750


Dodgson, George Haydock (1811-1880), watercolour painter and illustrator, was born at 38 Castle Street, Liverpool, on 16 August 1811, the eighth of fifteen children of Pearson Dodgson, a linen draper, and his wife Hannah, 'nee' Haycock. He received what an obituarist referred to as a 'middle class education' ('The Athenaeum', 831), which included attendance at a private school in Church Lane, Liverpool, and drawing lessons from Andrew Hunt, the father of Alfred W. Hunt. From 1826 until 1831 he was apprenticed to the Liverpool surveyor Jonathan Bennison before being employed by the railway engineer George Stevenson who employed him to survey land, make specifications, and calculate the expenses of railway construction for the Board of Trade. George Dodgson was extremely conscientious; the same obituarist recalled that, to complete the plans for the Whitby and Pickering Railway in time, Dodgson and three others did not remove their clothes for two weeks 'and kept themselves awake through many nights by eating opium and drinking strong black coffee' (ibid.). His health suffered and in 1834 he abandoned engineering for art. 
After a sketching tour of Wales, Cumberland, and Yorkshire, Dodgson moved to London, living at first in Lambeth (1835-6) and subsequently Gower Street (1837-9). Later, following his marriage on 30 September 1839 to Jane Sims (1819-1908), daughter of George Sims, described as clerk of the Mercers' Company, he settled near Regent's Park, occupying 21 Mornington Place (1839-49), 18 Mornington Road (1849-61), and 1 St Mark's Crescent (1861-1877). Dodgson embarked on his new career immediately. He executed picturesque drawings of many public buildings in and around London -- St Paul's, Westminster Abbey, and Greenwich Hospital were among his subjects -- and soon found employment making drawings for eminent architects. One of these, 'Tribute to the Memory of Sir Christopher Wren', a group of Wren's principal works arranged by C. R. Cockerell, was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1838 and afterwards engraved. Plates from drawings by George Dodgson depicted the 'highly romantic and beautiful scenery' of north-eastern Yorkshire in the 'Illustrations of the Scenery on the Line of the Whitby and Pickering Railway', published in 1836 with text by Henry Belcher (p. iv). His work was also engraved on steel and wood for the 'Cambridge Almanack' (1840-47); the 'Art Union' (1851); the 'Illustrated London News' (1845-62); 'The Book of Celebrated Poems' (1854); 'The Poets of the Nineteenth Century', edited by R. E. Willmott (1857); 'Lays of the Holy Land', edited by H. Bonar (1858); and 'The Home Affections', edited by C. Mackay (1858). 'Summer Time' (exh. Society of Painters in Water Colours, 1855) was chromolithographed by George Rowney. 
From 1835 onwards Dodgson exhibited watercolour drawings of buildings, landscapes (including garden scenes, 'fetes-champetres', and, later, coastal scenes), and some interiors and subject pictures (a few of them literary) at the Society of British Artists (1835-9), the Royal Academy (1838-50), the British Institution (1841), and the Liverpool Academy (and Liverpool Society of Fine Arts), where he showed thirty-five pictures between 1841 and 1861. Most of his exhibited work, however, appeared at the watercolour societies. Forty-eight paintings were shown at the New Society of Painters in Water Colours (1842-7), of which he was elected an associate in 1842 and then a member in 1844. Having resigned from this position in 1847, he was elected an associate (1848) and subsequently a member (1852) of the Society of Painters in Water Colours where he was represented by 353 exhibits (1848-80). In addition, Dodgson contributed to the Royal Manchester Institution (1849-62) and the Royal Hibernian Academy (1852). 
George Dodgson's works attracted increasing patronage; his popularity was founded on a repertory of landscapes and coastal scenes, many of which were executed during recurrent visits to favourite locations in Yorkshire (Richmond and Whitby), Cumberland (Cockermouth), Westmorland (the Lake District), south Wales (Gower, Swansea, and the Mumbles), and Haddon Hall in Derbyshire, Knole Park in Kent, and along the Thames. He was very fond of beech trees, a favoured specimen at Knole being known as Dodgson's Beech. In all his travels, he never left Britain. Dodgson was described by a contemporary as one of a small group of 'searchers after idealized truth' ('Art Journal', 300). He exaggerated the chiaroscuro in sun and moonlit scenes (and artificially lit interiors), introduced small figures in historical costume, and often appended poetical descriptions -- from Walter Scott, Coleridge, and Longfellow, among others -- to his titles. Dodgson's atmospheric and at times visionary effects owed much to an unusual technique: he was one of the first watercolour painters to exploit a wet method, dropping spots of colour (including vermilion and emerald green) on very damp paper and then blending them together. This practice may have resulted partly from a nervous condition affecting control of the hands. 
George Dodgson died of congestion of the lungs at 28 Clifton Hill, St John's Wood, London -- to which address he had recently moved -- on 4 June 1880. The following winter the Society of Painters in Water Colours exhibited a loan collection of fifty-two of his works. His remaining pictures were sold at Christies on 25 March 1881. He had three children, Jennie (1841-1899), George Pearson (1842-1928), and Jessie (1854-1911), of whom the two youngest became artists. Examples of his works can be found in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum in London, as well as provincial public collections, including the Laing Art Gallery in Newcastle upon Tyne and the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 7751


Dodington, Bartholomew (1535/6-1595), Greek scholar, was born in Middlesex of unknown parentage. He was admitted a scholar at St John's College, Cambridge, on the Lady Margaret Beaufort foundation on 11 November 1547 and proceeded BA in 1551-2. In 1552 he was admitted a fellow of the college, on the same foundation, and in 1555 proceeded MA and signed the Marian articles imposed on the university. He was senior proctor from 1559 to 1560 and was elected a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, at about the time he left office. In 1561 he unsuccessfully solicited the interest of Sir William Cecil, principal secretary, for the vacant oratorship at Cambridge, but was in the following year elected regius professor of Greek. 
As a Johnian and a regius professor Dodington was well placed to attract the friendship of Cecil, himself a Johnian and one-time brother-in-law of Sir John Cheke, regius professor of Greek from 1540 to 1547, and surviving correspondence demonstrates that this was the case. His nephew leased a house in Westminster from Cecil, and it is likely that it was in this house that Dodington spent his last years. That he was a conscientious professor is witnessed by a copy of Hermogenes' 'Rhetorica', interleaved and copiously annotated by him, apparently as a source of lectures, with references to Demosthenes, Dionysius Halicarnassus, Isocrates, Iamblichus, Plato's 'Gorgias', Lysias, and, of course, Aristotle. On Elizabeth I's visit to Cambridge in 1564 Dodington made Greek and Latin orations before her and before Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and his Greek contribution to the verses presented to her by the university opened the volume with thirty-three lines of Greek hexameters in his own hand -- fittingly, both because of his status as regius professor and fellow of Trinity and because his calligraphy in Latin and Greek has long been recognized as the finest example of Cambridge humanist italic. 
In 1571 Dodington published an edition of the translation of Demosthenes by his predecessor in the regius chair, Nicholas Carr, prefaced by not only Greek verses but also a sensitive and revealing life of Carr. In later years he contributed verses to Edward Grant's 'Graecae linguae spicilegium' (1575), William Whitaker's translation of John Jewel's reply to Thomas Harding (1578), Peter Baro's 'Praelectiones in Jonam' (1579), Everard Digby's 'Theoria analytica' (1579), Edward Grant's edition of Crispinus's 'Lexicon' (1581), and William Camden's 'Britannia' (1586), as well as verses on the death of Cecil's daughter, Anne de Vere, countess of Oxford, in 1588. Dodington's friendship with Baro, a fellow Calvinist, is attested to by his having acted as godson to Baro's son, Andrew, in 1574, and he was one of those who signed the petitions in favour of Thomas Cartwright in 1570. From Westminster in 1581 he wrote for John Whitgift, bishop of Worcester, a learned disquisition in connection with some matter of controversy on the distinction between the terms 'eidolon' and 'simulachrum'. 
In 1585 Dodington resigned from his chair, but was allowed to retain the emoluments of his fellowship. He never married. He died on 22 August 1595 aged fifty-nine and was buried in the north transept of Westminster Abbey. His arms were: sable, three bugle horns azure, stringed gules. 


@@@@@


doc= 7752


Dodington, George Bubb, Baron Melcombe (1690/91-1762), politician and diarist, was the only son of Jeremiah Bubb (died 1692) of Foy, Herefordshire, and his second wife, Alicia (died 1721), daughter of John Dodington of Dodington in Somerset. Nothing is known of Jeremiah Bubb's origins, but he made his way as a minor courtier in the 1670s, probably through the offices of Lord Scudamore, and at the time of the duke of Monmouth's invasion in 1685 he was commissioned into the army as a captain. He later became acting commander of the Carlisle garrison, and in 1689 governor of the castle and one of the town's MPs. 
After his father's death in 1692 young George Bubb's upbringing was supervised by his maternal uncle George Dodington ('c'.1658-1720), a highly successful financier and contractor in the service of William III's armies who went on to a minor career in politics as an MP and office-holder, and latterly adopted Bubb as his heir. In 1703 Bubb was sent to Winchester College and in July 1707 he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, his age then being given as sixteen. At Lincoln's Inn, where he was enrolled in 1711, his studies had hardly begun when he was packed off later that year on a grand tour that lasted until 1713, taking him to France, the Low Countries, Switzerland, and Italy. In 1715 his uncle brought him into parliament for his own former seat of Winchelsea, and in May Bubb -- again presumably through his uncle's contacts among the new whig ministers -- was appointed envoy at Madrid where for the next two years he ably represented Britain's commercial interests and renegotiated several vital agreements with the Spanish court. He was replaced, however, in the summer of 1717, shortly after the beginning of the whig split, having already identified himself with the faction of Robert Walpole and Charles, second Viscount Townshend. 
His uncle's death in March 1720 put Bubb in possession of a fine estate at Eastbury, Dorset, where a magnificent mansion designed by Sir John Vanbrugh was in the process of construction, an income of $4000 per annum, and a fortune of $100,000. He had already in 1718 taken the name Dodington. He quickly set about overturning his uncle's will and brought the Eastbury trust under his own direct control. In doing so, he set himself permanently at odds with one of the executors, his kinsman Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham (a cousin through his maternal grandfather's marriage into the Temple family), who stood next in line to the estate after another childless Dodington relation. Temple initiated a chancery suit against Dodington which kept him on tenterhooks well into the 1740s. The Eastbury 'palace' was to cost Dodington more than $140,000 to complete and was a drain on his pocket throughout most of his career. Its purpose was to fulfil Dodington's soaring, if buffoonish, aspirations to rank among the foremost whig grandees, and though loving nothing better than to ridicule and snipe at his colleagues in power, his pressing financial needs required the cushioning of salaried office. This weakness in his position, coupled with his naturally orotund personality, portly appearance, and sententious humour, ensured that he remained a political lightweight, a slightly ridiculous larger than life character, blinkered, vain, and with little principle. 
In the early 1720s, however, everything seemed possible. Recognition of Dodington's elevated social status and his potential usefulness came almost as soon as his uncle was laid to rest with his appointment as lord lieutenant of Somerset, followed in the same year by the clerkship of the pells in Ireland, a life sinecure which yielded some $2000 annually. At the 1722 election he fought a successful campaign at Bridgwater and continued to sit for that borough until 1754. In April 1724 Walpole selected Dodington to join him at the Treasury board as a lord commissioner. Walpole, of course, was at least partially mindful of Dodington's useful influence in several parliamentary boroughs -- Weymouth and Melcombe Regis (returning four MPs), Winchelsea, and Bridgwater -- which set him above most rank-and-file whigs. It was probably in 1725 that Dodington married Katherine (died 1756), daughter of Edmund Beaghan of Sissinghurst, Kent, though for reasons most likely connected with the chancery dispute concerning his estate, the union was concealed from the world until 1742. Dodington, however, was hardly the philandering type, a characteristic which only enhanced his absurd and old-fashioned bearing. The story was told that on one occasion he had urged himself upon a female acquaintance declaring 'Oh that I had you, but in a wood!', only to incur the lady's astonished, rather than shocked, response: 'In a wood, Dodington! What would you do -- 'rob' me?' (Carswell, 169). 
Dodington was always much more intent on wooing politicians. In 1726, mortified by Walpole's recent failure to nominate him to the newly revived knighthood of the Bath, he published an epistle to the minister which, though complimentary, conveyed the pointed message that loyalty outshone merit as a qualification for advancement, an unmistakable hint of his growing discontent. At the accession of George II in 1727 he made an ill-judged bid to swing behind the new king's favourite Sir Spencer Compton, who it was generally believed would supplant Walpole. However, Walpole remained in office but in future was circumspect towards Dodington. Though remaining a member of Walpole's administration, Dodington aligned himself thereafter with its discontented elements, notably Lord Wilmington, as Compton had become, and Wilmington's kinsman the duke of Dorset. By 1732 Dodington was deeply in the confidence of Frederick, prince of Wales. Ministerial insiders felt that the prince used him more as a court jester off whom he could scrounge than as a serious political adviser. At all events, Dodington was too careful to allow the prince's headstrong feelings against the king's premier to run to extremes, and during the excise crisis in 1733 gave his royal protege no encouragement to patronize the opposition. However, Dodington himself gave the government scant support for the measure in parliament, and in the aftermath recriminations were flung in his direction. Sir Robert Walpole's brother Horatio described him as 'the vilest man, vain, ambitious, loose, and never to be satisfied. He wants now to be a lord and when he is that he will want to be a duke' ('Egmont Diary', 1.427). 
From the middle of 1734 the prince began to spurn Dodington's moderating influence and turned his attention to the young and certainly more provocative patriot 'cubs'. For the next five years Dodington appears to have avoided any form of conduct which might be badly construed by his ministerial colleagues, and doggedly continued to fulfil his responsibilities at the Treasury board. He resisted the prince's strong overtures in February 1737 to support the opposition motion for an increase of his allowance from the king's civil list, but kept Walpole in suspense over the voting intentions of his five followers in the Commons until almost the last minute, savouring the moment when, on finally assuring the minister of his full support, he strode off before Walpole could finish uttering ungenuine promises of 'future expectations'. 
Dodington finally broke with Walpole in the spring of 1740, and in May was dismissed from his well-paid Treasury position. In the preceding months he had importuned relentlessly for a peerage which Walpole refused to sanction. Walpole told one colleague that 'there had been no cordiality between them ever since this King's reign... [he] thinks he is not considered enough' (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54', 1.501). With the approach of the next general election, Walpole went to endless lengths to usurp Dodington's hold over the four Weymouth and Melcombe seats, but this unseemly struggle only resulted in the election of three new MPs beholden neither to Dodington nor to Walpole. Failure in his other constituencies in 1741 meant an overall reduction in Dodington's Commons following from five to one. At some point before the election Dodington had established a rapport with the duke of Argyll, who had also lately taken himself and his Scottish followers into opposition. He soon found, however, that Argyll could not be animated into taking the initiative to co-ordinate the opposition forces in such a way that Walpole's entire administration might be replaced by a new one constructed on 'broad-bottom' lines. In the debate on 21 January 1742 on the opposition motion calling for a secret committee on the war, Dodington described the minister's whole administration as 'infamous'. Walpole thrust back in his reply, pointing out that Dodington was 'a person of great self-mortification, who for sixteen years had condescended to bear part of the odium' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 17.297). Dodington did not profit from Walpole's fall at the beginning of the following month despite much expectation that he would become secretary at war in the new administration. For the next few years he languished discontentedly in opposition, dabbling in various journalistic ventures among which was his 'Comparison of the Old and New Ministry'. In 1744 he collaborated with Henry Fielding's assistant, the historian James Ralph, on a more searching piece of polemic, 'The Use and Abuse of Parliaments', a work which argued that the Walpole administration had unravelled rather than safeguarded the achievements of the 1688 revolution. 
In December 1744 Dodington's political fortunes took a turn for the better when Henry Pelham brought him back into government in the lucrative post of treasurer of the navy. Participation in office offered him interim contentment, but his ultimate goal, a peerage, still eluded him. By 1749 he was therefore prepared to accept an invitation from the prince of Wales to join his household in the senior position of treasurer of the chamber, with a salary of $2000. Encouragement to sever once more his ties with the government lay in the apparent certainty that the prince's accession could not be many years away. He was duly promised not only a peerage but also a secretaryship of state upon George II's demise, while in the meantime he was to have 'principal direction' over the prince's affairs. There were also promises 'in reversion' for a number of Dodington's friends such as Sir Francis Dashwood and Lord Talbot. Although Dodington's seniority -- he was now not far off sixty -- and experience were essential to a group largely of younger political aspirants, he was variously disliked, viewed with suspicion, and regarded as a coxcomb by other leading figures at Leicester House, the centre of the prince's court. The chief of these was the second earl of Egmont, who wrote that Dodington 'presumes a great deal -- and hints at measures quite contrary to our system' (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54', 1.502). In a memorial to the prince, Dodington condemned the aggressive style of opposition pursued by Egmont and his colleagues and warned that its factional overtones would affect its credibility. However, his attempts to discipline the behaviour of the prince's followers and urge them to play a dignified and patient 'waiting game' only alienated him further from Egmont and his associates, and they refused to consult with him on parliamentary business and tactics. Dodington thereafter quickly tired of his master's meagre understanding of political affairs, and after one of his gibes reached the prince's ears, communication between them all but ceased. The prince accordingly relegated him from future high office to the less exalted household position of master of the wardrobe. Frederick's sudden death, however, on 20 March 1751, after a brief illness, brought this phase of Dodington's career to an abrupt and unexpected end. 
Dodington was once more in the political wilderness and left to his own resources. He at first thought of retirement, and indeed his parliamentary attendance slackened considerably. His health now somewhat impaired by a hernia, he spent an increasing amount of time at La Trappe, the villa on the riverbank at Hammersmith which he had acquired in 1749 and where he loved to play the consummate host to an odd coterie of friends, retainers, and minor literati. At Eastbury, Hammersmith, and his town house in Pall Mall he surrounded himself in tasteless splendour. His own literary endeavours were nondescript occasional pieces couched in his usual high-flown, lapidary prose. A far more significant though private venture, however, was the diary which he had begun to keep in 1749. Recording day to day the intrigues of an apparently compulsive, self-seeking place-hunter who seemed equally attached to the sentiments of virtue and poetry, Dodington's diary, first published in 1784, has subsequently anchored his reputation as the archetypal eighteenth-century man of politics. 
Dodington succeeded in establishing a reasonable accord with the Pelhams, but the king's prejudice against him on account of his previous connection with the prince of Wales precluded any possibility of office. On Pelham's death in March 1754 Dodington made his court to Pelham's brother the duke of Newcastle, now head of the administration, but he was unable to secure a promise of the treasurership of the navy for which he had been angling. At the ensuing general election he lost his long-held Bridgwater seat to his 'bete noire', Lord Egmont, but was elected for Weymouth, where he was able to put two other seats at the ministry's disposal. 
The following year, however, Dodington forgot all thoughts of retirement as he became ineluctably drawn into the complex struggle for leadership of the House of Commons between William Pitt and Henry Fox that took place during the summer and autumn of 1755. Dodington, it must be said, had already cast himself as a Pitt supporter in March, but as spring gave way to summer he saw the benefits to be reaped from the tentative alliance forming between Pitt and the new 'reversionary interest' now centring upon the dowager princess of Wales and her young son Prince George (the future George III). In the aftermath of Prince Frederick's death, Dodington had found the princess uninterested in forming her own political party, but with Pitt's involvement the new Leicester House group had healthy prospects of success. While doing all he could throughout the late summer to encourage Pitt's aspirations, Dodington nevertheless kept up a dialogue with the duke of Newcastle. Thus in October, when the scales began to tip against Pitt in favour of Fox, Dodington was easily won over by the duke and in December, after Pitt and his friends had been finally dismissed from the administration, Dodington was given back his old office. Under repeated barracking from Pitt, however, the Fox-Newcastle ministry weakened and in November 1756 collapsed. Dodington was turned out of the navy treasurership to make way for Pitt's brother-in-law George Grenville. In February 1757 he briefly rose above his normally self-interested political stance and in delivering what Horace Walpole described as a 'humane and pathetic speech' in the Commons was one of the few to defend the unfortunate Admiral John Byng against those who desired his execution for the loss of Minorca. 
Dodington returned to office for a short time from April to June 1757 during the interregnum that followed Pitt's dismissal, but again had to make way for Grenville when Pitt formed his great administration with Newcastle. By the end of the year Dodington was in contact with the prince of Wales's tutor, the earl of Bute, now resigned to await whatever rewards would follow upon the death of George II. Dodington's wait was longer than he anticipated, and when the king finally died in October 1760 old age and infirmity barred him from any post in the new administration. The young king did, however, fulfil his father's promise of a peerage, and on 6 April 1761 Dodington was duly created Baron Melcombe of Melcombe Regis. In the final year of his life Dodington gave vent to angry impatience with Pitt and the war, though soon the old confidence between himself and Bute fell away until Bute ignored him altogether. Dodington died at his Hammersmith residence on 28 July 1762 and was buried at Fulham. Since he left no issue, the Eastbury estate went as directed in the original entail to Richard Grenville, first Earl Temple, nephew of his old antagonist Lord Cobham who had died in 1749, and his disposable property, including the manuscript diary, to another cousin, Thomas Wyndham of Hammersmith. 


@@@@@


doc= 7753


Dods, Marcus (1786-1838), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born on 7 December 1786 near Gifford, Haddingtonshire. He was educated at the University of Edinburgh and was ordained as a minister in the Church of Scotland at Belford, Northumberland, in 1811. On 6 May 1818 he married Sarah Palliser (died 1859); the couple had seven children of whom the most significant was Marcus Dods (1834-1909), the Free Church minister and professor of the 'New Testament' at New College, Edinburgh. Dods was a distinguished scholar, and used his knowledge of biblical languages, oriental literature, and patristic studies in both his preaching and his writing; the evangelical leader Thomas Chalmers described him as 'being at once rich in the scholarship of a varied and extensive erudition, and yet possessed in no ordinary degree of massive and original powers of his own' (T. Chalmers, 'Recommendary notice', in M. Dods, 'On the Incarnation of the Eternal Word', 2nd edn, 1841, v). Dods was a frequent and distinguished contributor to the 'Edinburgh Christian Instructor', the principal organ of the evangelical party in the Church of Scotland, and became its editor after the death of Andrew Thomson (1779-1831), the celebrated evangelical whose biography he was planning to write at the time of his own death. In the 1820s Dods was actively involved in the 'Apocrypha' controversy, strongly opposing the inclusion in 'Bibles' of the 'Old Testament' 'Apocrypha'. He wrote a humorous but forceful statement of his position called 'Anglicanus Scotched' (1828) and in the same year produced 'Remarks on the Bible', described as 'perhaps as good a statement as the age saw of the case put forward by those who stood for an undiluted and a thoroughly inspired Canon of Scripture' (Macleod, 261). 
Dods was a prominent and committed opponent of Edward Irving's views on the doctrine of the incarnation of Christ, and penned a particularly devastating review of Irving's 'The Doctrine of the Incarnation Opened' in the 'Edinburgh Christian Instructor' in January 1830. In that review Dods caustically remarked that Irving 'contradicts himself more frequently than any other writer probably ever did. With Mr Irving a single idea is spread over many a turgid page' (M. Dods, 'Review', 'Edinburgh Christian Instructor', Jan 1830, 2-3). A late twentieth-century biographer of Irving described Dods as 'Irving's sternest and most theologically erudite critic' (Needham, 476). Dods expanded his own views on the incarnation in his most famous work, 'On the Incarnation of the Eternal Word' (1831), a powerful and closely argued statement of the doctrine of the sinlessness of Christ, which according to the writer of his obituary in the 'Edinburgh Christian Instructor' 'will remain a permanent monument of his research, learning and strength of intellect... as well as of his warm, fervent and rational piety' ('Edinburgh Christian Instructor', 544). Dods died on 29 September 1838 after more than six months of illness and was buried in Belford, where his epitaph concludes that 'he captivated his friends by his rich converse, and edified the church by his learned and eloquent pen'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7754


Dodsley, James (1724-1797), bookseller, was born in Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, the youngest of seven children of Robert Dodsley ('bap'. 1681, died 1750), a local schoolmaster, and younger brother of Robert Dodsley (1704-1764). By 1742 James was employed in his brother's London bookshop at the sign of Tully's Head, his signature as witness appearing that year on Robert's agreement to purchase the copyright to Henry Baker's 'The Microscope Made Easy'. Despite the central role Tully's Head played in the contemporary literary world, almost nothing is known of James during his first fifteen years at the shop: he is not mentioned in his brother's correspondence until 1757, and only one of his own letters survives from the period. His name was first joined with Robert's in the well-known imprint 'Printed for R. and J. Dodsley' on 2 May 1753 when the firm published Henry Jones's poem 'Merit'. On 3 December 1754 he became a member of the Stationers' Company by redemption, and, in April 1759, he assumed the reins of Tully's Head at his brother's retirement. 
Although James Dodsley was bequeathed only $500 at his brother's death in 1764, he inherited a small fortune in copyrights. Of these, the following, which he owned either in whole or in part, enjoyed multiple editions during James's years at Tully's Head: William Melmoth's translations of Cicero's 'Letters' and Pliny's 'Letters', and his 'Fitzosborne's 'Letters on Several Subjects''; Joseph Spence's 'Polymetis'; William Whitehead's 'The Roman Father'; William Duncan's 'Elements of Logic'; Robert's own 'Preceptor' and his weekly 'The World'; and Samuel Johnson's 'Rasselas' and 'Dictionary'. To these James added many editions of Robert Dodsley's own works, including 'The King and the Miller of Mansfield' and 'The Oeconomy of Human Life', the most printed work of the century. Likewise, James continued to issue Robert's popular collections, the 'Select Fables of Aesop', 'Select Collection of Old Plays', and 'Collection of Poems by Several Hands' (the most popular poetic miscellany of the last half of the century), the latter two re-edited by Isaac Reed. 
James Dodsley's own industry added many new titles to Tully's Head credits, including works by Frances Brooke, Richard Cumberland, Oliver Goldsmith, Richard Graves, Charlotte Lennox, Horace Walpole, and, notably, Laurence Sterne's 'Sermons of Mr. Yorick'. Christopher Anstey's 'The New Bath Guide' (1766) netted eleven editions for Dodsley in its first ten years. By far his most profitable publication, Edmund Burke's 'Reflections on the Revolution in France', passed through seven editions and 18,000 copies in 1790 alone. Other popular titles included Lord Chesterfield's 'Letters to his Son' (ten editions by 1793), Soame Jenyns's 'Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion' (seven editions by 1785), and Thomas Warton's 'History of English Poetry'. James Dodsley's joining the London Congers in the early 1780s gave a new direction to Tully's Head's agenda, for most of his subsequent publications involved joint undertakings of large printings of multi-volume editions of established authors, such as Johnson's 'Lives of the Poets'. 
Some time late in 1786, after forty-four years at Tully's Head, Dodsley announced his retirement, only to resume business two weeks later. On 7 June of the next year he suffered a major loss when $2500 of uninsured stock went up in flames at his Lincoln's Inn warehouse. John Nichols, who was dining with the bookseller during the fire, reports that Dodsley bore the news 'without the least apparent emotion', and before the fire was extinguished, sold the potential waste paper to a member of the company for $100. The agreement was not fulfilled, however, and Dodsley later sold the residue for $80 (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.439). The following year Dodsley paid the usual fine to avoid the office of sheriff of London and Westminster. His reserved manner is reflected in his obituary printed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine': 'He kept a carriage many years, but studiously wished that his friends should not know it, nor did he ever use it on the eastern side of Temple Bar' ('GM', 347). Some time in the 1780s Dodsley bought an estate between Chislehurst and Bromley but rarely visited it. He continued in his Pall Mall house, but, during the early 1790s, he seems to have turned over his retail business to George Nicol and to have acted merely as a wholesaler for his own productions. 
Dodsley died at his home in Pall Mall on 19 February 1797. He was buried in St James's Church, Westminster, where his epitaph reads, in part: 'a man of retired and contemplative turn of mind', who was 'upright and liberal in all his dealings' and 'a friend to the afflicted in general, and to the poor of this parish in particular'. Having never married, he distributed his estate -- estimated at $70,000 -- primarily to his nephews and nieces. His stock and copyrights were sold at the Globe tavern, Fleet Street, London, on 18 October 1797, ending the house of Dodsley. 
Although he was at the helm of Tully's Head several years longer than his brother and predecessor, Robert, James Dodsley did not seem to enjoy all of Robert's energy and enterprise; nor did he possess his brother's literary talent. Besides his career as a bookseller, Robert also earned some contemporary reputation as a poet and playwright; James does not seem to have authored any works. Although James published some major works during his time, nothing approached Robert's ingenious conception and execution of such undertakings as the 'Select Collection of Old Plays', the 'Collection of Poems by Several Hands', and 'Select Fables of Aesop'. Nor did James initiate any periodicals as did Robert. In short, Robert was a literary man as well as a bookseller; James was a businessman. 


@@@@@


doc= 7755


Dodsley, Robert (1704-1764), bookseller and writer, was born on 13 February 1704 in Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, the eldest of seven children of Robert Dodsley ('bap'. 1681, died 1750), a master of the free school in Mansfield, and his first wife. Robert's early efforts at poetry suggest that he learned something of the art from his schoolmaster father, as well as a smattering of major authors, both classical and contemporary. However, in a practical-minded move, his father apprenticed Robert, at the age of fourteen, to a local stocking weaver. It is not clear when Robert left his master or under what circumstances, but by the mid-1720s he entered into service with a series of well-connected families that eventually took him to London. 
The first known verses of the aspiring young poet were composed while Dodsley was in the service of Sir Richard Howe, who kept a residence both at Langar Hall, east of Nottingham, and at Compton, in Gloucestershire. At some time before September 1729 Dodsley became a footman to Charles Dartiquenave, a well-known London epicure, friend of Swift and Pope, member of the Kitcat Club, and contributor to 'The Tatler'. Dodsley's first publication, 'Servitude', a poem attempting to counter the increasing displeasure with the attitude of servants, appeared on 20 September 1729. At Dartiquenave's Dodsley became acquainted with visiting literati and probably first met Alexander Pope, who would later play a major role in his young career. Within two years Dodsley had moved to Whitehall as footman to Jane Lowther, a daughter of John, Viscount Lonsdale. On 14 February 1732, while still in Mrs Lowther's service, Dodsley married Catherine Iserloo (died 1754), the beloved Kitty of his early poems. A little more than two months later, Mrs Lowther engaged a host of her fashionable friends to subscribe to Dodsley's 'A Muse in Livery, or, The Footman's Miscellany', his most significant publication to date (the first edition had appeared in February). The more than 200 subscribers included Sir Robert Walpole, the countess of Hartford, and the duchesses of Bolton, Bedford, and Cleveland. Not until the 'second' edition, however, did Nourse, the publisher, add to the title-page: 'By R. Dodsley, now a Footman to a Person of Quality at Whitehall'. 
The earliest remnant of Dodsley's acquaintance with Pope, a brief letter from the older poet on 5 February 1733, acknowledged the receipt of Dodsley's manuscript of 'The Toy-Shop' and promised to recommend the one-act play to John Rich, manager of Covent Garden theatre. Pope kept his word, and Rich produced 'The Toy-Shop' as an afterpiece on 3 February 1735. A moralizing satire on the town's vanities delivered by the toyshop owner himself, the play captured the fancy of audiences and enjoyed at least thirty-four performances and seven editions in its first year alone. 
Although Pope had encouraged young Dodsley's poetic aspirations, apparently his own publishing agenda led him to convince Dodsley that his true talents would be realized in the book trade. Lacking experience in the bookselling business, Dodsley probably spent time learning the trade in the shop of Pope's current publisher, Lawton Gilliver, while Gilliver was publishing Dodsley's next three poems -- 'The Modern Reasoners' (1734), 'An Epistle to Mr. Pope, Occasion'd by his Essay on Man' (1734), and 'Beauty, or, The Art of Charming' (1735). 
With proceeds from 'The Toy-Shop' and other works, together with a $100 contribution from Pope, Dodsley opened his bookshop at the sign of Tully's Head in Pall Mall, London, probably in March or April 1735. Not surprisingly, his first publication found him linked in the imprint with Lawton Gilliver and James Brindley for volume 2 of the 'Works of Alexander Pope'. The original site of Tully's Head is not known, but, three years later, he moved into the former quarters of Sir William Younge in Pall Mall, a large house at the end of a passageway almost directly opposite Marlborough House and running up towards King Street. Although some distance from the centre of the book trade around Stationers' Corner, Tully's Head was near the fashionable coffee houses in St James's, a short walk from parliament and government offices in Whitehall, and had no serious competition in the area, except for Brindley in New Bond Street. 
During these early years Pope channelled several of his own works to Tully's Head and recommended the shop to his friends. To William Duncombe, he wrote on 6 May 1735: 'Mr. Dodsley, the Author of 'the Toyshop'... has just set up a Bookseller, and I doubt not, as he has more Sense, so will have more Honesty, than most of [that] Profession' ('Correspondence', ed. Sherburn, 3.454). In 1737 Dodsley issued nine publications, including a volume of Pope's letters (together with Knapton, Gilliver, and Brindley); an edition of still another of his own plays, 'The King and the Miller of Mansfield'; and the year's most popular work, Richard Glover's political epic 'Leonidas'. The next year saw twenty-one new works, including 'London' by the not yet famous Samuel Johnson, an edition of Fenelon's 'Telemaque', a translation of Tasso's 'Jerusalem', a few more poems by Pope, and another of Dodsley's own plays, 'Sir John Cockle at Court'. By 1739 Dodsley had begun to mount sufficient reserves to publish several multi-volume works on his own, including two-volume editions of Mrs Rowe's 'Miscellaneous Works', 'The Philosophy of Sir Isaac Newton', and Roger Boyle's 'Dramatic Works'. 
In the same year Dodsley's brief publishing career suffered a formal blow when he was prosecuted for publishing Paul Whitehead's 'Manners', a satire on various court figures and prelates. Bishop Thomas Sherlock, one of Whitehead's targets, induced the House of Lords to summon both author and publisher to Westminster Hall. Although Whitehead absconded to avoid prosecution, Dodsley was reprimanded and ordered to be detained in custody until further notice. A week later, upon the intercession of Dodsley's Pall Mall neighbour Benjamin Victor, a petition for his release was filed by one of Whitehead's victims, Lord Essex. After a formal apology upon his knees in the Lords and the payment of a $70 fine, Dodsley was released. As Alexander Chalmers later commented, 'The whole process, indeed, was supposed to be intended rather to intimidate Pope, than to punish Whitehead' (Chalmers, 16.201). 
Dodsley had not been wholly innocent in the Whitehead affair. A decade of service in aristocratic gatherings had acquainted him with arrogance and incompetence in high places, and, early on, he had begun to resent the haughty imposition of a privileged social class. His struggle to reconcile his sense of his own genius with the humiliations he was forced to endure as a footman were vividly expressed in his 'Miseries of Poverty' (1731). 'The Toy-Shop' of 1735 had indicted the vanities and pretensions of aristocrats and clergymen. In the opening scene of his second play, 'The King and the Miller of Mansfield' (1737), Henry II, lost and alone at night in Sherwood Forest, realizes that, when not surrounded by his courtiers and flatterers, he is but a 'common Man'; the king chastises Lord Lurewell for harassing the simple country folk and knights the humble, virtuous miller as Sir John Cockle, the titular character of Dodsley's next play (pp. 26, 51). Also about this time, the bookseller became acquainted with Pope's circle of patriot friends -- George Lyttelton, Richard Glover, lords Chesterfield and Cobham, and the prince of Wales, major contributors to anti-ministerial literature. Dodsley also lent his shop to the cause by publishing Pope's satires on court and political figures: 'The First Epistle of the First Book of Horace Imitated' (1737), 'The Second Epistle of the Second Book of Horace Imitated' (1737), 'One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Eight', the last published just seven months before Whitehead's 'Manners'. 
Except for 1740, Dodsley's list of publications and authors, both new and established, grew at full tilt during the 1740s. He brought out the first poems of Mark Akenside, John Brown, John Gilbert Cooper, Thomas Gray, William Mason, William Shenstone, Joseph and Thomas Warton, and William Whitehead, all of whom, except the contentious Brown, continued a long-term publishing relationship with Tully's Head. Also appearing under Dodsley's imprint for the first time were poems by William Collins, Stephen Duck, William Thompson, and Edward Young, specifically 'Night Thoughts'. Also during the decade, he issued Johnson's 'Vanity of Human Wishes', the last works of Jonathan Swift, including 'Directions to Servants', and the tenth volume of 'Miscellanies', as well as various editions of Pope's 'Works'. 
Notable also was the broadening of the subjects and types of works Dodsley was publishing during the 1740s: translations of ancient and foreign authors, works on architecture, religion, philosophy, travel, and science. These included Christopher Pitt's edition of Virgil's 'Aeneid' (1740), William Melmoth's 'The Letters of Pliny' (1746), and translations of Callimachus (1744), Sallust (1744), the 'Decameron' (1741), and 'Don Quixote' (1742); Joseph Spence's 'Polymetis' (1747), John Wood's 'The Origin of Building' (1741), George Lyttelton's 'Observations on the Conversion and Apostleship of St. Paul' (1747), John Barr's 'Summary of Natural Religion' (1749), Voltaire's 'The Metaphysics of Sir Isaac Newton' (1747), William Duncan's 'Elements of Logic' (1748), James Spilman's 'Journey through Russia into Persia' (1742), Richard Pococke's 'Description of the East' (1743), William Cheselden's 'Anatomy of the Human Body' (1741), and Henry Baker's 'The Microscope Made Easy' (1742) and 'Natural History of the Polype' (1743). 
The year 1741 saw the first of four periodicals Dodsley would publish during his career, the 'Publick Register, or, The Weekly Magazine'. This threepenny sixteen-page weekly, containing foreign and domestic news, literary essays, and poetry, was aimed at capturing some of the market dominated by Edward Cave's monthly 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Cave met the challenge by exerting his influence in the trade, and Dodsley was forced to discontinue the periodical with the twenty-fourth number which carried the complaint: 'the ungenerous Usage I have met with from one of the Proprietors of a certain Monthly Pamphlet, who has prevail'd with most of the common News-Papers not to advertise it, compel me for the present to discontinue it' ('Publick Register', 332). 
Engaging Mark Akenside as editor, Dodsley made his second bid for the periodical market by issuing the fortnightly 'The Museum, or, Literary and Historical Register' on 29 March 1746. Running regularly forty pages, the fortnightly contained literary essays, poems, book reviews, and historical essays, and attracted original contributions from a host of notables, including William Collins, Stephen Duck, David Garrick, Soame Jenyns, Samuel Johnson, Robert Lowth, George Lyttelton, Christopher Smart, Joseph Spence, Horace Walpole, William Warburton, the Warton brothers, and the future poet laureate William Whitehead. When 'The Museum' was discontinued with its thirty-ninth number on 12 September 1747, once more Cave, in the preface to the collected edition of his 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1747, smugly celebrated the demise of the supposed 'super-excellent Magazine' ('GM', 1747). Fifteen months later, Dodsley bought a quarter-share in the 'London Magazine', the 'Gentleman''s chief competitor. In the same year he purchased a share in the influential thrice-weekly 'London Evening-Post'. 
Dodsley's genius for envisioning new literary projects also brought to the market in the 1740s the two major works by which he is chiefly known to posterity. His love of the theatre -- largely bred of his own success (three of his plays running on London stages within a single month in 1738) -- inspired him to produce the twelve-volume 'Select Collection of Old Plays' (1744-5). A compilation of sixty-one plays, ranging back beyond Shakespeare, the 'Collection' drew upon the Harleian collection (then in his possession) and the collection of Sir Clement Dormer, to whom the work is dedicated. As announced in his preface, Dodsley's intention 'to snatch some of the best Pieces of our old Dramatic Writers from total Neglect and Oblivion' produced an unprecedented repository of texts in the English theatre tradition to which all subsequent editors would be indebted ('Select Collection', 1.xxxv). 
The advertisement to Dodsley's second major contribution to English literary history, 'A Collection of Poems by Several Hands', showed similar intent and foresight: 'to preserve to the public those poetical performances, which seemed to merit a longer remembrance than what would probably be secured to them by the Manner wherein they were originally published' ('Collection of Poems', 1748, vol. 1.iii-iv). Given the extensive circle of poets Dodsley had cultivated by 1747, he had no trouble filling the first three volumes of the 'Collection', which appeared on 15 January 1748. Four editions were called for by March 1755 when Dodsley added a fourth volume, and, three years later, he completed the set with volumes 5 and 6. Although the earlier volumes showed many changes by their 1758 edition, the 'Collection' set the canon for mid-eighteenth-century poetry, passing through several editions and supplements by other editors through the rest of the century. Although the earlier volumes show a disproportionate number of contributions by Dodsley's friends Shenstone and Akenside, except in the case of perhaps a half-dozen figures (including Swift and Young), its pages reflect the work of most major and minor practising poets of Dodsley's era. 
In the late 1740s Dodsley solidified his publishing relationship with Samuel Johnson. Johnson provided the introduction and 'The vision of Theodore the hermit' to Dodsley's two-volume 'Preceptor' (1748), a compilation of essays for the education of youth on such topics as mathematics, architecture, geography, rhetoric, drawing logic, ethics, trade and commerce, and law and government. The work passed through many editions, even becoming a textbook in colonial American colleges. Also, in 1749, Dodsley published Johnson's 'Vanity of Human Wishes' and his tragedy 'Irene'. Within a week of the last night of 'Irene''s performance at Drury Lane, Dodsley's own masque, 'The Triumph of Peace', was acted on the same stage. 
During the 1750s Dodsley reached the zenith of his career: his book production reached new highs, he became 'the' London publisher of 'belles-lettres', he introduced many significant works and new talent, and his own pen enjoyed a few triumphs. He opened the decade with his own popular compilation of moral aphorisms, 'The Oeconomy of Human Life' by an 'Ancient Bramin' (1750), a work that was soon translated into five languages and became the most frequently printed work of the entire eighteenth century. The next three years brought Gray's 'Elegy Written in a Country Church Yard', Richard Owen Cambridge's 'Scribleriad', the first English edition of Voltaire's 'Age of Louis XIV', Christopher Pitt and Joseph Warton's edition of Virgil's 'Works', William Duncan's translation of Caesar's 'Commentaries', William Melmoth's translation of Cicero's 'Letters', William Popple's translation of Horace's 'Ars poetica', Edward Young's 'Poetical Works', and, the least successful, Dodsley's own 'Public Virtue'. 
On 4 January 1753 Dodsley re-entered the periodical market with 'The World', a lively weekly on contemporary fashionable life. Immediately successful, the weekly was soon printing 2500 copies per week, ran for a full three years, and earned its conductor, Edward Moore, the amazing sum of $858. Among its many contributors were lords Bath, Chesterfield, and Hailes, the earl of Cork, Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, Richard O. Cambridge, Soame Jenyns, Joseph Warton, William Whitehead, and Horace Walpole. Two days after the close of 'The World', Dodsley ventured into the newspaper trade with William Strahan, publishing the first issue of their 'London Chronicle' on 1 January 1757. Samuel Johnson provided the introduction for this thrice weekly, which ran through to the end of the century and included many contributions from James Boswell. Dodsley's last entry in the periodical market, the 'Annual Register', was begun in 1758 (published in 1759) with Edmund Burke at the helm. This annual 400-page volume chronicled the previous year's major events, and printed literary, historical, and topographical essays, as well as poetry and reviews. Burke discontinued his services in the 1760s, but James Dodsley continued the publication until 1791, when it was taken over by the Rivingtons. 
Dodsley's eminent stature in the trade during the last half of the 1750s is evident in both the number and importance of his publications. Collaborating with five other booksellers, Dodsley published one of the most notable works of the century, Johnson's 'Dictionary of the English Language' (1755). Johnson later acknowledged that Dodsley had given him the idea for the dictionary and, since Dodsley had published all of his significant works to date, Johnson referred to the bookseller as 'Doddy... my patron' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.326). 
Other notable first editions of these years included Edward Young's 'Centaur not Fabulous' (1755), James Hampton's 'History of Polybius' (1756), Thomas Blacklock's 'Poems' (1756), John Dyer's 'The Fleece' (1757), Soame Jenyns's 'Free Enquiry into the Origin and Nature of Evil' (1757), Edmund Burke's 'Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful' (1757), Thomas Gray's 'Odes' (1757), volumes 4-6 of Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems' (1758), David Hume's 'Remarks on the Natural History of Religion' (1758), Oliver Goldsmith's 'Enquiry into the Present State of Polite Learning in Europe' (1759), and (with William Strahan and William Johnston) Johnson's 'Rasselas' (1759). In 1758 Dodsley's own poetic exploration into the realm of terror and pity, 'Melpomene', appeared under Mary Cooper's imprint, and, in one week, he sold 2000 copies of his tragedy 'Cleone', as it was being acted at Covent Garden Theatre in early December. Although Dodsley baulked at the purchase of the copyright to Laurence Sterne's 'Tristram Shandy' in late 1759, the first London edition would appear from the Dodsley's shop, his brother James having paid Sterne $630 for volumes 1-4 early the next year. 
By the mid-1750s, Tully's Head became a fashionable gathering place of London's literati. As Joseph Warton recalled Johnson saying, 'The Noctes Atticae are revived at honest Dodsley's house' ('Correspondence', ed. Tierney, 19), and Dodsley's correspondence frequently notes the visits and gatherings at Tully's Head. As his correspondence also reveals, Dodsley's regular literary advisers were Spence, Mark Akenside, George Lyttelton, and Horace Walpole. Outside London Dodsley relied heavily upon his Birmingham friend Shenstone and frequently on Shenstone's friend at Bath, Richard Graves. Besides his substantial contributions to Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems' and 'Fables of Aesop', Shenstone entertained Dodsley on several summer visits in the 1750s where the two would revise Dodsley's works. Graves did much the same for Dodsley's writings, although most of his advice came by letter. 
In 1755, as one of the earliest members of the newly founded Society of Arts (then calling itself the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce), Dodsley was elected the society's first 'stationer' and was thereby responsible for providing all of its printing and publishing. He also served, along with William Hogarth, Samuel Richardson, and Jacob and Richard Tonson, on several society committees delegated to offer rewards to the public for the execution of prescribed drawings and the invention of new processes related to paper making, as well as to judge the resulting submissions. 
During his later years Dodsley's own pen and genius for literary projects remained active. After protracted revisions and continuing refusals by David Garrick, Dodsley's tragedy 'Cleone' was finally produced by John Rich at Covent Garden on 2 December 1758, with George Anne Bellamy in the title role. The occasion found the whole town taking sides, and a bitter exchange arising between the author and his friend Garrick. In late February 1761 appeared Dodsley's 'Select Fables of Aesop and other Fabulists', printed by John Baskerville and including ancient, modern, and 'newly invented' fables in three volumes, respectively. By his death, Dodsley, with the help of Graves, had managed to edit and publish the first few volumes of an edition of Shenstone's 'Works' (1764-9), as they were simultaneously serving as the poet's executors. 
In his time, Dodsley was variously described as a man of modesty, simplicity, benevolence, humanity, and true politeness. His relations with his authors seem regularly to have been conducted with cordiality and integrity, but always moderated by practical business sense. Extant evidence of copyright purchases shows that he offered the age's standard rates for authors' manuscripts, meaning that he was consistently fair, though not overly generous. Although early contributors to Tully's Head, only William Warburton and John Brown quit Dodsley in pique. Warburton associated several attacks on his works with Dodsley authors, and, as Pope's literary executor, he thought Dodsley 'not very regardfull' of the memory of his patron when the bookseller published such works as Thomas Warton's 'Observations on the Faerie Queene' (1754), which accused Pope of prejudice and ignorance for enthroning Lewis Theobald as the 'prince of dullness' ('Correspondence', ed. Tierney, 212; Warton, 11.265). The Revd Mr Brown, fearing allusions to his penchant for cursing and swearing in Sir Charles Hanbury's forthcoming response to his 'Estimate', attempted to intimidate its publisher, but then resorted to dismissing Dodsley's mediation with 'Footman's language I never return' ('Correspondence', 357). 
Besides his brother James, Dodsley trained at least two other apprentices at Tully's Head, John Hinxman and John Walter. Both men advertised themselves as former Dodsley apprentices when they opened their own shops, Hinxman taking over John Hildyard's business in York in 1757 and Walter setting up at Homer's Head in Charing Cross, London, in 1759. James Dodsley left Walter $1000 in his will, suggesting an ongoing relationship through the last half of the century. Hinxman returned to London in 1761 to marry Mary Cooper's sister and to take over the business of Dodsley's long-time publishing associate. 
During his twenty-four-year career at Tully's Head, Dodsley co-published with at least fifty-three other booksellers, including the most notable members of the London trade: Charles Bathurst, Charles Hitch, Andrew Millar, the Knaptons, Rivingtons, Tonsons, and Longmans. Likewise, he collaborated with or served as the agent for a number of provincial booksellers including Joseph Bentham, Richard Clements, and James Fletcher. In the 1750s he also shipped some of his works to Dublin's George Faulkner for the issuing of Irish editions. By far, the names appearing most frequently in his imprint were those of Thomas (and later) Mary Cooper, Dodsley's City agents, who also occasionally published works with which Dodsley did not initially want his name connected. 
Although at least thirteen printers had a hand in producing Dodsley's volumes, John Hughs seems to have been his primary printer, and the latter sometimes farmed out work to William Bowyer junior and William Strahan. John Baskerville printed Dodsley's 'Fables of Aesop', and the bookseller acted as the Birmingham printer's London agent for the sale of his Horace and Virgil, as well as for Baskerville's new typeface and wove paper. For the illustration of his publications, Dodsley enlisted the designing and engraving services of at least twenty-three hands, some among the best-known names in the trade: Francis Hayman, William Hogarth, William Kent, Samuel Wale, Charles Grignion, and Simon Ravenet. 
By the time of his retirement, Dodsley's name had appeared in imprints, either as sole or joint publisher, for 468 first editions alone. He was listed as 'seller' in the imprints to another 135 publications. Beginning in 1753, James Dodsley's initial had become linked with Robert's in Tully's Head imprints, and, although Robert officially retired in March or April 1759, the familiar imprint R. and J. Dodsley continued to appear on Tully's Head publications until his death. 
On 23 September 1764, in his sixty-first year, Dodsley died of complications arising from his old nemesis, gout, while visiting Durham with his close friend Joseph Spence. Spence, who held a prebend in that city, saw to Dodsley's burial in the Durham Cathedral churchyard and provided the inscription on the large brown stone that marks his grave. 
Dodsley's executors were Francis Dyer, husband of his sister Alice, and his younger brother Alvory, who had served in the house of Sir George Savile (and might have been running a London pamphlet shop at the time). Over the years, Dodsley must have reinvested his profits in the business because he had comparatively little savings at the time of his death. Although he bequeathed a total of $1500 to his siblings John, Isaac, Alice, and Alvory and to his nieces Kitty (daughter of Isaac), Sarah (daughter of John), and Kitty (daughter of Alice), all of these legacies were to be paid from James's $2000 bond to his brother (perhaps the purchase price of Tully's Head at Robert's retirement in 1759). James was left the remaining $500 due, as well as the remainder of Robert's estate. Most lucrative, however, was James's inheritance of at least fifty copyrights that, by reason of continuing editions through the rest of the century, would help make the small fortune James himself left at his death ($8000 apiece to two nephews alone). 


@@@@@


doc= 7756


Dodson, James (c.1705-1757), mathematician and actuary, was the son of John Dodson ('b'. 1675), citizen and freeman of the Merchant Taylors' Company, and his wife, Elizabeth, who died shortly after his birth. His grandfather, also John Dodson, was a tailor of Edmonton, Middlesex. It is not known if Dodson, who became free of the Merchant Taylors' Company by patrimony in 1733, was ever employed as a tailor, but he was at one time a student under Abraham De Moivre, and as a young man he devoted himself to the unremunerative task of calculating antilogarithms. He married on 28 October 1735 at St Clement Danes, Westminster, Elizabeth Goodwin, the ward of Sir John Chesshyre, from whom he received a loan of $300. He may thereafter have earned his living as a writing-master, for some years later he was living in Warwick Lane, near St Paul's Cathedral, under the sign of the Hand and Pen, which was widely used by such teachers. Handwriting, in the new style known as copperplate, developed during the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, was a principal subject of a commercial education, along with accounting and arithmetic. In 1744 William Mountaine and Dodson produced an updated version of Edmond Halley's isogonic magnetic chart, which they published in 1746; a later updated edition was presented to the Royal Society thirteen days before Dodson's death. 
At some time before 1747 Dodson removed to Bell-Dock, Wapping, where in that year he was describing himself as an accountant and teacher of mathematics. In the preface to 'The Calculator' (a book of tables), Dodson claimed that he would examine accounts, advise businessmen of the form of accounting best suited to their business, and oversee their clerks until they were familiar with its working. In time Dodson built up a reputation as a consultant on the values of annuities, and his first letter to the Royal Society was a plea for more information to be given in the bills of mortality which could assist in such valuations. When the Revd William Brakenridge sent the society a life table calculated from the London bills of mortality from 1744 to 1753, Dodson wrote to the society that he felt it was his duty to compute the values of annuities according to Brakenridge's table. Dodson's major work, 'The Mathematical Repository', was published in three volumes in 1748, 1753, and 1755. The first volume was dedicated to De Moivre; the second was dedicated to David Papillon and contained a contribution by De Moivre. A classic of actuarial science, the 'Repository' displayed Dodson's mastery of algebra and his knowledge of the subject of annuities, and it earned him election to the Royal Society in January 1755. 
In May or early June 1755, Dodson took over the mathematics classes at Christ's Hospital in place of John Robertson who had moved to the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth, and on 22 July he was formally appointed master of the Royal Mathematical School, and Stone's School, institutions within Christ's Hospital. It was a brief tenure, but following his death in November 1757, his salary was paid up to April 1758 to benefit his children. 
In his closing years Dodson's interest turned to life assurance. It was said that he was denied admission to the Amicable Life Assurance Society, being over forty-five years old, and that this led him to advertise asking for those interested in a project for a new form of life assurance to meet him at the Queen's Head, Paternoster Row, on 2 March 1756. He set out the operating system for mutual life assurance, showing how premiums should be calculated, and worked some examples to show how the fund would be maintained. His (unpublished) 'First lecture on insurances' was written about this time, and from a series of such meetings the Society for Equitable Assurances on Lives and Survivorships developed, though Dodson did not live to see its formation. He died on 23 November 1757, leaving a widow and three children, James ('b'. 1742), who later became actuary for the Equitable Society, as it was by then known, Thomas ('b'. 1744), and Elizabeth ('b'. 1749). In his will, Dodson made arrangements for his share of the profits (5's'. for every $100 paid in) which would accrue once the Equitable received its royal charter, and for repayment of his debt to Sir John Chesshyre's estate. Dodson's granddaughter Elizabeth later married Colonel James De Morgan; their son was Augustus De Morgan (1806-1871), logician and professor of mathematics at University College, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7757


Dodson, Sir John (1780-1858), judge, was born at Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, on 19 January 1780, the eldest son of the Revd Dr John Dodson (died 1807), rector of Hurstpierpoint, and his wife, Frances, daughter of the Revd Mr Dawson. He went to Merchant Taylors' School in 1790, and then to Oriel College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1801, MA in 1804, and DCL in 1808. He was admitted an advocate of the College of Doctors of Law on 3 November 1808, and acted as commissary to the dean and chapter of Westminster. Early cases which brought him notice included 'Dalrymple v. Dalrymple' (husband and wife), a report of which he published in 1811. On 24 December 1822 he married Frances Priscilla, eldest daughter of George Pearson, a London doctor. They had one child, John George Dodson, barrister and politician, created Baron Monk Bretton in 1884. 
From July 1819 to March 1823 Dodson was conservative MP for Rye. On 11 March 1829 he was appointed by the duke of Wellington advocate to the Admiralty court. He was subsequently named advocate-general (15 October 1834) and knighted (29 October 1834). He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple only on 8 November 1834, and in the following year was elected a bencher. He became master of the faculties in November 1841, and vicar-general to the lord primate in 1849. From February 1852 he was judge of the prerogative court of Canterbury until the abolition of this jurisdiction on 9 December 1857, and was dean of the arches court until his death. He was sworn a privy councillor on 5 April 1852, and died at his home, 6 Seymour Place, Mayfair, London, on 27 April 1858. 
Dodson's judgments on cases in the Admiralty courts were published in 'Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the High Court of Admiralty' (1811-22) and in 'A Digested Index of the Cases Determined in the High Court of Admiralty' by Joshua Greene (1818). A case concerning ritualist practices in the Church of England ('Liddell v. Westerton', 1857) was much discussed, and Dodson's judgment upheld on appeal. 


@@@@@


doc= 7758


Dodson, John George, first Baron Monk Bretton (1825-1897), politician, born at 12 Hertford Street, Mayfair, Westminster, on 18 October 1825, was the only son of Sir John Dodson (1780-1858) and his wife, Frances Priscilla 'nee' Pearson. He was educated at Eton College from 1838 where he won in 1841 and 1842 the prince consort's prizes for modern languages. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 9 June 1843, and graduated BA in 1847, when he obtained a first class in classics, and MA in 1851. In 1853 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn. 
On leaving Oxford in 1847 Dodson spent two years in travel in the East, going as far as Baghdad, and on his return journey visiting Albania and Montenegro. He stayed for three months in 1848-9 in Cyprus, and his account of that island, which was then little known, was reproduced in successive editions of Murray's 'Handbook' down to 1872. His eastern tour was soon followed by travel in other parts of the world -- the United States in 1853 and the Crimea during the Crimean War. He possessed great facility as a linguist, which he retained throughout his life. An ardent mountaineer, he was a member of the Alpine Club. He published his narrative of an ascent of 'the passages of the Glacier du Tour and of the Col de Miage in September 1859' in 'Peaks, Passes, and Glaciers' (2nd ser., 1.189-207). 
Dodson unsuccessfully contested the division of East Sussex in July 1852 and March 1857 as a Liberal, but in April 1857 he was returned at the head of the poll and held the seat until February 1874. At the general election of 1874 he was elected for the City of Chester, and was again returned in April 1880, being shortly afterwards re-elected on receiving an office under the crown. But subsequently the earlier election was declared void on petition, and, although the second election remained unimpugned, he could neither sit nor vote. He consequently found a new seat at Scarborough, and represented that constituency from July 1880 until 1884, when he became a peer. 
For three years (1858-61) Dodson was prominent in urging in the House of Commons the repeal of the hop duties, which Gladstone removed in 1861. In 1863 he carried through the House of Commons the act enabling university electors to vote by post (which led to Gladstone's defeat as MP for the university). He unsuccessfully introduced in 1864 a bill for the abolition of tests at the universities. From February 1865 to April 1872 Dodson was chairman of committees and deputy speaker of the House of Commons, and on 10 May 1872 he was sworn of the privy council. He was an authority on parliamentary procedure, and his speech on private bill legislation on 18 February 1868 was printed. He was financial secretary to the Treasury from August 1873 to February 1874, and for three years (1874-6) he was chairman of the committee of public accounts. 
In April 1880, on the formation of Gladstone's second ministry, Dodson was made president of the Local Government Board with a seat in the cabinet. During his first year of cabinet office he carried the government's 'Employers' Liability Act' through the Commons but failed to produce a local government bill satisfactory to the cabinet. On 20 December 1882 he was transferred to the post of chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, an office he retained until October 1884, when he retired from the government. He was created Baron Monk Bretton of Conyboro and Hurstpierpoint on 4 November 1884 (on this curious combination in a title see 'GEC', 5.330). He filled political office competently and was reckoned a sound man of business, but his abilities 'did not appear on the surface, and many people were puzzled at the success he attained' (West, 1.55). In the making of policy he was fussy and pedantic. Like H. C. E. Childers, he made less impact on Victorian Liberalism than a more determined person in his position could have done. 
In 1886 Lord Monk Bretton declined to accept Gladstone's home-rule policy, and thenceforth took no prominent part in politics. During the parliamentary recess he always lived a retired life in his country home at Conyboro, Sussex, and played a great role in county business. He was the first chairman of the East Sussex county council (1889-92). He wrote seven articles for the 'Edinburgh Review' and contributed to the collections of the Sussex Archaeological Society an article on Sussex roads (15.138-47); he chaired the society's meetings in 1870, 1872, and 1875. 
On 3 January 1856 Dodson married Florence, second daughter of William John Campion of Danny, Sussex. They had one son and three daughters. Lady Monk Bretton died on 17 February 1912, aged eighty-one. Monk Bretton died at 6 Seamore Place, London, on 25 May 1897 and was buried in the churchyard of Barcombe, Sussex, the parish of his estate of Conyboro. 


@@@@@


doc= 7759


Dodson, Michael (1732-1799), barrister and biblical scholar, the only son of Joseph Dodson, dissenting minister at Marlborough, Wiltshire, and Elizabeth Foster, was born there on 20 or 21 September 1732. He was educated at Marlborough grammar school and then, in accordance with the advice of his maternal uncle, Sir Michael Foster (1689-1763), justice of the king's bench, was entered at the Middle Temple on 31 August 1754. He practised for many years as a special pleader but was finally called to the bar on 4 July 1783. In 1770 he was appointed one of the commissioners of bankruptcy, a post he held until his death. On 31 December 1778 he married Elizabeth Hawkes of Marlborough. 
Dodson was held in high regard as a legal expert, and among his legal writings was an edition with notes and references of Sir Michael Foster's 'Report of some proceedings on the commission for the trial of rebels in the year 1746 in the county of Surrey and of other crown cases', first published in 1762, with a third edition in 1792. In 1795 he wrote a 'Life of Sir Michael Foster'. This, originally intended for the new edition of the 'Biographia Britannica', was published in 1811 with a preface by John Disney. 
Dodson, who was a Unitarian in religion, was probably held in even higher regard for his critical judgement on biblical literature. His most famous publication, 'A New Translation of Isaiah' (1790), which was an answer to Bishop Robert Lowth's earlier translation, brought about a long-running, but generally good-humoured, disputation with Lowth's nephew, Dr John Sturges. He wrote many other theological works, including several papers for the Society for Promoting the Knowledge of the Scriptures, and his works were much admired by his friend John Disney. 
Dodson enjoyed good health until the last year of his life, when he began to suffer from a chest infection, probably tuberculosis. By October 1799 he was confined to bed, and he died at home in Boswell Court, Carey Street, London, on 13 November of the same year. He was buried in Bunhill Fields on 21 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 7760


Dodsworth, Roger (bap. 1585, d. 1654), antiquary, was born at Newton Grange, Oswaldkirk, near Helmsley in Yorkshire, the son of Matthew Dodsworth, the registrar of York Minster, and Elizabeth Sandwith, daughter of Ralph Sandwith of Newton Grange, and baptized on 24 April 1585 according to Oswaldkirk parish register, although Dodsworth himself gave the date as 24 July in his memoir of his life. In 1599 he entered Archbishop Hutton's School at Warton in Lancashire, founded three years earlier, where his schoolmaster was Miles Dawson, who afterwards became the vicar of Bolton. There is no record of his attending university. Few details of his youth are known, but his memoir records that in 1605 he witnessed the execution at York of Walter Calverley, whose murders formed the subject matter of the anonymous play 'The Yorkshire Tragedy'. In September 1611 he married Holcroft Rawsthorne (died 'c'.1620), the widow of Lawrence Rawsthorne of Hutton Grange, near Preston, Lancashire, and daughter of Robert and Mary Hesketh of Rufford Old Hall. Mary Hesketh was the daughter of Sir George Stanley, and so by marriage Dodsworth acquired kinship with the Stanleys, earls of Derby. His wife's house at Hutton Grange became his home, which he left only on antiquarian expeditions. 
Dodsworth began making antiquarian collections when he was about twenty years old. Initially he began extracting records from York Minster archives and making pedigrees of local families, these exercises being facilitated by his father's position at the minster. He soon enlarged the scope of his activities and began to travel around the churches of Yorkshire, making notes of monumental inscriptions and of coats of arms in stone and glass, and transcribing parish records. He made his first visit to the Tower of London, the principal repository of the exchequer and chancery records, in 1623. Quite early in his career he formed a friendship with Charles Fairfax of Menston, the seventh son of the first Lord Fairfax and uncle of Sir Thomas Fairfax the soldier. He transcribed many of the Fairfax family papers at Denton and Menston; by this means he came to the attention of Sir Thomas Fairfax, who eventually became the patron of his researches into monastic foundations, providing him with a pension of $50 a year. 
In the mid-1630s Dodsworth determined to make collections of material relating to the history of the monasteries in England, a subject that had been first opened by three recusant scholars, all monks of the revived English Benedictine congregation, Augustine Baker, Leander Jones, and Clement Reyner, who collected many of the records of their order which were published as 'Apostolatus Benedictinorum in Anglia' at Douai in 1626. Dodsworth was particularly concerned to collect monastic charters, and by 1638 he had transcribed enough of these to fill a manuscript volume that he entitled 'Monasticon Anglicanum'. In that same year William Dugdale made contact with Dodsworth through the good offices of Sir Henry Spelman (like John Selden, Augustine Vincent, and Simonds D'Ewes, a member of Dodsworth's circle of friends) and volunteered to help with the project. Dodsworth was willing to journey around England in search of monastic records, though in practice most of his research was done in London, at the Cotton Library and in the Tower, and in York. According to Francis Drake, the author of 'Eboracum' (1736), St Mary's tower in York contained 'all the records taken out of the religious houses, at their dissolutions, on the north side Trent', and when the tower was blown up in the siege of the city in 1644, most of the manuscripts were destroyed, but 'our painful countryman Mr Dodsworth had but just finished his transcripts of these valuable remains' (Drake, 575). 
By 1644 Dodsworth had come to believe that his undertaking was too ambitious and planned to concentrate on documenting the monasteries of the north of England, and accordingly began to assemble his collections into a 'Monasticon boreale', as he called it. Spelman, who was encouraging Dodsworth's scheme, seems to have persuaded him that a comprehensive account of English monasteries was possible. By 1650 Dodsworth believed he could proceed to publication, but needed Dugdale's help to put his papers into better order; Dugdale, however, was detained in Warwickshire, and when he did get to London found that a great deal of work had to be done to make the manuscript ready for the press. By July 1651 a hundred sheets had been printed, but then problems of finance arose, as the booksellers were not prepared to undertake the publication of a large work on a politically hazardous subject. The two men decided to borrow money to finance the publication themselves. Enough material had been gathered to produce two folio volumes, and Dugdale laboured long and hard to put Dodsworth's collections into presentable shape, for Dodsworth, though an accurate transcriber, had little ability to methodize his material, nor did he have any fluency in writing the narrative prose required for the introductory sections. Without Dugdale's help, Dodsworth's work would never have gone into print. 
In the midst of the final preparations, Dodsworth died, in August 1654, at his home in Lancashire. He was buried in the church at Rufford. In his will, dated 30 June 1650, he had indicated that he wished the 'Monasticon Anglicanum' to be dedicated to Thomas Fairfax and Dugdale to write the dedication; he hoped that John Rushworth, who had been Fairfax's secretary, would oversee the publication. At this stage, Dugdale could still refer in a letter to 'Mr Dodsworth's work of Monastery foundations' (Denholm-Young and Craster, 8). When the first volume finally appeared in 1655, it had the names of both Roger Dodsworth and William Dugdale on the title-page. There was no dedication, and it is possible that Fairfax did not want a book on monasteries dedicated to him at the height of Cromwell's republic. Dugdale claimed in a letter that it was Rushworth who suggested he add his name to the work. It is impossible at this stage to estimate how much of the material collected in the 'Monasticon' was supplied by Dugdale, but most contemporaries regarded Dodsworth as the true compiler of the work, with Dugdale the assistant who did indeed contribute a certain amount of documentation but who was primarily the editorial figure who gave it shape and ensured its publication. Both names appeared on the second volume in 1661, but the third volume (1673), composed mainly of documents that had come to light after 1661, carried Dugdale's name alone. The English abridgement of the 'Monasticon' by James Wright in 1693 attributed the work solely to Dugdale, as did the much lengthier English abridgement of 1718 by John Stephens. Roger Dodsworth had been forgotten. 
The perception that Dodsworth was robbed of his rightful role as the principal author and mover of the 'Monasticon' by an unscrupulous Dugdale is of long standing, going back at least to John Anstis, the herald and genealogist who described Dugdale as 'that Grand Plagiary' in a letter to Arthur Charlett in 1713 (D. C. Douglas, 'English Scholars, 1660-1730', 2nd edn, 1951, chap. 2). There is some truth in this charge. As is evident, the published 'Monasticon' was essentially the result of a collaboration, but over the years Dugdale was willing to allow the monumental labours of his deceased colleague to be ignored. For many years Dodsworth had also collected material towards a history of the baronage, an immense project, which, like those of so many contemporary antiquaries, never came to fruition. It is significant, however, that Dugdale also developed a project along similar lines in the 1640s. In 1666 he borrowed sixteen volumes of Dodsworth's notes from Lord Fairfax (into whose possession they had come) to help him with his research, which eventually came into print in 1675 as 'The Baronage of England'. This time he acknowledged his debt to 'the elaborate collections from the Pipe Rolls made by Mr Roger Dodsworth, my late deceased friend' (Preface). Fairfax in turn bequeathed Dodsworth's manuscripts to the Bodleian Library, and Anthony Wood described how in June 1673 eighty-five volumes of manuscripts arrived from York in a rain-soaked condition, and how he spent the best part of a month drying them out on the leads of the library roof. 


@@@@@


doc= 7761


Dodsworth, William (1798-1861), Tractarian clergyman and Roman Catholic writer, was born on 19 March 1798 at Kirk Ella, Yorkshire, the third son of wealthy Hull timber merchant, John Dodsworth (1765-1818), and his wife, Harriet Haydon (died 1837). He was educated at Richmond School, Yorkshire, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1820 and MA in 1823. He was ordained in the Church of England, being made deacon in 1821 and priest in 1822. He served curacies at Saxby, Lincolnshire (1821), Stisted, Essex (1823), and Chiddingfold, Surrey (1826). At first he held evangelical doctrines, and was for a time associated with Edward Irving and his premillennialism, preaching at the Albury conferences. Through this connection he became in 1829 minister of Margaret Street Chapel, London, where he was a popular and gifted preacher. Despite breaking with Irving about 1830, he was strongly influenced by his former associate's incarnational theology, which influenced his innovative sacramental practice. By 1835 his works on the eucharist and on confirmation identified him with the Tractarian movement, and he took a leading role in the diffusion of its principles in London. He married Elizabeth (1799-1856), youngest daughter of Sir Francis Yarde Buller, second bt, and sister of the first Baron Churston, on 28 October 1830. They had seven children; the youngest, Cyril Dodsworth (1844-1907), became a Redemptorist priest in America. 
In 1837 Dodsworth was appointed perpetual curate of Christ Church, Albany Street, London, where, under the direction of E. B. Pusey, he put into practice the ideals of the Tractarian movement, and helped set up the first Anglican religious sisterhood at Park Village West. Although cautious in ritual matters, his services at Christ Church became important preaching venues for the Tractarian leaders. He was active in Bishop Blomfield's Metropolitan Church Building Fund, preached widely, and travelled on the continent with his friend and correspondent H. E. Manning. His faith in the Church of England was so shaken by the judgment in the Gorham case that he resigned his cure and joined the Roman Catholic church on 1 January 1851. Being married he could not take orders in that church, and after his conversion led a quiet life as a layman, publishing a small number of Roman Catholic apologetic works. After a long illness due to a stroke, he died at 7 York Terrace, Regent's Park, on 10 December 1861, and was buried in Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, London. 
Among his forty-seven known works the earliest reflect his evangelical and adventist period. The majority are Tractarian sermons or treatises. 'Discourses on the Lord's Supper' (1835) justified his restoration of the holy communion as the central Sunday service at the Margaret Street Chapel. 'The Church of England, a Protester Against Romanism and Dissent' (1836) was also influential. His Roman Catholic works included 'Popular Objections to Catholic Faith and Practice Considered' (1858). 


@@@@@


doc= 7762


Dodwell, Edward (1776/7-1832), traveller and archaeologist, was the son of Edward Dodwell (1747-1828), of West Molesey, Surrey, and his wife, Frances ('nee' Jennings). Dodwell's sister, Frances (1771/2-1857), was a watercolour painter who married the physician Sir Alexander Crichton (1763-1856); a younger brother, Harry, died in infancy about 1778. Dodwell was the grandson of Henry Dodwell, a London businessman, and his wife, Dulcabella. He was also the great-grandson of the prolific writer and theologian Henry Dodwell (1641-1711), fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, who from 1688 to 1691 occupied the post of Camden professor of history at Oxford. 
Dodwell was educated first at Parson's Green School, Middlesex, under Mr Waring, and second at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1798, and graduated BA in 1800. When young, he travelled in Scotland, Ireland, and England with his father and developed a taste for drawing buildings. Having private means he adopted no profession, though in 1823 he was described as 'a learned English architect' ('GM', 1823). He is known to have resided for some time in Paris. 
In 1801 Dodwell made a tour of Holland, Germany, Austria, and Italy. In April 1801 he arrived at Trieste to embark on his first tour of Greece; his 'intention was to visit Greece, to explore its antiquities, to compare its past with its present state, and to leave nothing unnoticed, which, to the classical reader, can be an object of interest, or a source of delight' (Dodwell, 1.1). On this journey, he was accompanied by his friend Sir William Gell (1777-1836), who also travelled with Dodwell through Greece in 1805 and 1806. From Trieste he proceeded to Venice, and on 29 April 1801 set sail in the merchant ship 'Lo Spirito Santo e la Nativita della Madonna', which was captained by Giovanni Marassi. Although this voyage was hampered by adverse weather conditions, by the end of May that year they had reached Corfu, where their passports were presented to Sir Speridion Foresti, the British consul-general. In June 1801 Dodwell travelled on to Ithaca, the island of Cephalonia, Patras, and through the provinces of Phocis and Boeotia, to Athens, and then on to the islands of the Greek archipelago, the coast of Troy, and Constantinople. 
Dodwell's second tour of Greece began on 1 February 1805 when he departed from Messina with his artist, Signor Simone Pomardi, in the Greek merchant ship 'Saint Speridion'. They landed at Zakinthos, and after about a week proceeded on their journey to Mesolongion, Patras, Galaxidhion, and Amfissa where they were met by Dr Andrea Cattani. Dodwell also visited the ruins at Delphi, Mount Parnassos, Levadhia, Thebes, and by about 26 March 1805 he had proceeded to Athens. 
At Athens Dodwell was required to make a payment to the disdar, or Turkish governor, for the privilege of making drawings and observations of the Acropolis. Dodwell offered only part payment of the fee, with the promise of full payment on completion of his drawings. The disdar, however, demanded the whole sum, which Dodwell refused: in turn, he was banned from entering the Acropolis. However, on reaching the Acropolis, Dodwell procured his entrance by bribing the guards 'by throwing a few paras amongst them'. Repeatedly visiting the Acropolis by this means, he 'acquired the name of the Frank of many Paras, and for a small expense purchased the civility of the soldiers' (Dodwell, 1.293). On a later occasion, while at the Parthenon, Dodwell attempted to explain his camera obscura to the disdar, who became perturbed and called Dodwell 'pig, devil, and Buonaparte', to which Dodwell replied that if he did not leave him unmolested, he would put him into his box (camera obscura). Apparently, the disdar did not trouble him again. 
From Athens, Dodwell journeyed out to the Attic Mountains, visiting Aegina, Piraeus, Thessalia, Chaeroneia and Orchomenos, Eleusis, and (about 30 November 1805) Corinth. Near Corinth, at the village of Mertese, he persuaded local villagers to open sepulchres a quarter of a mile from their village. A number of bones, vases, and an urn containing burnt remains, were extracted from these tombs; in addition he was informed by the villagers 'that a Jew of Corinth, who had lately been digging in this spot, had found several vases' (Dodwell, 2.197). On visiting this person, Dodwell found and procured an inscribed vase, the lid of which depicted a wild-boar chase, with the names of the actors written beside each painted human figure. This vase, referred to now as the 'Dodwell vase' or 'Dodwell pyxis', was one of a group of vases of Middle Corinthian oriental style now attributed to the 'Dodwell painter', who specialized in decorating vases with friezes of animals. 
After leaving Corinth, Dodwell also travelled across the Peloponnese, visiting Mycenae, Tiryns, Epidavros, Messene, Megalopolis, and Sparta. On 2 April 1806 he left Patras for Mesolongion, and a week later set out for Ithaca. Dodwell made a prolonged stay at Corfu until 16 May 1806 when he set sail for Messina in a Russian armed brig, 'Letun'. At Messina he met his acquaintance Mr Mackenzie, and on 12 August 1806 sailed in the merchant vessel 'Il Redivivo' to Civita Vecchia (which had been taken by the French some weeks before). Dodwell's ship next sailed for Leghorn where the passengers had to undergo a quarantine of twenty-one days. As a former prisoner of Bonaparte's government, Dodwell felt obliged (according to the terms of his parole) to surrender himself to the French; and his two years' leave of absence to quit France (to make his tour of Greece) had expired. Therefore, following quarantine, he disembarked and visited the French general at Civita Vecchia. He was indebted to the artists Granet and Paulin du Quelar, Count Annoni of Milan, the sculptor Dupaty, and the author Lechevalier, whose exertions secured permission for him, first, to travel in Greece and, second, to surrender himself at Rome, rather than Verdun. On 18 September 1806 Dodwell arrived at Rome. In this latter city and in Naples, he reportedly resided almost continuously for the remainder of his life. 
Dodwell spent two years examining Cyclopean buildings, making drawings of the walls of the cities of Argos, Tyrinthia, and Lycosurae and compared them with similar monuments in Italy. The most important of these drawings was considered to be that of Lycosurae, the ancient city of Arcadia, which was apparently discovered by Dodwell in 1805. In Greece, Dodwell also made some four hundred drawings, while his artist, Pomardi, made about six hundred. Dodwell also collected numerous coins in Greece, and during his lifetime formed an impressive collection of classical antiquities (see Braun, 'Notice sur le Musee Dodwell', 1837), including 115 bronzes and 143 vases. He sold the remarkable bronze reliefs from Perugia and an archaic head of a warrior to the crown prince of Bavaria. The location of a marble head from the west pediment of the Parthenon, once in his possession, is now unknown. 
Dodwell's publications included: 'Alcuni bassi rilievi della Grecia descritti e pubblicati in viii tavole' (1812); 'A Classical and Topographical Tour through Greece; during the Years 1801, 1805 and 1806' (2 vols., 1819), with a German translation by F. K. L. Sickler (1821-2); 'Views in Greece, from Drawings by E. Dodwell', with descriptions in English and French (1821); and 'Views and descriptions of Cyclopian or Pelasgic remains in Greece and Italy... from drawings by E. D.' (1834), which was also printed with French text and title in the same year. 
In 1816 Dodwell was elected an honorary member of the Royal Academy in Berlin, along with his friend Gell. Dodwell married late in life Theresa, the daughter of Count Giraud; she was at least twenty years his junior. There were no children from this marriage. His wife was described by Lady Blessington as 'one of the most faultless models of loveliness ever beheld' (Madden, 427); and when Moore saw Theresa Dodwell in society at Rome (October 1819), he remarked 'that beautiful creature, Mrs. Dodwell... her husband used to be a great favourite with the pope, who always called him 'Caro Doodle'' ('DNB'). Dodwell died at Rome on 13 May 1832 from the effects of an illness contracted in 1830 when exploring the Sabine Mountains near Rome. 
Dodwell was survived by his wife who married, second, in 1833, Count de Spaur, the Bavarian minister at Rome. She was responsible for organizing the pope's escape from the Vatican to Gaeta during the revolution of 1848. Gell, who acted as a trustee of Dodwell's estate, considered his friend's will most unjust towards Theresa, his widow. He left her just 12,500 scudi and, while the leased house and furniture also went to her, at the time it was doubtful whether she would inherit his museum and books. However, family records suggest that she did indeed acquire his collections of Greek, Roman, and other artefacts, including the Dodwell vase, which were later sold. The Dodwell vase, for example, now resides in the Staatliche Antikensammlungen und Glyptothek, Munich. Dodwell's sister, Lady Frances Crichton, who also survived him, inherited his Irish land. 


@@@@@


doc= 7763


Dodwell, Henry (1641-1711), scholar and theologian, was born in late October 1641 in the parish of St Warburgh, Dublin, the only surviving son of William Dodwell (died 1650), army officer, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 'c'.1651), daughter of Sir Francis Slingsby of Yorkshire. Dodwell was born a few days after the Irish rising of 1641 broke out. He spent his early years with his mother in Dublin while his father's estate in Connaught was possessed by the rebels. In 1648 the family left for London and thence to York where their relatives lived. Dodwell spent five years at the 'Free School in the Horsefair' (St Peter's School), where Christopher Wallis was his teacher. In 1650 his father died of the plague at Waterford on his way back to his estate. His mother died of consumption soon after, and Dodwell was left an orphan. He spent about a year in his uncle Henry Dodwell's house in Suffolk before continuing his education in Ireland. In 1656 he was admitted a pensioner to Trinity College, Dublin, where the eminent physician and scholar John Stearne was his tutor. Dodwell obtained a fellowship in 1662, when a bachelor of arts, and proceeded MA in 1663. He resigned the fellowship in 1666 because he did not wish to take orders when this was required by the statutes of the college. Though he always revered the priesthood, he felt personally insecure about ordination and more confident about serving the church as a lay scholar. 
From his days of study under Stearne, whom he admired as a philosophical thinker and a theologian, Dodwell developed a strong interest in philology, classical, biblical, and patristic history, and especially chronology. In his view these were the disciplines with which to acquire knowledge useful to the church of his own day. After Stearne's death in 1669 Dodwell as his literary executor published 'De obstinatione' (1672), together with a preface of his own. That same year saw the publication of 'Two Letters of Advice', a work which among other things emphasized the importance of historical and philological studies for students of divinity. The following year, he published anonymously 'Introduction to a Devout Life', an edition of St Francis of Sales's work adapted for protestant use. Dodwell had paid brief visits to England to study in the libraries but finally moved to London in 1674 in pursuit of learning and of contacts with English scholars. In 1675 he went to live and work with William Lloyd, then dean of Bangor, and from 1680 bishop of St Asaph. Lloyd had a reputation as a chronologist and asked Dodwell to join him in his studies. Dodwell accompanied Lloyd on his journeys in these years, and began publishing his own controversial works against Catholicism and nonconformity, for example his 'A reply to Mr [Richard] Baxter's pretended confutation of... Separation of churches from episcopal government... proved schismatical' (1681). Tensions developed between the men because of the 1688 revolution, Lloyd being a latitudinarian whig and Dodwell a high-church tory. Nevertheless, their literary and personal friendship survived these differences. 
In the early 1680s Dodwell's ambition to defend the Restoration church and episcopacy also led to a number of scholarly publications. At Oxford, which he visited regularly during this period, Dodwell found a congenial conservative climate and important patristic scholars who enlisted his help, such as John Fell, dean of Christ Church and bishop of Oxford, John Pearson, bishop of Chester, and Edward Bernard. Dodwell wrote 'Dissertationes Cyprianicae' (1682) at Fell's request. The work was also bound with copies of Fell's famous edition of St Cyprian that came out the same year. The several works of this patristic revival argued the close relationship between the church of primitive Christianity and the Anglican episcopal church. After Pearson's death (1686), Dodwell published his friend's posthumous works together with several essays of his own in 1688. 
All this time Dodwell held no university position, but his reputation for learning was growing. He was known to frequent the coffee houses in London and Oxford where he engaged in lively and learned debates on the religious and political issues of his time. With the support of William Lloyd, the biblical scholar John Mill and others at Oxford, Dodwell was elected to the Camden chair of history on 2 April 1688. He was incorporated MA at Hart Hall on 21 May and on 25 May gave a successful inaugural lecture on ancient chronology. This was followed by six lectures on the 'Historia Augusta', and a further series of sixteen on Hadrian, until 6 November 1691. Altogether nineteen lectures were published in 1692 as 'Praelectiones academicae in schola rhetorices Camdeniana', with which Dodwell impressed his contemporaries as a sophisticated humanist scholar. 
Dodwell's public career, however, was not to last much beyond the revolution of 1688. He published anonymously his 'Concerning the Case of Taking the New Oath of Fealty and Allegiance' in 1689, himself intending to refuse to take the oath to William and Mary. It was argued at the time that refusing the oath might not endanger his praelectorship, but as Dodwell wrote to Arthur Charlett on 11 March 1690, 'If I may not keep my place without Sin or Scandal, I desire not to keep it at all' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ballard 34, fols. 2-10). When his lectures had been stopped, Dodwell felt he was being forced to resign by the institution of the new oath. Therefore, he made sure to receive a certificate from the vice-chancellor of the university stating that his dismissal was on the grounds of nonjuring. This certificate, dated 19 November 1691, confirmed to Dodwell and his nonjuring friends that he had not resigned voluntarily. 
Dodwell developed his theology to justify the separation, becoming one of the first leaders of the nonjuring movement. 'A Cautionary Discourse of Schism' (1691) after the suspension of the bishops was soon followed by 'A vindication of the deprived bishops, asserting their spiritual rights against a lay-deprivation' (1692). This work answered Humphrey Hody's 'Anglicani novi schismatis', published in English as 'The Unreasonableness of a Separation from the New Bishops' (1691). Both Hody and Dodwell argued their cases by examining historical precedents. Hody presented an ancient Greek manuscript in the Bodleian (Bodl. Oxf., MS Baroccian 142), but Dodwell proved Hody's scholarship flawed. In order to defend the deprivation of the nonjuring bishops, Hody had repressed part of the manuscript which contained canons requiring a synod to validate a deprivation. Dodwell's point that the new bishops were schismatical was based on the writings of St Cyprian. In Dodwell's patristic theology the secular ruler could not replace bishops who had been canonically appointed. The church was envisioned as a divine society with independent jurisdiction in spiritual matters, separate from the state and its temporal affairs. Dodwell's fight against Erastianism in these and following publications considerably influenced the high-church Anglicanism of his time. 
After his deprivation in 1691 Dodwell wished to live in retirement and moved to Cookham, a village in Berkshire. He came to know Francis Cherry, a Jacobite squire from nearby Shottesbrooke, and the two met regularly in a Maidenhead coffee house, discussing religion and politics. Becoming close friends, Cherry desired Dodwell to move closer to a manor house he owned in White Waltham. On 29 June 1694 Dodwell married Anne Elliot (died 1750), the daughter of his landlord from Cookham. Upon their marriage Dodwell and his wife moved to Shottesbrooke where Cherry fitted them up with a house. They had ten children, of whom two sons, Henry Dodwell (1706-1784) and William Dodwell (1709-1785), and four daughters survived him. 
Shottesbrooke developed into an important centre for nonjurors and scholars, with regular visitors such as Thomas Ken, Charles Leslie, Robert Nelson, George Hickes, Edmund Gibson, and White Kennett. Francis Brokesby functioned as nonjuror family chaplain and was to become Dodwell's biographer. Cherry had taken the promising student Thomas Hearne into his house and Dodwell introduced the boy to the discipline of classical philology. While pursuing his own career as Oxford antiquary a decade later, a grateful and admiring Hearne filled his diaries with detailed biographical information about Dodwell. Shottesbrooke was also visited by scholars from abroad. Dodwell came to know a group of German scholars, among them Gottlieb Schelwig, C. M. Pfaff, and J. C. Wolf, who visited Oxford to work in the Bodleian Library and afterwards kept up a correspondence with Dodwell and Hearne. 
Dodwell continued to defend the Church of England and episcopacy in scholarly and theological writings, but he could not be happy with the schism as a permanent situation in the church. As early as 1700, and unknown to the nonjuror bishops, he tried unsuccessfully to come to an understanding with Archbishop Tenison. Dodwell foresaw another opportunity to heal the breach when, eventually, all deprived nonjuror bishops would have either died or relinquished their sees. In his view, the schism could not be maintained once the situation of two bishops to one see or 'altar against altar' no longer existed, even though the deprivations had been invalid. Dodwell explained his position in 'A case in view considered... proving that (in case our present invalidly deprived fathers shall leave all their sees vacant, either by death or resignation) we shall not then be obliged to keep up our separation from those bishops, who are as yet involved in the guilt of the present unhappy schism' (1705). The Anglican doctrines of non-resistance and passive obedience were to be heeded, despite remaining irreconcilable differences concerning liturgy and prayers. In January 1710, when Bishop Lloyd of Norwich died and Thomas Ken, the last surviving deprived bishop, ceded his claim to the bishopric of Bath and Wells, Dodwell and the Shottesbrooke group returned to the Church of England. 'The Case in View now in Fact' (1711) confirmed the end of the schism. Other nonjurors followed, though it is not known how many. 
Dodwell's leadership of the nonjurors, however, was no longer undisputed by this time. His tendency to present himself as the champion of Anglican religion provoked bad feelings and jealousies. Increasingly, friends had come to criticize his scholarship and theological speculations. Some, like fellow nonjuror Henry Gandy in 'A Conference between Gerontius and Junius' (1711), argued that Dodwell's ideas about ending the schism were inconsistent with his earlier writings. Gandy and others were especially baffled by his ideas about the mortality of the soul in 'An epistolary discourse, proving, from the scriptures and the first fathers, that the soul is a principle naturally mortal' (1706). Immortality, Dodwell maintained, was a gift of God through baptism by episcopally ordained clergy only. Though published in times of heated party debates about the constitution of the church, some of Dodwell's friends considered that his theological speculations were damaging their cause. During the next three years, attacks in sermon and pamphlet, including Edmund Chishull's charge of heresy, left Dodwell a bitter man. 
Nonjurors such as George Hickes, Thomas Wagstaffe, Henry Gandy, Thomas Smith, and even Thomas Hearne among others, though supporting Dodwell's arguments against nonconformity, did not follow him in his return to the church. In fact the first two nonjuror bishops (Hickes and Wagstaffe) had been newly consecrated in secret in 1694 in order to maintain the schism. The remaining group of nonjurors led by Hickes saw no reason to end the separation on the basis of Dodwell's Cyprianic principles. With Hickes the nonjurors developed into a sect outside the Church of England, though still claiming to represent the remnant of the only true Catholic church. 
Dodwell wished his scholarship to serve the causes of the established church. Nevertheless, his vast output of philological and historical studies remains valuable regardless of their possible application to the religious or political issues of his day. His great passion was the study of chronology and historiography of the ancient world. He produced numerous series of treatises on classical authors such as Lactantius, Irenaeus, Cicero, Thucydides, Xenophon, Velleius Paterculus, Quintilian, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus. Some were published in the classical editions of other scholars. For Bodley's librarian John Hudson, for example, Dodwell wrote introductions to the Greek geographers (published in four volumes 1698-1712) and he advised Hearne on his editions of Livy and Eutropius. Dodwell's first truly antiquarian publication was 'A Discourse Concerning Sanchoniathon's Phoenician History' (1681), which showed his independent critical spirit and approach in proving the then much cited work a forgery. Dodwell was involved in the scholarly debates of the eighteenth-century 'Battle of the books' between the ancients and the moderns. He contributed 'An invitation to gentlemen to acquaint themselves with ancient history' to a new edition of Degory Wheare's 'Method and Order of Reading... Histories' (1694), and corresponded with Richard Bentley and William Lloyd about the epistles of Phalaris, trying to defend them as authentic historical documents. However, in his rather delayed publication of 'Exercitationes duae' (1704), the two dissertations on the age of Phalaris and Pythagoras, Dodwell had to content himself with the discussion of minor chronological problems, tacitly granting Bentley's main point on the forgery. 
Dodwell's great chronological study and life's work was 'De veteribus Graecorum Romanorumque cyclis' (1701), an impressive and well-received study of all the chronological systems of the classical world. An abridged version was published by Edmond Halley and reprinted in Brokesby's 'Life of Dodwell'. Other antiquarian studies, especially those on recently unearthed ancient objects, were undertaken by Dodwell when such antiquary friends as William Musgrave, Thomas Hearne, and John Woodward aroused his enthusiasm for the chronological problems involved. Thus Dodwell worked on the dating of a Latin inscription for a study of Roman Britain, 'Julii Vitalis epitaphium' (1711), and on the interpretation of a relief representing the sacking of Rome on a supposedly genuine Roman shield in Woodward's possession. Woodward's shield caused a stir in the international scholarly world. Dodwell's learned and minutely detailed contribution was left unfinished at his death but published by Hearne as 'Henrici Dodwelli de parma equestri Woodwardiana dissertatio' (1713). 
As a scholar Dodwell was renowned for his erudition, piety, and integrity, both at home and abroad. Dodwell corresponded with important foreign scholars such as J. G. Graevius, Antonio Magliabecchi, Cardinal Noris, and Jacob Perizonius, and his works were given respectful attention in English and continental journals. He was also criticized for his obscure and digressive style, something he felt insecure about himself. Brokesby ascribed Dodwell's obscurity to his not being among people enough to know how to communicate his learning. The less charitable opinions of contemporaries such as the bishops Burnet, Kennett, and Nicolson were often coloured by political and religious prejudice. Later in the century, Edward Gibbon appreciated Dodwell's erudition but was also critical: the 'worst of this author is his method and style, the one perplexed beyond imagination, the other negligent to a degree of barbarism' ('Gibbon's Journal', 82). Dodwell indeed presents the modern reader with intricate and at times unintelligible arguments, and scholars today agree that his conclusions were not always right (and often could not be, considering the complexity of the problems). Yet his work contains a variety and an abundance of historical detail and original observations about events in classical history. Most important was his effort, through elaborate chronological studies, to recover and reconstruct the ancient past and its historical sources. According to Joseph Levine, 'Dodwell's criticism, like that of the best of his contemporaries, had advanced beyond the possibilities of Renaissance philology. Scholars of 1700 were no longer content to discover and to expose legend and forgery; they had begun the task of reconstruction as well. (Levine, 'Woodward's Shield', 210)' Dodwell struggled with deteriorating eyesight in the last years of his life. He died of a consumption on 7 June 1711 after a brief period of illness. He was buried on 9 June in the chancel of his parish church at Shottesbrooke in Berkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 7764


Dodwell, Henry (1706-1784), religious controversialist and barrister, was born on 25 November 1706 at Shottesbrooke, Berkshire, the fourth child and eldest son of Henry Dodwell (1641-1711), classical scholar and theologian, and Anne Elliot (died 1750). Educated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 17 April 1723, he proceeded BA on 9 February 1726 and went on to study law. He entered the Middle Temple on 15 January 1731, from where he was called to the bar on 10 February 1738. He later became a bencher (1767) of the Middle Temple and served as reader from Lent 1775 and as treasurer from 1778. 
Dodwell was an early participant in the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. However, he is remembered largely because of his satirical assault on the fideism of William Law and other orthodox apologists in a book entitled 'Christianity not Founded on Argument' (1741). Though it was published anonymously Dodwell was widely known to be the book's author. The supposed thesis of the work is that reason cannot be the foundation of vital Christian faith; Dodwell argued that the notion 'that your Assent to Revealed Truths should be founded upon the Conviction of your Understanding' was 'false and unwarranted' ('Christianity not Founded on Argument', 7). Rather, belief in Christ must be maintained in opposition to the dictates of fallen reason. Moreover he questioned: 'whether that Person does not enjoy his Belief with much greater Tranquility and Confidence of Spirit, who never asked himself but one Single Question about it, than he, who by the most elaborate Discussions, and busiest Search, has attained to the utmost Degree of Moral Assurance in the Matter. (ibid., 29)' This reasoning parodies the argument contained in William Law's lucid 'The Case of Reason' (1731), in which the talented and pious Law argues against the general aggrandizement of reason in all areas of human existence. 
Though written by a deist and in opposition to Christian apologists 'Christianity not Founded on Argument' was read by many as a serious and even important defence of the faith. The long battle with deism had taken its toll on public confidence in argument, and less discerning readers found in Dodwell a sensible retreat to a faith not dependent on an individual's capacity as a logician. Methodists in particular were drawn to Dodwell's argument and some recommended it to John Wesley himself. Dodwell's thesis complemented the Wesleyan doctrines of new birth and instantaneous conversion. Dodwell had written: 'the Holy Ghost irradiates the souls of believers at once with an irresistible light from heaven that flashes conviction in a moment, so that this faith is completed in an instant, and the most perfect and finished creed produced at once without any tedious progress in deductions of our own.' Wesley, however, was not taken in by Dodwell's satire: 'On a careful perusal of that piece, notwithstanding my prejudice in its favour, I could not but perceive that the great design uniformly pursued throughout the work was to render the whole of the Christian institution both odious and contemptible. His point throughout is to prove that Christianity is contrary to reason, or that no man acting according to the principles of reason can possibly be a Christian. (J. Wesley, 'Earnest Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion', 1743, 14)' Wesley adds the cautionary note that Dodwell's book 'is a wonderful proof of the power that smooth words may have even on serious minds that so many have mistook such a writer as this for a friend of Christianity' (ibid.). 
Dodwell's most ardent respondent, Philip Doddridge, published three letters in reply to 'Christianity not Founded on Argument' in 1742-3. Doddridge asked indignantly, in response to Dodwell's charge that faith made no reference to reason: 'Can anyone indeed seriously think, that the noblest of our powers was intended only to the lowest and meanest purposes; to serve the little offices of moral life, and not to be consulted in the greatest concerns; those of immortality? Strange! (P. Doddridge, 'The Perspicuity and Solidity of the Evidences for Christianity', 1742, 10)' The most authoritative of the anti-deistic writers, John Leland, wrote an entire work on Dodwell's subject, entitled 'Remarks on a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, 'Christianity not Founded on Argument'' (1744), and devoted a chapter to it in his 'View of the Principal Deistical Writers' (1757). Dodwell was also answered by George Benson in 'The Reasonableness of the Christian Religion as Delivered in the Scriptures' (1743) and by Thomas Randolph in 'The Christian Faith a Rational Assent' (1744). Dodwell's own brother William Dodwell preached two sermons against the book before the University of Oxford. These repudiations notwithstanding, even William Law, apparently one of the objects of Dodwell's satire, maintained the possibility that 'Christianity not Founded on Argument' had been written by an earnest Christian. Dodwell died in 1784. 


@@@@@


doc= 7765


Dodwell, William (1709-1785), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born at Shottesbrooke, Berkshire, on 17 June 1709, the second son and fifth child of Henry Dodwell (1641-1711), Jacobite and nonjuror, and his wife, Anne Elliot (died 1750). His elder brother was Henry Dodwell (1706-1784), religious controversialist. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 23 March 1726 and proceeded BA in 1729 and MA in 1732. On 27 November 1740, at Bray church, he married Elizabeth Brown ('b'. 1712), who was probably the daughter of the Revd Thomas Brown, vicar of Bray, and Elizabeth, his wife. Dodwell took holy orders and, thanks to the patronage of the resident squire, Arthur Vansittart, became rector of Shottesbrooke, vicar of White Waltham in 1742, and vicar of Bucklesbury in 1749. Other preferment followed, due in the first instance to Dodwell's polemical skills rather than the pastoral gifts that he also possessed, perhaps in smaller measure. Thomas Sherlock, while bishop of Salisbury, awarded him the prebendal stall of Grantham Australis in Salisbury Cathedral in 1748 (collated 5 October) and he was subsequently given a residentiary canonry there (collated 2 November 1754). In 1763 (collated 25 October) Sherlock's successor, John Thomas, made Dodwell archdeacon of Berkshire -- an inspired choice, since he took seriously the need for the clergy to pursue lives of practical holiness, a concern reflected in his 'Practical Discourses on Moral Subjects' (2 vols., 1748-9). 
Dodwell was one of the staunchest defenders of orthodoxy produced by the Church of England in the eighteenth century. Unsurprisingly, given his background, his position was high-church in essentials but moderate withal; he took care to distance himself from both the Jacobitism and the deism that had characterized his father and brother Henry respectively. Dodwell had no doubt that faith was the highest good and comfort available to mankind. His own position was well articulated in 'Two sermons on 1 Peter iii. 15 on the nature, procedure, and effects of a rational faith, preached before the University of Oxford, 11 March and 24 June 1744' (1745); in reply to his brother's 'Christianity not Founded on Argument' he emphasized that 'The Fundamentals of Christianity are on all sides acknowledged to be few, plain and easy' (p. 69). But this was by no means a non-dogmatic version of Anglicanism. 'The Practical Influence of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity Represented' (1745), preached at St Mary's, Oxford, before the university, criticized those believers who had 'given up all the distinguishing Articles of Revealed [religion], in compliance with the professed advocates of natural religion' (p. 28). This could not be justified when trinitarianism was 'the very essence of the Christian Religion, the foundation of the whole Revelation, and connected with every part of it' (p. 19). Dodwell expounded his position in 'Three Charges on the Athanasian Creed', originally delivered to the Berkshire clergy but not published until 1802. 
Dodwell was punctilious in defending the apostolic deposit of faith against all those who would modify, abridge, or deny it. In 'The desirableness of the Christian faith illustrated and applied: a sermon preached at the triennial visitation of the Rt Rev Father in God Thomas, lord bishop of Sarum, held at Reading, 30 August 1744' (1744) he deplored the growth in number of 'speculative infidels' (p. 2) and insisted that 'an infidel in calamity is the most miserable creature, that imagination can paint' (p. 18). Bolingbroke was a particular target in 'The Doctrine of a Particular Providence Stated, Confirmed, Defended and Applied in Two Sermons' (1760), a topic of central importance for contemporary defenders of Christianity. Dodwell directed most of his polemical energies against those whom he saw as distorting the faith, among them Conyers Middleton, William Romaine, and William Whiston. In 'A free answer to Dr Middleton's free inquiry into the miraculous powers of the primitive church' (1749), he defended the church fathers and contested each of Middleton's four main criticisms of the primitive church and its use of miracles; there were occasions, he insisted, when they could be convincingly vindicated 'to the satisfaction of men of sense' (p. 21). He queried Romaine's grasp of the 'Old Testament' in 'Dissertation on Jephthah's Vow, Occasioned by Rev. William Romaine's Sermon on the Subject' (1745), and in 'The eternity of future punishment asserted and vindicated: two sermons preached before the University of Oxford on Sunday, 21 Mar 1741' (1743) he attacked what he believed was Whiston's blatantly heretical theology, suggesting that: 'these Attempts to distinguish away the Sense of the most vital parts of our religion, by Those, who in profession are friends to the authority of it, are rather more prejudicial than the open attacks of those, who more consistently reject the whole. (preface)' If Dodwell was never the most feared spokesman for theological correctness, neither was his reputation tainted by a tendency to acerbity or an insistence on having the last word on any matter. His linguistic skills and his familiarity with the primary documents of the Church of England (including patristic authorities and the Caroline divines) made him also something of a liturgist. His 'The sick man's companion, or, The clergyman's assistant in visiting the sick, with a dissertation on prayer' (1767) is a remarkable series of prayers, inspired by the 'Book of Common Prayer', for all sorts of afflicted men and women, such as 'for one that is recovered/under a relapse', 'one that wants sleep', 'prisoners before or after trial'. This work, like the rest of Dodwell's output, reflected his satisfaction with his confession's primitive character. In 'A charge delivered to the clergy of the archdeaconry of Berks. at the late visitation, in May 1764' (1764) he returned to his favourite theme of the early church, insisting that the protestant religion was as old as the 'New Testament': 'All the primitive Churches in the world were of our religion' (p. 27). It was wholly appropriate that the degree of DD, by diploma, was conferred on him by the University of Oxford, on 23 February 1750. 
Dodwell wrote copiously and published a large number of sermons in addition to those already discussed. He also published 'Letter to the Author of Considerations on the Act to Prevent Clandestine Marriages', with a postscript prompted by Stebbing's 'Enquiry into the Annulling Clauses in London' (1755). He died on 23 October 1785, leaving a large family, and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral, where there is a monumental inscription composed by his old friend Bishop Charles Moss. 


@@@@@


doc= 7766


Doget, John (d. 1501), humanist scholar and college head, was the nephew of Cardinal Thomas Bourchier, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1486), to whom Doget must have owed much of the considerable church patronage later bestowed on him. He was born in Sherborne, Dorset, and was probably educated in Bourchier's household before being admitted to Eton College as a king's scholar about 1447. From Eton he passed to King's College, Cambridge, in 1451, and became a fellow there in 1454. His humanist interests were no doubt encouraged at King's by the presence of a number of books from the library of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447), which gave King's the largest and most up-to-date collection of books in any of the Cambridge colleges. These books included the 'Phaedo' of Plato, and the 'Republic' in the Latin translation of Pier Candido Decembrio (now BL, Harley MS 1705). 
In 1460 Doget took orders as a priest, and was granted leave to incept in theology in 1464. But in the same year he left Cambridge for Padua, the first of a number of King's fellows to follow this route. However, he was swindled out of more than $50, intended to support him in Padua, by a London shearman named James Fynde, and had to leave, subsequently migrating to Bologna, where he studied canon law and earned his doctorate in 1469. He returned to Cambridge and continued his collection of benefices, which had begun with his appointment as archdeacon of Chichester in 1463. Papal dispensation enabled him to become a prebendary at Lincoln, Salisbury, and Southwell; to which were added by papal provision in 1479 canonries at Cambrai, St Omer, and St Mary's, Antwerp. He was also rector of Havant and Odiham, Hampshire, Eastbourne, Sussex, and Winterbourne Zelstone, Dorset, and became chancellor of Salisbury (1486) and Lichfield (1489) and master of Trinity College, Arundel (1499). 
Doget was prolocutor of the clergy in the convocation of Canterbury in 1473, and was entrusted with important diplomatic duties in 1479-80. He was sent to Rome to help arrange a peace between Pope Sixtus IV ('r'. 1471-84) and Florence in 1479, dealing also with the princes of Sicily and Hungary. He was then appointed to an embassy to the king of Denmark. The standing he had attained at court was not affected either by the death of Edward IV, or by that of Richard III, whose domestic chaplain Doget had become in 1483. It was Henry VII who presented him to the provostship of his old college in 1499. At his death he bequeathed all his books on canon law and theology to King's, while also making bequests to the poor in the many parishes with which he was connected. His prosperity had taken a sad blow in 1491, when the fire that had destroyed his rectory house and outbuildings at Eastbourne cost him $600, so he claimed. John Doget's will is dated 4 March 1501. He died the following month, and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral. 
Doget's principal claim to fame lies in his authorship of 'Examinatorium in Phaedonem Platonis', the first philosophical work by an English humanist. Dedicated to Cardinal Bourchier, to whom it must have been presented between 1473, when the latter became a cardinal, and his death in 1486, it survives in the British Library as Add. MS 10344. The script is italic and is probably that of Doget himself. But the parchment and illuminated vine-stem initials are English. The text of the 'Phaedo' on which Doget comments is the translation of Leonardo Bruni. As Roberto Weiss has pointed out in the commentary, 'his aim appears to have been an interpretation of some of Plato's passages as Christian maxims. Because of this he deals principally with an explanation of obscure passages in the 'Phaedo', which are presented so as to emphasize their common points with Christian doctrine' (Weiss, 166). The Neoplatonic texts cited by Doget, which include Marsilio Ficino's Latin version of the 'Pimander', or 'Poemander', of Hermes Trismegistus, are seen through the prism of Christian apologetics, and the 'Phaedo' was no doubt chosen in the first place as a vehicle for his commentary because it could be presented as a mythologized version of Christian doctrine. Doget's manuscript was later purchased by another humanist, Robert Sherborn, bishop of Chichester (died 1536). 


@@@@@


doc= 7767


Doggett, Thomas (c.1670-1721), actor and theatre manager, was born in Castle Street, Dublin, though nothing is known of his family or upbringing. Apparently by his early teens he was already engaged as a thespian, being listed in a 1684-5 manuscript cast for an intended production of John Fletcher's 'The Night Walker' at Smock Alley, and various authorities have suggested that for the next several years he performed as a stroller. He eventually made his way to London, where in January 1691 his appearance at Drury Lane as Deputy Nincompoop in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Love for Money' marked the beginning of a long and successful career. It was his creation of the role of Solon in D'Urfey's 'The Marriage-Hater Matched' at Drury Lane a year later that marked his first triumph: the 'London Mercury' remarked that the author ought 'to present Mr Dogget... with half the Profit of his Third Day' as the play's success 'was half owing to that admirable Actor' (26 Feb 1692). During the next twenty years Doggett went on to establish himself as one of the most talented and versatile comedians on the London stage, being termed by John Downes ('c'.1708) as 'the only Comick Original now Extant' (Downes, 108). 
In the early years of his career Doggett performed numerous comic roles, and became a personal favourite of William Congreve. The playwright tailored characters for Doggett's talents, from Fondlewife in 'The Old Bachelor' to Ben in 'Love for Love'. To these successes can be added Sancho Panza in D'Urfey's 'Don Quixote' (pt 1), Mass Johnny in Colley Cibber's 'The School-Boy', Savil in Fletcher's 'The Scornful Lady', Marplot in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Busy Body', Sir Oliver in George Etherege's 'She Would if she Could', and Sir Tristram Cash in Charles Johnson's 'The Wife's Relief', to name only a few of literally dozens of parts. On occasion he could also perform roles of a quite different nature, such as Shylock in George Granville's 'The Jew of Venice', and his singing in D'Urfey's 'The Richmond Heiress' earned him the praise of John Dryden. 
Early in his career Doggett recognized his own acting gifts, and like his fellow performer Colley Cibber with 'Love's Last Shift', created a play featuring himself in the best role. 'The Country Wake' received its premiere in April 1696, with Doggett in the role of Hob. This play achieved some initial success, but became wildly popular in its later revised form as 'Hob, or, The Country Wake' (first performed 6 October 1711; published 1715), an afterpiece which achieved notable success for decades. There is controversy over the authorship of 'The Country Wake', with Cibber frequently being mentioned as the adapter, but no convincing evidence has surfaced to prove Cibber's hand, and Doggett was certainly competent enough to revise his own play. The enduringly successful 'Hob' inspired at least three later adaptations or sequels: 'Hob's Wedding' (1720, by John Leigh), 'Flora, an Opera' (1729, by James Hippisley), and 'A Sequel to Flora' (1732, also by Hippisley). 
Always a shrewd negotiator, Doggett exhibited a keen sense for advancing his career. During 1695-6, for example, he moved back and forth several times between Christopher Rich's Drury Lane troupe and Thomas Betterton's newly formed company at Lincoln's Inn Fields, playing one offer against the other. He also realized early on that he had management potential. In 1697, uncomfortable with Rich's unjust and irregular business practices, but in apparent default of his London contract, he obtained permission under the patronage of Henry Howard, seventh duke of Norfolk, to perform in Norwich, an opportunity which he renewed several times, interspersed with intermittent and limited London appearances, through 1700. The running of the Norwich company allowed him to develop expertise that would later prove invaluable, and he evinced considerable ambition, as exemplified in his production of Betterton's 'Dioclesian' in 1700, thought to be the first performance of an opera in England outside London. Nevertheless, Rich served Doggett with a warrant in Norwich in 1697, recalling him to London for a hearing. Doggett, Cibber tells us, 'was not, in the least intimidated, by this formidable Summons'. He 'was not only discharg'd, but the Process of his Confinement (according to common Fame) had a Censure pass'd upon it in Court', for the plaintiffs 'had mistaken their Man' in regard to both legal knowledge and tenacity (Cibber, 193). The vindicated Doggett returned to Norwich, but in autumn 1702 he rejoined Betterton's company, where he remained for several seasons. The 1706-7 season found him once again heading the duke of Norfolk's provincial troupe. 
A turning point in Doggett's affairs took place in March 1709, when he joined with Robert Wilks and Cibber to form a partnership with Owen Swiny to perform later that year at Vanbrugh's Haymarket Theatre. After experiencing several tempestuous seasons, on 6 December 1712 he signed yet another agreement with Wilks, Cibber, and William Collier to operate at the Drury Lane Theatre, a partnership arrangement which very quickly established itself, both artistically and economically. The need to add a fourth partner, Barton Booth, in November 1713 precipitated a crisis which by summer 1714 resulted in Doggett's exit from performance and management at Drury Lane, though he still retained ownership of his share of the business. Doggett remained intransigent in demanding that his one-third share not be diluted by the addition of new partners. His position, as reported by Cibber, was simply that 'nothing but the Law, should make him part with [i.e., share] his Property' (Cibber, 259). From mid-1714 onwards Doggett was no longer actively concerned in the Drury Lane management, and the protracted legal dispute was not resolved until 6 March 1716, when Doggett received $600 and back interest on his share, terms far less favourable than he had hoped to achieve. Relations with Wilks and Cibber improved after the settlement, and he eventually returned to the company to act from time to time. However, 1 April 1717 is thought to be his last-known performance on the stage, appropriately as Hob in 'The Country Wake'. 
Doggett's retirement years saw large changes in his personal affairs. The 'Original Weekly Journal' of 23-30 August 1718 announced that he was 'lately married to a gentlewoman of 20,000 l. fortune'. This sizeable sum, when added to his own considerable earnings from the stage, allowed him, on 1 August 1716 (being the second anniversary of the accession of George I), to establish an endowment for an annual race on the Thames and award for the Watermen's Guild, as an expression of his staunch whiggism. The race, with its award of 'Doggett's Coat and Badge' remained as a tradition enduring at least to the end of the twentieth century. The new Mrs Doggett was dead by 1721, and her husband followed her on 20 September 1721; he was buried in Eltham, Kent, on 25 September. No verifiable likenesses of Doggett are known, though a portrait reported to be his image hangs in the Garrick Club and another by Thomas Murray is at Sherborne Castle, Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 7768


Dogherty, Thomas (d. 1805), legal writer, was born in Ireland, the son of Patrick Dogherty of Edenderry, King's county. Educated at a country school, he later moved to England, and became clerk to Mr Foster Bower, an eminent pleader or legal writer. He spent more than sixteen years in this capacity, studying law industriously, and making from his master's manuscripts, and those of Sir Joseph Yates and Sir Thomas Davenport, vast collections of precedents and notes. However, about 1785, on Bower's advice, he became a special pleader, concerned with drawing up the written proceedings of lawsuits. Dogherty was admitted a member of Gray's Inn on 4 October 1804. For some years he held the office of clerk of indictments on the Chester circuit. 
In 1787 Dogherty wrote 'The Crown Circuit Assistant', in 1790 and 1799 he edited the sixth and seventh editions of 'The Crown Circuit Companion', and in 1800 he brought out an edition of Sir Matthew Hale's 'The History of the Pleas of the Crown'. Dogherty wore himself out with hard work and died at his chambers in Clifford's Inn on 29 September 1805, leaving a large family ill-provided for. Describing Dogherty as a self-taught genius, an obituary praised 'his modest and unassuming manners, his independent mind, his strict honour and probity' ('GM', 1074). 


@@@@@


doc= 7769


Dogfael (fl. 6th cent.), holy man, is the patron saint and presumed founder of the church of St Dogmael, known in Welsh as Llandudoch, situated on the south side of the Teifi, opposite Cardigan. In 1120 a Tironian priory was established on the site under the patronage of Robert fitz Martin, lord of Cemais, but the name remained. Robert's charter distinguishes the church of St Dogmael from the adjacent land of Llandudoch. Yet, in spite of this and of phonological objections which have been raised, it is likely that Tudoch was simply a pet form of the name Dogfael. His usual feast day was 31 October. There is no life of Dogfael, but the genealogies of the saints make his father Ithel a son of Ceredig ap Cunedda, the eponymous ancestor of the ruling kindred of Ceredigion. The centre of Dogfael's cult, however, was to the south of the Teifi in the cantrefs of Cemais and Pebidiog in Dyfed (in the north of the later Pembrokeshire), as shown by his churches: apart from St Dogmael's, they were the nearby Capel Degwel, St Dogwell's near Fishguard, Mynachlog-ddu, and Meline. The only clear trace of his cult outside north Pembrokeshire is Llanddogwel (Llanddygfael) in Anglesey (now attached to Llanfechell). The affiliation to a son of Ceredig ap Cunedda may have been in defence of the expansionist aims of the descendants of Rhodri Mawr (died 878), king of Gwynedd. The saintly Dogfael is not to be confused with his supposed great-uncle, another son of Cunedda, who was the eponymous ancestor of the ruling kindred of Dogfeiling, later a commote of Dyffryn Clwyd. 


@@@@@


doc= 7770


Doherty, John (1783-1850), judge, was born in Dublin, the son of John Doherty of Dublin. He was educated at Chester School in England and later at Trinity College, Dublin, where he obtained his BA in 1806 and his LLD in 1814. He was called to the Irish bar in 1808 and joined the Leinster circuit; he took silk in 1823. His progress at the bar was slow, but he was known for his wit and powers of oratory. 
From 1824 to 1826 Doherty was the elected MP for New Ross, co. Wexford. In 1826 connections with the Bushe family and with George Canning, then premier, aided his return for Kilkenny as a liberal tory. He became solicitor-general on 18 June 1827, during Canning's administration, and was re-elected for Kilkenny. In 1828 he was elected a bencher of the King's Inns, Dublin; from July to December 1830 he was MP for Newport, Cornwall; and on 23 December 1830 he was appointed lord chief justice of the common pleas, with a seat in the privy council, on the promotion of Lord Plunket to the lord chancellorship of Ireland. 
Although a committed protestant, Doherty supported Catholic emancipation and is better remembered for his political activity than for his career as a judge. He was one of Peel's chief advisers on Irish policy and impressed the house with his fluency on both Irish matters and policy in general. As solicitor-general he had led the prosecution in a case of conspiracy to murder, 'the Doneraile conspiracy', debated in the house on 15 May 1830. Daniel O'Connell represented the Catholic defendants and later in the house raised charges of impropriety against Doherty in relation to the conduct of the case. In refuting O'Connell's charges, Doherty won fame for his oratory as well as winning the case. 
In 1834 Sir Robert Peel asked Doherty to retire from the judicial bench, with the view of resuming his position in parliament. However, Doherty refused, stating that he had left politics behind upon his ascension to the bench. He was a commissioner for education and lost a large fortune through railway speculation. He retired to Beaumaris, north Wales, and died from heart disease on 8 September 1850. He left a widow, Elizabeth Lucy Doherty, formerly Wall, and several children. He was buried at St Kevin's churchyard, Dublin. A portrait of Doherty by Martin Cregan was acquired by the National Gallery of Ireland and an anonymous print was obtained by the National Portrait Gallery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7771


Doig, David (1718/19-1800), writer on history and philosophy, was born at Monifieth, Forfarshire, where he was baptized on 17 February 1719. His father, also David Doig, who was a small farmer, died while his son was an infant, and his mother remarried. Because of poor eyesight Doig did not learn to read until he was twelve; but after only three years at the parochial school he was successful in a Latin competition for a bursary at the University of St Andrews. Having completed the classical and philosophical course with distinction, Doig graduated BA. He began the study of divinity, but scruples regarding the Westminster confession of faith prevented him from entering the ministry. From 1749 he taught in the parochial schools of Monifieth and of Kennoway and Falkland in Fife. A few years later his growing reputation gained him the rectorship of the grammar school of Stirling, an office which he held for more than forty years. In addition to Greek and Latin, Doig mastered Hebrew and Arabic, and was generally well read in the history and literature of the Middle East and India. The University of Glasgow conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD, and on the same day he received from St Andrews his MA. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. 
Doig published three separate works. The first was some twenty pages of annotation on the 'Gaberlunzie-Man' included in 'Two Ancient Scottish Poems' (1782), edited by his friend and neighbour John Callander of Craigforth. The purpose of the annotations was to illustrate etymological principles set out in Callander's preface by tracing European languages to Asian roots. In 1792 he published his most significant work, 'Two Letters on the Savage State, Addressed to the Late Lord Kaims'. Dated 1774-6 and written in immediate response to Kames's 'Sketches of the History of Man' (1774), the letters attack the view, prominent among the moderate literati and their friends, that human nature is perfectible and that history is progressive. Doig, whose thought was shaped by the Episcopalian traditions of St Andrews as well as by his close friendship with the Episcopal clergyman George Gleig, argued that human nature is corrupt and that history demonstrates degeneration rather than progress. Whenever progress does occur, it is the result of the direct interposition of Providence. Doig's eventual decision to publish the letters in the midst of the French Revolution, with a dedication to George Horne, bishop of Norwich and outspoken critic of David Hume and Adam Smith, suggests that he had come to see himself as part of a Scottish reaction against perfectibility, infidelity, and revolution. His third publication was a topographical poem reflecting his historical and antiquarian interests. Entitled 'Extracts from a Poem on the Prospect from Stirling Castle' (1796), the poem consists of five distinct parts. 
Besides his separate works, Doig contributed a dissertation, 'On the ancient Hellenes', to the Royal Society of Edinburgh's 'Transactions' (1794). A continuation which he forwarded to the society was lost and never appeared. He also wrote for the third edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', edited by George Gleig, the articles 'Mythology', 'Mysteries', and 'Philology'. They attracted great attention and brought Doig into contact with such eminent scholars as William Vincent, dean of Westminster, and Jacob Bryant. In addition to Latin and English poems, he left many treatises in manuscript on a wide range of philological, religious, and historical subjects. 
Doig, who married and had children, died at Stirling on 16 March 1800, aged eighty-one. A mural tablet, with an inscription in commemoration of his virtues and learning, was raised by his friend John Ramsay of Ochtertyre. The town of Stirling also erected a marble monument to his memory, which contains his own Latin epitaph. 


@@@@@


doc= 7772


Dokett, Andrew (c.1410-1484), college head, was of uncertain origins, but there are indications from a pedigree of 1595, said in 1869 to be in the College of Arms, London, that he came of the Dukets of Grayrigg Hall, near Kendal, Westmorland, and was the second son of Sir Richard Duket of Grayrigg and Mabel Bellingham. Two of the quarterings of the Dokett arms in a late sixteenth- or early seventeenth-century light in the north-west window of the hall at Queens' College, Cambridge are arms of Bellingham and Burnishead, families in the same area. No academic record survives for Dokett, beyond the fact that in documents from at least 1439 onwards he is referred to as 'master'. There is no evidence for Fuller's assertion that he was a Franciscan, the only basis for this being that he was admitted into confraternity with the Franciscan order in 1479. 
Dokett's first recorded preferment was as vicar of St Botolph's Church, Cambridge, to which he was presented by Corpus Christi College in 1435 or 1436. In 1439 Dokett began a judicial process by which Barnwell Priory, the rector of St Botolph's by appropriation, was summoned by the bishop of Ely for neglect in maintaining the church, and subsequently renounced its rights as rector. Dokett was officially confirmed in that title on 21 October 1444, subject to the right of presentation remaining with Corpus Christi. He held the prebend of Ryton in Lichfield Cathedral from 1467 to 1470, when he exchanged it for the chancellorship of Lichfield, which he held until 1476. On 2 July 1470 he had resigned the rectory of St Botolph's. 
While he was rector Dokett made those improvements to the church neglected by Barnwell, and used his wealth for the benefit of other local causes. He gave to the king a house in Milne Street (the present Queens' Lane), which was among property granted to Henry VI's new King's College in 1449; but his own great achievement in Cambridge was the establishment of Queens' College, which began its existence as the College of St Bernard in 1446. Property for its site was acquired partly through the benefactions of wealthy parishioners of St Botolph's. In August, September, and October 1446 one of these, Richard Andrew, conveyed two properties on the first site of the new college, between Milne Street and the present Trumpington Street (then High Street), to a fellow burgess, and to two clerks who were among the first four fellows of the college. 
Andrew Dokett's endowment was mentioned in the first royal charter founding the college (3 December 1446), and he left it further benefactions of money and property in his will in 1461. In 1447 the original site was replaced by the present one, on the west side of Queens' Lane. Another burgess and parishioner, John Morris, donated his large messuage and garden to form the core of the new site, and another royal charter was issued on 21 August 1447. A third important parishioner was Reginald Ely, for whose soul Dokett left property by his will to establish a chantry in Queens' College. Ely was a master mason who was employed on the building of King's College, and was very likely responsible for the design of the Old Court at Queens'. After the granting of the charter Queen Margaret petitioned her husband that she might be founder of the new college, and letters patent refounding it in honour of St Margaret and St Bernard were granted on 30 March 1448. These named Andrew Dokett as president and the same four fellows mentioned in the first charter of December 1446. The queen granted her own charter of foundation, adding a dedication to the Trinity and the Virgin Mary, on 15 April. 
The dedication of the college to St Bernard in all three foundations pointed clearly to the personal importance of Dokett, who besides being rector of St Botolph's governed St Bernard's Hostel, which occupied the site of the present New Court of Corpus Christi College. In 1458 a benefactor to Queens', Richard Withemarsh, received a life pension from the hostel in consideration of his donation; the upkeep of a lamp in Queens' College chapel given by another benefactor, Thomas Duffield, was to be met from the hostel rents. By Dokett's will 40's'. annually from 'my hostel ['hospicium'] of St Bernard' was allocated for bread, wine, wax, and lamp oil to use in Queens' College chapel. He also specified that, should a benefaction of rents made to Queens' by William Lasshby not fully materialize, any shortfall was to be made good from the hostel. Finally, after his death and that of his executors, the hostel and its rents were to pass to the college, and Queens' was duly to commemorate Dokett and other benefactors. 
If Dokett's local interests were vital to the foundation of Queens', his court and other connections ensured its steady growth. Both Edward IV's queen, Elizabeth Woodville, its second royal founder, and Lady Margery Roos, a benefactor of the college, had been ladies of the bedchamber to Margaret, the first royal founder. Margery granted lands and manors in Essex, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingdonshire to the college in and after 1469, and by her will in 1477 left plate to it. She also left $10 and a covered vessel engraved with her husband's arms as a personal legacy to Dokett. When Queen Elizabeth officially assumed the title of founder of Queens' in 1475, Dokett was mentioned by name in the preface to the code of statutes then issued. It was stated to be at his request that Elizabeth, as 'true foundress', had drawn up statutes and ordinances for the foundation and establishment of the college. 
Dokett's activity can be seen at a humbler level in negotiations for benefactions from citizens of London. Typically, as in the case of the chantry established in 1474 for Edmund Carvell, grocer, a sum of money would be handed to the college, in return for the commemoration of the benefactor at masses and prayers said by its priest-fellows. In the same year Dokett himself received at London the last instalment of a payment of $320 given by Dame Alice Wyche, widow successively of an alderman and a mercer of London, to buy lands in Lincolnshire. On 13 February 1478 a document was made at Westminster, witnessing that Dokett had received from Dame Elizabeth Yorke, widow of William Yorke of London, $40 to endow masses for the souls of the Yorkes, their children, and friends. 
Dokett left another memorial of his local wealth and his efforts on behalf of charity in Cambridge. He owned a house which backed onto the first site of Queens', and he converted this to provide almshouses for three poor women, who by his will were to pray for his soul and those of the benefactors of the college; like St Bernard's Hostel, the almshouses were to be managed after his death by his executors and after their deaths by Queens'. Dokett made his will on 2 November 1484 and died on 4 November; he was buried in Queens' College chapel. In his will Dokett instructed the fellows -- in so far as he was able -- to elect Thomas Wilkinson as his successor as president, another sign of his proprietorial interest. Jesus College, Cambridge, has a twelfth-century manuscript, including sermons of St Ambrose, owned by Dokett while he was rector of St Botolph's. He is also commemorated by his catalogue of the books in Queens' College Library, and by a half-length representation carved on a boss over the gateway into his college's Old Court. 


@@@@@


doc= 7773


Dolben, David (1581-1633), bishop of Bangor, was born at Segrwyd, Llanrhaeadr-yng-Nghinmeirch, Denbighshire, a younger son of Robert Wyn Dolben of Segrwyd, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Owen ap Reinallt of Glyn Llugwy, in Llanrwst. His family, settled at Segrwyd since 1497, when it had been given to his great-great-grandfather Robert Dolben for his support for Henry VII against the Cornish rebels at Blackheath, had supplied a recorder and several common councillors to the nearby town of Denbigh during the sixteenth century. Dolben was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1602, and proceeded MA in 1609. He was ordained deacon on 23 September 1610 and priest on 23 December 1610, both at Fulham, and became curate of Baythorpe, Hertfordshire. He was appointed vicar of Hackney in Middlesex in January 1619. He held the living of Hackney until May 1633, but in 1621 acquired in addition the living of Llangernyw, Denbighshire, in the gift of the bishop of St Asaph. In 1626 he was promoted to the prebendary of St Asaph. This in turn led to recognition in the town of Denbigh, which made him capital burgess in 1627, in which year he was also made doctor of divinity. However, other than some undergraduate verses, Dolben published nothing, and played no significant part in the controversies in church affairs which marked the 1620s and 1630s. 
The death of Lewis Bayly in 1631 provided Dolben, as a leading north Wales cleric, with an opening, and he succeeded Bayly as bishop of Bangor. He was elected on 18 November 1631, and was consecrated at Lambeth by Archbishop George Abbot on 4 March 1632. He may have owed some of his preferment to Sir Julius Caesar, master of the rolls, whose family held property in Hackney and in Beaumaris, and to whom Dolben acknowledged his gratitude for past favours. By June 1632 Dolben declared himself to be ill and a year later he was noted as 'crazy and very sickly' ('CSP dom.', '1633-4', 110), the object of manoeuvrings for his bishopric. 
Dolben died, unmarried, on 27 November 1633 at Bangor House, Shoe Lane, in the parish of St Andrew, Holborn. Despite a wish expressed in his will to be buried in Bangor, he was buried in Hackney parish church, where he had been vicar for fourteen years. A half-length effigy of him, in ruff and lawn sleeves, complemented by an inscription and commendatory verses, was erected, and re-erected when the church was rebuilt. In his will he left $30 for lands to be bought to relieve poor families in Hackney, and for improvements to the local roads. He bestowed money also on the poor of Bangor, Llanrhaeadr-yng-Nghinmeirch, and Denbigh. St John's College, Cambridge, was left $20 for its library, and Jesus College, Oxford, received 20 marks for the same purpose. As he wished, his successor as bishop of Bangor was Edward Griffith, the dean. 


@@@@@


doc= 7774


Dolben, Sir Gilbert, first baronet (1658/9-1722), politician and judge, was the eldest son of John Dolben (1625-1686), Church of England clergyman (and later archbishop of York), and his wife, Catherine (1626-1706), daughter of Ralph Sheldon of Stanton in Derbyshire; Gilbert Sheldon, future archbishop of Canterbury, was his great-uncle. He was educated first at Westminster School (1671-4) and then at Christ Church, Oxford, from where he matriculated aged fifteen on 18 July 1674. In the same year he was admitted to the Inner Temple, and seven years later was called to the bar. 
In 1676 Dolben attended the treaty negotiations at Nijmegen, but soon abandoned diplomacy to follow his uncle Sir William Dolben into the law, at first not very successfully. By 1683 he had married well, however. His wife, Anne (died 1744), was coheir to her father, Tanfield Mulso, of Finedon in Northamptonshire. Dolben's brother John Dolben (bap. 1662, d. 1710) married Anne's sister, but gambled away her fortune, and eventually Gilbert was able to acquire both shares in the Finedon estate. 
Dolben was returned to parliament in 1685 for the borough of Ripon, on the archiepiscopal interest. Unlike his brother John, who became a whig, Gilbert was a high-churchman of a priggishly conservative cast of mind, described even at the age of twenty-seven as 'the fustiest old gentleman you ever saw' ('Downshire MSS', 1.389). He was also a man of scholarly interests, and is said to have assisted Dryden to publish his translation of Virgil. The fact that loyalty to the church was paramount for him was evident when he was removed from the commission of the peace in 1688 for refusing to countenance repeal of the 'Test Act'. In the Convention, in which he represented Peterborough, probably on the cathedral interest, he was the first to give an opinion that the throne was vacant. He also declared that to have a Catholic king was 'inconsistent with the law of England' (Grey, 'Debates', 9.28). He sat in parliament almost continuously for the next two reigns, retaining his seat for Peterborough until 1698, recovering it in 1701, and transferring in 1710 to the pocket borough of Yarmouth, Isle of Wight. He was always a tory, but, as a protege of the politically pliable secretary of state Sir William Trumbull, he supported the administration throughout the 1690 parliament, even after the king had shifted towards the whigs, and in 1693 was spoken of for the solicitor-generalship. Eventually, however, he followed his party into opposition. 
Reward came in May 1701, when under the predominantly tory administration Dolben was named a justice of common pleas in Ireland. While not a permanent absentee, he refused to let judicial duties interfere with parliamentary business, and during sessions was excused attendance on circuit. For a time he was associated with Lord Nottingham, in campaigns against occasional conformity in England, and in imposing the sacramental test in Ireland in 1704, by means of a clause added by the English privy council to an Irish popery bill. In April 1704 he was created a baronet. After Nottingham left office Dolben developed a reputation as a moderate, and kept his place on the bench under the whig ministry of 1705-10. It was only on questions of religion that his prejudices were visible: resisting repeal of the Irish test, for example, or in the debates on the Anglo-Scottish union, in which he not only denounced Scottish Presbyterianism but also pressed for some mention in the union treaty of the English 'Test Act', recalling how, 'when the church was attacked by a papist that sat on the throne, his first and great endeavour was to get that act repealed' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. e. 6, fols. 9-11). He found the junto Lord Wharton hard to stomach as lord lieutenant of Ireland, but managed to avoid open insubordination. 
Ultimately Dolben's success as a political survivor counted against him, when the tories returned to power in 1710: though in no danger of removal, he found promotion blocked by the 'resentments' of Lord Chancellor Harcourt. In a final political accommodation he withstood the purge of tories from office after the Hanoverian succession. A particular interest of his later years was the charity school movement, of which he was an active supporter both in Ireland and at home, setting up a school on his own estate. He was finally obliged to retire through ill health in 1720, and died at Finedon on 22 October 1722. His will included a bequest of $500 to the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy. His only son, Sir John Dolben, took holy orders, and succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 7775


Dolben, John (1625-1686), archbishop of York, was born on 20 March 1625, the eldest son of Dr William Dolben (1588?-1631), prebendary of Lincoln and rector of Stanwick, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Williams, who had two other surviving sons and two daughters. He was baptized on 27 March. His mother was the niece of Bishop John Williams, who nominated John to be admitted as a king's scholar at Westminster School, some twelve years later, just before Richard Busby's long and influential tenure as headmaster began. In 1640 John was elected a student of Christ Church, Oxford, and in the following year he composed some Latin verses to celebrate the return of Charles I from Scotland during the deepening political crisis. When civil war came in 1642 he was among a large group of students of Christ Church who enlisted in the king's army. He fought at the battle of Marston Moor on 2 July 1644 as an ensign and was shot in the shoulder carrying the colours. He fought on at the siege of York and was wounded again, this time more seriously in the thigh, being confined to bed for a year as a result. He was promoted to the rank of major in recognition of his courage but by the time he was up and about again the civil war was all but lost. 
His war service left a lasting impression on Dolben in a number of ways. His youthful royalism had resulted in serious injury. It is possible that his wounds left a certain lameness in him, which may partly explain the corpulence in later life on which contemporaries remarked. He seems to have retained throughout his life a certain military style and bearing as well as a knowledge of and interest in military affairs as is evident from his sermons. 
Dolben returned to Oxford after the war in the hope of continuing his studies, graduating MA on 9 December 1647, without the usual preliminary of a BA degree. However, he was deprived of his studentship by the parliamentary visitors of the university in 1648. Thereafter he disappears from the record until 1656, in which year he sought out episcopal ordination (from Bishop King of Chichester), as indeed did many of the clergy who conformed during the period as well as those who, like Dolben, did not. In 1657 he married Catherine Sheldon (1626-1706), daughter of Ralph Sheldon of Stanton in Derbyshire, the niece of Gilbert Sheldon, a connection which was to have a huge impact on his subsequent career. The couple settled down in Ralph Sheldon's house in St Aldates, Oxford. 
Dolben began his ministry in the context of proscribed prayer book services, held in the house of Dr Thomas Willis opposite Merton College, in collaboration with Richard Allestree and John Fell, who was Willis's brother-in-law. These services attracted wide support from Church of England loyalists at the time. Given the partly intentional laxity of interregnum regimes about local religious practice, such activity hardly now appears as daring as it seems to have done to Dolben's nineteenth-century biographers. The latter may have been misled by Dolben's own exaggerated references to the precariousness of life in the 1650s, made in a sermon of 1666 (Dolben, 'A Sermon Preached before the King Aug. 14 1666', ix). But of course, such semi-clandestine devotion did Dolben no harm when the tables were turned and the traditional Church of England was restored after 1660. It was immortalized in the famous group portrait of Allestree, Dolben, and Fell by Sir Peter Lely, painted at the time of the Restoration and now in the possession of Christ Church. All three appear in clerical garb. Fell (on the left of the picture) seems somewhat detached, while Allestree (on the right) points very emphatically at an open copy of the 'Book of Common Prayer', which is one of the volumes on the table before them. Dolben (in the centre) looks straight at the viewer. In this as in other portraits, he cuts a striking figure, with a full face, fine light brown hair, and a piercing eye. Altogether it conveys the strong presence to which at least one contemporary account alludes (Beddard, 420). 
Dolben, along with his co-protagonists Fell and Allestree, received prompt recognition in Restoration Oxford. Dolben and Allestree petitioned for canonries of Christ Church as early as April 1660, to which they were duly appointed in July. Fell became dean. On 3 October Dolben took his DD degree alongside the other two. The three of them joined in penning Latin verses mourning the death of the duke of Gloucester, which were published in 'Epicedia academiae Oxoniensis' (1660). Dolben was further rewarded with the living of Newington-cum-Britwell, Oxfordshire, on the king's presentation. 
The trio had their critics, even in Restoration Oxford. Wood mocked them for trying 'to reduce the University to that condition as it stood in Laud's time'; something quite unrealistic given the intervening years (Clark, 1.348-9), though Wood may have been prejudiced by some difficulties he had had with Dolben over access to certain ecclesiastical registers while Dolben was chapter treasurer. 
Meanwhile Dolben's fame as a loyalist clergyman was spreading beyond Oxford. He wrote verses mourning the death of the princess of Orange. In October 1660 he was commissioned by the king, along with Dr Barwick, to visit the condemned regicides in an abortive attempt to solicit expressions of remorse. 
A series of senior ecclesiastical promotions came Dolben's way soon after 1660, largely due to the influence of his wife's uncle, Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London and soon to be archbishop of Canterbury. On 29 April 1661 he was installed as prebendary of Caddington Major in St Paul's Cathedral and on 11 October 1662 nominated archdeacon of London; and shortly after that, vicar of St Giles Cripplegate. Finally, he was raised to the deanery of Westminster, being installed on 5 December 1662. Dolben gradually reduced the number of his appointments, starting with the parochial ones and resigning the archdeaconry in 1664, the same year he became prolocutor of the lower house of convocation, in succession to John Barwick. His star continued to rise at court, culminating in his appointment as clerk of the closet, also in 1664. Dolben rapidly acquired the reputation of being a great preacher, which would be reflected some years later in a passing reference to him in Dryden's 'Absalom and Achitophel' (lines 868-9). Initially Dolben tended to read the sermons which he delivered at court until a word from Charles II encouraged him to adopt a more extempore style, in which he proved highly effective. It is hard to assess Dolben on the basis of the three published sermons that survive. They certainly possess an admirable clarity and directness along with an underlying note of passion, which could have had a powerful effect on the hearers, even at the court of Charles II. A sermon which he gave before the Commons on a fast day for the fire in October 1666 (from which sadly only brief notes survive) helped to prompt MPs to appoint a committee the next day, to consider strengthening the laws against atheism and irreligious behaviour. On one occasion in Westminster Abbey, when the preacher was taken ill having only named his text and the headings of his sermon, Dolben mounted the pulpit and without any preparation 'discoursed much better on each head than the other would have don' (Beddard, 420). Even towards the end of his life, as archbishop of York, he retained a formidable reputation as a preacher. Dolben's eloquence may have contributed to his next ecclesiastical promotion, to the see of Rochester in 1666. Dolben was allowed to keep the deanery of Westminster 'in commendam', thus beginning a tradition of pluralism which would last into the early nineteenth century, on the grounds of the poverty of the see. However, he resigned as prebendary of St Paul's at this time. He was consecrated at Lambeth Palace by Sheldon on 25 November 1666, the sermon being preached by Robert South, a friend from Oxford days despite the latter's conformism under the Commonwealth. 
Dolben was briefly a member of the privy council but almost immediately his standing at court began to fluctuate dramatically. After the fall of Clarendon he lost his place at court (as did Sheldon and George Morley, bishop of Winchester) and was under a cloud for several years. His well-attested contempt for flattery and his quality of plain-speaking, as Burnet noted, hardly fitted him for court life at the best of times ('Burnet's History', 2.431). It is true that Burnet had a grudge against him for persuading Sir John Cotton to bar him from using his library while Burnet was researching his history of the Reformation, on the grounds that he was 'a great enemy of the prerogative' (ibid., 2.107). But on this, as on other aspects of Dolben's life, Burnet's judgement seems sound. Only with the rise of Danby would Dolben come fully back into favour, rising to be lord high almoner in 1675. 
Just as Dolben's influence at court was waning, he was acquiring a distinctive political role elsewhere: in the Lords. He took his seat there just four days after his consecration and rapidly became a regular attender and effective operator there, with an admirable grasp of procedure. He worked closely with Sheldon and used his new found expertise to defend the church. He was linked with the parliamentary initiatives for comprehension in 1673 and 1674, though as with Morley of Winchester, this did not necessarily imply great flexibility towards dissent. When in due course under Danby defending the church became part of the court's agenda as well, it was Dolben who in 1677 introduced the far-reaching bill to safeguard the Church of England under a Roman Catholic successor. 
By the late 1670s, despite Sheldon's death, Dolben was again in line for an ecclesiastical step-up. In 1678 he was offered but declined the archbishopric of Dublin, on grounds of ill health and personal inadequacy, provoking a quizzical response from Charles II (who wondered aloud if Dolben would have turned it down had he known its financial value). 
Dolben was loyal to the court, but no mere 'yes-man' to any party. In parliament he supported an amendment to Danby's test bill in 1675, inspired by the country opposition, which attempted to distinguish between legal and illegal means of seeking to bring about change in the religious settlement. But in 1678 he voted against a very different test bill, apparently because of the accusation of idolatry against the Roman Catholic church which it contained. He briefly chaired the Lords committee to investigate the Popish Plot and as late as March 1679 he was said to be intimate with Sir Thomas Meres, a leading figure in the country opposition. But Meres was his half-brother and even his political stance would change over the ensuing two years. On 15 November 1680 Dolben was among the fourteen bishops in the House of Lords who helped to vote down the 'Exclusion Bill'. Dolben's loyalty was recognized and in due course rewarded, when he was made archbishop of York in July 1683. He finally relinquished the deanery of Westminster and the almoner's place along with his southern see and moved north to the scene of his youthful military adventures. 
Dolben's tenure of the see of Rochester and the deanery of Westminster had not been without its critics. Simon Patrick drew attention to the lack of progress towards weekly communion at the abbey in this period, and Burnet paid Dolben the back-handed compliment that he was later a better archbishop than he had been a bishop ('Burnet's History', 2.431). Burnet's grudge notwithstanding, his implied criticism of the Rochester episcopate may have had some truth in it. 
Dolben comes across as a vigorous dean. On the day of his installation he persuaded the chapter to enhance the financial provision for the repair and upkeep of the abbey. His commitment to its welfare and defence of its interests seem to have remained throughout his tenure. Pepys found him living 'like a great prelate' in the deanery at Westminster, 'his lodgings being very good', on 24 February 1668 (Pepys, 9.89). But it was easier to combine this with his heavy parliamentary involvement than it was to care for his diocese. He did not wholly neglect the latter though, rebuilding the episcopal residence at Bromley after civil war damage, at his own expense, and living in it, at least for a time. His securing the appointment of William Trumbull as both chancellor of the diocese and official to the archdeacon in 1671 at least prevented the clash between the two jurisdictions which occurred elsewhere in this period. The diocesan archives are too scanty to form a judgement as to how conscientiously Dolben fulfilled his episcopal duties, though Dolben Paul, one of his nineteenth-century biographers, appears to be mistaken in thinking that no episcopal register was kept between 1663 and 1683. 
Dolben would be active in his archdiocese for only just over two and a half years before his death but he made a vigorous start in many areas to what could have been a very significant archiepiscopate had he lived. He had Thomas Comber made precentor of York even before his own arrival there and the two would work closely together during Dolben's tenure. Dolben arrived at Bishopthorpe on 25 September 1683 amid early snow, which failed to deter a cavalcade of some five hundred local gentry and clergy from turning out to greet him. In October he initiated meetings of clergy in their own localities for mutual edification. At the same time he delicately began to explore the possibility of establishing a weekly communion in the minster, an initiative which was clearly highly controversial with the dean and chapter. This would not actually bear fruit until April 1685 but before that Dolben had managed to hold a visitation of the chapter, despite a dispute over his jurisdiction there. He also got Comber completely to reorganize the minster library and conduct a survey of the minster with a view to its repair. Dolben himself provided for a rota of vicars-choral to supervise readers and prevent thefts from the minster library. In addition, he reformed the arrangements for preaching at the minster, so that, among other things, absences were properly covered for and further sermons were provided on Wednesdays and Fridays in Lent. 
Sometimes Dolben was over-ambitious in what he attempted: writing to Archbishop Sancroft on 11 August 1684, 'I know that I have undertaken too much at once to visit Chester Dioces metropolitically & mine own Dioces together'. Nottinghamshire would have to wait until the following summer (MS Tanner 32, fol. 117). But he continued to be very active in visiting the various parts of his domain and in conducting confirmations. Unfettered by rival commitments at court or (at least until 1685) in parliament, at York Dolben was able to become at once a reforming archbishop, a political broker on behalf of the government, and an invaluable interpreter of the regional political scene for Archbishop Sancroft. Dolben arrived in the north at the height of the tory reaction and this gave his role an added ideological edge. His family was caught up in the partisan divisions of the time. While he was reaching the peak of his ecclesiastical career, his brother William Dolben suffered a reverse in his judicial one, for failing to support the 'quo warranto' proceedings against London. John's elder son, Gilbert Dolben, a lifelong tory whom his father had appointed steward of the manor of Ripon, was rapidly adopted to stand for the parliamentary seat there after the borough surrendered its charter to the archbishop personally in September 1684. His younger son, John Dolben, would later emerge as a whig. 
The archbishop's support for the regime was unflinching. Dolben featured prominently in the ceremonies to mark James II's accession in February 1685. He deliberately stayed in the north during the general election campaign which followed to support loyal candidates and was involved in promoting loyal addresses. He could be conciliatory towards those whose loyalty had been compromised but this seems to have reflected a sense of political isolation rather than any sympathy for their views. He wrote to Sancroft 'we have soe few friends that we ought to have as few enemies as we can' (MS Tanner 32, fol. 182). His conciliatoriness did not even extend to sharing a loyal address with people whose motives he suspected. Dolben backed James II's succession to the throne and put his trust in the king's assurance that the Church of England was safe in his hands. By the autumn of 1685, on his way to the second session of parliament, he was apparently beginning to have doubts, though he did not confide these to Sancroft, at least in his letters. Comber may have been wide of the mark when he wrote that Dolben's fears for the church shortened his life but there can be no doubt that by the time of his death at Bishopthorpe from smallpox on 11 April 1686 he had become a worried man. Dolben was buried on 12 April in the minster and an impressive monument was erected there in his memory. He made a number of bequests to institutions with which he had been associated, for example, leaving some 367 books to the recently reorganized minster library. 
Dolben was survived by his wife for some twenty years. She was buried in due course in the church at Finedon in Northamptonshire, where Gilbert Dolben had acquired property by marriage. His other son, John, also survived him. One daughter, Catherine, had died in infancy. 
From his surviving correspondence and published sermons Dolben emerges as a passionate man, sometimes hasty in his judgements of others and occasionally indiscreet but generous to those who won his favour. He was an energetic and practical-minded churchman, who really found his metier as archbishop of York towards the end of an eventful life. 


@@@@@


doc= 7776


Dolben, John (bap. 1662, d. 1710), politician, was baptized in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, on 1 July 1662. He was the younger son in the family of two sons and one daughter (who died in infancy) of John Dolben (1625-1686), canon of Christ Church, Oxford, later archbishop of York, and his wife, Catherine (1626-1706), daughter of Ralph Sheldon of Stanton, Derbyshire, and niece of Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury from 1663 to 1677. Dolben's elder brother was Sir Gilbert Dolben, judge of the court of common pleas in Ireland. John Dolben matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 23 March 1678, but his name does not appear in the printed list of graduates. 
Dolben entered the Inner Temple, and was called to the bar in 1684, but having gambled away most of the money inherited from his father in 1686, he went to the West Indies, where he married Elizabeth (died 1736), daughter of Tanfield Mulso, of Finedon, Northamptonshire. They had two sons and three daughters. 
Dolben came back to England, and was returned to parliament at a by-election on 21 November 1707 as MP for the borough of Liskeard in Cornwall. In the House of Commons he worked hard as chairman of several committees until, in 1709, Godolphin put him in charge of the case against Dr Henry Sacheverell, who had preached two inflammatory sermons in Derby and in St Paul's Cathedral, directed against Godolphin and the government. On 13 December 1709 Dolben called the attention of the house to these sermons, with the result that the house decided to impeach Sacheverell in the House of Lords. The articles of impeachment against Sacheverell, drawn up by a committee of the House of Commons, were reported to the house by Dolben on 10 January 1710, and two days later he took the articles to the House of Lords. Although he was one of the managers of the impeachment, he was prevented by ill health from attending Sacheverell's trial. He died in Epsom on 29 May 1710, the day of the trial; he was buried in Finedon church. 
Dolben's involvement in the case was the subject of several pamphlets, including 'A Letter Written by Mr. J. Dolbin to Dr. Henry Sacheverell' (1710), composed as a letter of repentance, 'An Elegy on the Lamented Death of John Dolben' (1710), and 'The Life and Adventures of John Dolben' (1710). Verses were written about him, including the epitaph: '
Under this marble lies the dust 

Of Dolben John, the chaste and just. 

Reader, read softly, I beseech ye, 

For if he wakes he'll straight impeach ye. 
(Wilkins, 2.84)' 



@@@@@


doc= 7777


Dolben, Sir John, second baronet (1684-1756), Church of England clergyman, was born on 12 February 1684 at Bishopthorpe Palace, near York, the only son of Sir Gilbert Dolben, first baronet (1658/9-1722), a tory MP and a judge of the common pleas in Ireland, and his wife, Anne (died 1744), eldest daughter and coheir of Tanfield Mulso of Finedon, Northamptonshire. Dolben came from a clerical family. His great-grandfather (died 1631) had been bishop designate of Bangor; his grandfather, John Dolben, was archbishop of York (1683-6), and his grandmother was the niece of another primate, Gilbert Sheldon of Canterbury. John Dolben was admitted on the foundation of Westminster School in 1700. He matriculated at Oxford University on 11 May 1702, having come into residence as a gentleman commoner at Christ Church on 28 April. Dolben graduated BA on 22 January 1704, proceeded MA on 8 July 1707, and accumulated the degrees in divinity on 6 July 1717. 
Although Dolben entered the Inner Temple in 1707 at the request of his father (a bencher), he eventually opted for the church rather than the law, and was ordained deacon in June 1709 and priest in April 1711. He gained swift preferment, first as chaplain to Thomas Sprat, bishop of Rochester, on 11 April 1711, and then as subdean of the Chapel Royal on 20 April 1713. Although he was in charge of the thanksgiving service for the accession of George I at St Paul's Cathedral in January 1715 and was in routine control of the chapel, he was dismissed from office on 20 March 1718 together with the dean, John Robinson, bishop of London. The precise reasons for Dolben's dismissal remain obscure although, in a changed political climate, moderate tories like him were expendable. 
Dolben was compensated for the loss of his Chapel Royal duties by Nathaniel, Lord Crew, bishop of Durham, who lived at Steane, near Brackley, Northamptonshire, and was thus a neighbour, as well as a tory survivor from the generation of Dolben's grandfather Tanfield Mulso. Dolben was admitted by Crewe to the sixth stall at Durham Cathedral on 2 April 1718. He exchanged it for the eleventh ('golden') stall on 17 July 1719. He kept regular residence at Durham, but lived mainly as a squire and parish clergyman at Finedon. He was presented to the vicarage of Finedon, Northamptonshire, by his father on 9 August 1714, and instituted on 30 September; he was subsequently presented to the nearby rectory of Burton Latimer on 3 February 1719, and instituted on 14 March. Dolben acted as one of the two proctors in the lower house of convocation for the clergy of the Peterborough diocese from 1714 to 1748. On 22 October 1722 he succeeded his father as second baronet. He married at Sherborne, on 28 July 1720, Elizabeth, second daughter of William Digby, fifth Baron Digby of Geashill. Lady Dolben died at Aix-en-Provence on 4 November 1730, and was buried on 12 January 1731 at Finedon. The couple had five sons and three daughters. In Aix Cathedral there is a monumental inscription to three of their sons, who, like Lady Dolben, died of smallpox. Dolben's last appointment was to the visitorship of Balliol College, Oxford, on 22 June 1728. He adjudicated in several disputes, and as the modern historian of Balliol contends, exercised his 'authority with patient and impartial wisdom' (J. Jones, 'Balliol College', 163). His resignation on 24 March 1755 on health grounds was widely regretted. 
As the direct descendant of two primates Dolben might himself have expected a mitre, but the Hanoverian succession in 1714 dashed his hopes of crown preferment. Nevertheless, as a moderate high-churchman, Dolben did his utmost to protect the interests of the Church of England without involving himself publicly in Jacobite politics. Evidence for his direct participation in the Atterbury plot of 1720-22 is inconclusive, though in the 1740s he accepted a gift of Prince Charles Edward Stuart's portrait and was 'reckoned a staunch friend to the Pretender, or, at least, to hereditary right' (Hodgson, 200). Music was a lifelong compensation for his marginalization in the church. Dolben inherited the taste from his father, and was a minor patron in his own right. He presented Finedon church with a magnificent organ in 1717 (probably originally at Windsor) and commissioned the composer William Croft (organist of the Chapel Royal) to provide anthems for the organ's opening and music for his marriage. He was elected a member of the Academy of Vocal Music in 1726. 
Dolben suffered from recurrent ill health for the last thirty years of his life; he died at Finedon on 20 November 1756, and was buried there on 11 December. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son William Dolben (1727-1814). He published his sermon on brotherly love ('Heb. 13: 1') preached at the sons of the clergy service at St Paul's Cathedral on 8 December 1726, and an address of 1750 welcoming the new bishop of Durham, Joseph Butler, into his see. Part of his huge theological library was placed in the monk's cell above the south porch at Finedon church as part of a 'clerical library' about 1790 by his grandson John English Dolben, later the fourth baronet. Sir John Dolben's career symbolically linked the generation of his own grandfather (and especially Archbishop W. Sancroft and Bishop T. Sprat) to their later Georgian admirers such as George Horne, who preached his first sermon at Finedon, and William Jones (of Nayland), who was Dolben's last curate in the parish. Jones dedicated his first book to Dolben and paid tribute to 'your character and station in the Church, your firm attachment to, and experienced knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, your familiar acquaintance with Antiquities, both sacred and profane, and your unblemished life' (W. Jones, 4). 


@@@@@


doc= 7778


Dolben, William (1588?-1631), Church of England clergyman, was the only son of John Dolben, from Segrwyd, Denbighshire, who had become a merchant at Haverfordwest and founded the Pembrokeshire branch of the family, and Alice, daughter of Richard Myddleton of Denbigh and sister of Sir Hugh Myddleton. He was educated at Westminster School and then Christ Church, Oxford, from where he matriculated on 10 February 1604 aged sixteen, and graduated BA on 6 June 1607. He proceeded MA as from All Souls on 18 June 1610 and was incorporated in that degree at Cambridge in 1614. He was admitted BD on 13 December 1617 and was awarded his doctorate on 15 June 1619. 
Dolben acquired two Pembrokeshire benefices, Stackpool Elidyr (1616) and Lawrenny (1620), and in 1623 was instituted to the rectory of Llanynys in Denbighshire. In the same year, from 11 July until November, he held the rectory of Bartholomew by the Exchange in London, but on 8 November 1623 he was instituted to the rectories of Stanwick and of Benefield, Northamptonshire. Also in 1623, he married Elizabeth Williams, daughter of Captain Hugh Williams of Cochwillan, Caernarvonshire, and Elizabeth, sister of John Williams, bishop of Lincoln and later archbishop of York. It was undoubtedly through the agency of Bishop Williams that in 1629 Dolben was installed in the Lincoln prebend of Caistor. Dolben was reported in 1741 by his great-grandson to have been nominated for a Welsh bishopric, but this assertion is likely to rest on confusion with a relative, David Dolben, who in the year of the prebend's death became bishop of Bangor in succession to Lewis Bayly. 
Dolben maintained links with his native Pembrokeshire. At his death he was still in possession of the rectory of Stackpool, leaving some of its profits to one of its parishioners, his 'most honoured and faithful friend' Henry Lort. He bequeathed $20, in addition to the provision made by his cousin William Myddleton, merchant, of London, towards the stipendiary lectureship at Haverfordwest inaugurated about 1620. He died in 1631 and was buried on 19 September at Stanwick, aged forty-two. He was survived by his sons John Dolben (1625-1686), later archbishop of York, and William Dolben (bap. 1627, d. 1694), later justice of king's bench. 


@@@@@


doc= 7779


Dolben, Sir William (bap. 1627, d. 1694), judge, was baptized on 27 September 1627 at Stanwick, Northamptonshire, the second son of the Revd William Dolben (1588?-1631), rector of Stanwick, and Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh Williams of Cochwillan, Caernarvonshire, and niece of Archbishop Williams. John Dolben (1625-1686), archbishop of York, was his brother. William Dolben was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1647-8 and was called to the bar in 1655. He received the degree of MA at Oxford in 1665 on the occasion of the incorporation 'ad eundem' of the earl of Manchester, for whom he acted as secretary. In 1672 he was made a bencher of his inn. He was made recorder of London in 1676 and was knighted on 3 February 1677. Later in that year Dolben was made a king's counsel (2 May) and a king's serjeant (24 October), and a serjeant-at-law. Archbishop Sheldon made him steward of the see of Canterbury. North wrote of him that he was 'bred under a clerk of assize, and executed the office of the crown side, which gave him the habit of a loud voice, though he was but of a small person' (North, 3.110). No doubt this quality helped him when appointed a judge of king's bench on 23 October 1678. North thought him 'an arrant old snarler' (ibid.) on the bench. On 4 April 1678 he had opened the case for the crown on the trial of the earl of Pembroke for the murder of Nathaniel Cony. As a judge Dolben tried many of those implicated in the Popish Plot, including Edward Coleman (November 1678), those accused of the murder of Edmund Berry Godfrey (February 1679), the queen's physician Sir George Wakeman (July 1679), Sir Thomas Gascoigne and Oliver Plunket, as well as one of their accusers, Edward Fitzharris (April 1681). 
However, Dolben did not favour the surrender of corporate charters, an integral part of Charles II's strategy for taming the whigs, North reporting that he declined to give any opinion. So at the beginning of 1683 it was reported that 'Judge Dolben sits very slippery' ('Kenyon MSS', 156), and on 18 April he received his 'quietus'. According to Luttrell 'many think the occasion of his removal is because he is taken to be a person not well affected to the 'quo warranto' against the city of London' (Luttrell, 1.225). Back in practice Dolben was one of the prosecutors of Algernon Sidney in November 1683. In December 1688 Dolben was suggested by the earl of Macclesfield as a possible source of legal advice for the peers meeting to solve the problem of calling a free parliament, but he was not summoned to attend. Dolben was reinstated as a judge in king's bench on 18 March 1689. In April he gave the charge to the Middlesex grand juries, inveighing 'mightily against the corruption of juries the last seven years, and gave in charge the laws against papists' (ibid., 1.527). In June he appeared before the Lords to provide reasons why he had been dismissed, and was soon called on to deliver his opinion on the surrender of the charters, whereon he stated that there were not enough precedents to support surrender. In June 1691 he gave another characteristic charge to the grand juries of Middlesex, directing them to inquire into malcontents who disturbed the peace of the kingdom through spreading seditious news. 
Dolben died 'suddenly of an apopletic ['sic'] fit' (Luttrell, 3.259) on 25 January 1694, and was buried four days later in the Temple Church, his funeral being attended by the lord keeper and the judges. He was unmarried. In his will he memorably expressed his concern that any legacy bequeathed to his dissolute nephew John Dolben (1662-1710) would be 'thrown away at the gaming table' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/418/6). Having already bequeathed $1000 to John, Dolben therefore instructed his executor, John's brother Gilbert, to pay the remaining part of his nephew's legacy, a sum of $4000, directly to John's children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7780


Dolben, Sir William, third baronet (1727-1814), politician and slavery abolitionist, was born and baptized on 12 January 1727 at Finedon, Northamptonshire, the second and only surviving son of Sir John Dolben, second baronet (1684-1756), rector of Burton Latimer and vicar of Finedon, and his wife, Elizabeth Digby (died 1730). He was educated at Westminster School and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 28 May 1744, aged seventeen; he was elected a student of the house in 1744 and awarded the degree of DCL on 7 July 1763. Soon after coming down from Oxford he married, at Westminster Abbey on 17 May 1748, Judith (1730-1771), the only daughter of Somerset English of Eastergate, Sussex, housekeeper of Hampton Court Palace, and his wife, Judith, the daughter and eventual heir of Hugh Pearson of Hampnett, Sussex. She brought with her a fortune of $30,000. Dolben succeeded his father in the baronetcy on 20 November 1756 and served as high sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1760-61. He was appointed a verderer of Rockingham Forest in 1766. 
Dolben's family background, his personal reputation for probity, and his attachment to a moderate toryism made him a stop-gap candidate to represent the University of Oxford in the Commons at the by-election of 3 February 1768. He had already been nominated as one of the county MPs for Northamptonshire, so when he lost his seat following the dissolution later in 1768 he was returned to the Commons for Northamptonshire. A supporter of the duke of Grafton and Lord North, he stood down in 1774 and was readopted by the university on the retirement of Sir Roger Newdigate at the general election of 1780. Dolben told his predecessor that he meant to act his 'humble part, on so great a Theatre... free from all attachments' apart from those of the university and the country (Dolben to Newdigate, 24 Sept 1780, Warks. CRO, Newdigate Papers, CR136/B1636), and his record bears scrutiny. He sat in the Commons as an independent for the next twenty-six years, supporting the governments of North, Pitt, and Addington, though none of them uncritically, and was a terse, unacerbic speaker respected throughout the house. He voted for parliamentary reform in 1783, 1785, and 1797. Seeing himself as a lay watchdog of the Church of England in the Commons, he criticized J. P. Bastard's 1787 bill to regulate the church courts, which forbade prosecutions for immorality after the lapse of six months. Dolben was also ready to defend clergy rights to resist unacceptable forms of tithe commutation in private bills. Moral issues always attracted him, and he was a strong supporter of the royal proclamation against vice and immorality issued in 1787; in 1795 he initially backed a bill for the more effectual working of the 'Lord's Day Observance Act' that would have made a breach of the sabbath a breach of the peace. No cause was dearer to him than the abolition of slavery, or at least the improvement of conditions for black slaves being shipped to the West Indies on the middle passage. Despite opposition from the merchants of Bristol and Liverpool, with Pitt's support he successfully piloted a bill through the Commons in 1788 designed to limit the number of slaves allowed on a vessel in proportion to its tonnage (initially, for a trial period of a year). Dolben developed a close alliance in parliament with William Wilberforce on the slave trade. He supported in principle the series of abolition bills Wilberforce brought forward in the 1790s (often acting as chairman at the committee stage), while his own annual bill to extend 'Dolben's Act' of 1788 gave him the chance to expatiate regularly on the trade's iniquities. Influenced by Wilberforce, Dolben supported his motion for peace with France on 27 May 1795. 
Dolben had a happy and relaxed family life. Following the death of his first wife, aged forty, on 6 January 1771, he married a second cousin, Charlotte Scotchmer, 'nee' Affleck ('c'.1739-1820), on 14 October 1789. She was the widow of John Scotchmer (died 1786), a banker, of Pakenham, Suffolk, and the sixth daughter of Gilbert Affleck, of Dalham Hall, Suffolk, and his wife, Ann, the daughter of John Dolben, brother of the first baronet. Dolben was delighted with his new wife. He thus described her prior to their wedding: 'Her mien is erect and Generous; Her stature rather full, her shape in fine proportion slender, and her limbs grow from it with such happy elegance as gives peculiar grace to all her motions... she is a woman of real and intrinsic fashion. (Dolben to James Bland Burges, 18 Sept 1789, Bodl. Oxf., DD Bland Burges)' They had no children. Though troubled by increasing deafness, Dolben enjoyed a vigorous old age, and never wore a greatcoat or had a fire in his bedroom. As his son reported in July 1803: 'My venerable Father, tho' 76 met the Parishioners at Church Porch and vowed he would go Volunteer in the Army at reserve against French invasion, if they would not, praising God he was able' (pocket diary of Sir John English Dolben, Northants. RO, Dolben (Finedon) collection, D(F) 65). He made his last public appearance at the Northamptonshire county meeting in 1807 to thank the king for his stand against Catholic emancipation. Dolben died at Bury St Edmunds on 20 March 1814, aged eighty-seven, and was buried on 27 March at Finedon church. He was succeeded in the title and estates by (John) English Dolben (1750-1837), his only surviving son from his first marriage. His widow died on 12 March 1820. 
Dolben was a country gentleman whose dedication to the Church of England, Oxford University, and the county of Northamptonshire came naturally to him. He consistently gave generously of his time and money to encourage worthy causes, such as the Sunday school movement. He was also a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce and of the Marine Society, and he was a Radcliffe trustee at Oxford. It was typical of Dolben that one of his first actions after inheriting was (in 1757) to make over the great tithes of Finedon to the vicar, appreciably increasing the latter's income. But it is his single-minded dedication to the abolitionist cause for which he merits recognition. The African author of 'Thoughts and Sentiments on the Evil and Wicked Traffic of the Slavery' (1787), Ottobah Cugoano, predicted that in time 'your noble name shall be revered from shore to shore' (Northants. RO, Dolben (Finedon) collection, D(F) 39, n.d., probably 1788), and though posterity has been more forgetful, Dolben's life as an enlightened lay Anglican impressed all his contemporaries. He closely resembled Richardson's fictional hero Sir Charles Grandison and remained free of any trace of priggishness to the last, 'the model of a man, a gentleman, and a Christian' ('GM', 1st ser., 84/1, 1814, 526). As some of his sorrowing constituents put it: 'No man bore human sorrows with greater firmness nor felt a more lively compassion for those of other men... In him courtesy was but the ornament of sincerity, never its substitute' (draft letter, 16 April 1814, Northants. RO, Dolben (Finedon) collection, D(F) 52). 


@@@@@


doc= 7781


Dolle, Walter (fl. 1662-1674), engraver, was a minor figure of the Restoration period who seems to have worked entirely for booksellers rather than print publishers. He always signed his plates 'W. Dolle', and he has often been called William Dolle (as in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'). James Granger, however, called him Walter, and said that he was a pupil of Faithorne the elder; his correctness is proved by the discovery that Walter Dolle was apprenticed to William Faithorne in 1662. 
Dolle appears in the diary of Robert Hooke for 3 April 1674: 'Wat Dole showed me a plate of his doing in metzotinto I thought it had been Sir Ch. Wrens way, but it proved to be done by squeezing a file on it with a presse' ('The Diary of Robert Hooke', ed. H. W. Robinson and W. Adams, 1935, 95). This is the only reference to Dolle's being associated with the new art of mezzotint, or with the circle of experimenters of the Royal Society, and his known work is entirely in engraving. Granger noted that 'he was a workman of a much lower class' (Granger, 4.134) than William Faithorne the elder. Dolle's work consists entirely of portraits used as frontispieces and of other book illustrations, but no complete catalogue of it has ever been compiled; many of his portraits are copied from earlier prints. 


@@@@@


doc= 7782


George Dollond (1774-1852) was born on 25 January 1774, the sixth son and seventh and youngest child of Susan 
(or Susanne; 1728-1798)
, daughter of John Dollond, and William Huggins. He was educated at George Lloyd's seminary in Kennington, Surrey. His father died while he was still a child and his uncle, Peter Dollond, arranged his training. In March 1788 he was apprenticed in the London Grocers' Company to Charles Fairbone, mathematical instrument maker, but he did not take his freedom until June 1804. In 1807 he also took his freedom by purchase in his uncle's guild, the Spectaclemakers' Company; he served as its master between 1811 and 1813. 
The family tradition of inventiveness continued with George Dollond, who patented a new lighting arrangement for compass binnacles in 1812. He developed an improved micrometer with a rock crystal eyepiece, which he explained to the Royal Society in 1821. He had extensive business with a variety of public institutions, supplying equipment for the observatories at Cambridge, Madras, and Trivandrum. He provided the board of longitude with some of the instruments used on the Arctic expedition of 1821, and a Dollond theodolite was used by Captain Lort Stokes in his surveys of Australia, New Zealand, and the Timor Sea. However, not everyone was satisfied with the goods supplied by Dollond. Lord Palmerston, for example, sent back a telescope, complaining of the indistinctness of the image. 
Peter Dollond apparently retired from business in 1819 and George carried on the family firm alone, though in 1820 Peter and George were jointly made opticians to George IV. Peter Dollond moved his home to Richmond in 1817, but three years later moved back to Kennington, where after only a few days he died, on 2 July 1820; he was buried at the parish church of St Mary, Lambeth. 
George Dollond was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1819. Like his grandfather and uncle, he had papers published in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. He played an active role in seeking a charter for the creation of the Astronomical Society and became one of the founding fellows in 1820. He was also a founder member of the Royal Geographical Society in 1830. On the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837 he was appointed optician to her majesty. He contributed a number of papers to the 'Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society', notably 'A short account of a new instrument for measuring vertical and horizontal angles' (vol. 2, 1826, 125), describing improvements to enhance the accuracy of such devices. He wrote a number of short treatises on some of the instruments he sold, such as 'Description of the Camera Lucida' ('c'.1830), a drawing aid patented in 1806 by William Hyde Wollaston and manufactured by the Dollonds. At the Great Exhibition of 1851 he was awarded the council medal for his invention, a type of weather station in which instruments which measured variations in air pressure, temperature, humidity, rainfall, and force and direction of the wind were caused to record on a roll of paper. 
George Dollond died unmarried at his home at Camberwell Terrace North on 13 May 1852, and was buried on 20 May at Norwood cemetery. His property was bequeathed to his nephews and their children. He was highly respected by his contemporaries, and acquired a reputation for absolute honesty which led the Spectaclemakers' Company to entrust their investments to his care. 
George Dollond had trained at least five apprentices through the Spectaclemakers' and Grocers' companies, including his nephew George Huggins (1797-1866), son of his brother John, who was bound through the Grocers in 1812 and took his freedom in 1827. The younger George succeeded to the family business on his uncle's death and, following the family tradition, adopted the surname Dollond. When the second George Dollond died in 1866 the firm was taken over by his son, William (1834-1893). In 1871 William Dollond became too ill to continue working, and he sold the firm to J. R. Chant, a former employee, who, though no Dollond family interest remained, nevertheless kept the trading name of Dollond. In 1928 the firm was acquired by James Aitchison, to become Dollond and Aitchison, and it thereafter concentrated increasingly on prescription spectacles. 


@@@@@


doc= 7783


John Dollond (1707-1761), originally a silk weaver. He was born in Spitalfields, London, the third child and eldest son of Jean Dollond, a Huguenot weaver, and his wife, Susanne Marie, who had both fled from France after the revocation of the edict of Nantes. His first biographer, the Revd Dr John Kelly, husband of his granddaughter Louisa, erred in giving his date of birth as 10 June 1706 (Kelly, 6), for his year of birth is entered in a family 'Bible' as 1707. He was baptized at the French church in Threadneedle Street, in the City of London, on 24 June 1707. 
Very little is known of John Dollond's early life and education, except that he was brought up as a silk weaver, like his father. He had to work to help support the family from an early age, but even as a teenager he pursued his interest in mathematics in his spare time, and he became a member of the Spitalfields Mathematical Society. On 25 February 1727 he married Elizabeth Sommelier (1708-1782); of their nine children, only two sons and three daughters survived to adulthood. John continued to pursue his studies, developing a particular interest in astronomy and optics. This enthusiasm was passed on to his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 7784


Peter Dollond (1731-1820), his second child, born on 13 February 1731. It was through his son that John Dollond gave up weaving and became an optician. 
Peter Dollond was trained as a silk weaver and assisted in the family business, but he did not take to the work and in 1750 set up as an optician, under his father's guidance. His first shop was probably in Vine Court, Spitalfields, where the Dollond family lived. By 1752 the optician's business was sufficiently successful for John Dollond to abandon weaving and go into partnership with his son. During 1753 they moved house to Denmark Court, Westminster, and by 1759 had opened a shop 'at the Golden Spectacles and Sea quadrant, Near Exeter Exchange in the Strand'. Here they traded as J. Dollond & Son, witness the signatures on an early achromatic telescope at the Royal Museum of Scotland, Edinburgh, and a compound microscope at the Whipple Museum, Cambridge. 
John Dollond immediately began to improve refracting telescopes, having the reports of his work communicated to the Royal Society by his friend the optician James Short, who was a fellow. There was little competition between the two because Short made only reflecting telescopes. John Dollond's first letter, read to the society on 1 March 1753, 'concerning an Improvement of refracting Telescopes', described a method of correcting eyeglasses. This was followed by his first public contribution to the theory of optics, 'A mistake in Euler's theorem for correcting aberration in object-glasses for refracting telescopes' ('PTRS', 1753, 287). This was inspired by a paper by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler, which had been published by the Berlin Academy in 1749 and summarized in a letter from Euler which Short communicated to the Royal Society in November 1752. A description of a further practical improvement devised by Dollond followed in May 1753, an adaptation of the micrometer invented by Servington Savery. Instead of Savery's two separate glasses, Dollond used a single glass cut in half, with the two parts sliding against each other. He developed three versions of this device, which became known as the divided object-glass micrometer, the first of which found some use for measuring the apparent diameter of heavenly bodies, although it halved the brightness of the image. The second and third versions were less successful. 
John Dollond was at the same time working on the improvement of objective lenses for refracting telescopes. His criticism of Euler in 1753 had been based on Sir Isaac Newton's laws of optics. Euler addressed the problem of chromatic aberration which resulted in coloured fringes of light distorting the images seen through refracting telescopes. He suggested that it could be removed by having two lenses with water between them, taking the human eye as his inspiration. Dollond criticized this proposal because Newton's laws, which had been verified by experiment, showed that chromatic aberration in glass lenses could not be corrected. 
However, Dollond was soon led to question his previous confidence in Newton's experiments by the work of Samuel Klingenstierna, professor of mathematics and later physics at Uppsala University in Sweden. After seeing Euler's article Klingenstierna began to investigate Newton's experiments mathematically, discovering inconsistencies which led him to conclude that the experiments could not all be correct and that the general laws deduced from them were not valid. When he heard of Dollond's criticism of Euler, Klingenstierna translated his own paper into Latin and asked a pupil who was in London to show it to Dollond. It led Dollond to doubt his previous confidence in Newton's theories and to begin repeating some of the latter's experiments with prisms. Eventually he was able to produce a compound lens for refracting telescopes which was free of both chromatic and spherical aberration. In April 1758, prompted by his son, Dollond obtained a patent for his new lenses and in June he communicated the results of his experiments to the Royal Society as 'An account of some experiments concerning the different refrangibility of light' ('PTRS', 1757-8, 733-43), although he did not mention what had inspired him to undertake the work. The lenses were described as achromatic, a term said to have been coined by Dr John Bevis. 
Ever since Dollond's own time it has been debated whether he was entitled to claim the invention of the achromatic telescope lens, or whether he merely took up ideas previously developed by Chester Moor Hall ('bap'. 1703, died 1771) and the European mathematicians. Chester Moor Hall was a barrister and landed gentleman with an interest in optics. It was claimed by another eminent optician, Jesse Ramsden, who was married to John Dollond's daughter Sarah (1743-1796), in a paper read to the Royal Society (letters and papers, decade IX, no. 146), that as far back as the 1730s Hall had developed an achromatic object-glass made from a combination of two lenses of different types of glass with different refractive powers. The optician employed to grind these lenses later mentioned the fact to Dollond, information which, combined with the ideas of Klingenstierna and his own experiments, enabled Dollond to develop his achromatic compound lens. Like Hall's, it made use of the different refractive powers of crown and flint, or lead, glass. Although the idea of using two types of glass with different refracting properties came first from Hall, neither he nor the opticians who worked with him were able to develop a method of producing achromatic lenses in commercial quantities. Dollond's contribution was first to devise a much quicker and simpler method of correcting the spherical aberration of the lenses. Second, he realized that batches of glass varied in their refractive and dispersive powers, and developed a method of measuring these values so that batches could be matched and achromatic doublet lenses reliably produced. It was the difficulty of correcting spherical aberration and of producing good-quality achromatic lenses in quantity which had inhibited the other opticians who knew of Hall's experiments from effectively exploiting their knowledge. Dollond was able to solve these problems and bring the achromatic lens successfully to the market. 
In 1758 John Dollond was awarded the Copley medal of the Royal Society for his work on achromatic lenses, and on 28 May 1761 he was elected a fellow. In addition to these honours, in December 1760 he was appointed as optician to the king, George III. However, there was some resentment among the European mathematicians, who felt that their contributions to the advances in the understanding of optics and the improvement of lenses had not been properly acknowledged by Dollond and the Royal Society. 
Late in the evening of 29 November 1761 John Dollond suffered what contemporaries described as an attack of apoplexy, probably a stroke, and died soon afterwards; contemporary notices record the date of his death as 29 November; Kelly (Kelly, 13) gives it as 30 November. It was said that he had been sitting by the fire at his house in the Strand studying Clairaut's treatise on the motions of the moon when he was taken ill. He was buried on 6 December at the parish church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, a short distance from his shop. Kelly provides the only character sketch of John Dollond: 'In his appearance he was grave, and the strong lines of his face were marked with deep thought and reflection; but in his intercourse with his family and friends he was cheerful and affectionate; and his language and sentiments are distinctly remembered as always making a strong impression on the minds of those with whom he conversed. His memory was extraordinarily retentive, and amidst the variety of his reading he could recollect and quote the most important passages of every book which he had at any time perused. (Kelly, 14)' Dollond regularly attended services at the French protestant church in Threadneedle Street. 
John Dollond had financed the cost of applying for the achromatic lens patent by means of a partnership agreement with fellow optician, Francis Watkins ('bap'. 1723, died 1792), dated 29 May 1758. Watkins paid the expenses of the application in return for an equal share in the profits arising from the exploitation of the patent. The cost of making the tube and glass were to be deducted, then a quarter of the profit was to be retained by the seller, the remaining three-quarters divided equally. Peter Dollond inherited his father's share of the profits from the patent, and acquired the whole rights in 1763 for $200, terminating the previous arrangement on the grounds that Watkins had on occasion retained the entire profit, contrary to the articles of partnership. 
On 16 August 1761, a few months before his father's death, Peter Dollond married Ann Phillips at St Martin-in-the-Fields. Between 1760 and 1767 they had two daughters, Louisa and Ann, followed by a son, John, who probably died young. After his first wife's death Peter married a Mrs Randall in 1795. Peter Dollond took an active part in London guild affairs, becoming a freeman of the Spectaclemakers' Company in March 1755 and master in 1774-82, 1797-9, and 1801-3. However, he did not become a freeman of the City until 1765, shortly before taking his first apprentice, John Berge, in December of that year. He took three more apprentices between 1769 and 1778, including his nephew John Huggins, son of his sister Susan, who had married William Huggins. He also apparently received some assistance in the business from his sister Sarah, who became estranged from her husband, Jesse Ramsden, and with their son John occupied a house in Haymarket owned by the Dollonds. 
Peter Dollond was a far more ruthless businessman than his father, and set about exploiting the achromatic lens patent to the full. Towards the end of 1763 he took proceedings in the court of king's bench against Watkins for infringing the patent. In June 1764 he extracted from Martha Ayscough, widow of the optician James Ayscough, a bond of $500 that she would not make achromatic refracting telescopes. These actions brought Peter Dollond into conflict with many of the other London opticians. Thirty-five of them signed a petition to the privy council calling for John Dollond's patent of 1758 to be revoked, on the grounds that the achromatic lens had been invented by Chester Moor Hall and was already on sale in London before 1758. Their action was supported by the court of the Spectaclemakers' Company, whose master at that time was Watkins, the Dollonds' former partner. The company contributed $20 towards the expenses of presenting the petition, but to no avail as the privy council refused to hear it. It was left to those who were prosecuted by Peter Dollond for infringing his father's patent to defend themselves in the courts. In a series of cases between 1764 and 1768 Peter Dollond established his right to enjoy the privileges of the patent, and in so doing created a precedent in the case law on patents which was referred to in later judgments. Hearing Dollond's case against the optician James Champneys in the court of common pleas, Lord Mansfield gave his decision in favour of the patentee on the grounds that it was 'not the person who locked up his invention in his scrutoire that ought to profit by such an invention, but he who brought it forth for the benefit of the public' (TNA: PRO, court of common pleas, judgments, H.6 Geo III, 626 Middx, Feb 1766). 
In 1766 Peter Dollond went into partnership with his younger brother, John (1746-1804), and also moved to a new shop, acquiring for $200 the lease on premises in St Paul's Churchyard, later no. 59, from Mary Sterrop, widow of the optician Thomas Sterrop. The firm traded as P. and J. Dollond, supplying a wide range of mathematical, philosophical, and optical instruments, including several items for Captain James Cook's second voyage of exploration to the Pacific. Peter continued to improve the achromatic telescope objective, perfecting the combination of three lenses with which his father had begun to experiment. This further development of his father's work was communicated to the Royal Society on 7 February 1765. The new arrangement reduced the spherical error of the lens, and was generally accepted as a significant improvement. The Dollonds were the first to use mahogany telescope tubes, which were much more robust than the traditional vellum, and in 1783 they began to supply instruments with plated brass draw tubes, made by a process patented in 1782 by Joshua L. Martin. Peter Dollond was also working to improve other instruments. In 1772 he sent the Royal Society a description of adjustments to the glasses of Hadley's quadrant, which helped to prevent distortion, and he also patented the arrangement. In 1779 his 'Account of an apparatus applied to the equatorial instrument for correcting the errors arising from refraction in altitude' was presented to the Royal Society by the astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne. However, neither of the younger Dollonds was elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society. Indeed, the French astronomer, Jean Bernoulli, who visited the Dollonds during his stay in England, professed astonishment at Peter Dollond's lack of mathematical understanding, although he admitted later that he might have drawn too sweeping a conclusion from a limited conversation, and certainly Peter had sufficient knowledge to develop the use of devices for measuring the properties of lenses. 
The telescopes supplied by Peter Dollond were much in demand. For the Royal Observatory at Greenwich he made an achromatic telescope of 10 ft focus with a double object-glass of 5 ins. diameter, the largest and only one of that size he made. In fact, in the closing years of the eighteenth century his workshop supplied all the new refracting lenses and eyepieces for the observatory. Dollond's refractors were also sought by customers overseas, who included J. J. Lalande, head of the Paris observatory, and Charles Messier, another Frenchman, who was responsible for the first major catalogue of nebulae. However, there were frequent complaints about the time taken to complete orders, and the high cost of Dollond telescopes. In part the delays were beyond the Dollonds' control, because of the difficulty of obtaining sufficient good-quality optical glass, especially for the larger lenses. Peter justified the cost by the care and time needed to produce high-quality achromatic refractors. Certainly Dollond instruments enjoyed a high reputation in the British Isles, to the extent that 'a Dollond' became a synonym for a telescope, but it was widely believed by contemporaries that refractors made in the latter part of Peter Dollond's lifetime by the Swiss optician Pierre Louis Guinand were superior, because Guinand developed his own process of producing improved optical glass with far fewer imperfections than the traditional methods. 
In November 1805, the year after his brother John's death, Peter Dollond took into partnership his nephew George Huggins, who changed his name by licence to Dollond, the alteration being recorded by the College of Arms. However, the trading name remained P. and J. Dollond. 


@@@@@


doc= 7785


Dolman, Charles (1807-1863), Roman Catholic publisher, was born at Monmouth on 20 September 1807. He was the only son of Charles Dolman, a surgeon, and his wife, Mary Frances, daughter of Thomas Booker, a Roman Catholic publisher in London. Dolman's father died in the year of his birth, leaving his son and his two daughters to be brought up by their mother, who remarried in 1818. Dolman was educated at Downside School, near Bath, from 1817 to 1821. Subsequently he studied architecture at Preston in Lancashire. Probably in the mid-1830s his mother's family, the Bookers, invited him to join their publishing establishment at 61 Bond Street, London. After the death of his uncle Joseph Booker in 1837, Dolman carried on the business with his aunt, Miss Mary Booker, and his cousin Thomas. On Mary Booker's death in 1840, Dolman and Thomas Booker went into partnership; soon after, the business became entirely Dolman's. On 12 January 1841 he married Frances, the daughter of James and Apollonia Coverdale of Ingatestone Hall in Essex; they had one son, Charles Vincent Dolman, later canon of Newport. 
Dolman's early publishing career was dominated by his interest in the publication of Roman Catholic periodicals. From 1838 to 1844 he was the publisher of the 'Dublin Review', a quarterly journal founded by Nicholas Wiseman, M. J. Quinn, and Daniel O'Connell. The commencement of this publication was marked by financial problems and editorial disputes. Wiseman felt that Dolman wanted too much say in the management of the 'Review'; Dolman was also criticized as inefficient, and accused of failing to advertise the 'Review' properly. But Roman Catholic publishers generally had less capital and fewer trade openings than their protestant counterparts, difficulties Dolman's critics failed to appreciate. It soon became necessary to guarantee Dolman against losses of up to $400, and in 1844 arguments over the management of the journal led to Dolman's departure. 
From April 1838 Dolman had been the publisher of the 'Catholic Magazine', a periodical of a more apologetic nature than the 'Review'. The 'Magazine' aimed to promote fellow feeling between Catholic and protestant, and to make the Roman Catholic faith attractive to a wider audience. After the 'Magazine' folded in 1844, Dolman continued this tradition with his own 'Dolman's Magazine and Monthly Miscellany of Criticism'. Established in July 1845, it aimed to be 'all things to all men' ('Dolman's Magazine', April 1846, 318). Like its predecessor it avoided dealing with the controversial issues of Irish politics. It quarrelled with both the 'Dublin Review' and 'The Tablet' over Frederick Faber's first volume in the series 'Lives of the Modern Saints', his admiring account of the masochistic excesses of Rosa of Lima. In August 1849 'Dolman's Magazine' was united with Thomas Booker's 'Catholic Weekly' to form the 'Weekly Register'. After 1850 Dolman ceased to have any connection with it. 
From the late 1840s Dolman turned his attention away from journals, though he later engaged in one further publication of this kind: from January 1856 to December 1862, he published 'The Lamp', a Roman Catholic journal intended for the edification of the lower classes. He concentrated instead on the publication of de luxe editions of Catholic classics, such as Kenelm Digby's 'Broadstone of Honour'. The most significant of these productions was the fifth edition of John Lingard's 'The History of England', published in 1850 with the author's corrections. The historian's opinion of his publisher shows that Dolman's disputes with the 'Dublin Review' personnel should not be permitted to obscure the strength of his commitment to the defence and propagation of his religion: Lingard, with his lingering cisalpine sympathies, found Dolman 'too fond of puffing' (Lingard to E. Price, Feb 1848) and refused to write a combative preface to the edition, indicating the errors of Macaulay's 'History'. The cost of Dolman's special editions exhausted his capital; in 1858 he tried to form his business into a limited liability company called the Catholic Bookselling and Publishing Company. However, the company failed, and, probably in 1862, he went to live in Paris, where he established a small business at 64 rue du Faubourg St Honore. He died there on 31 December 1863; his wife survived him, dying on 2 March 1885 at Erith. 


@@@@@


doc= 7786


Domett, Alfred (1811-1887), writer and premier of New Zealand, was born on 20 May 1811 at Camberwell Grove, Camberwell, Surrey, the sixth of the nine children of Nathaniel Domett, a shipowner, and his wife, Elizabeth Curling. He was educated at Stockwell Park House and then St John's College, Cambridge (1829-32), but left university without completing a degree. From 1833 to 1835 he travelled in North America and the West Indies, then returned to read law at the Middle Temple in 1835; he was called to the bar in 1841. He also pursued his literary interests, publishing volumes of poetry in 1833 and 1839. Robert Browning was a family friend. 
In April 1842 Domett followed the example of his cousin William Curling, and emigrated to New Zealand on the 'Sir Charles Forbes'. He attained early prominence in the colony through his involvement with the 'Nelson Examiner' (1843-5), while his petition of November 1845 for the recall of Governor Robert FitzRoy won settler acclaim for its cogent criticism of the humanitarian emphasis in contemporary imperial policies towards the Maori. 
Domett's thirty-year career in New Zealand encompassed both political and administrative office. He was appointed by Governor George Grey to the legislative council in 1846, and later served as a provincial councillor for Nelson (1857-63) and as the elected member of the house of representatives for Nelson (November 1855-November 1860) and Nelson City (December 1860-January 1866). He led a short-lived ministry from August 1862 until October 1863, which was notable only for his advocacy of a vigorous policy of military conquest and confiscation during the New Zealand wars. In June 1866 he became a legislative councillor, a political appointment which he held, despite concurrent employment in the public service, until his retirement in 1871. 
Domett's administrative contribution in these foundation years was outstanding. An energetic and efficient colonial secretary for New Munster (1848-53), he produced two significant compilations, 'Statistics of the Province of New Munster, New Zealand, from 1841 to 1848' (1849); and 'The Ordinances of New Zealand Passed in the First Ten Sessions of the General Legislative Council, AD' 1841 to AD 1849 (1850). Iner 1851 he was also gazetted civil secretary to the general government. With the dissolution of crown colony administration, in February 1854 he took up the position of commissioner of crown lands and resident magistrate in the Ahuriri district of Hawke's Bay, and named the streets of Napier to commemorate those countrymen whose military, literary, or scientific achievements he admired. In 1856 he combined political representation with the responsibilities of commissioner of crown lands in Nelson. 
A continuing interest in land administration led Domett to retain the portfolio of crown lands during his brief premiership. Political successors acknowledged his expertise by changing the position of secretary of crown lands from a political to a civil service post, with Domett taking up the appointment in January 1864. Over the ensuing eight years the brown-eyed intellectual, whose irritable public manner belied underlying qualities of gentleness and vision, transformed the crown lands office into an efficient regulatory agency for overseeing the implementation of general government land policies. Legislation passed in 1870 to prevent paid politicians from holding civil service positions specifically excluded Domett. 
Upon his retirement in 1871, Domett returned to England with his wife, Mary George, a widowed Wellington schoolteacher whom he had married on 3 November 1856. He pursued his literary interests more actively, the epic verse 'Ranolf and Amohia: a South-Sea Day-Dream', long derided by critics, being published in London in 1872. His poetic accomplishments were relatively minor and his reputation derives more from his personal associations, particularly his friendship with Browning, than his own verse. A pivotal role in the establishment of the New Zealand parliament's general assembly library was his most enduring literary endeavour. 
Domett was created CMG in 1880. He died at his home, 32 St Charles Square, Kensington, London, on 2 November 1887, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7787


Domett, Sir William (1752-1828), naval officer, was possibly born in Hawkchurch parish in Dorset; details of his parents and upbringing are unknown. He entered the navy in 1769 under the patronage of Captain Alexander Hood, who introduced him to Captain Reynolds, under whom he served, first as able seaman and then as midshipman, in the 'Quebec' (36 guns) for three years in the West Indies. He then joined the sloop 'Scorpion' (Captain Elphinstone) in the Mediterranean and was in her for two-and-a-half years before returning to England and serving in the 'Marlborough' (74 guns) for a month; from her he transferred as master's mate to the 'Surprise' (28 guns, Captain Linzee), in which he served for two years on the Newfoundland station. He was still in the 'Surprise' when, with the outbreak of the American War of Independence, she was the advance ship of the squadron that raised the rebel siege of Quebec in May 1775. Thereafter the 'Surprise' went to Newfoundland, where Linzee recommended Domett to Admiral John Montagu, who made him acting lieutenant in the 'Romney' (50 guns). Domett proved a 'persevering and deserving officer' (Ralfe, 2.419) who studied his profession but he was in the 'Romney' for only four months, returning to England with Montagu at the end of the year. A midshipman from 5 February 1777, he was appointed to Alexander Hood's ship, the 'Robust' (74 guns), and was present at the battle of Ushant on 27 July 1778. After being appointed lieutenant on 27 December 1778 Domett remained in her under Captain Cosby until she had led Arbuthnot's line in the action off Cape Henry on 16 March 1781. He then moved to the 'Invincible' (74 guns, Captain Sir Charles Saxton), and was present at the action off Chesapeake on 5 September 1781; after this he was taken, as his signal officer, to the West Indies by Sir Samuel Hood, in the 'Barfleur' (90 guns). He served in that demanding capacity in the operations against St Kitts in January 1782 and in the battle of the Saints (12 April 1782). When the first lieutenant of the 'Barfleur' was promoted Domett was appointed to his place. Hood, detached from Rodney's fleet, captured four enemy ships in the Mona passage on 19 April. Rodney promoted Domett to the command of one, the sloop 'Ceres', on 21 August 1782 and sent him to England with dispatches. He was advanced to post rank on 9 September 1782 and, at the particular request of Alexander Hood (now Rear-Admiral Sir Alexander Hood), was appointed his flag captain in the 'Queen' (98 guns), one of Lord Howe's fleet which relieved Gibraltar and repelled the enemy attack off Cape Spartel on 20 October. The Hood 'interest' with William Pitt, and Domett's growing service reputation, served him well: though unemployed at the end of the war, on 23 June 1786 he was appointed senior officer at Leith in the 'Champion' (24 guns). 
On 13 May 1788 Domett was appointed to the 'Pomone' (28 guns), which was bound first for the African coast and then the West Indies, and returned to England in 1789. Here, at Admiral Milbanke's request, Domett transferred, on 9 May, to the flagship 'Salisbury' (50 guns), and went to Newfoundland, where Milbanke was appointed governor and commander-in-chief. On 10 May 1790 Domett was appointed to the 'London', fitting for Sir Alexander Hood's flag, in the Spanish armament, the mobilization for the Nootka Sound crisis, and joined Howe's fleet at Torbay. But being paid off he moved on 6 December 1790 to the 'Pegasus' (28 guns), and once more to Newfoundland, where he stayed until returning to England at the end of 1791. Admiral Goodall, appointed commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, then asked for Domett as his flag captain and Domett was appointed to the 'Romney' (22 March 1792), but the outbreak of the French war in the following year led to his recall and appointment (14 June) as flag captain to Sir Alexander Hood in the 'Royal George' (100 guns). In her he was present at the battle of 1 June 1794 and the battle off Lorient (23 June 1795) where Alexander Hood (now Lord Bridport) was commander-in-chief. After Lorient, Bridport especially commended Domett's conduct and assistance and his 'active and attentive mind' (Ralfe, 2.421) and entrusted him with dispatches of the victory. Domett remained captain of the 'Royal George' for a record seven-and-a-half years, during which she was considered 'one of the best disciplined and most expert ships' (ibid.). 
Domett's personal and professional loyalties lay with the Hood family, and he corresponded with Bridport after the admiral's retirement, keeping him informed of matters of naval interest. When St Vincent took command of the Channel Fleet in May 1800 Domett was critical of his abilities and wary of St Vincent's early favours to Bridport's appointees. Hearing of vacancies among the marine regiments, in May 1800 he gloomily supposed 'upwards of 'thirty' years constant and faithful service' would give him no chance (Domett to Bridport, 19 May 1800, BL, Add. MS 35201, fols. 100-01), so he must have been pleased at his appointment as colonel of the Portsmouth division of marines in January 1801. His appointment as captain of the fleet in August 1800 may have been equally surprising to him, since he told Bridport that Sir Thomas Troubridge had long been appointed to this post and was longing to take it up, but that the matter was settled between Lord Spencer and St Vincent. Domett retained his position until 29 October, taking the 'Royal George' to Portsmouth to hoist Sir Hyde Parker's flag, and relieving St Vincent, whose health had broken down. Domett himself moved to the 'Belleisle' (74 guns) but on 17 February 1801 he was appointed, in the 'London', captain of the fleet to Parker, commander of the fleet sent to the Baltic to break the combination of states formed there against Britain. 
It was thanks to Domett's advice that the fleet entered the Baltic directly through the sound rather than through the great belt. Parker, on consulting Vansittart and Nelson, had first begun to enter by the belt; Copenhagen was then to be attacked over the grounds by the 64-gun ships and smaller vessels. Domett disagreed with this plan, arguing that the ships sent would not constitute a sufficient force, that the wind which carried the ships into the attack would prevent them returning, and that if they were crippled or repulsed, shoaling water would make it impossible to help them and the fleet would be divided, all of which the Danes knew well. Domett also reminded Parker that going into the sound they would pass closer to a fortified point of land than to Kronenborg Castle, which they sought to avoid by going through the belt. These considerations induced Parker to change his plan and enter the sound. However, he mentioned none of this in his public letter after the victory at Copenhagen, though he had told Domett that he was obliged to him 'for the 'whole' and shall acknowledge it to the last day of 'my Life'' (Domett to Bridport, 4 May 1801, BL, Add. MS 35201, fols. 136-9). 
On arrival at Copenhagen, Parker consulted Nelson, Graves, and Domett about an attack, which Domett supported, but his name once more was not mentioned in the public dispatch. Parker apologized for this omission and said he would try to put it right, but Domett rightly felt aggrieved. 'I am left quite in the background from his neglect, or rather forgetfulness and the public know of no such man in the Fleet' (Domett to Bridport, 4 May 1801, BL, Add. MS 35201, fols. 136-9). On Parker's return to England Nelson took command and expressly asked Domett to remain captain of the fleet, which he did, in the 'St George' (98 guns) from 14 May 1801, before returning to England with Nelson. On 6 July 1801 he resumed command of the 'Belleisle', but on 28 September he was appointed to the 'Ville de Paris' (110 guns) as captain of the fleet to Admiral Cornwallis, commander-in-chief of the Channel Fleet, who had asked for him. He held this post until the peace of Amiens. 
During that brief period of peace Domett served on the Irish station as senior officer with a broad pennant, but the renewal of war in 1803 again saw him as Cornwallis's captain of the fleet, from 6 June to 23 April 1804, when he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue. He was ordered to hoist his flag on the North Sea station (26 April), but declined on health grounds and in December was appointed one of the commissioners for revising the civil affairs of the navy, whose chairman was Sir Charles Middleton. 
On 9 November 1805 Domett was promoted rear-admiral of the white and on 28 April 1808 rear-admiral of the red, while on 9 May he joined the Board of Admiralty, a position in which he served until 23 October 1813. Further promotion, to vice-admiral of the white, followed on 25 October 1809; four days after leaving the Admiralty, on 27 October 1813, he succeeded Sir Robert Calder as commander-in-chief at Plymouth, and on 4 December he became vice-admiral of the red. He served at Plymouth for fifteen months, resigning because a foot injury made him increasingly lame. He was promoted admiral of the blue (12 August 1819) and admiral of the white (27 May 1825). On 2 January 1815 he was nominated KCB, and on 16 May 1820 GCB. 
Although, as he feared, he was not well known to the public, Domett was held in general esteem by his colleagues for his professional abilities. He was almost constantly employed because of these and took part in many battles. No one had more experience as captain of the fleet, under many admirals, 'an eulogium', as his monument in Hawkchurch parish church says, 'on his character and talents more eloquent than words and more durable than marble'. His ships were always in good order and discipline and ready for service, seldom suffering in bad weather and causing less expense in repairs than those of any other commander, according to Ralfe. So it is not surprising that Domett, the model of a professional seaman, backed by powerful interest earlier in his life, achieved a highly successful career. Domett never married. The family were long settled on the borders of Dorset and Devon at Hawkchurch, not far from Bridport's estate at Cricket St Thomas. Domett bought a considerable part of the manor of Phillyholm in the parish when he was one of the Admiralty commissioners, perhaps at the same time Lord Bridport bought Wild Court Manor in the same parish in 1806. Domett made his home at Westhay House, Hawkchurch, in retirement and died there, suddenly, on 19 May 1828 aged seventy-six. He was buried in a family vault in the churchyard. A monument in the parish church records his achievements. 
Domett's nephew Lieutenant William Domett was lost in the schooner 'Vigilant' on 9 February 1804: 'a promising young officer', wrote Commodore Samuel Hood in reporting it, 'who was succeeding fast to the skill of his gallant uncle, the captain of the Channel fleet' ('Naval Chronicle', 11, 1804, 494). 


@@@@@


doc= 7788


Dominis, Marco Antonio de (1560-1624), archbishop of Spalato and ecumenist, was born on the island of Rab off the eastern Adriatic coast. He was from a prominent family that may have been South Slavic in origin but which had used an Italian name since the fourteenth century. He received his early education at a Jesuit school in Loreto in Italy and entered the Society of Jesus in 1579. Following further education in Verona and Padua he became a professor of mathematics at the University of Padua and of rhetoric and philosophy at the University of Brescia. He made significant contributions to the science of optics during his academic career. His 'De radiis visus et lucis', published in Venice in 1611, analysed the refractions of light in droplets of water. In 1597 he resigned from the Society of Jesus in order to accept appointment as bishop of Segna, in Habsburg-controlled Croatia. He made strenuous efforts to pacify the Uskok pirates, refugees from the Ottoman empire who preyed on both Turkish and Venetian shipping, but met with little success. In 1602 he became archbishop of Spalato (Split) and primate of Dalmatia and Croatia. Spalato was in territory controlled by Venice, but much of the archdiocese was in Ottoman hands. 
De Dominis took the side of Venice in the crisis over Venetian-papal relations in 1606-7 and wrote, anonymously, two manuscript treatises dealing with the jurisdictional issues in dispute. He argued that papal jurisdiction did not extend to temporal affairs and that the pope had no right to interfere in the affairs of civil governments when there was no issue of religious faith involved. He had reason to resent papal actions in the administration of his archdiocese. He was required to pay a pension to another ecclesiastic, Marzio Andreucci, who became bishop of Trau in 1604, precluding, in de Dominis's opinion, any need for a pension. During his years as archbishop he developed a theory of how the universal church ought to be governed, on the model of the early church; this was the basis of his 'De republica ecclesiastica', eventually published in three volumes. King James VI and I's ambassadors in Venice, Sir Henry Wotton, Sir Dudley Carleton, and then Wotton again, along with Wotton's chaplain, William Bedell, cultivated de Dominis's friendship, seeing in him a critic of the papacy whose activities might open the way for protestantism in the Venetian territories or who might take the protestant side in the religious and political controversies that revolved about the oath of allegiance. By 1616, de Dominis had been promised a place of dignity and modest reward by George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, and he made plans to migrate to England. By agreement with the papal authorities, who were not aware of these plans, he renounced his episcopal see in favour of his nephew, Sforza Ponzone. 
De Dominis set out for England in September 1616 disguised as a Ragusan merchant in the company of two British subjects. Travelling by way of northern Italy, Switzerland, the Rhineland, and the Netherlands, he arrived in England in December 1616. His 'Manifestation', explaining his departure from Italy, was published in Latin and Italian in Heidelberg ('Consilium profectionis') in autumn 1616 and in an English translation in London after his arrival there. French and Dutch translations were also published on the continent in 1616. His migration was a sensation in the religiously divided Europe of his day. The reasons he gave included his hope of finding greater intellectual freedom in Britain and being able to encourage a reunion of the church as a community of churches sharing a common faith. It seems clear that he also wanted to find an opportunity, lacking even in Venice, of publishing his 'De republica ecclesiastica'. The English Jesuits John Floyd and John Sweet wrote rejoinders accusing de Dominis of seeking material gains. They poured scorn on his intended efforts to bring unity to the warring religious sects. In England, de Dominis became a guest of Archbishop Abbot at Lambeth Palace and was given a warm welcome at court by King James. Soon afterwards he received significant appointments: dean of the Chapel Royal at Windsor and master of the Savoy, the hospital with chapel attached, in London. On occasion he preached at the Italian church, the chapel of the Mercers' Company set aside for Italian residents and visitors. In summer 1617 he visited both Cambridge and Oxford and received doctor's degrees at both universities. De Dominis assisted Archbishop Abbot in the consecration of Nicholas Felton and George Montaigne as bishops in December 1617. 
De Dominis's stay in England was marked by publications widely circulated in Britain and on the continent. His sermon on 30 November 1617 at the Italian church accused the Church of Rome of having discarded the map and compass, namely the scriptures and the first four general councils, but nevertheless asserted that the churches of Christendom shared a common legacy of faith. The sermon was published in London in Italian and English in 1617 and on the continent in Latin and German in 1618 and in French in 1619. His Latin 'Papatus romanus' (1617) was a collection of passages about the papacy from the church fathers, the general councils, and canon law, showing that, in earlier times, ecclesiastical power had been shared among Rome and the other major sees. His 'The Rockes of Christian Shipwracke' -- published in English, Italian, French, and German in 1618 -- argued that papal claims to supremacy were obstacles or rocks in the way of the church's successful voyage. His most important statement on how to reunite the church and to secure peace and concord in Europe was his massive Latin work, 'De republica ecclesiastica', which dealt with most of the current theological and ecclesiological controversies. The first volume, published in London in 1617, contained the first four of a projected series of ten books. The second, published in London in 1620, contained the fifth and sixth books. The third volume, containing books seven and nine (eight and ten never appeared), was published in Hanau in 1622. He sought to provide a basis on which the 'Bishops of the Holy Catholic Church', to whom the preface to the first volume was addressed, could unite to oppose papal intrusions and to overcome the dissensions that afflicted the church. In refuting the prominent Roman Catholic theologian Francisco Suarez on the exercise of the royal supremacy in England, he argued that the Church of England was an exemplary case of a reformed church in which the ancient orders of ministry had been preserved, the eucharistic recalling of Christ's sacrifice was celebrated with great solemnity, and parish churches were dedicated to the saints and martyrs and to the Blessed Virgin Mary. The universal church could best be reunited, he contended, by an ecumenical council attended by bishops from the east as well as the west and supported by the temporal rulers. Protestants whose churches lacked bishops would certainly need to be represented at the council. There, theological agreement would be sought on the basis of the scriptures and the decrees of the general councils. If perfect union could not be achieved, differences among the churches might be tolerated where they did not compromise the fundamentals of the faith. 
De Dominis assisted in the publication in London of Paolo Sarpi's celebrated 'Historia del Concilio Tridentino' in 1619, published in an English translation as 'The Historie of the Councel of Trent' in the following year. Sarpi sought to show that the opportunity of reconciling Roman Catholics and protestants by means of a council had been lost at Trent, partly through the tactics employed by the popes and their agents. De Dominis's dedication of the work to King James implied that he had brought the manuscript to England from Venice to be published. In fact, it was sent in weekly packets from Venice by the English lawyer and scholar Nathaniel Brent to Archbishop Abbot. It was Brent who translated the work into English. But de Dominis knew Sarpi and may have brought a sample of the work to England. In 1617 de Dominis offered advice to the states general of the United Provinces on how to resolve theological disputes in the Netherlands in a moderate way, and in 1619 he wrote to Cyril Lukaris, patriarch of Alexandria, to propose that the Church of England and the Greek Orthodox church formalize the closer relations that had developed between them during James's reign. 
In spring 1622, in a remarkable reversal of his earlier migration, de Dominis returned to the continent and to the communion of the Roman Catholic church. He explained his reasons in 'Second Manifesto', published in 1623 in Rome as 'Sui reditus ex Anglia consilium exponit', and in an English translation in Liege in the same year. He had found, he wrote, that the Church of England was deeply infected with heresy and he acknowledged errors in his own work since his migration to England. In a long letter to Joseph Hall, dean of Worcester, dated 1 March 1622 -- not published until 1660 as 'De pace religionis' -- he said that he had found the leaders of the English church less willing than their king to recognize the common ground shared by the Church of England and the Roman Catholic church. A further explanation is found in his written answers to interrogations by English ecclesiastical officials in early 1622, before he was given permission to leave the country. He pointed out that the recent accession of Pope Gregory XV, a friend from earlier years in Italy, had given him a potential ally in the cause of religious reconciliation. He received absolution in Brussels from the papal nuncio in May 1622 and journeyed to Rome where he was given housing, provisions, and a stipend. But Gregory XV died in summer 1623, with the result that de Dominis's position became less certain. In April 1624 he was put in prison by the Inquisition while his teachings were examined, and there he died of a fever on 9 September 1624. The Congregation of the Holy Office concluded its case by decreeing, on 21 December 1624, that he had died as a relapsed heretic. As a result his body and his books were burnt at campo dei Fiori, Rome. Among the items considered by the Inquisition was a plan, presumably written after his return, for a reunion involving the Church of Rome, the Church of England, and the reformed churches (Bibliotheque de l'Arsenal, MS 4111, 77-83). It seems to have persuaded the inquisitors that he had returned to his previous errors. 
Archbishop Abbot, in a letter to Sir Thomas Roe, the British ambassador in Constantinople, described de Dominis in November 1622 as a 'bestaccio' (little beast) who had never thanked his British hosts for their generosity and hospitality. Thomas Middleton's play of 1624, 'A Game of Chess', represented de Dominis as a fat bishop, worldly, proud, and gullible, who fell victim to the machinations of the black knight (the Spanish ambassador Gondomar) to return him to the kingdom of darkness. Bishop Richard Neile, who published a collection of official documents concerning de Dominis's departure, called him, in the subtitle of the book, 'a man for many masters'. Though attacked by Roman Catholic writers during his sojourn in England and by protestant writers after his return to the Roman obedience, he was a pioneer in the cause of reconciliation among Christians, a cause to which most of his contemporaries were unresponsive. His personal flaws -- including, according to many observers, avarice, overweening ambition, and arrogance -- also impeded the ecumenical project to which he was passionately committed. His major work, the 'De republica ecclesiastica', is a considerable achievement in the breadth of its subject matter and scholarship and in its provocative theological and historical arguments. 


@@@@@


doc= 7789


Taylor, Silas (1624-1678), parliamentarian army officer and antiquary, was born on 16 July 1624 at Harley, near Much Wenlock, Shropshire, the eldest son of Silvanus Taylor, a 'grand Oliverian' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1st edn, 1691-2, 464). Wood says that Taylor's surname was Domville, but that he rarely used this alternative name. Nothing is known about the subject's mother but his father was a 'busie man against the King's party' (ibid.). Silvanus Taylor was a member of the high court of justice in 1650, lieutenant of the Tower (1649-50), and a regular member during the 1650s of various committees and commissions in the counties of Herefordshire, Shropshire, Radnorshire, and Middlesex. He appears to have lived in the parish of St Clement Danes, Westminster. 
Silas Taylor entered Shrewsbury School in September 1637; Wood's statement that he was also at Westminster School is unconfirmed. He entered New Inn Hall, Oxford, at the beginning of 1641. On the outbreak of the civil war he joined the parliamentary army, becoming a captain under Colonel Edward Massey, the garrison commander of Gloucester, whose command also included Herefordshire and Monmouthshire. Virtually nothing is known of Taylor's exploits during the war, nor of his marriage, but he was in Hereford in 1645 when his wife was buried in the cathedral (Hereford Cathedral archives, fabric accounts). According to John Aubrey, Taylor's 'eldest sonne, wife and children were all burnt in their beds in... near Lothbury' ('Brief Lives', 310) presumably the street of this name, near the Guildhall in the City of London. Taylor never remarried. In August 1647, along with Massey and other officers loyal to the Presbyterian parliament, Taylor was in arms in Hyde Park, intending to defend London against the New Model Army. 
Taylor's father was active in the Herefordshire land market and purchased for $728 the manor of Bosbury when the lands belonging to the cathedral church of Hereford were auctioned in 1649. Some of this land, according to Wood, was settled upon his son who added to it other church properties including Litley Court in the parish of Hampton Bishop, close to Hereford; the disused 'almshall' of the hospital of St Ethelbert, adjoining the cathedral close; and in 1655 the major portion of the bishop's palace at Hereford, which he shared with Colonel John Birch. On the last 'he lay'd out much money in building and altering' ('Brief Lives', 309). 
Early in the 1650s Taylor was appointed joint sequestration commissioner for Herefordshire with Captain Ben Mason. His pragmatic approach to this powerful office made him 'beloved by all the King's party' in Herefordshire ('Brief Lives', 308) but created friction with his fellow commissioner who was more dogmatic but less scrupulous in accounting for the moneys which passed through his hands. A bitter dispute ensued. Taylor's letters to his masters in London suggest that by means of prevarication he certainly allowed many 'papists and delinquents' to enjoy their estates longer than the parliamentary administrators expected, and thus lost them income, as Mason was quick to point out. He drew up a series of articles against Taylor in 1653 who responded with a similar list of Mason's irregularities. After an inquiry held in Gloucestershire in August, Taylor was acquitted and eventually became the sole sequestration officer for Herefordshire. At the root of the dispute with Mason lay Taylor's increasing tendency to become identified with the county community of Herefordshire. During disputed elections in 1656 Taylor is noticed as one of those prominent in supporting the candidature of Colonel Edward Harley and John Scudamore -- two members of the most prominent families in Herefordshire and both alienated from the parliamentary regime at this date. 
Taylor's religious views, like those of his father, appear to have been Erastian and Presbyterian, favouring the survival of a state church, under lay control. His vicious attack upon the cathedral minister Richard Delamaine, published anonymously as 'Imposter magnus' (1654), was a response to the latter's apparent radicalism. Taylor says that with his father, Silvanus, and the celebrated divine John Tombes, he witnessed one of Delamaine's sermons, with which he inflamed his congregations. His exploitation of women in his congregations, and his 'strange applications' of the scripture, said 'farewell to that very genuine sense of the word 'Religion', and to all civil society' (Taylor, 'Imposter magnus', 9). Taylor, an educated man, also distrusted a minister who lacked a university education, whose Latin was weak, and who could not even make a scale drawing of an ancient monument! There may have been a hint of intellectual arrogance here, for Wood records that Taylor was especially skilled in 'Mathematics and Tongues' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1st edn, 1691-2, 466). Moreover, Delamaine was an ally of Mason and of the governor of Hereford Castle, Colonel Wroth Rogers, and thus represented a threat to Taylor's ascendancy in Herefordshire. They viewed Taylor's new acquaintances with suspicion and when he held a music meeting in January 1652 -- a few months after Charles II's descent upon Worcester -- the presence of many royalists made the garrison of the castle 'keep to their arms' (Taylor, 'Imposter magnus', 26). The music was also conducted by Taylor's friend Matthew Locke, 'a papist that was in armes amongst the Rebels in Ireland' ('The Close Hypocrite Discovered', 18). 
According to Aubrey, Taylor found the cathedral library at Hereford in disorder, the books and archives 'lay uncouth and unkiss' ('Brief Lives', 309). Rawlinson, writing soon after the Restoration, said the library had been 'plunder'd and several valuable MANUSCRIPTS taken away, but preserv'd by Silas Taylor' (Rawlinson, vii). Thus, though Aubrey and Wood insist that Taylor 'ransacked' the library, modern commentators have found it difficult to prove this imputation. According to the scrupulous late twentieth-century catalogue of the cathedral library (Mynors), the only manuscript for which evidence exists for Taylor's misappropriation is 'De brevis relatio de glorioso Rege Willelmo' bound with Lanfranc's 'Constitutiones', which Taylor may have found unbound, and in this state gave it to the Bodleian Library in 1658, after transcribing it for publication as an appendix to 'Gavelkind' (1663). 
Taylor's antiquarian collections for the history of Herefordshire, contained in BL, Harley MS 6726, show that far from looting the cathedral library he exploited its contents thoroughly, especially the bishop's registers, which are all present in the library at the beginning of the twenty-first century. The 'History of the county of Hereford' was prepared for publication and even includes a crude title-page with Celtic, Roman, Saxon, and Norman figures ranged around a canopied opening. There is a general introduction on the 'Island of Great Britain' with much sympathy displayed for the indigenous population such as the 'stout Silures' while, in keeping with seventeenth-century radical thinking, the Normans are regarded as oppressive usurpers, 'outlandish inmates... strangers (to) the comons of England'. The focus is very much upon Herefordshire and the marches and there are tantalizing references to sources in Taylor's possession, including 'a ms chronicle in my custody' relating to Arthur's battles (Harley MS 6726). A major part of the manuscript is devoted to the topography of the county combining local and national archive material, with published histories and personal observations made by the author between 1655 and 1657. The manuscript seems to have been left for safe keeping in the hands of Colonel Harley at Brampton Bryan in Herefordshire and the spare quire of paper purchased by Taylor for the 'History' was later used for recording the militia assessment for Herefordshire of 1663. In 1672 he hoped to persuade John Olgilby to publish his collections in the third volume of 'Britannia' only to find that he 'desired mee to epitomize my collections into 9 or 10 sheets of paper for Herefordshire, & he would put it into what stile of English he thought fit' (BL, Egerton MS 2231, fol. 259). It seems likely that the manuscript remained at Brampton Bryan until it found its way into the Harleian collection. It was one of the sources rediscovered and exploited by John Duncumb for his 'Collections towards the History and Antiquities of the County of Hereford', vol. 1 (1804). 
From the evidence of Harley MS 6726 Taylor remained resident in Herefordshire until 1659 when 'upon the rising of George Booth in Cheshire... he received a Commission to be Captain of a Troop of Horse for the Militia of the City of Westminster, and showe'd himself very active in that employment' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1st edn, 1691-2, 463). Along with his father he was also commissioner for the Westminster militia and in this role he makes an appearance in the diary of Samuel Pepys on 21 February 1660. While Pepys was listening to 'a canon of 8 voices composed by Mr Lock', Captain Taylor (probably Silas, though Pepys also has another seagoing colleague called Captain Taylor) reported amid the bonfires celebrating the passing of the Rump, that the gates of the city (recently destroyed on the orders of the Rump) were 'to be made up again' and those members of the city in prison 'were to be set at liberty' (Pepys, 1.63). 
Aubrey says that after the king's return Taylor was 'faine to disgorge all he had gott, and was ruined' ('Brief Lives', 309). But following a brief period in Scotland he found employment as the keeper of armaments at Dunkirk where Colonel Harley (now Sir Edward) was governor between 1660 and 1661. Taylor's practical turn of mind is demonstrated in a brief letter to Harley written in April 1661 reminding him of 'those engines that are made to quench fire by casting water' ('Portland MSS', 3.251). During this time he took refuge from his 'daily Turmoyl' (Taylor, 'Gavelkind', preface) in writing 'The History of Gavelkind' (1663) which was dedicated to Harley. The book explores the tradition that in certain regions of England land tenure was pre-feudal. It was a response to an essay in the same field by M. William Somner of Canterbury, which simply explored 'the common Etymologistical notion thereof' (ibid., 1-2). Taylor, however, set out to prove that the custom of gavelkind was a 'British original' (ibid., preface, 2), which had survived the Roman, Saxon, and Norman invasions of England. He corresponded with John Aubrey about the book and eventually sent him a copy. 
In November 1664, through the offices of Sir Paul Neile, an active member of the Royal Society and a friend of Pepys, Taylor was appointed by royal warrant commissioner of the king's storehouse at Harwich for the annual fee of $1000. Pepys notes that some of those close to the king felt the choice of an old 'fanatique' for such a post was ill-considered. On becoming a member of the corporation in 1672 he had access to the books and records of the borough, and carried out a search among the records of the Tower of London. Another book was prepared for publication but 'the Thread of his Life being not long after cut off' (Dale, i) the manuscript was seized by his creditors. Eventually it found its way into the hands of the antiquarian Samuel Dale who used it as a palimpsest for his own researches, and published Taylor's original text, combined with his own in the form of notes, as 'The History and Antiquities of Harwich and Dovercourt' (1730). 
Pepys was regularly in touch with Taylor, and even read a draft of his play -- 'The Serenade, or, Disappointment' -- sent to him in 1669. He was embarrassed in June 1666 when Taylor sent him misleading news of an English victory over the Dutch at Dunkirk. Nevertheless he regarded Taylor as 'a good schollar, and among other things a great antiquary' (Pepys, 6.81) and in 1665 was shown Taylor's copy of the charter of King Edgar, in which the king refers to himself as 'Rex marium' 'Britanniae'. This, according to Aubrey, had been 'garbled' from the library at Worcester Cathedral and was offered to the king for $120. After Taylor's death Aubrey tried to interest the secretary of state in the document, since the prebends of Worcester 'cared not for such things' ('Brief Lives', 309). Taylor also tried to sell the king a manuscript on the philosopher's stone, but again with no success. 
Pepys, Aubrey, and Taylor also shared a common interest in music. Aubrey noted that he had composed for the king and that in 'those unmusicall dayes' after the civil war he possessed a fine chamber organ ('Brief Lives', 347). Wood remembered that Taylor had played in the music faculty at Oxford before 1660 while Pepys also commented on his skill as a composer. He was, however, less flattering about an anthem played at the Chapel Royal in June 1668, which he declared was 'a dull, old-fashioned thing, of six and seven parts, that nobody could understand: and the duke of York, when he came out, told me that he was a better store-keeper than anthem-maker, and that was bad enough too (Pepys, 9.251)' Two of his compositions were published in John Playford's 'Court Ayres' (1655) and several other pieces are known to have existed in manuscript. His younger brother, Sylvanus (died 1672 in Dublin), also composed and performed music. 
Taylor died in straitened circumstances -- 'his papers lying with him' but some already pawned (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1st edn, 1691-2, 464) -- at Harwich on 4 November 1678. He was buried in the chancel of the parish church of St Nicholas and, according to Dale, 'without either Grave Stone or Inscription to preserve his Memory to Posterity' (Dale, 37). 


@@@@@


doc= 7790


Don, David (1799-1841), botanist, was born at Doo Hillock, Forfarshire, Scotland, on 21 December 1799, the second son among the fifteen children of George Don (1764-1814), nurseryman and field botanist. David and his brother George Don (1798-1856) became distinguished botanists; their three brothers remained gardeners. Like his older brother, David Don was employed as a gardener in the well-stocked nursery of Messrs Dickson at Broughton, near Edinburgh, and then in the Chelsea Physic Garden. However, he was soon appointed keeper of the rich library and herbarium of Aylmer Bourke Lambert (1761-1842). His first publications were 'Descriptions of new or rare plants in Scotland' and 'Descriptions of several new plants from Nepaul', both of which appeared in 'Memoirs of the Wernerian Society' (3, 1820). These were followed by 'A monograph of the genus Saxifraga' in 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' (13, 1821, 341-452). 
In 1821 Don accompanied his father's friend Dr Patrick Neill (1776-1851), secretary both of the Caledonian Horticultural Society and the Wernerian Society, to Paris, where he met Humboldt and Cuvier. In 1822 he became librarian of the Linnean Society, where a fellow Scot, Alexander McLeay, considered his pride and self-conceit to be intolerable. Don's important 'Prodromus florae Nepalensis' (1825), based on Nepalese specimens from Hamilton and Wallich in Lambert's herbarium, contained Latin so ungrammatical that John Lindley scathingly described it as 'written in so strange a language, that we can scarcely guess its name' ('Botanical Register', 11, 1825, 1). Yet, a friend stated in his obituary in 'The Phytologist' that: 'It has never been our lot to meet with a botanist equally able and willing to afford information to the student... nothing could exceed the kindness and zeal with which he assisted every student, however complicated or however trite the subject laid before him.' Don was professor of botany at King's College, London, from 1836 to 1841. Extremely industrious, he published during his short life fifty-two papers listed in the Royal Society's 'Catalogue of Scientific Papers', acted as an editor of 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History', and produced volumes five to seven of Robert Sweet's 'British Flower Garden' (1831-7). He died on 8 December 1841, after twelve months of suffering from cancer, in the Linnean Society's house at Soho Square, London, and was buried at Kensal Green on 15 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 7791


Don, Sir George (1756-1832), army officer and colonial governor, was born in Edinburgh on 30 April 1756, the second of the three sons of John Don, a wine merchant, and his wife Ann Seton or Seaton. He entered the army as an ensign of the 51st regiment on 26 December 1770 and was promoted lieutenant in June 1774, after he had joined his regiment at Minorca. His qualities attracted the notice of General Johnstone, the lieutenant-governor and commander-in-chief, who took him on his staff as aide-de-camp, and he served General James Murray, Johnstone's successor, in the same post. General Murray also made him his military secretary. At this time he met General Murray's niece Maria Margaretta Murray ('c'.1760-1854), an illegitimate daughter of Patrick Murray, fifth Lord Elibank, and married her on his return to Britain in 1782. 
Don was chief of the staff during the gallant but unavailing defence of Fort St Philip (1781-2) and was sent to London with his report on the siege by Murray, who commended him highly. In November 1783 he received a brevet majority and in April 1784 a substantive majority in the 59th regiment, which he joined in Gibraltar; he purchased the lieutenant-colonelcy in April 1789. He left Gibraltar in 1791 to take up a staff appointment in England. In 1792-3 he was with his regiment in Jersey. He was deputy adjutant-general to Sir James Murray (later Murray-Pulteney) in the duke of York's army in the Netherlands in 1793, and for his services was made aide-de-camp to the king and promoted colonel in February 1795. 
Don remained on the continent after the departure of the army, as military commissioner with the Prussian army. He appears to have been engaged in co-ordinating espionage activities at this time. He was promoted major-general on 1 January 1798 and appointed to command the troops in the Isle of Wight. In 1799 he joined the duke of York's unsuccessful expedition to The Helder, commanding the 3rd division under Sir David Dundas. He was captured and imprisoned by the French while carrying messages to General Brune, who accused him of carrying documents intended to subvert the Batavians, and was not released until June 1800. While in captivity he succeeded Sir John Moore as colonel of the 9th West India regiment. There seems to be no evidence for the statement in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that on his return he rejoined the staff of the Horse Guards as assistant adjutant-general. In 1802 he was in Scotland, where he was in command of the south-east, organizing a large force of militiamen against a possible invasion. He was promoted lieutenant-general in 1803. When the war with France resumed, Don returned to London to organize and command the newly formed King's German Legion, which consisted mainly of Hanoverians. With this corps and other troops, amounting in all to 14,000 men, he sailed for Germany in 1805 on a diplomatic and military mission, in which he was later superseded by Lord Cathcart. 
On 20 October 1805 Don became colonel of the 96th regiment and in 1806 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Jersey, where he commanded until 1814; however, he was absent in 1809-10, when he was sent to Walcheren in order to command and supervise the withdrawal of the forces engaged in that disastrous expedition. He kept Jersey in a good state of defence, improving fortifications, building roads, and reorganizing the militia, and won the trust of the inhabitants. He was promoted general in June 1814 and appointed lieutenant-governor of Gibraltar, where he arrived in October 1814 during an epidemic of yellow fever. Recollecting the terrible toll taken by disease in the enclosed communities of Fort St Philip and Walcheren, Don improved sanitation and the water supply, built a hospital for the civilian inhabitants, and created a public park, the Alameda. The sanitary police which he established evolved in 1830 into the first British police force outside the United Kingdom. He also built Gibraltar's court house, and the charter which established Gibraltar as a crown colony was published during his term of office (1830). He repaired and completed defences which had been in disrepair since the great siege (1779-83) and built roads in Gibraltar and neighbouring parts of Spain. He was made GCH in 1816 and GCB in 1820, and received the grand cross of military merit of France in 1817 for services to the French royal family. He was appointed colonel of the 36th regiment in 1818 and transferred to the 3rd regiment (the Buffs) in 1829. In 1831 he retired as lieutenant-governor of Gibraltar and was made governor of Scarborough Castle. He died in Gibraltar of influenza on 1 January 1832 and was buried on 4 January with full military honours in the new garrison church in Gibraltar (later the cathedral of the Holy Trinity), which he had built. 


@@@@@


doc= 7792


Don, George (1798-1856), botanist and plant collector, was born at Doo Hillock, Forfarshire, Scotland, on 17 May 1798, the eldest of the five sons of George Don (1764-1814), clockmaker turned nurseryman, who discovered many highland plants new to Scotland, and principal gardener (1802-6) at the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh. David Don (1799-1841) was a younger brother. After horticultural experience in the nursery of Messrs Dickson at Broughton, near Edinburgh, Don worked from 1816 to 1821 as foreman gardener in the Chelsea Physic Garden. In December 1821 he began a voyage with Captain Edward Sabine to Madeira, Sierra Leone, Sao Tome, the West Indies, and Brazil, his task everywhere to collect seeds, plants, bulbs, and herbarium specimens for the Horticultural Society's garden. He returned in February 1823 having successfully assembled many new plants but, as he violated an agreement not to publish on what he had collected, the society dismissed him in 1825. He published, in 1827, 'A Monograph of the Genus Allium', a preprint from 'Memoirs of the Wernerian Society' (6, 1832, 1-102). This and his 'Review of the genus 'Combretum'' in 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' (15, 1826, 412-41) made evident his botanical ability and he was commissioned to prepare 'A General System of Botany and Gardening' (4 vols., 1831-8), an excellent work, but one which was financially unsuccessful and never completed. He later provided the botanical section for the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' (2, 1843). Don was elected an associate of the Linnean Society of London in 1822 and a fellow in 1831. He died, unmarried, in Kensington on 25 February 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 7793


Don, Sir William Henry, seventh baronet (1825-1862), actor, was born on 4 May 1825, the only son of Sir Alexander Don of Newtondon, Berwickshire, sixth baronet (died 1826), MP for Roxburghshire, and his wife, Grace ['see 'Wallace, Grace Jane, Lady Wallace], the eldest daughter of John Stein of Edinburgh. His father was a close friend of Sir Walter Scott, and a frequent attendant at his dinner parties. William Henry Don succeeded to the baronetcy when less than a year old. His mother married as her second husband Sir James Maxwell Wallace, of Ainderby Hall, near Northallerton. Don was educated at Eton College between 1838 and 1841. In August 1839 he took part in the Eglinton tournament as page to Lady Montgomerie. He entered the army as a cornet in the 5th dragoon guards in June 1842, was an extra aide-de-camp to the lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1844, and became lieutenant in the 5th dragoon guards in 1845; in November that year he retired from the army, deep in debt. The fine estate called Newtondon, left him by his father, had to be sold, and produced $85,000, which went to his creditors. He was then compelled to turn to account the experience which he had acquired as an amateur actor. 
After a short starring engagement in the north of England, and following his marriage to Antonia, the daughter of M. Lebrun of Hamburg, on 1 June 1847, he went to America. He made his first public appearance there as John Duck in 'The Jacobite' at the Broadway Theatre, New York, on 27 October 1850. Shortly afterwards he was seen in the character of Sir Charles Coldstream in Boucicault's comedy 'Used Up'. He remained in America for nearly five years, playing with success in New York, Philadelphia, and other large towns, and on his return to England found that after all his affairs had been wound up he was still in debt about $7000. In an attempt to pay off this sum he continued as a comic actor. He began in Edinburgh and Glasgow, and after a provincial tour went to the Haymarket Theatre, London, where in 1857 he acted in J. M. Morton's farce 'Whitebait at Greenwich'. His first marriage ended for unknown reasons, and on 17 October 1857, at Marylebone, he married Emily Eliza Saunders, the eldest daughter of John Saunders of the Adelphi Theatre, London. She had been well known as a lively actress in comedy and farce at the Adelphi, Haymarket, Surrey, and other theatres for some years. 
In 1861 Don and his wife went to Australia, where he appeared at the Royal Theatre, Melbourne. At this period he had taken to playing female characters in burlesques. In February 1862 he visited Hobart Town, Tasmania, with a company of his own, where he fell ill with an inflammation of the lungs. On 15 March 1862 he played Queen Elizabeth in the burlesque 'Kenilworth', by Robert Reece and H. B. Farnie, and four days later, on 19 March 1862, he died from aneurysm of the aorta at Webb's Hotel, Hobart Town. He had a private burial in the same town. He left two daughters, Alexina Mary from his first marriage, and Harriette Grace Mary from his second; in the absence of any male heir, the title ended with him. Don possessed a fine sense of humour, a quick perception of the ludicrous side of life and character, a remarkable talent for mimicry, a strong nerve, a ready wit, and great self-possession. 
Lady Don returned to England after her husband's death and resumed her professional career, but with no very profitable result, though she had been very popular in the Australian colonies and in New Zealand. In 1867 she went to the United States, where she made her appearance on 18 February at the New York Theatre in 'Peggy Green' and the burlesque 'Kenilworth'; on the close of the season she returned to England. She was for a short period lessee of the Theatre Royal, Nottingham, and assisted at the opening of the Gaiety Theatre, Edinburgh. Latterly she was in reduced circumstances and was obliged to appear as a vocalist in music halls. She died at Edinburgh on 20 September 1875. Don's first wife, Antonia, died in 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 7794


Domnall Brecc (d. 642/3), king of Dal Riata, was overking of the Dalriada in Scotland and Ireland ['see also 'Dal Riata, kings of]. The epithet Brecc, usually translated 'the Freckled', taken together with the name of his father, Eochaid Buide, 'the Yellow' ['see under 'Dal Riata, kings of], suggests a fair family complexion. In 622 Domnall is said to have fought at Cend Delgthen (probably in Meath) in an internal conflict between southern Ui Neill. His motives are unknown, but this is the only recorded battle in which he was on the winning side. 
Eochaid Buide died about 629. His successor, Connad Cerr, was, according to one group of texts, a brother of Domnall, but there is more convincing evidence that Connad belonged to the Comgall (Cowal) branch of the Dalriada in Britain. He died in the same year, in Ireland. His successor is said to have been his son Ferchar, but there is evidence that Ferchar's reign came later, and that Connad's immediate successor was Domnall Brecc. 
A badly displaced annal, which may belong to 'c'.635, records a defeat of Domnall Brecc 'in Calathros' (A. O. Anderson, 1.158), apparently a district near Loch Awe. In 637 Congal Caech, the overking of the Ulaid in north-east Ireland, was attacked by the head of the northern Ui Neill, Domnall, son of Aed. In the battle of Moira, in Down, Congal was killed. Domnall Brecc had been his ally, and, though apparently not personally present at Moira, was said to have wasted the province of Domnall son of Aed. His abandonment of his family's traditional loyalty to the family of Aed was thought to have brought about the fulfilment of a prophecy made by Columba to Domnall's grandfather Aedan (or Aedan) mac Gabran (though not, apparently, in Domnall Brecc's lifetime). 
After 637 there is no word of Domnall Brecc in Ireland. In 638 there was a 'battle of Glenn Mureson in which Domnall Brecc's people fled' (A. O. Anderson, 1.163); the place is unidentified, but is assumed to be in Scotland. His last battle was fought in December of 642 or 643 in Strathcarron, east of the Kilsyth hills, against Owen, king of the Dumbarton Britons. A fragment of Welsh panegyric verse (the 'Gododdin') says that Domnall was killed after he had 'fired' a British 'town', and adds, with a note of exultation, that 'the head of Domnall Brecc, ravens gnawed it' (Jackson, 47). The cause of the affair is unknown, but it should perhaps be placed within the context of a struggle for supremacy between Dal Riata and Dumbarton. 
From 637 Domnall Brecc seems to have had to share the overkingship of the Dalriada with Ferchar, Connad Cerr's son. After Domnall's death, Ferchar reigned alone until he died, probably about 651. Domnall left at least two sons: Cathusach, who died in 650, and Domangart, who reigned from 660 to 673 and was the ancestor of the later Scottish kings. 


@@@@@


doc= 7795


Donald I (d. 862), king in Scotland, in whose time (the date is not specified) the Gaels with their king 'made the rights and laws of the kingdom [which were known as the laws] of Aed, son of Eochaid, at Forteviot' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.291). What they then promulgated (rather than created, it may be supposed) was presumably a body of more or less Irish customary law associated with the name of Donald's great-grandfather Aed Find. 'Laws of Macalpine' which were known, or known about, in the thirteenth century may not have been distinct from these laws of Aed. Some writers have been misled by a late group of king-lists into believing that Donald was the father of a famous king, Giric. But in the original source Giric's father was undoubtedly 'Dungal', not 'Donald'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7796


Donald II (d. 900), who was the son of Constantine I (d. 876) and the first ruler to be described as 'king of Scotland' ('ri Alban') in contemporary record. 'Alba' referred to the region over which Donald and his successors established their rule, and was probably only the area bounded approximately by the River Spey to the north, the Forth to the south, and the central highlands to the west. The title 'king of Scotland' replaced the earlier 'king of Picts', and the people of the kingdom ceased to be known as Picts, and became simply 'inhabitants of Scotland' ('fir Alban' or 'Albanaig'). Since 'Alba' had hitherto denoted 'Britain' in Gaelic, this represents an extraordinary change in terminology, suggesting that the adoption of 'Alba' as the kingdom's name represented the coining of a radically new identity, and perhaps signifying an attempt, following a period of disruption and uncertainty between 875 and 889, to establish a new political order based on dynastic kingship. During the reign of Donald II (889-900) 'the Northmen wasted Pictland' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.395), but Donald defeated the Danes in a battle on some unidentified islands, before being killed by Scandinavians at Dunnottar, Kincardineshire. He was later reported to have been buried on Iona. 


@@@@@


doc= 7797


Donald, Adam (1703-1780), spiritualist, was born into a poor family of peasant farmers at the hamlet of Bethelnie, 20 miles north of Aberdeen. Despite an extraordinarily large stature and build, which caused him to be regarded as a changeling, Donald was unable to use his hands for work. Required to find an alternative source of income, Donald 'affected an uncommon reservedness of manner, pretended to be extremely studious, spoke little, and what he said was uttered in half sentences, with awkward gesticulations and an uncouth tone of voice, to excite consternation and elude detection' ('Life and Character'). Though scarcely able to read, he was said to have studied books in all languages, and to have been particularly knowledgeable of John Gerard's 'The Herball, or, Generall Historie of Plants' (1597). He made, too, a practice of haunting the ruined church of Bethelnie, where he was thought to converse with and learn from the dead. 
Donald's supposed necromancy meant that he was frequently questioned about inexplicable occurrences in his community and his talent for generalized advice meant that his comments often appeared prophetic. He also acted as a quack physician and dealt principally with lingering disorders supposed to owe their origin to witchcraft. His prescriptions invariably required the application of certain unguents of his own making to various parts of the body. This was to be accompanied by particular ceremonies, described in minute detail and intended to confirm his mystical persona. Donald's assumed character provided both popularity and financial security. His house was frequently crowded with visitors seeking cures or details of their futures, for which he charged a maximum of 1's'. Such was his fame that he was asked to sit for a full-length portrait, which was later engraved. To relieve the boredom of sitting he composed the prophetic lines: '
Time doth all things devour, 

And time doth all things waste. 

And we waste time, 

And so are we at last. 

' In later life Donald persuaded a local woman, details of whom are unknown, to marry him on account of his powers, the limitations of which proved difficult to hide in an intimate relationship. His artifice, while kept secret by his wife, was exposed by his daughter who openly mocked him. Donald died in 1780. 


@@@@@


doc= 7798


Donaldson, James (d. 1719), publisher and writer, is a figure whose origins are unknown, apart from his own account of them. He claimed that his father had been a landowner, and that he himself raised a company in the earl of Angus's regiment for William III in the revolution of 1688. He saw action, being wounded at Killiecrankie and imprisoned in Blair Castle, but received no reward. The company was disbanded at Candlemas 1690 and shortage of funds forced him abroad for a few years. 
Donaldson took to writing with no great success. His 'Husbandry anatomized, or, An enquiry into the present manner of tilling and manuring the ground in Scotland' (1697-8) was unduly neglected. It contained a programme for improved farming in advance of current thought, his most innovative proposal being for the use of potatoes as a field crop. This pamphlet was dedicated to the earl of Marchmont, then lord chancellor, and in an introduction he supplied what little is known of his family background. 
Donaldson's next publication, a piece of bad verse entitled 'A Picklock for Swearers, or, A Looking-Glass for Atheists and Profane Persons' (1698), was more successful for the Edinburgh council gave him an award of 10 Rex dollars 'for his paines in compyling of some poems against profanity which are dedicat to the good town' (Armet, 'Extracts, 1689-1701', 231). He wrote various other tracts, mainly on economic issues. 'The Undoubted Art of Thriving' (1700) proposed the expansion of trade and laid emphasis on the Indian and African Company (the Darien scheme). In 1701 he produced 'Certain and infallible measures whereby the whole begging poor of the kingdom may be alimented at much less charge', which proposed very little more than rigorous enforcement of the existing poor law, other than calling on every parish to have a group of young men to visit each household and take the 'vicious or idle' to compulsory work. Parishes were to force those in workhouses to work more productively, so as to earn more than they ate. He seems ignorant of the lack of workhouses and assumes that profitable work is always available. He also wrote a series of verse panegyrics to various craft skills: malting and brewing (1712), weaving (1712), and wright craft (1713). 
Donaldson married Jean Wedderburn (died 1697) on 28 August 1691. Their son James (1694-1754) was a weaver, but their grandson, Alexander Donaldson, and a further generation returned to publishing. He claimed to have a numerous family, but other members have not been traced. There is an undated verse flysheet of no literary merit entitled 'An epithelanium on the jovial nuptials of Captain James Donaldson with the meritorious Mrs Jean Reid, alias Mrs Scott, composed by a lady of honour'. This may have been part of a jest or protest at his press. 
Donaldson's significance lies in the fact that for fifteen years, from his printing house on the south side of Edinburgh's High Street, he was editor of the first newspaper in Scotland to have had any long-term continuity. This was the 'Edinburgh Gazette', a weekly licensed by the privy council on 10 March 1699. The paper's text was supposed to be checked before printing by Lord Cassillis for the council, but at first this was not enforced and in June 1699 a piece appeared which annoyed the council: Donaldson was imprisoned for five days, securing release by an abject statement of submission. Control in advance of printing then became a reality. 
The 'Gazette' consisted mainly of news from London, and British and foreign politics, passed on by the council. This was what the Scottish business community wanted for most of the eighteenth century. Donaldson also ran a business in 'buriall letters', adaptable printed formulas allowing for the insertion of specific funerals. He tried to set up a factory for producing firearms, but ran into opposition from the Edinburgh Hammermen as well as the council. 
In 1705 the promise of a monopoly to Donaldson was broken by the council and one Adam Boig was allowed a similar newspaper, the 'Edinburgh Courant'. Boig was also later allowed to print the names of the Scottish members of the British parliament. He got his news by post from London, for which he had to pay postage. Donaldson obtained the privilege of correspondence with France. Both editors carried on a vigorous correspondence with the council complaining of the privileges of the other, and in Donaldson's view there was no adequate market for two papers. He received a grant of $30 from the convention of royal burghs but still felt inadequately supported. When Boig printed an advertisement which the council disliked, both editors were put in gaol. The 'Courant' ceased publication soon after the quarrel with Donaldson. In 1708 the privy council was abolished but the town council of Edinburgh attempted to assert similar control. Donaldson had become a burgess and guild brother of the burgh in 1703. He died on 17 September 1719 and was buried two days later in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh. He left a legacy for afflicted children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7799


Donaldson, James (fl. 1794-1796), writer on agriculture, practised as a land surveyor in Dundee. He was also agent for the earl of Panmure. His chief work was 'Modern Agriculture, or, The Present State of Husbandry in Great Britain' (4 vols., 1795-6). Donaldson was one of those employed by the board of agriculture to make surveys of the agriculture of each county, and he was responsible for 'A General View of the Agriculture of the County of Banff' (1794) and similar reports on the agriculture of the Carse of Gowrie, and the counties of Elgin and Nairn, all published in 1794, and Kincardine (1795). His 'General View of the Agriculture of the County of Northampton' (1794) includes an appendix comparing the systems of agriculture in Northampton and Perth. 


@@@@@


doc= 7800


Donaldson, James (1751-1830), newspaper editor and philanthropist, was born on 3 December 1751 at 7 West Bow, Edinburgh, and baptized the same day. He was the eldest son of Alexander Donaldson (bap. 1727, d. 1794), an Edinburgh bookseller, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Marshall. In 1763 his father opened a bookshop in London that took advantage of copyright differences between Scotland and England, thereby establishing the family fortune (about $100,000). 
In 1774 Donaldson took over the editorship of the bi-weekly 'Edinburgh Advertiser', which his father had founded about ten years earlier. The paper grew into a flourishing business, particularly during the years of the American War of Independence and the French Revolution. In 1792 he married Jean Gillespie. They lived first in George Street and then in both a town residence at 85 Princes Street and a country seat at Broughton Hall. They had five children, none of whom survived childhood. 
Donaldson more than doubled his inheritance through judicious investments, and although rumours of eccentricity and even miserliness seem to have circulated about him, he was extremely regular in his work habits, a fair employer, and generous in response to appeals for charity. He became a burgess and guild brother of the city of Edinburgh, and a director of the Bank of Scotland; he sat on the jury which convicted the infamous burglar Deacon Brodie in 1788. He retired in 1820. 
On the death of his wife in 1828 Donaldson made a will leaving his fortune ($215,377) for the founding of a hospital for destitute children, with preference to be given to those named Donaldson and Marshall. He died at Broughton Hall on 16 December 1830, and was buried in the graveyard of St John's Church, Princes Street. Donaldson's Hospital was built at West Coates, Edinburgh, to a design by William Henry Playfair, and inaugurated in 1851; as Donaldson's College it is now a leading institution in the education of deaf people. 


@@@@@


doc= 7801


Donaldson, John (1789/90-1865), composer and musicologist, was the son of a Mr Donaldson and his wife, M. S. Gregg, and appears to have started his professional career as a music teacher in Glasgow from 1811 to about 1814. In 1826 he became an advocate in Edinburgh. In 1841 he applied for the Reid chair of music at the University of Edinburgh, and was elected in 1845 as its fourth occupant. He succeeded two English holders of the chair who had regarded it as a sinecure. Such had been their indolence that the funds for the chair (endowed by General Reid) had been allowed to be appropriated by the university authorities for other purposes and, to a man of principle (which Donaldson's 'Statement' on the professorship, published in 1848, clearly shows him to have been), the appointment was little short of a poisoned chalice. 
Donaldson, using his legal knowledge, was the first Reid professor to establish the chair on a proper footing. He instigated proceedings in the court of session in 1850 and, after five years of litigation, gained a decision in his favour. The university was ordered by the courts to build a music room and provide adequate moneys for it to function. The university senate did not finally carry out its obligations until 1861, the battle having by then broken Donaldson's health. He was granted a civil-list pension of $75 in April 1861. The professorship being in 'the theory of music', he specialized in theory, acoustics, and even the engraving of music, as well as assembling for his department an outstanding collection of instruments, including a fine organ. 
Donaldson's piano sonata in G minor, published about 1823 (reproduced in N. Temperley, 'The London Pianoforte School', 1985, 7.xviii, 275), is his only surviving composition. A powerful and ambitious work, hinting at cyclic structure, the piece is stylistically advanced in the context of British music of the period: given its quality, it is regrettable that Donaldson appears to have abandoned composing. He died at his home, Marchfield, Cramond, near Edinburgh, on 12 August 1865. His wife, Dorothea Finlay, predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7802


Donaldson, John (1799-1876), writer on agriculture, was born in Northumberland and was probably related to another agricultural writer, James Donaldson (fl. 1794-1796). In all, John Donaldson wrote, contributed to, and edited more than a dozen works on agricultural topics, covering such subjects as clay lands and loamy soils, farm buildings, manures, and the management of crops, describing himself on their title pages as a professor of botany. In addition to these, he also published 'Agricultural Biography' (1854) and wrote, for William Owen the bookseller, a periodical detailing country fairs to be held during the year. Donaldson was presented to the Charterhouse in Holborn, London, by the prince consort in August 1855, and died a poor brother there on 22 March 1876, leaving a will in favour of Elizabeth Paine, a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 7803


Donaldson, John William (1811-1861), philologist, born in London on 7 June 1811, was the second son of Stuart Donaldson, Australia merchant, and brother of Sir Stuart Donaldson. His grandfather, Hay Donaldson, was town clerk of Haddington, near Edinburgh, and his mother was Betty, daughter of John Cundale of Snab Green, Arkholme, Lancashire. He was educated privately, and at fourteen was articled to his uncle, a solicitor. In 1830, while in his uncle's office, he went up for an examination at University College, London, and gained the first prize in Greek. His ability attracted the attention of the examiner, George Long, by whose advice he was sent to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1831. He gained a scholarship in 1833, and in 1834 was second in the classical tripos and senior optime. He proceeded MA in 1837, BD in 1844, and DD in 1849. He was elected fellow and tutor of Trinity in 1835, and up to his marriage in 1840 devoted himself to lecturing, teaching, and making himself master of the results of German philology. He was president of the union in 1839, and in the same year he was ordained deacon and published his 'New Cratylus, or, Contributions towards a More Accurate Knowledge of the Greek Language', said to be 'the only complete treatise on inflected language then in existence either in England or on the continent'. Donaldson was right to stress the importance of the study of comparative philology, but his tone was polemical and his conclusions were doubtful. In 1844 Donaldson published 'Varronianus', which he defined in the preface to the third edition as 'an attempt to discuss the comparative philology of the Latin language on the broad basis of general ethnography'. Although the work was unsystematic and of no lasting value, it involved him in a violent controversy with Professor T. H. Key, who accused him of plagiarism. 
Donaldson lost his fellowship in 1840 on his marriage to Laetitia, daughter of Sir John Mortlock, banker at Cambridge, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. His first wife predeceased him, and he went on to marry Louisa, daughter of John Rawlins; they had three daughters. After taking pupils for a time at Winfrith in Dorset, in 1841 Donaldson was appointed headmaster of King Edward's School, Bury St Edmunds, an appointment unfortunate for the institution and for himself. He was deficient in judgement and administrative power, and the school declined under him, notwithstanding his efforts to obtain reputation by the publication of Latin and Greek grammars, which met with little acceptance beyond the sphere of his personal influence and involved him in controversy. They were probably too scientific for school use, and his conviction of the defects of standard grammars had been expressed with indiscreet candour. He was active in the cultural life of Bury St Edmunds, where he greatly improved the Athenaeum. 
Donaldson resigned the headmastership in 1855 partly on account of the outcry caused by the publication of 'Jashar; fragmenta archetypa carminum Hebraicorum; collegit, ordinavit, restituit J. G. Donaldson', which appeared at the end of 1854. In this extraordinary work he endeavoured to show that fragments of a book of Jashar are to be found throughout the 'Old Testament' scriptures up to the time of Solomon, that the book was compiled in the reign of that monarch, and that its remains constitute 'the religious marrow of the scriptures'. The work was heavily criticized and Donaldson's religious orthodoxy was questioned. Although he defended his position in a vigorous pamphlet, he failed to convince his critics. 
After resigning his headmastership Donaldson took up his residence at Cambridge, where he obtained a high reputation as a tutor, and he was elected one of the classical examiners of the University of London. In 1856 he produced a lengthy essay entitled 'Classical scholarship and classical learning', which despite its characteristically intemperate style contains interesting suggestions about the improvement of university classical teaching. He prepared new and improved editions of his 'New Cratylus', 'Varronianus', 'Jashar', and 'Greek Grammar'; he also wrote a disquisition on English ethnography in the 'Cambridge Essays', and the article 'Philology' in the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and in 1858 completed K. O. Muller's unfinished 'History of Greek Literature'. He began a Greek dictionary, which was to have been the great work of his life. Unfortunately he worked far too hard, both as author and teacher. When advised to take six months' rest he replied that this would cost him $1500. The neglect of the advice proved fatal. On coming to London in January 1861 he found himself unable to conduct the university examination, and on 10 February he died there at his mother's house, 21 Craven Hill, killed by overwork. 
Donaldson had a brilliant mind, but he lacked the scholarly virtues of moderation and restraint. Judgement too often forsook him in his speculations, and taste in his controversies. He theorized far too boldly from insufficient data, and put forward as certainties views which should only have been advanced as suggestions. In biblical criticism more especially he can only be regarded as a brilliant amateur. He was greatly beloved by his friends, who included N. C. Thirlwall and W. H. Thompson. The diarist Henry Crabb Robinson spoke enthusiastically of the charm of his conversation. Donaldson produced a large number of other books, pamphlets, and reviews, especially in 'Fraser's Magazine', and was part author with P. W. Buckham of 'The Theatre of the Greeks', which achieved considerable popularity in its time. 


@@@@@


doc= 7804


Donaldson, Joseph (1794-1830), soldier and surgeon, was born in Glasgow, where his father was employed by a mercantile house. With some school companions he ran away to sea and made a voyage to the West Indies, which disenchanted him of a sea life, and he returned home and was sent back to school by his father. Early in 1809 he again ran away, and without communicating with his friends enlisted in the old 94th (Scotch, or Scots, brigade). He accompanied the regiment to Jersey, then to Spain, where it took part in the desperate defence of Fort Matagorda during the siege of Cadiz, and afterwards was with Picton's division in the principal battles and sieges in the Peninsula from 1811 to 1814. After the peace in 1814 the Scots brigade was stationed in Ireland, where it was disbanded in 1818, except for the 94th, which survived. In the meantime Donaldson married a young Irish girl, alluded to in some of his writings under the name of Mary MacCarthy; they had ten children. 
Early in 1815 Donaldson was discharged as sergeant, at the age of twenty-one, at the expiration of his limited-service engagement. Returning to Glasgow with his wife, he made a little money by the publication of his 'Scenes and Sketches in Ireland'. His hopes of obtaining employment in civil life having utterly failed, Donaldson went to London with his family, enlisted in the East India Company's service, and was employed as a recruiting-sergeant, at first in London and afterwards in Glasgow. Disliking this, he got himself transferred to the district staff, and was employed as head clerk in the Glasgow district staff office for some years, during which time he published his 'Recollections of an Eventful Life, Chiefly Passed in the Army' and 'The War in the Peninsula'. 
While in London, Donaldson had found time to study anatomy and surgery, studies which he continued at Glasgow University. Having qualified as a surgeon, he took his discharge in 1827, and set up in medical practice at Oban in Argyll, where he remained until 1829, though with little success. He left his wife and children in Glasgow, and, hoping to improve his medical prospects, went to London and afterwards to Paris, where he died of pulmonary disease in October 1830, at the age of thirty-six. He was reported to have been a frequent anonymous contributor to the press. His three books, which give a vivid picture of soldier life in the Peninsula and in Ireland, were republished in 1855 as 'Recollections of the Eventful Life of a Soldier' for the benefit of his widow and a surviving daughter, then in distressed circumstances in Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 7805


Donaldson, Sir Stuart Alexander (1812-1867), businessman and politician in Australia, was born on 16 December 1812, the third son of Stuart Donaldson (died 1849), a London merchant born in Haddington, Scotland, and his wife, Betsy, the daughter of John Crundall of Snab Green, Lancashire. John William Donaldson (1811-1861) was his brother. Family memory held that Stuart was educated privately. At the age of fifteen he entered his father's firm, which was one of the major traders with Australia. He spent part of 1830 in Hamburg and Berlin, and travelled in the silver-mining regions of Mexico between 1831 and 1834; in 1866 he published his letters on his experiences there under the title 'Mexico Thirty Years Ago'. 
In 1835 Donaldson migrated from England to Australia to work with his father's correspondent Richard Jones, who was the leading merchant in Sydney. Donaldson became Jones's partner in 1837 and bought his business from the beginning of 1838. This made him immediately a substantial broker, buyer, and exporter of wool and whale oil, as well as an importer and wholesaler on a grand scale. He acquired 250,000 valuable acres of sheep-runs in New England. Building on the capital and credit of the family firm, he became promoter and director of banking, insurance, steamshipping, railway, and copper-mining companies. His profits increased markedly once gold was discovered in 1851. 
Donaldson had been appointed a magistrate as early as 1838, in which year he organized the Australian Club, the first club for gentlemen in the colony; in 1856 he was a founder member of the Union Club, its main rival. The capital, youthful energy, affability, bachelorhood, and self-regard that involved him in managing the social life of his peers drew him also into electoral politics, with the franchise limited to men of property. In the legislative council of New South Wales he held the rural seat of Durham, in the Hunter valley, at four polls between 1848 and 1853, when he returned to England on business. While there he married, on 21 February 1854, Amelia, the daughter of Frederick Cowper of Carleton Hall, Penrith, Cumberland. Following his return to Australia, Donaldson won the suburban seat of Sydney Hamlets in 1855 and retained it in 1856 at the first election under a new constitution (with a broader franchise) which conferred responsible government on the colony. 
After two weightier conservatives failed to form a ministry, the governor turned to the clubman Donaldson as a safe alternative. Donaldson assembled his team in April 1856 and was sworn in as colonial secretary and first premier of New South Wales on 6 June. He and his backers hoped that he might gain support from some of the liberal parliamentarians, but the factional and administrative complexity of moving to responsible government brought his ministry down on 25 August 1856. Its liberal successor lasted for five weeks only. In the ensuing conservative ministry led by Henry Parker (October 1856-September 1857) Donaldson was colonial treasurer and, briefly, commissioner for railways. He was also a member of the senate of the University of Sydney from 1851 to 1861. 
Having reached the limit of honour in Australia, Donaldson consolidated his wealth, placed his sheep stations in the hands of two brothers-in-law, and in 1859 retired to England. He was knighted on 23 August 1860. In that year he assumed the chair of the General Association for the Australian Colonies, an investors' lobby in London, and he joined company boards. From his arrival in England he looked for a seat in the House of Commons: 'The Times' described him in April 1860 as 'a returned Australian gentleman who has been hovering about several English constituencies in the last few months'. He was the official but unsuccessful Liberal candidate at by-elections for Dartmouth in August 1859, Harwich in April 1860, and Bath in February 1861. A moderate conservative in the fast-changing Australian colonies, he presented himself as a moderate liberal in the United Kingdom, an admirer of Lord Palmerston who opposed church rates and supported a $6 franchise and the secret ballot. Donaldson visited his investments in Australia in 1861 and 1864. But his health declined drastically, and he was diagnosed with heart problems; he became gaunt where he had once been portly, and he lost his voluble joviality (which some people called bumptiousness). He died at his father-in-law's seat, Carleton Hall, on 11 January 1867, survived by his wife, their four young sons, who included St Clair George Alfred Donaldson (1863-1935), and one infant daughter. In 1841 Donaldson had arranged a cabin passage from Sydney to London for Mrs Maria Leicester and her four-month-old son, whose paternity he acknowledged. 


@@@@@


doc= 7806


Donaldson, Thomas Leverton (1795-1885), architect, was born on 19 October 1795 at 8 Bloomsbury Square, London, the third son in the family of four sons and two daughters (the eldest son died in infancy) of James Donaldson ('c'.1756-1843), architect and district surveyor, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Andrew Leverton. Thomas Leverton, the architect, was his great-uncle. He was educated at King Edward VI's Grammar School, St Albans. 
In 1809 Donaldson went to the Cape of Good Hope to work for Robert Stuart, a merchant, but soon after his arrival he volunteered for the 87th regiment, for an expedition to capture Mauritius. The French surrendered, and as there was no permanent vacancy for him in the regiment, he returned to Britain at the age of sixteen, and became a pupil under his father. In 1815 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools, where he studied under John Soane, and was awarded the silver medal in 1817. 
In 1819 Donaldson set off for the continent, and travelled for five years in Italy, Greece, and Asia Minor, measuring and sketching the most important buildings, and developing a great enthusiasm for the antique. Canova, president of the Accademia di San Luca at Rome, liked his design for a temple of victory, and Donaldson was elected a member of that academy in 1822. 
On his return to Britain in 1823, Donaldson began to practise as an architect. He married Matilda Georgiana Lingham (died 1876) in 1825, and they had three sons. Though unsuccessful in the competition for the completion of King's College, Cambridge, in 1825, he won the competition for Holy Trinity Church, South Kensington, with a Gothic design (1826-9). Many buildings were erected from his designs, including the library at University College, London (1848-9), in the classical style, and University Hall (now Dr Williams's Library), Gordon Square (1848-9), his best-known work, in the Tudor Gothic style, and the German Hospital, Hackney (1865). His design for the rebuilding of the Royal Exchange, which burnt down in 1838, was given first place as a design in 1840, but did not win; he also competed unsuccessfully to build the Nelson monument in Trafalgar Square and in 1860 for the memorial to Prince Albert. In addition to his practice as an architect, Donaldson was district surveyor for South Kensington for many years. 
Not a major architect, Donaldson was nevertheless a prominent figure in the world of Victorian architecture and is best remembered as the founding father of the Institute of British Architects (later the Royal Institute of British Architects) in 1834. He continued to act as honorary secretary of this professional body until 1839, and then as its foreign secretary for a further twenty years. He devised the motto 'Usui civium, decori urbium', and designed the Mycenean lions medal of the institute. He was awarded the royal gold medal in 1851 and was president of the institute from 1863 to 1864. Donaldson served on the building committee for the Great Exhibition of 1851, and it is thought by some that the official design produced by the committee, which was rejected in favour of Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace design, was almost entirely his. He also served as treasurer of the Architectural Publication Society from 1848 to 1860. 
In addition to his work towards establishing the professional status of architects through the foundation of the Institute of British Architects, Donaldson is also remembered as the first professor of architecture to be elected to the newly founded chair at University College, London, in 1842. Second only to that established at the Royal Academy in 1768, this chair was established at University College in 1841 at the suggestion of William Inwood, architect. A pioneer in the academic study of architecture, Donaldson had to plan a system of work and to devise his own methods: he divided his subject into architecture as a fine art, which he treated from a historical point of view, and architecture as a science. His lectures were well illustrated with drawings and diagrams, his collection of which passed into the possession of the school. He was described as always dressed in professional black (Bellot, 265 and n.). On his retirement in 1864 the Donaldson medal was struck to commemorate his services in promoting the study of architecture; two silver impressions of the medal are given annually as prizes at the college. He was a member of the Institut de France and of various other foreign academies of the fine arts. 
Donaldson also published extensively, including 'Pompeii' (1827), 'A Collection of the Most Approved Examples of Doorways from Ancient Buildings in Greece and Italy' (1833), and 'Architectura numismatica, or, Architectural Medals of Classic Antiquity... Explained' (1859). 
Donaldson died at his home, 21 Upper Bedford Place, Bloomsbury, London, on 1 August 1885, and was buried five days later at Brompton cemetery. In 1879 the prince of Wales had called him 'the father of the institute and of the profession' (Blutman, 542). 


@@@@@


doc= 7807


Donaldson, Walter (bap. 1574), philosopher, was baptized at St Nicholas, Aberdeen, on 11 November 1574, the son of Alexander Donaldson, burgess of Aberdeen, and his wife, Elizabeth Lamb. He perhaps took his degree in arts at King's College, Aberdeen, and it is known that in 1598 he accompanied David Cunningham, bishop of Aberdeen, on an embassy to Denmark and to the German protestant princes. Donaldson enrolled at Heidelberg on 11 September 1599 to study the laws. By 1603 he was appointed to the protestant academy of Sedan, where he remained for sixteen years. His son recorded that Donaldson remained in France for about forty years, first as professor of natural and moral philosophy, thereafter as academy principal; in Sedan he was pastor of the protestant church. From there he was appointed principal of the new protestant academy proposed at Charenton outside Paris, a foundation opposed by Paris University. Thus his stay at Charenton was brief, though he soon became principal at the academy of La Rochelle, where John Leech wrote some verses to him and described him as poet laureate; Leech had graduated in arts at King's College in 1614. An attempt was made by Patrick Copland to have Donaldson appointed to Marischal College. Donaldson would have preferred an Aberdeen appointment to a continental one; he visited the city in 1606 to become a burgess in succession to his father and again in 1621 to renew his burgess claim. 
At Heidelberg, Donaldson gave a course on moral philosophy to private pupils, one of whom printed his notes, which were published as 'Synopsis moralis philosophiae' at Frankfurt am Main in 1604. Donaldson himself republished the work at Darmstadt in 1606 and further editions subsequently appeared. The publication of 1606 was dedicated to the duc de Bouillon, founder of Sedan, with verses by Zacharias Palthenus. Book 1 is concerned with definitions of ethics and its relevance to the man of politics. Its study is concerned with the pursuit of happiness; he makes the point that there are grades of happiness. Book 2 concerns virtue in general, focusing on moral virtue, though intellectual virtues are mentioned. As principal of Sedan, in 1613 Donaldson published his panegyric on the death the previous year of Henry Frederick, prince of Wales. 
Donaldson also presided over several printed theses not recorded in Aberdeen bibliographies. According to 'L'exegese de l'ethique: histoire litteraire', a Paris publication, he moderated at least the following printed theses: 'De virtutibus intellectivis' (1603), 'De principibus actionum humanorum' (1604), 'De justitia' (1605); 'De habitibus moralibus imperfectis' (1605); 'De amicitia' (1605); 'Disputatio publica quae est de familia primo republicae fundamento' (1606). He also seems to have lectured on Greek and on political theory. In 1628 John Leech sent some Donaldsonian verses on the marquis d'Avere to John Scot of Scotstarvit, but these do not appear in the 'Delitiae poetarum Scotorum' (1637). Donaldson entices the literary student with references to classical writers, Latin and Greek, notices a few medieval writers like Thomas Aquinas and 'our Scotus', but notes more modern writers like Toledo, Lipsius, and Muret. The 1620 Paris edition of 'Synopsis oeconomica' is dedicated to the future Charles I, and mentions his courtiers James Foulerton and Thomas Murray. Donaldson's ethical course is largely based on Aristotle's 'Nicomachean Ethics', and the economics course is founded on Xenophon updated. For Donaldson, society is a natural growth whose roots are in nature. His 'Synopsis oeconomica' makes the family its first consideration. He writes that he was professor at Sedan of civil and natural philosophy, of Greek also, and was its principal. His book starts with the father; no word occurs oftener in sacred letters and he cites Buchanan's psalms in support. Woman is man's helper, her main job the bearing of children; the father is the ship's captain. Servants are acquired by the father to be educated, exercised, and corrected. Servants' pay must be paid faithfully, but tipping is disallowed. The virtues of servants are obedience, diligence, trustworthiness, and silence. 
Donaldson was determined to popularize Dionysius Laertius, publishing a selection of his material in 'Electa Laertiana' (Frankfurt, 1625). Donaldson's theological views occasionally intrude with references mainly to Paul and he was close to the Arminian Daniel Tilenus, an important figure at Sedan. Donaldson's first wife was Catherine Dervilliers and his second Elizabeth Goffin, mother of his eldest son, Alexander, a doctor of medicine. The date of Donaldson's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 7808


Donatus (d. 876), bishop of Fiesole, was an Irishman of noble birth; nothing more is known of his ancestry. According to the 'Vita sancti Donati episcopi', preserved in two Florentine manuscripts, he decided to go abroad as a pilgrim to visit the basilica of the apostles and other sacred sites. At that time the church of Faesulae, now Fiesole, near Florence, had been plundered by the vikings and was without a bishop. The people were praying in their church when Donatus entered. As he did so, the bells pealed and the lamps burst into light miraculously. The people, realizing that their prayers had been answered, insisted that he should be their bishop. Events may not have been as fortuitous as they appear, however; he may have been tutored by Dungal at Pavia in the years preceding his election to the episcopate of Fiesole. 
The timescale of Donatus's episcopate can be established from a range of references to his presence at various church councils. In 826, at a Roman council under Pope Eugenius II, the bishop of Fiesole is named as Grusolphus; hence election of Donatus must be subsequent to that but before 844 when he is recorded as being present at the consecration of Louis, son of Lothar, as king of the Lombards. The charters at Bobbio indicate that in 850 he commissioned a church at Piacenza which he dedicated to St Brigit and granted to the monastery of Bobbio. Likewise, he was present at the Council of Ravenna in 861 or 862 and applied for redress to the emperor for the destruction wreaked by the vikings in Fiesole, an application confirmed by Charles the Bald in 875 or 876 at Piacenza. But by 877, at the Council of Florence, Zenobius was present as bishop of Fiesole. We may assume therefore that Donatus died in 876. In his epitaph, supposedly his own composition, he states that his episcopate lasted forty-seven years ('octonis lustris septenis insuper annis'). If so, it presumably began in 829. 
In addition to his own epitaph, Donatus has been credited with the 'Vita metrica sanctae Brigidae', a poem of at least 2004 lines on the life of the Irish saint. It is preserved in five Italian manuscripts ranging in date from the eleventh to the seventeenth century none of which contains a full text, and, to judge from the prose version derived from it, what survives may represent only about two-thirds of it. The attribution to Donatus is based on a number of points, some more circumstantial than others. Two of the twelfth-century copies contain a twenty-eight line prologue beginning 'ego Donatus virtutes sanguine Scottus | Bricte descripsi...' (as a result of this Lapidge and Sharpe name him Donatus Scottus, but Scottus seems to be an epithet rather than part of his name). Moreover, there are close verbal parallels between the 'Vita metrica' and Donatus's epitaph ('Vita sancti Donati', chap. 27). His interest in Brigit is also evidenced by his commission of a church dedicated to her. Furthermore, according to the 'De S. Brigida virgine Faesulis in Etruria', St Brigit of Fiesole was the sister of Andreas, pupil and archdeacon to Donatus. There is, then, enough evidence to associate Donatus with Brigit, but it is not clear how much of the metrical life beyond the prologue can be attributed to him, since the closest verbal parallels to his life are with the prologue and the author of that may not be the author of all of the rest. The Brigidine sources of the poem seem to have included the 'Vita prima', the (largely) Old Irish 'Bethu Brigte', and Cogitosus. A prose life based on the poem is extant in three manuscripts and it too has been attributed to Donatus but there are sufficient misunderstandings and confusions to make it unlikely that the same person composed both. Mario Esposito ('Poems', 129) has also attributed the poem '... Praesulis Donato abbati' to Donatus, though this has been rejected by Kissane. 


@@@@@


doc= 7809


Donellan, Nehemiah (b. c.1565, d. in or after 1609), Church of Ireland archbishop of Tuam, was born in co. Galway and is said to have been the son of Melaghlin Donellan and his wife, Cecily, daughter of William Kelly of Calla, co. Mayo. The O'Donellans were a bardic family who originated in the south-eastern part of co. Galway. The Irish version of his name was Fearganainm O Domhnallain, where Fearganainm literally means 'man without a name'. 
Nehemiah was sent to Cambridge and became a sizar of King's College in January 1580. He transferred to St Catharine's College and graduated BA in 1581-2. He returned to Ireland and spent some time in Kilkenny in the diocese of Ossory. He was still in Kilkenny in 1591. In that year an observer, probably Sir Turlough O'Brien, wrote that there were only three protestant clerics in the province capable of preaching in Irish apart from 'Nehemias o Donnellane a man of Connaught now resident in the diocese of Kilcaney'. 
Thereafter Donellan became coadjutor to William Laly (Uilliam O Maolala), Church of Ireland archbishop of Tuam. When Laly died in 1595 Thomas Butler, earl of Ormond, recommended Donellan to the see and he was appointed in August of that year. Donellan was described at the time as 'a very honest man and recommended by many'. As was customary Donellan held other benefices along with his see, namely the rectory of Kilmore and the vicarage of Castledoagh, both in Ossory, and the vicarage of Donard in the diocese of Dublin. 
In the writ of privy seal directing his appointment Donellan is praised as being 'very fit to communicate with the people in their mother tongue, and a very meet instrument to retain and instruct them in duty and religion'. It was also said that he had 'taken great pains in translating and putting to the press the Communion-Book and 'New Testament' in the Irish language, which her Majesty greatly approved of'. There is no evidence that any part of the Church of Ireland liturgy had been translated by Donellan, but William Daniel mentions Donellan as one of those who assisted in the translation into Irish of the 'New Testament'. Indeed, when Donellan was elevated to the see of Tuam, part of the 'New Testament' was actually being typeset. The whole book was published in the years 1602-3 and the dedication and preface are said to have been the work of Donellan. 
Donellan married Elizabeth, daughter of Nicolas Daniel and sister of William, whom he met in all probability when he was resident in Kilkenny. They had five sons: John, James, Edmund of Killucan in Westmeath, Murtagh, and Teigue of Ballyheague in co. Kildare. James was subsequently knighted and became lord chief justice of the common pleas. Murtagh was ordained priest in the Roman Catholic church. 
Nehemiah Donellan voluntarily resigned his see in 1609 and died shortly afterwards in Tuam. He was buried in the cathedral. He was succeeded as archbishop by his brother-in-law William Daniel. 


@@@@@


doc= 7810


Donkin, Bryan (1768-1855), inventor and engineer, was born at Fountain Hall, near Sandoe in Northumberland, on 22 March 1768. He was the third son of a family of eight and his father, John Donkin, an acquaintance of John Smeaton, was a land agent and surveyor for a number of estates, including those of the duke of Northumberland and the Errington family. The young Donkin's aptitude for engineering was apparent in childhood; there are accounts of him, as a boy, spending almost all his spare time in the smiths' and carpenters' shops of the estates managed by his father. It was intended that he should follow his father's profession, and in 1788 he moved to Sevenoaks in Kent, where for two years he acted as agent for the duke of Dorset at Knowle Park. When he became dissatisfied with his position, he consulted Smeaton, who advised him to serve an apprenticeship with a Dartford millwright, John Hall. In 1798 Donkin married Mary Brame (died 1858), the daughter of a Flemish refugee; they had three sons, John ['see below'], Bryan, and Thomas, all of whom entered the family firm. 
Donkin's career path can be described as following three overlapping activities: inventor, developer of other people's inventions, and engineering consultant. His first major venture was the development of the Fourdrinier paper making machine. In 1799 a French mechanic, Louis Robert, invented a crude machine for making paper; this was taken to England by John Gamble, who assigned his patent of 1801 to Henry and Sealy Fourdrinier, who ran a successful London stationery firm. John Hall, who had business contacts with the Fourdriniers, was invited to develop the invention and he passed the project to Donkin. In 1802 Donkin began the development work, initially at Hall's plant and then at a new works at Spa Lane, Bermondsey, financed by the Fourdriniers, which was completed in April 1803. In 1807 Donkin leased the Bermondsey works and began to produce the machines on a royalty basis. By 1812 nineteen machines had been sold, a number that had increased to 191 by 1850. Although the original idea was not Donkin's the development work on the machine was due to him, and the merit of his work was recognized by the award of a gold medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Throughout the development phase of the paper making machine Donkin was actively engaged in other enterprises. His two most notable inventions of this period were a steel nib pen, patented in 1808, and a tachometer which he submitted to the Society of Arts in 1810 and which was awarded its gold medal. He was also involved in three other major projects, concerned with printing, canning, and scientific instrument making. In 1813, with Richard Mackenzie Bacon, a Norwich journalist and musician, he secured a patent for an improved printing machine. The machine was adopted by the Cambridge University Press but was not successful. Donkin's subsequent activities in printing were more significant; in 1820, with Sir William Congreve and John Wilks, his then partner, he contrived a method of printing stamps in two colours, and further work was commissioned from the excise and stamp office and by the East India Company at Calcutta. 
Donkin has been described as the father of modern canning. In 1795 a Parisian confectioner, Francois Appert, had invented a method of preserving food in glass jars. An English patent was taken out in 1810 by Peter Durrant, a merchant, and this was acquired by Donkin, Hall, and Gamble for $1000. The three men formed a company with Donkin in charge of the development work at Bermondsey, where he established the first British cannery. His innovation was to use tinned containers in conjunction with a new preservation process. In order to achieve complete sterilization, which Appert's process had failed to do, Donkin heated meat in tin cans very gradually in a bath of chloride of lime. By 1813 he felt sufficiently confident to submit samples to the prince regent for tasting; given the novel nature of the product the latter rather surprisingly agreed, and his approval was a major marketing factor in the innovation's success. A quantity of meat was supplied to the Royal Navy, and an office was opened in Cornhill and depots established in the seaport towns. Donkin's tinned meat was taken by Sir James Ross in 1829, and by Sir John Franklin in 1845, on their Arctic expeditions. Donkin himself appears to have lost interest in the project once the development problems had been tackled, but there is no doubting his vital contribution to modern canning. 
Throughout his life Donkin was interested in astronomy, and in 1808-9 he collaborated with the scientific instrument maker Edward Troughton on the construction of the first mural circle for the Royal Greenwich Observatory. Donkin undertook the precision casting and machining of the large sections of this, and other astronomical apparatus and standards of length, for Troughton and subsequently for his successors, Troughton and Simms. He was a member of the Royal Astronomical Society, and he passed his enthusiasm on to his sons. He was an expert in the use of micrometers and was best known to astronomers for his dividing engine and spring level. On 6 April 1831, in the absence of Sir James South, he chaired the meeting at which the Astronomical Society was granted its royal charter. 
An important spin-off from Donkin's work was his development of metal working tools, such as lathes, drills, and gear cutting engines. He stands alongside pioneer engineers, such as Maudslay and Bramah, who helped establish London as a major engineering centre. His growing reputation led him to be involved increasingly as a consultant on civil engineering projects, to be invited to give evidence before parliamentary select committees, and to act as an arbitrator when government money was used to finance innovatory projects. Thus Donkin was involved with Thomas Telford in the latter's Caledonian Canal project, supplying the engine and machinery for a dredger; he was in frequent consultation with Marc Isambard Brunel over the design of shields and pumping machinery for the Thames Tunnel Company; was called as an expert witness before the select committee on artisans and machinery in 1824; and was commissioned to make an estimate of the development costs of Charles Babbage's calculating machine. Donkin was among those instrumental in founding the Institution of Civil Engineers; he served as a member of its council for the first time in 1822, and was vice-president from 1826 to 1832, and again from 1835 to 1845. In 1828 when the institution sought its first royal charter, the cost of which was 300 guineas, Telford and Donkin advanced it 200 and 100 guineas respectively. Donkin's son Bryan became president in 1872, and his great-grandson in 1949. As early as 1803 Donkin was elected a member of the Society of Arts, and in 1807 was appointed as chair of the committee of mechanics and vice-president of the society. On 18 January 1836 Donkin was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and served repeatedly on its council. He finally retired from business in 1846, but continued to play a role in his local community, acting as a magistrate in Surrey until shortly before his death. He died at his home, 6 The Paragon, New Kent Road, London, on 27 February 1855. 
His son 


