@@@@@


doc= 852


Atkinson, Matthew (1656-1729), Franciscan friar, was born in Yorkshire and entered the Franciscan order on 27 December 1673 at St Bonaventure's Franciscan College, Douai, where he had been educated. He took the name Paul of St Francis. After ordination he lectured in philosophy and theology. Relieved of teaching because of failing eyesight and ill health, he was sent on the English mission in 1687, joining the friary in Lincoln's Inn Fields. He became prefect of choir, novice master, and, finally, definitor. 
The friars dispersed in 1688 after attacks on their house by the mob following the landing of William of Orange. Two were imprisoned but Atkinson zealously continued his pastoral work in London for twelve years until the bishop of London had him arrested. On 28 August 1700 he was convicted at the Middlesex sessions for exercising the function of a popish priest by hearing the confession of Elizabeth Rich and absolving her contrary to the statute lately made, 'An Act for Further Preventing the Growth of Popery' (II Will. 3.c.4). She testified that she had been an apprentice with a family living in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields who were Roman Catholics and that she had been 'perverted to the Romish Church by two Popish priests, Cornwall and Atkinson'. Atkinson was sentenced to perpetual life imprisonment and committed to Newgate prison. There he began to convert his fellow prisoners, to the alarm of the bishop, who had him transferred to Hurst Castle on the Solent, facing the Isle of Wight, lately designated to be the prison for 'every Popish Bishop, Priest, Jesuit or other Papist' condemned to perpetual life imprisonment. In the event he was the only one ever confined there. He arrived on 3 October 1700. At first he was treated leniently by the governor. According to local tradition, he was able to move about the neighbourhood and even to educate some local children. He was said to have lived there with cheerful composure, beloved and respected by the keeper of the castle and the whole neighbourhood as an unfortunate, amiable man, until some strangers, who happened to visit Hurst, complained to the authorities about the governor's indulgence and, to avoid causing him further trouble, Atkinson retired to his miserable cell and did not go out again. 
Several unsuccessful attempts were made to obtain Atkinson's release, notably by the French ambassador, the duc d'Aumont. In the thirtieth year of his imprisonment he became ill owing to the dampness of his prison and the raw sea air and he died on 15 October 1729. His body was brought to Winchester by members of the Catholic nobility, who came from all parts of the country. There he was laid to rest in the ancient Catholic cemetery of St James, Romsey Road, Winchester, perhaps the last man in England to suffer perpetual life imprisonment for exercising the function of a Catholic priest. His gravestone has a Latin inscription which, translated, reads: 'Here is buried Reverend Paul Atkinson, Franciscan, who, on October 15th, 1729, in the 74th year of his age, died in Hurst Castle, having been a prisoner there for thirty years. Rest in peace'. 


@@@@@


doc= 853


Peter Atkinson (1735-1805), architect, and his wife, Magdalen ('c'.1750-1811), daughter of John Righton, who had married on 1 May 1775 at St Mary Bishophill Senior, York. He was the second of three generations of York architects. His father, who was born in or at Ripon, began as a carpenter and then succeeded William Lindley as principal architectural assistant to John Carr of York about 1774. While still assisting Carr, Atkinson senior was undertaking independent commissions such as Hackness Hall, North Riding of Yorkshire, 51 Bootham, York, or Home Farm at Harewood. Peter Atkinson the younger and his first wife, Sarah ('c'.1786-1825), daughter of the Revd Robert Bownas, whom he married 'c'.1806, had two sons: John Bownas Atkinson (1807-1874) and William Atkinson (1811-1886), who went on to become Carr's successor in practice after the latter's death in 1807. It is presumed that Peter Atkinson the younger was his father's pupil before becoming his partner in 1801, but there is no evidence that he worked directly for Carr, despite certain similarities of style. Atkinson was later in partnership first with Matthew Phillips ('c'.1781-1825) until 1819, then with a former pupil, Richard Hey Sharp (1793-1853), from 1819 to 1827, and finally with his elder son from 1831. This last partnership was dissolved in 1833. Atkinson's younger son, William, eventually became his brother's partner in 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 854


Atkinson, Peter (bap. 1780, d. 1843), architect, was baptized on 16 March 1780 at St John's, Ousebridge, York, the third child (he had two elder sisters) of 
Peter Atkinson the elder died on 19 June 1805 and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary Bishophill Senior. In the same year his son followed his father as city steward and husband of York and in that capacity designed the city gaol (1802-7), the new council chamber (1810-11), and the house of correction (1814), before resigning in 1833. The gaol had a nine-bay front with a pedimented centre, surmounted by a clock turret and cupola. Only the proportions of its windows suggested its public character. As steward, Atkinson was also responsible for redesigning the approaches to the city's bridges which were to be rebuilt under his direction, and, in 1833, for the initial layout of a wide new thoroughfare, Parliament Street, which cut across the city's historic grain. Atkinson also extended the women's prison in the castle yard by repeating the end bays of Carr's assize courts opposite. In 1818 he demolished the range of jury rooms at the latter, and rebuilt them to a different plan, but in 1824 neither of his two schemes won for his partnership the lucrative commission for the new prison to be built within the castle yard. He rebuilt the Foss Bridge in 1811, and the Layerthorpe Bridge in 1829, as well as winning the important competition to rebuild the Ouse Bridge in the city centre from 1810 to 1820. Other public buildings by Atkinson included the subscription library and the concert room, both in York, the Bradford dispensary, and the completion of the Bradford grammar school. The concert room, built to accommodate the music festival of 1825, was a major extension to Lord Burlington's assembly rooms, through which they were approached. The orchestra was placed in a broad apse and the walls ornamented with giant Grecian pilasters. 'Messrs Atkinson' also designed the temporary galleries and orchestra within the nave of York Minster for the festival of 1835. Among their drawings is one for gallery fronts to be executed in 'paper' ('The Atkinson/Brierley drawings', Borth. Inst.). 
Atkinson would have assisted his father with country house commissions such as the extension of Ormsby Hall, Lincolnshire (1803), and Brockfield Hall, Yorkshire (1804-7). He was responsible for a new rectory at Middleton on the Wolds, and the new residence in the close at York, the last in a Gothic style also adopted for the new south range of Bolton Hall, where his patron was the duke of Devonshire. Atkinson was also involved in the building of a terrace of speculative houses called South Parade (1824-8), where he lived at no. 17 from 1827 to 1833. 
During the period 1820-31 the successive partnerships designed sixteen churches, all in the Gothic style. The two earliest are at Sproatley and Wainfleet All Saints, the former built of yellow gault brick. The rest were constructed of ashlar or with ashlar dressings. Twelve were built for the commissioners for the building of new churches, under the act of 1818. By choosing either a simplified Early English or Perpendicular style, and by the most careful attention to economy, Atkinson also managed to provide at least a tower (for South Crosland) or spires (at Heckmondwike, Linthwaite, and Golcar): the towers distinguished his churches from the nearby and often equally expensive nonconformist chapels. (The construction of St Andrew, Travis Street, Manchester, to his design cost $9988 11's'. 6died, while the Friends' meeting-house nearby cost $12,000). Though none of the churches has survived unaltered, those at Heckmondwike, Golcar, and Linthwaite retain their cast-iron window frames, which betray their late Georgian date. The spires, however, might be of the 1840s. 
The Atkinsons' banqueting house at Naburn Lock is Grecian of the boldest character and suggests the newer style that was developed by Peter Atkinson's sons during their long and successful practice in York. The accumulated drawings of the Carr-Atkinson partnership were sold by public auction by Christies on 13 December 1988 and subsequently dispersed. They included a scheme for a bank at Huddersfield dated 1827, drawings of Gilling Castle of 1815, and projected alterations to Denton Park of 1826. 
Following the death of his first wife in 1825, Atkinson married Joanna (1797-1837), a professional singer and a daughter of Thomas Goodall. Following a financial crisis in 1832 he resigned from his post as city receiver on 15 January 1833 and, in order to protect his son from the worst effects of bankruptcy, dissolved their partnership in March that year. After calling on his creditors to submit their claims on 13 March 1833, Atkinson left York for Calcutta, where he died on 13 January 1843. His second wife had also died there in 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 855


Atkinson, Stephen (fl. 1586-1619), metallurgist, whose early life is not documented, was a native of London. After serving an apprenticeship to Francis Tiver, a refiner of gold and silver, he was admitted a finer in the Tower of London mint about 1586. After a year spent working at the mint he took employment as finer with Sir Bevis Bulmer, a mining engineer at Chewton minery in the Mendip hills in Somerset. He was to remain a constant companion to Bulmer during the next twenty-six years, which he described as his 'Golden time', and it was from Bulmer that he learned his mining skills. 
In 1587 Atkinson and Bulmer began working the rich silver and lead mines at Combe Martin in Devon, where they also refined silver from lead sent over from Waterford in Ireland. Atkinson accompanied Bulmer on two trips to search for alluvial gold in Lanarkshire, first from 1593 to 1596 and from 1603 to 1605. From 1608 to 1610 he and Bulmer were at the Hilderstone mine near Linlithgow, and in 1611 they travelled to Tipperary to work at a mine near Kilmore. Here Bulmer's finances gave out and after borrowing $340 from Atkinson he returned to England and died leaving Atkinson 'much in debt for him' (Atkinson, 40). 
By a grant of the privy council for Scotland in June 1616, and confirmed by James I, Atkinson obtained leave to search for gold and silver in Crawford Moor, on paying the king one tenth of the metals found. He sent a sample of metal to his cousin in London, who gave it to John Murray, one of the king's bedchamber attendants, to show to the king. Unfortunately Murray refused to give it back to Atkinson on his return from Scotland and consequently he had no proof to show to the various London merchants whom he was hoping would provide financial backing for his venture. The view taken by such backers was that it was an enterprise 'more fitting for princes than subjects' (Atkinson, 33). 
After his failure to get commercial backing for his mining ventures, Atkinson wrote in 1619 'The Discoverie and Historie of the Gold Mynes in Scotland'. This was published by the Bannatyne Club in 1825, from a copy in the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh. The purpose of the book was to flatter the king by comparing him to various biblical luminaries, in order to persuade him to provide backing for the search for gold in Scotland. He argued that 'the opening of the secrets of the earth -- the gold mines of Scotland' would make 'his majesty the richest monarch in Europe, yea in all the world' (Atkinson, iii). Atkinson failed to make any impression on the king, who had already expended $3000 on the goldmines in Scotland and obtained not quite 3 ounces of gold. However, the book does provide an insight into the activities of his master, Sir Bevis Bulmer, and as such it is of great historical value. After this date Atkinson disappears, perhaps the clue being in his book, where he remarks, 'And because merchants are not willing to adventure to Scotland, I am therefore resolved to adventure my life and skill to Guiana' (ibid., 60). 


@@@@@


doc= 856


Atkinson, Thomas (1599-1639), author, was born in London in August 1599; he may have been the Thomas, son of Steven Atkynson, baptized on 2 September 1599 at All Hallows, Bread Street. He entered the Merchant Taylors' School in August 1608. Twice a finalist for a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, he lost the election in 1614 when William Laud was one of the examiners, but won it in the following year. He matriculated at Oxford on 13 October 1615, and is described in the register as the sixteen-year-old son of a London gentleman. Atkinson was admitted BA on 12 May 1619, but did not complete the requirements for that degree until the following year. He proceeded MA on 26 April 1623. On 12 February 1625 he was ordained deacon by Laud. He was named senior proctor of the university on 15 April 1629 and graduated BD on 12 May 1630. 
Twenty-three of Atkinson's letters to Sir Hugh Smyth and his son Thomas have survived in the Bristol Record Office. The correspondence begins in 1623 and documents Atkinson's role as the tutor and guardian of Smyth's son at Oxford. It ends in 1636 with Atkinson begging Thomas for money to repay a debt to the college president. On 29 August 1636 the king, the queen, and their two nephews visited Laud at Oxford: they were escorted to St John's College, where Atkinson delivered a speech in their honour. According to Laud, the speech was 'very brief, and much approved of by his majesty afterwards to me' ('Works of... William Laud', 5.149). On 20 January 1638 Atkinson was installed as rector of South Warnborough, Hampshire, but apparently he was not content with this living. Laud gave his permission on 9 November 1638 for Atkinson to exchange livings with Peter Heylin, then rector of Islip, Oxfordshire. Atkinson died in early February 1639 and was buried in the chapel of St John's College on 6 February. The administration of his effects was granted at Oxford on 21 February 1640. 
Atkinson left a Latin play, 'Homo', in manuscript at his death; it takes up the entire volume (thirteen folios, including two of preliminary matter) of Harley MS 6925 in the British Library. Possibly a response to a standard college exercise, the play is an allegory in iambic senarius about Epimetheus's struggle with Prometheus for the loyalty of man, resulting in man's loss of eternal youth. It is dedicated to William Laud as president of St John's College. Thus Bentley assigns it to the period between Atkinson's matriculation at St John's in 1615 and Laud's resignation as college president in late 1621. Anthony Wood mentions two additional manuscript works by Atkinson: 'Andrei Melvini 'Anti-tami-cunicategoria'', written in sapphics, and 'Melvinus delirans', written in iambics. Bentley states that a copy of the former work can be found in 'Folger MS 2203.1', and his statement has been repeated by several writers, but the relevant manuscript is actually a copy of Andrew Melville's 'Anti-tami-cami-categoria' ('c'.1604), not printed until 1620. Atkinson's 'Melvinus delirans, sive, Satyra edentula contra eiusdem 'Anti-tami-cami-categoriam'', also dedicated to Laud, is in the British Library (Harley MS 3496, fols. 79-89). Also in the British Library is a theme by Atkinson on the thesis 'Vivitur parvo bene' (Add. MS 21508, fols. 8-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 857


Atkinson, Thomas (1799-1833), bookseller and writer, was born on 18 November 1799 in Glasgow, the son of Thomas Atkinson and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Millar. After an apprenticeship with a Mr Turnbull, bookseller, he became co-partner in a publishing business with David Robertson, later king's publisher for Glasgow. The partners also conducted a brisk bookselling business. The assertion that Daniel Macmillan, the publisher, in his youth worked as a shopman for Atkinson is apocryphal. Early in his career Atkinson published 'The Sextuple Alliance', a series of poems on Napoleon Bonaparte, favourably commented upon by Sir Walter Scott. From 2 December 1826 to 29 December 1827 Atkinson was co-editor, with Solomon Saveal, of 'The Ant', published by Robertson and Atkinson, at first twice monthly and then weekly, and circulated in Glasgow, Edinburgh, and London. It carried original poems and essays, narrative, correspondence, and local literary intelligence. Atkinson's 'A Sketch of the Origin and Progress of the Literary and Commercial Society of Glasgow' was printed for private circulation in 1831. That same year, his firm began publication of a Scottish annual, 'The Chameleon', which lasted for three issues and was composed of folklore, fiction, songs, poetry, and music. 
After the 'Reform Act' was passed in 1832 Atkinson was invited to stand as 'a candidate in the liberal interest' ('DNB') for Stirling, but was not returned. After the election he was diagnosed as suffering from tuberculosis and embarked on a voyage to Barbados for his health. Before departure he purchased an oaken coffin to be shipped with his baggage in case of need. He died on 10 October 1833, and was buried at sea, using his coffin. Atkinson bequeathed a sum to be added to a fund to erect a building in Glasgow to house scientific projects. A monument to his memory was erected in the Glasgow necropolis. 


@@@@@


doc= 858


Atkinson, Thomas Witlam (1799-1861), architect and artist, was born on 6 March 1799 at Cawthorne, Yorkshire, the son of William Atkinson, head mason to the Spencer-Stanhope family of Cannon Hall, near Barnsley, and his wife, Martha, housemaid to the same family. He began work as a labourer under his father, then, having been orphaned in his youth, became a bricklayer and quarryman. By the age of twenty he was a stonecarver, and executed sculpture on St George's Church, Barnsley, and a church in Ashton under Lyne, where he was also briefly employed as a teacher of drawing. He then turned to architecture, and became clerk of the works for George Basevi's Greek revivalist church of St Thomas in Stockport, Cheshire, in the mid-1820s and subsequently at St George's Church, Ramsgate (Henry Kendall, 1825-7). He married, in Halifax, on 1 April 1819, Rebecca (or Rebekah), 'nee' Mercer (1794/5-1872), with whom he had a son, John William Atkinson (1822/3-1846), who became a marine artist. 
In 1827 Atkinson set up in architectural practice at 8 Upper Stamford Street, Blackfriars, London, with Charles Atkinson (possibly his brother) as partner. Having immersed himself in the study of Gothic architecture, particularly that of Lincolnshire churches, from the early 1820s, in 1829 he published a folio volume entitled 'Gothic Ornaments Selected from the Different Cathedrals and Churches in England' with forty-eight lithographic plates by himself and Charles Atkinson. One of his first works, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1830, was a Gothic altar-tomb for Walter Spencer-Stanhope at All Saints' Church, Cawthorne. With Atkinson he rebuilt Bowers Gifford Church, Essex (1829-30), and designed St George's Church, Hyde, Cheshire (1831-2). Another Gothic-style work from this period was the church of St Nicholas at Lower Tooting (1831-3). His domestic commissions included a terraced crescent at Beulah Spa, Norwood, Surrey (1836), and Italianate villas for Cheadle, Cheshire (1841). Most of these were carried out after he had moved his practice to Manchester in the mid-1830s, a move which followed his commissions for Hough Hill Priory, Stalybridge, Cheshire (1832), for David Cheetham, and the Gothic-style Manchester and Liverpool District Bank buildings in Hanley, Staffordshire (1833; dem. 1881), and in Spring Gardens, Manchester (1834; dem.). The astylar Italianate design of the latter signified an important new direction in the architectural history of the city. While in Manchester he designed numerous houses and villas for its suburbs, including Ashton, Stalybridge, and Stockport. He engaged John Gregan as his assistant, and had Frank Bellhouse and Edward Hall as his pupils. He also created his principal architectural work: St Luke's Church, Cheetham Hill, Manchester (1836-9; dem., except tower, 'c'.1980), built in a highly accomplished perpendicular Gothic style. In addition, he designed St Barnabas's Church, Openshaw, Lancashire (1838-40). 
By 1842 Atkinson had returned to London and in that year he exhibited drawings at the Royal Academy of Duncan McLeod's Palladianist nawab palace, Murshidabad, Bengal (1829-37). After fire devastated Hamburg in 1842 he went there, and entered unsuccessfully the competition for St Nicholas's Church (1844). Inspired by Alexander von Humboldt's accounts of Siberia, Atkinson then moved to St Petersburg, after a short stay in Berlin. There, in 1846, he abandoned architecture as a profession for the pursuits of an explorer and topographical artist. Between March and November 1847 he travelled to the Urals, the Kirgiz steppes, and Altai Mountains. He then returned to Moscow and on 18 February 1848 OS married Lucy Sherrard Finley ['see below'], a governess, with whom he had a son, Alatau Tamchiboulac ('b'. 4 Nov 1848). The register of marriages at the British chapel in Moscow recorded his status as widower; the existence of his previous wife did not come to light until after his death. Between 1848 and 1853 he travelled extensively in the Russian orient, gathering much geographical and geological information. During this time he produced over 500 watercolours of the landscapes and peoples, some of them 5 or 6 feet square. He wintered in Irkutsk and Barnaul. 
After his return to Britain, an exhibition of Atkinson's Siberian and Chinese Tartar scenes was held in 1856 at Colnaghi's Gallery, London. Some of these were lithographed and published in his narratives of his travels: 'Oriental and western Siberia: a narrative of seven years' explorations and adventures in Siberia, Mongolia, the Kirghis steppes, Chinese Tartary, and part of central Asia. With a map and numerous illustrations' (1858); and 'Travels in the regions of the upper and lower Amoor and the Russian acquisitions on the confines of India and China' (1860). The latter work was highly praised by 'The Athenaeum' on its publication, but its authenticity was subsequently questioned. Doubts were raised whether Atkinson had personally travelled on the Amur, and the book was shown ('The Athenaeum', 9 Sept 1899) to be at least in part a plagiarism of Richard Maak's work 'Journey to the Amur (Puteshestvia na Amur)', published in St Petersburg in 1859. Meanwhile, in 1858 Atkinson read a paper before the British Association 'On the volcanoes of central Asia'. In the same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, and in 1859 a fellow of the Geological Society. To the 'Proceedings' of the former body he contributed in 1859 a paper on 'A journey through some of the highest passes in the Ala-tu and Ac-tu mountains in Chinese Tartary', and in the 'Journal of the Geological Society' in 1860 he wrote 'On some bronze relics found in an auriferous sand in Siberia'. 
Atkinson in person was the type of an artistic traveller, thin, lithe, and sinewy, 'with a wrist like a rock and an eye like a poet's; manner singularly gentle, and air which mingled entreaty with command' ('The Athenaeum', 254). Returning as an 'honoured guest' to Cannon Hall in 1860 he met an acquaintance from his youth: 'Clapping his old comrade heartily on the back this friend... hailed Atkinson with the approving, if somewhat tactless comment, 'And soa, lad, you've cum back to lay yor ould bones amoong ous!' Atkinson... failed to appreciate the familiarity of this typical Yorkshire welcome, and did not again honour Cawthorne with his presence. (Stirling, 96-7)' After a year of failing health and a fall in early summer, 1861, he died at Lower Walmer, Kent, on 13 August 1861. 


This vivid account, which is arranged as a series of letters to a friend, shows Lucy Atkinson to have been an indefatigable horsewoman who was held in respect by local people both for her equestrian skills and as a markswoman with pistol and rifle. Her reference to the birth of her son Alatau (named after a nearby mountain and spring), in the absence of a medical attendant, offers a further indication of her unusually independent capabilities. While of intrinsic interest, her book has recently been used to support criticisms of inauthenticity raised against her husband's second volume by revealing inaccuracies in the chronology and detail. In her descriptions of meetings with survivors of the 1825 Decembrist uprising then scattered through Siberia, including M. I. Murav'ev-Apostol, I. D. Yakushkin, P. I. Falenberg, the Volkonsky and Trubetskoy families, the Borisov brothers, and the Betsuzhevs (which her husband could not include owing to the dedication of his second volume to Tsar Alexander II), Lucy Atkinson's work is of interest and importance to historians of the period. During the years she spent in the home of General Muravyov, Lucy Atkinson knew personally several of the family and friends of the Decembrists in St Petersburg and Moscow. At the end of her book she wrote 'I now look back on all those scenes, and repeat what we have often said, that willingly would we face ten times more toil and difficulty rather than go down to mother earth without having beheld them' (L. Atkinson, 350-51). After the publication of her book Lucy Atkinson returned to Russia. She came back to London, where she lived in Camden Road, Holloway. She died of acute bronchitis at 45 Mecklenburgh Square, London, on 13 November 1893. Her son, Alatau Tamchiboulac Atkinson (1848-1906), became a distinguished school principal in Hawaii, where he was prominent in public affairs. 


@@@@@


doc= 859


Atkinson, William (d. 1509), translator, lived in the diocese of York, and was one of the original fellows of Jesus College, Cambridge, by 1499. He gained the degrees of BA in 1475, MA in 1478, BD in 1489, and DD in 1497. He was appointed fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1477, a post that he held until 1496. 
Atkinson was ordained subdeacon at Lincoln on 19 December 1478 and deacon at Norwich on 5 June 1479. He was appointed as prebendary of Chichester on 16 August 1500, of Southwell on 12 May 1501, and of Lincoln on 7 March 1504, all posts that he kept until his death. The Lincoln position gave him from February 1507 the office of canon at St George's Chapel, Windsor, where he died on 8 August 1509 and was subsequently buried. His will was dated 1505 and bequeathed property in Horseheath, Cambridgeshire, to Pembroke College. 
At the command of Margaret Beaufort, countess of Richmond and Derby, mother of Henry VII, Atkinson translated from French three books of the 'Imitatio Christi' of Thomas a Kempis (died 1471). The translation was printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1502 and claimed as its source a Latin version attributed to Jean Gerson (died 1429), doctor and chancellor of Paris. Countess Margaret having translated the fourth book, all four were published by Richard Pynson in 1504. The most recent full edition is that of 1893 by J. K. Ingram for the Early English Text Society; a facsimile edition was produced in 1921 from the de Worde version. 


@@@@@


doc= 860


Atkinson, William (1774/5-1839), architect, was born at Bishop Auckland, co. Durham; he was probably the son of a William Atkinson who worked during the 1760s as a builder at nearby Auckland Castle, the palace of the bishops of Durham. The younger William began as a carpenter and in the mid-1790s came to the attention of the prominent architect James Wyatt, then making alterations to the castle, who took him, with Bishop Barrington's support, as a pupil into his London office. In July 1796 Atkinson, aged twenty-two, entered the Royal Academy Schools and in 1797 he won the gold medal for his designs for a court of justice. He was until 1811 an occasional exhibitor at the academy. 
In 1805 Atkinson published, in the villa book genre, 'Views of Picturesque Cottages', comprising asymmetrical elevations to complement picturesque landscapes, and irregular plans arising from utilitarian needs. His observations of Tudor Gothic on which the plates, among the earliest of their kind to be published, were based did not seriously suggest revivalism, representing rather the loss of playful eighteenth-century eclecticism before the onset of the archaeologically more rigorous Gothic revival. That want of sensitivity characterized much of Atkinson's architecture, of which by far the major part comprised country houses. 
Atkinson's career as an independent architect began about 1800. His almost fifty commissions were broadly distributed in the north of England and the Scottish lowlands, and London and the surrounding counties, with occasional excursions to Herefordshire, Staffordshire, and Ireland. In 1812-16 he had an office in Manchester, where, of the seven churches, including Durham Cathedral, on which he worked countrywide, All Saints', Newton Heath (1814-16), was the only one wholly rebuilt to his designs. Between 1804 and 1834 some twelve country houses were built or remodelled to his designs in the Gothic or castle style. His gothicization of Chequers, Buckinghamshire (1823), was considered exquisite by Sir Alexander Croke (Major, 48). Of four houses in Scotland, as well as his Gothic reconstruction (1803-12) of Scone Palace for the third earl of Mansfield, Abbotsford (1816-23) for Sir Walter Scott was notable, with contributions in the old Scottish style to what remains Atkinson's design, from the architect Edward Blore and others (including Scott himself) and other contributions, in the invention of detail, from the workers. Atkinson seems never to have executed entire classical buildings, in which style, of only about six examples, his work consisted before 1825 of additions or alterations to country houses, such as Bretton Hall (1807) and Broughton Hall (1809-11), both in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Gorhambury, Hertfordshire (1816-17), and Hylands, Essex (1819-25). The handful of public buildings to which Atkinson made minor modifications, mostly associated with his post as architect to the Board of Ordnance after 1813, were all in the capital, and included the Ordnance office (dem.) in Pall Mall, the Tower of London, and Woolwich arsenal. Also in London, his work on town houses included the addition in 1819-20 of the Flemish picture gallery to Thomas Hope's house in Duchess Street, Portland Place, to the designs of Hope, for whom Atkinson had recently remodelled his country seat, Deepdene, in Surrey. 
Besides architecture, Atkinson's great interests were chemistry, geology, and particularly botany. He combined the first two when, about 1810, he successfully introduced to the London market a Roman cement, known as 'Atkinson's cement', rivalling other recently patented types of stucco and mastic, used either externally or internally as stucco or rendering. Its significant ingredient, lime-bearing calcareous clay, he extracted from land in north Yorkshire belonging to the first earl of Mulgrave, for whom he had recently remodelled Mulgrave Castle, near Whitby; he then shipped the clay to Westminster, where he owned a wharf. Lord Mulgrave, at that time master-general of the ordnance, was instrumental in Atkinson's succeeding James Wyatt, on 1 October 1813, after the latter's sudden death on 4 September, as architect to the Board of Ordnance, a post he retained until his department was abolished on 1 January 1829. 
Atkinson was a most able architect, sound in both theory and practice and sometimes, as his Regency interiors at Broughton show, outstanding. He was also a successful businessman. In the opinion of the Architectural Publication Society's dictionary in 1852 'he particularly excelled in alterations to existing edifices' (Papworth, 1.119). He attracted numerous pupils, including Thomas Allason, Robert R. Banks, Peter Hubert Desvignes, Matthew Habershorn, John Burgess Watson, and his nephew Thomas Tredgold. Of his two sons, William and Henry George Atkinson, the younger also became an architect. 
Atkinson indulged his passion for horticulture by often planting rare species, for example in the gardens of the villa which he built for himself about 1818 at Grove End in Paddington and, later, in the 170 acre estate he purchased about 1830 at Silvermere, near Cobham, Surrey, where he also built himself a house. It was here that he died on 22 May 1839, aged sixty-six. He was buried at nearby Walton-on-Thames. 


@@@@@


doc= 861


Atkinson, William (1758-1846), pamphleteer and poet, was born on 14 April 1758, at Thorp Arch, West Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized there on 19 May 1758, the fourth and youngest son of the Revd Christopher Atkinson ('b'. 1712/13), rector of Thorp Arch and formerly master of Macclesfield grammar school, and his wife, Jane, daughter of William Johnson of Old Hall, near Kendal, Westmorland. One of his brothers was Miles Atkinson (1741-1811). William Atkinson was admitted a sizar of Jesus College, Cambridge, on 29 December 1775, graduated BA in 1780, and was elected a fellow of his college in 1782, proceeding MA in 1783. He was ordained priest in 1782, and in 1784 was appointed lecturer at the parish church of Bradford, Yorkshire. 
In the perhaps extravagant words of one late nineteenth-century commentator, this appointment was to cause 'one of the most violent controversies Bradford has ever known' (Scruton, 13). The then master of Bradford grammar school, Edward Baldwyn, had expected the lectureship to fall to him as a matter of custom, and was extremely angry when it was awarded to an outsider instead. Added to this perceived insult was the fact that Atkinson's views were very different from his own, and a bitter war of words ensued. This began with Baldwyn's criticism of Atkinson's 'Poetical Essays', published in Leeds in 1786. The volume contained two tales of the inception and frustration of the passion of a young swain and his lover in what Atkinson hoped was an authentic rustic setting, but without what he termed the 'vulgarity' of many contemporary pastorals. He seems to have failed on both counts, as his highly stylized poems clearly do not paint a genuine picture of rural life. Baldwyn, however, chose different grounds for his venomous attacks on Atkinson in two satirical pamphlets published under the pseudonym Trim: 'A Critique on the Poetical Essays of the Rev. William Atkinson' (1787), and 'A Congratulatory Letter to the Rev. William Atkinson' (1790). In these he maintained that, although not actually indecent, Atkinson's work was well calculated to encourage licentiousness among young readers. Although the poetry itself was also lambasted, Trim concentrated mostly on what he took to be Atkinson's hypocrisy and conservative tendencies, apparently based on sermons preached by Atkinson in Bradford condemning card-playing and dancing. Atkinson, however, was not defenceless against such attacks; he kept a printing press in his home and often issued pamphlets of his own on ecclesiastical and political topics under the name of the Old Inquirer. Between 1794 and 1829 he published a further twenty-five pamphlets, all of which took an increasingly reactionary approach to a variety of political, religious, and economic subjects. A consistent target was dissent; at one time he brought out a small serial called 'The Looking Glass', in which he bitterly expressed his views on this topic. He engaged in a short pamphlet war with 'Vindex' (Edward Parsons) on the loyalty of dissenters. 
On 5 July 1791 Atkinson married Mary, the daughter of John Cottam, and as a result resigned his long-standing college fellowship. He and his wife had three daughters and five sons, including Charles William (1795-1815), John Wilson (died 1836), Joseph Milner (died 1855), and Johnson Miles Christopher (1810-1831). Their daughter Elizabeth Sarah would later become the mother of Sir M. W. Thompson, the railway director and Bradford's mayor and MP. Shortly after his marriage, in 1792, Atkinson was presented by the lord chancellor to the rectory of Warham All Saints, Norfolk. Atkinson was described as a 'man of rare scholarly attainment, but of somewhat eccentric character' (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.'). He was said to have been of Herculean build, and was noted in his youth for his good looks and carefully cut clothes. He died at the home of his son Joseph Milner Atkinson in Boston, Yorkshire, on 30 September 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 862


Atkyns, Sir Edward (1587-1669), judge, was born at Hensington, near Woodstock, Oxfordshire, the son of Richard Atkyns and his wife, Eleanor Marsh. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 5 February 1601 and was called to the bar on 25 January 1614. In 1630 he became a governor of the society and two years later an 'autumn reader'. Atkyns was the pivotal figure in a long line of distinguished jurists stretching over four generations. Both his grandfather (Thomas) and his father had been readers of Lincoln's Inn and both had been appointed to minor judicial office under the Tudors. In turn, Edward Atkyns's first marriage, to Ursula (died 1644), daughter of Sir Thomas Dacres, produced three daughters and two sons: Sir Robert Atkyns (bap. 1621, d. 1710) and Sir Edward Atkyns (1630/31-1698), both of whom likewise became readers of Lincoln's Inn and distinguished jurists under the later Stuarts. 
Lincoln's Inn was something of a puritan stronghold in the early seventeenth century -- its active members included William Prynne and Henry Sherfield -- and Atkyns inevitably formed his closest associations within a tightly knit cohort of puritan benchers. Little is known about his early legal career. He appears not to have attracted much notice before 1633, when he appeared as defence counsel during the crown's famous Star Chamber prosecution of William Prynne, stemming from the publication of Prynne's 'Histrio-Mastix'. Prynne typically left his lawyers little room to make a persuasive defence and Atkyns's contribution was accordingly limited. He was forced to argue simply that Prynne's genuine passion for his subject -- 'the common resort to stage plays and the great abuse that comes by them' -- had led him into careless overstatement. In addition he argued that Prynne's intemperate language and bitter condemnations were often borrowed from other authors and were, in any event, meant to be taken generally rather than applied to any specific individual -- an attempt to exonerate Prynne on the charge of libelling the queen. Atkyns assured the court that in his long experience with Prynne as a fellow bencher in Lincoln's Inn he had never known him in his 'ordinary discourses' to be either 'factious' or 'seditious' ('State trials', 3.570-71). The court was not convinced but, despite the unfortunate outcome of Prynne's trial, Atkyns's sympathetic support may have led other puritans to seek his help in subsequent confrontations with the crown. In 1640 both Henry Burton and John Bastwick, notorious defendants (together with Prynne) before Star Chamber in 1637, petitioned the Long Parliament for relief and asked that Atkyns be appointed their counsel. 
Atkyns's close association with this contingent seems not to have fatally damaged his standing with the crown. Charles I made him serjeant-at-law on 19 May 1640. On the face of it, the promotion seems curious, but in all probability it was offered as a favour to the earl of Salisbury. Atkyns had worked as a legal adviser to the earl from the mid-1620s and they appear to have forged a close patron-client relationship; Atkyns named the earl his official 'patron' for the swearing-in ceremonies. At this critical stage, just a fortnight after the abrupt demise of the Short Parliament, Charles I was attempting to solidify political and financial support among key members of his council (and among the aristocracy generally) and this would have been a small price to pay for Salisbury's continuing loyalty. 
Though the evidence is entirely circumstantial, it does suggest that from this point Atkyns's career became closely tied to the earl's. Salisbury's decision to lend Charles $10,000 in the late summer of 1640 may, in similar fashion, have led to the issue of a royal patent, on 7 October 1640, appointing Atkyns a baron of the exchequer. In the event the patent never passed the great seal and consequently was never acted upon. While there may have been many reasons for this, it too may have reflected nothing so much as the declining relationship between Salisbury and the king after the unsatisfactory outcome of negotiations with the Scots at Ripon in late October, to which Salisbury had been a party. Increasingly during 1641 Salisbury came to be seen as untrustworthy, as a parliamentary 'reformer', especially after August 1641 when both houses recommended that he be appointed lord treasurer, and anyone associated with him would have suffered accordingly. 
With the outbreak of civil war Atkyns chose to stay in London and, because of Salisbury's patronage or because of his own professional (and puritan) credentials, was eventually named in the propositions for the Oxford treaty in February 1643 as a parliamentary candidate for elevation to the court of king's bench. The ultimate failure of the Oxford treaty precluded his appointment but over the next two years Atkyns was busily occupied, together with Salisbury and his two sons, as one of parliament's administrative assistants in Hertfordshire, serving on numerous county committees for the weekly and monthly assessments and for sequestration. He was eventually rewarded in October 1645 when parliament assumed to itself the right to fill vacancies on the common-law bench and appointed Atkyns baron of the exchequer. He would hold the post until the king's death in January 1649. Also in 1645, on 16 September, Atkyns married his second wife, Frances (1604?-1704), daughter of John Berry of Lydd, Kent. 
The violence of the revolution seems to have given Atkyns pause, at least temporarily. He initially refused to recognize the authority of the council of state and declined the offer of reappointment under the new government. He resigned his seat on 8 February. However, time and perhaps the influence of the earl of Salisbury, who himself became an enthusiastic convert to the Cromwellian regime, persuaded him to change his mind. By October 1649 he had accepted reappointment, this time to the bench of common pleas. He was subsequently reappointed by Cromwell on 19 January 1654, by Richard Cromwell on 29 September 1658, and despite refusing to take a reimposed engagement, by the returning Rump Parliament on 16 May 1659. Atkyns maintained a relatively high profile during the interregnum. He appears to have gained the confidence of Oliver Cromwell rather quickly and was called upon repeatedly to advise Cromwell and his council on a variety of issues and important cases. It was to Atkyns, for instance, that Cromwell turned for a critique of the nominated assembly's contentious legislation for relief of poor prisoners and creditors (which Cromwell had suspended) and it was Atkyns (together with Baron Thorpe) who drafted the replacement ordinance. He was also asked to deliver his opinion regarding the liability of an alien in the case of the brother of the Portuguese ambassador, who was to be tried in an English court for a murder committed on English soil. Atkyns answered in the affirmative and presided over the ensuing trial. He had already served on the high court of justice for the eastern counties to hear the trial of the Norfolk insurrection (December 1650) and was asked again, in June 1654, to serve as a justice, in the treason trial of John Gerard and others for plotting the assassination of Cromwell. This last assignment provoked Atkyns's only conflict with the Cromwellian regime. Atkyns refused to swear an oath supporting the ordinance which had created the high court the previous January (and therefore asked to be excused from serving) on grounds that the ordinance violated the laws of England to which he had previously bound himself. Specifically, he objected to the notion that these men would be tried for treason without benefit of jury. Precisely why this became 'a matter of great weight and concernment' in 1654, when it apparently had not troubled his conscience in 1650 (the ordinances creating the respective high courts of justice were virtually the same in this regard) isn't clear ('Acts and Ordinances of the Interregnum', 2.493, 917-18). However, he was allowed to withdraw and his standing with the regime apparently remained unaffected by the incident. 
Atkyns's close association with the republican governments had little appreciable effect on his prospects at the Restoration. Charles II's commitment to appointing qualified judges overrode the political reservations he must have had and Atkyns was created baron of the exchequer and knighted on 23 June 1660. His career during the next eight years was unremarkable. He did take part in the trial of the regicides in October 1660 and served as well, in April 1668, in the trial of Peter Messenger and the apprentices of Moorfields, which resulted in a dramatic broadening of the definition of treason, though the depth of Atkyns's contribution to either proceeding is unclear. He died on 9 October 1669 at Albury Hall, Hertfordshire. 
On balance Atkyns seems to have been remarkably successful in negotiating the not inconsiderable hazards of a judicial career at mid-century. Like all of his colleagues on the bench he was inevitably forced to make awkward and troubling political choices, serving as he did the Caroline, revolutionary, and Restoration regimes in turn, but he appears to have done so with sufficient conviction and integrity that his career suffered few negative repercussions and his reputation as 'a grave and learned judge' survived down to the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 863


Atkyns, Sir Edward (1630/31-1698), judge and politician, was born at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, the second son of Sir Edward Atkyns (1587-1669) of Hensington, Oxfordshire, and Albury Hall, Hertfordshire, baron of the exchequer and justice of the common pleas, and his first wife, Ursula (died 1644), daughter of Sir Thomas Dacres of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. He was admitted at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in October 1646 aged fifteen, entered Lincoln's Inn in 1647, and was called to the bar in 1653. He married on 9 December 1656 Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Francis Lucy of the Strand, Westminster, with whom he had two sons and seven daughters. In 1660 Atkyns was returned to parliament as member for and recorder of New Woodstock. Hensington was a hamlet of Woodstock, and he seems to have had the interest of his kinsman by marriage and fellow MP Sir Thomas Spencer. Atkyns was regarded as a court supporter, but was not an active member. In November he was granted the reversion to the monopoly of publishing law books for forty years. He lost his seat at New Woodstock at the 1661 election and resigned as recorder the following year. 
Atkyns was renowned for legal learning and hospitality; he succeeded to Albury Hall in Hertfordshire in 1669, and in June of that year he was raised to the bench as one of the barons of the exchequer. He was made a serjeant-at-law in 1679 and was knighted on 26 June. As a court supporter Atkyns was kept informed of moves by Lord Shaftesbury and other whigs to alter the succession to keep out Charles's brother James ('CSP dom.', '1676-7', 541). During the Popish Plot in July 1680 Atkyns was one of the presiding judges at the trials of Mary Presswicks and Thomas Thwing, two Roman Catholics, for high treason. The charge was plotting to murder the king in Yorkshire in order to establish a 'nunnery' there, but the real reason was probably having called Oates and Bedloe two rogues. Atkyns directed the jury that evidence against Presswicks was all hearsay, so that she was acquitted. He gave the rather surprising ruling that Presswicks's reported statement that 'we should never be at peace till we were all of the Roman Catholic religion, and the Duke of York was made king' did not amount to high treason. Thwing, a priest, against whom there were two witnesses, was found guilty and was hanged, drawn, and quartered. When, at the end of the year, Lord Stafford was tried for treason before the House of Lords, all the judges were asked for their opinion; Atkyns ruled that the requirement of two witnesses in the same overt act of treason might be waived, as otherwise he did not 'well see how any man can be convicted of treason' ('State trials', 7.1164-81, 1528; Kenyon, 226). His legal career, however, was overshadowed by that of his more eminent and whiggish brother, Sir Robert Atkyns (bap. 1621, d. 1710), from whom he increasingly diverged politically. 
In April 1686 Lord Chief Baron Montagu was removed from the bench by Lord Chancellor Jeffreys for refusing to agree that James II's suspending powers were legal; Atkyns was appointed to replace him. According to Lord Ailesbury, Atkyns, his 'worthy friend', 'was astonished when he was to be Chief Baron, he having given his opinion to the Chancellor in the negative' (Buckley, 151). It would seem that Atkyns continued his opposition, since James II wrote of the dispensing powers that the judges now 'agreed unanimously (all but one)' that the dispensing power was an essential part of the king's prerogative (Clarke, 2.81). 
After the revolution of 1688-9 Atkyns was one of the tories who refused to take the oaths to William III and Mary, and was replaced as chief baron by his brother, Sir Robert. He was on good terms with the earl of Danby, advising him and his family on the choice of loyal servants (BL, Egerton MS 3337, fol. 47). Danby could not persuade him to come over to the court, however, and he remained a nonjuror, though no evidence has been found that he was an active Jacobite. He lived in retirement at Pickenham in Norfolk, but he died of the stone in London in October 1698. 


@@@@@


doc= 864


Atkyns, John Tracy (1706-1773), law reporter, was born John Tracy at Lower Swell, Gloucestershire, on 10 January 1706, the second surviving son of John Tracy of Stanway, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Robert Atkyns of Sapperton, Gloucestershire, chief baron of the exchequer. His great-grandfather was John Tracy, third Viscount Tracy of Toddington, Gloucestershire. He adopted the name of Atkyns, probably because of his grandfather's legal eminence, some time after 1732, though by 1767 he had reverted to his original name, making his will in that year as John Tracy. 
Atkyns matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 10 November 1724 together with his elder twin brother, Robert, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 4 February 1725. There is no evidence that he took a degree at Oxford, but he paid rent to New College until 1728, when the college refunded his caution money. On 14 November 1732 he was called to the bar. He married Catherine Lindsay; they had no children. 
Atkyns was a 'very correct' taker of notes of cases in the court of chancery (Wilmot, 199), largely during the lord chancellorship of Philip Yorke, Lord Hardwicke, 1736-56. However, in 1748 Hardwicke refused his consent to the publication of these notes, and this prompted a letter to the lord chancellor from Robert Tracy, then MP for Worcester, outlining his brother's 'uneasy circumstances owing to a tedious and unsuccessful application to his profession' (BL, Add. MS 35590, fol. 71'v'). Robert Tracy asked for some preferment in the law for him, the refusal of permission to publish his notes having denied him both honour and profit. In 1762 Atkyns's wife wrote to Hardwicke's son, Charles Yorke, asking him to intercede with his father to obtain permission for publication. The notes were eventually published in three volumes of reports digested under alphabetical heads in 1765-8, soon after Hardwicke's death. Despite the opinion of the chief justice of the common pleas, Sir John Eardley Wilmot, of the correctness of Atkyns's note-taking, the reputation for accuracy of the published reports was not of the highest: Sir James Mansfield, chief justice of the common pleas, regarded them as 'extremely inaccurate' ('Olive v. Smith', 1813), and in 1765 the court of king's bench refused to allow the first volume to be cited as authority. A second edition appeared in 1781 and a third edition, much improved, by Francis William Sanders in 1794. 
By 1748 Hardwicke had promised Atkyns that he would recommend him to the king to be made a baron of the exchequer upon a vacancy, and on the retirement of Edward Barker, Atkyns was appointed cursitor baron of the exchequer on 22 April 1755, which post he held until his death. Sir John Eardley Wilmot thought Atkyns a 'cheerful, good-humoured, honest man; a good husband, master, and friend' (Wilmot, 199). He died on 22 July 1773 in London. At the time of his death he was living at Parliament Street, Westminster. Atkyns was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 865


Atkyns, Richard (1615-1677), army officer and writer on printing, was the only child of Richard Atkyns (1584-1636/7) of Tuffley, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Mary, second daughter of Sir Edwin Sandys, of Latimer, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Sandys, of The Vyne, Hampshire. He was educated at home by two cruel and incompetent tutors before attending grammar school in Gloucester, but was withdrawn after contracting smallpox. In 1629 he entered Balliol College, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner, remaining there for two years without taking a degree. He proceeded to Lincoln's Inn, where his grandfather Richard Atkyns had been a noted judge and his uncle Edward was a governor. However, 'upon some disgust in my entrance', he was recalled to join his grandmother at The Vyne (Atkyns, 'Vindication', 3-4). 
About 1635 Atkyns embarked upon a continental tour with the Catholic son of Thomas, second Baron Arundell of Wardour, with separate protestant and Catholic tutors. The young men visited Calais and Douai before travelling to Paris, where his companion contracted a fever and died. Atkyns returned to England and managed his father's estate on the outskirts of Gloucester, which he inherited soon after coming of age in 1636. He then travelled to London, where he joined the court, taking part in a royal masque and following the extravagant lifestyle of a minor courtier. Considering himself 'guilty of three imperfections, that would hinder my preferment there: a blushing modesty, a flexible disposition, and no great diligence', he returned to Gloucestershire, but found 'my house was burn'd down, and the place as a seat spoil'd by the long inhabiting of tenants' (Atkyns, 'Vindication', 9). 
In March 1640 Atkyns married Martha, the young widow of Sir Patrick Acheson and daughter of John More. More had in 1618 been granted a lucrative patent for publishing texts and abridgements of the statutes and books of common law for forty years from March 1629. More immediately assigned his rights to the booksellers Miles Flesher, John Haviland, and Robert Young for an annual payment of $60 and a third of the profits, which was left to his daughter in 1638. However, the partners sought to evade paying the annuity, purchasing instead the stock and premises of More's son Charles in 1639. Atkyns and his wife brought an action for recovery of this money, which was interrupted by the civil war. In the meantime Atkyns became involved with ill-advised financial transactions involving members of his mother's family which, together with his own and his wife's extravagance and the mismanagement of their estates, would ultimately contribute to his ruin. 
At the outbreak of war Atkyns accepted a commission under George Brydges, and raised a troop of sixty men, incurring substantial personal expense in the process. The troop later transferred into Prince Maurice's regiment. In May 1643 his regiment was detached to join the western army. He served with gallantry and distinction seeing action at the battles of Lansdown and Roundway Down, where he was adjutant-general of the horse. Following the royalist capture of Bristol in September 1645, he was offered several good commands but refused them and retired initially to his estate and then to Oxford. He left vivid descriptions of the fighting in his autobiographical 'Vindication', which was written in 1669 partly to answer accusations that he deserted the royalist cause after the war. 
Atkyns's estates were sequestrated, and upon his return to London about 1645 he was imprisoned by both parliament and his creditors for the non-payment of debts undertaken before the war. He was initially fined $500 for taking arms against parliament but this was reduced to $140 on 3 February 1646, 'most of his estate being extended for debt, except $130 a year in right of his wife' (Green). He also spent more than a year imprisoned in the Poultry and king's bench while his wife raised money to clear his debts. Thus on 22 September 1645 he sold the manor of Brickhampton to his uncle Sir Edward Atkyns for $2500, and likewise on 1 September 1646 sold the manors of Morcote and Boyfield to him for a similar sum. (He also sold the manor of Hempstead for $4400 to his cousin Robert Atkyns on 10 July 1655.) Richard and Martha retired to Tuffley, 'where we found the common fate of a sequestered estate; not only a ruin'd house, but gardens and orchards plough'd to the very doors' (Atkyns, 'Vindication', 50), and where they renewed their lease and repaired the property. 
Following the Restoration, Atkyns was made a deputy lieutenant of Gloucestershire, and appointed justice of the peace. He also sought to restore his shattered fortunes by exploiting More's law patent. In November 1660 Charles II extended the privilege to Atkyns's cousin Edward, acting on his behalf, for a further forty years from its expiry in 1669. Atkyns and his wife also recommenced their action against Miles Flesher (the only survivor of More's original assignment), and in 1664 Flesher was compelled to pay all arrears up to 1643 and from the Restoration onwards. However, anticipating the recommencement of this suit, Flesher had sold the remaining rights to the Company of Stationers for $200 in 1661, which sought to establish its own rights in respect of printing legal texts, above those of royal patentees. 
Atkyns therefore entered into a complex series of actions against the company between 1661 and 1669, which are said to have cost him more than $1000. He did so in alliance with the bookseller John Streater who, with Henry Twyford and James Flesher, had agreed to pay $100 a year each to Atkyns to print the titles covered in the privilege. Atkyns and Streater were ultimately successful in their objectives: the company renounced all claim, and in mid-1675 it passed 'Coll. Atkins Byelaw' acknowledging his patent in their regulations (Johns, 318). Yet the costs incurred ruined both men, and Atkyns was again imprisoned for debt in the Marshalsea prison about 1667, several years before the matter was finally resolved. His relationship with his wife had also irretrievably broken down, as is apparent from the publication in 1669 of his curious 'Vindication of Richard Atkyns... with certain sighs or ejaculations at the end of every chapter', written while he was in prison and from which much of his biography is derived. There were no children from the marriage. 
As a part of his campaign to assert the royal prerogative to grant patents for printing, Atkyns published a broadside entitled 'The Original and Growth of Printing', about 1660. This claimed that printing had been introduced to England at Oxford in 1468, by Frederick Corsellis, formerly from Gutenberg's workshop, at the instigation of Archbishop Thomas Bourchier and at the expense of Henry VI. The evidence for this was the recent discovery of Rufinus's 'Exposicio sancti Jeronimo' (1468; later shown to have been misdated for 1478), together with the alleged existence of documentation supporting this claim in the Lambeth Palace archives. Herman de la Fontaine Verwey suggests that the account may have been linked with a rich Flemish merchant called Nicholas Corcellis who was resident in London at that time and whom Atkyns may have known. The assertion was reiterated in 1664 in an enlarged quarto edition of the work, 'wherein is also demonstrated that printing appertaineth to the 'Prerogative Royal'; and is a Flower of the 'Crown of England'', dedicated to Charles II. A further quarto tract, 'The Kings Grant of Privilege for Sole Printing Common-Law-Books, Defended' (1669), is also attributed to Atkyns. These were not serious attempts at charting the history of printing so much as diatribes against the Stationers' Company which had 'turn'd this famous ART [of printing] into a Mechanick Trade for a Livelyhood' (Atkyns, 'Original', 1664, 7). Yet Atkyns's account of the origins of English printing was widely accepted for seventy-five years and repeated in Anthony Wood's 'History and Antiquities of the University of Oxford' (1674) and Joseph Moxon's 'Mechanick Exercises on the Whole Art of Printing' (1683). It only began to be questioned in Conyers Middleton's 'Dissertation Concerning the Origin of Printing in England' (1735) but the 'imaginary Corsellis haunted our histories of printing, in the face of mounting disbelief, until he was dismissed as 'pure invention' by A. C. Ducarel' in 1765 (Carter, 12). 
Atkyns describes himself in middle age as fat, sweaty, and suffering from gout, but denied his wife's accusations that he was 'a great Swearer, a Drunkard, &c.' (Atkyns, 'Vindication', 71), or that he had been unfaithful. According to 'Biographia Britannica' (1747-66), he was 'an ingenious and observing man, who saw the vanity of this world sooner than others tho' of elder years' (vol. 1, pp. 255-6), but the entry for William Caxton is less charitable about him, accusing Atkyns of telling an improbable tale: 'not heeding therein how slavishly for a little private and pecuniary advantage he undermined the liberties of his countrymen, how rancorously he vilified the Stationers, as a swarm of drones, who lived upon the labours of the painful Printers, and how unwarrantably he robbed Master Caxton of the honour wherewith he had long been by the suffrage of all learned men, undeniably invested. (vol. 2, p. 1226)' Atkyns remained in prison until his death on 14 September 1677. He was buried two days later in the church of St George the Martyr, Southwark, London, at the expense of his cousins and executors, Sir Robert and Sir Edward Atkyns. His will, which Atkyns appears to have drawn up before his final imprisonment, was proved on 22 January 1678. Legal texts continued to be printed by 'the assigns of Edward and Richard Atkyns Esqs.' until 1708. 


@@@@@


doc= 866


Atkyns, Sir Robert (bap. 1621, d. 1710), judge and politician, was born at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and baptized there on 29 April 1621, the eldest son of Sir Edward Atkyns (1587-1669), a baron of the exchequer during the interregnum, and the elder brother of Sir Edward Atkyns (1630/31-1698), who preceded Sir Robert as chief baron. His mother, Ursula (died 1644), was the daughter of Sir Thomas Dacres of St Andrew-le-Mott. 
After attending school at Hertford, Atkyns was admitted a pensioner at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, on 2 May 1637. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 8 October 1638 and was called to the bar in 1645. His first marriage was to Mary (died 1681), daughter of Sir George Clerk, of Watford, Northamptonshire; Robert Atkyns (bap. 1647, d. 1711) was their son. With his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Dacres and great-niece of his mother, he had a daughter, Anne, who became the mother of John Tracy Atkyns (1706-1773). During the interregnum Atkyns earned considerable success as an advocate, and he became a bencher in 1661 and a reader in 1664. In 1663 he received a masters degree from Oxford. He entered political life in 1656 when he was elected to the Commons to represent Carmarthen, and in 1659 he sat in Richard Cromwell's parliament as a member for Evesham, Worcestershire. 
Despite his service to the Cromwells, Atkyns was selected as one of the sixty-eight men whom Charles II created knights of the Bath at the Restoration. In 1661 he became recorder of Bristol and, at the king's marriage, solicitor-general to the queen. Sitting in the Cavalier Parliament for East Looe in Cornwall he delivered more than fifty speeches and served on numerous committees, including the one that successfully opposed Charles II's early efforts to dispense with the statutes enjoining religious conformity. Nevertheless, Atkyns continued to enjoy the favour of the king, which, along with his successful law practice, enabled him to prosper. In 1665 Atkyns served as a royal commissioner to collect the extra tax money that parliament mandated for the Dutch war, and in 1671 he became receiver-general of all rates and duties levied by parliament on legal proceedings, from which he earned $1000 in two years. In May 1673 a fellow traveller in the Loire valley described him as accompanied by 'his lady, a coach and six horses, a pack of hounds and half a dozen stable horses' (Landon, 49). He earned a reputation as 'a very learned man' who was second only to Sir Matthew Hale in legal erudition. But he could also be 'very hot and indiscreet' (H. C. Foxcroft, 'A Supplement to Burnet's 'History of my Own Time'', 1902, 122), probably a reference to his bold and outspoken opposition to Charles II and James II. 
Atkyns's legal talents continued to serve him well throughout the period of the Restoration. In 1672 he attained the rank of serjeant-at-law and was appointed a justice of common pleas, perhaps in an attempt to remove him from the lower house, where he was acquiring a reputation as something of an anti-court troublemaker. In addition to opposing Charles II's use of the dispensing power, he openly objected to what he considered to be royal attacks on the independence of parliament. His political beliefs played a role in the case of Sir Samuel Barnardiston, an opponent of the court who had been elected to the Commons in Suffolk. The sheriff of Suffolk, Sir William Soame, sent in a double return on the ground that many of Barnardiston's supporters, especially dissenters, were not forty-shilling freeholders. In February 1674 the House of Commons voted to seat Barnardiston, who then sued Soame in king's bench for damages on the ground that Soame's actions had prevented him from taking his seat for a year. Although Chief Justice Matthew Hale decided in Barnardiston's favour, the exchequer chamber reversed Hale's judgment. One of two dissenters in the exchequer, Atkyns objected to the verdict on the ground that the common-law courts could, and indeed should, compensate Barnardiston for the damages he had incurred. But even more harmful than the private wrong, Atkyns continued, was the public wrong, which he described as 'a design to model the parliament to the humour of the court' (R. Atkyns, 'Parliamentary and Political Tracts', 1734, 137). After the revolution of 1688 the case figured in the enactment of statutes 7 & 8 Wm. III c. 7, which made it illegal for a sheriff to make a double return in elections to the Commons. In June 1676 Atkyns's apparent support of the City of London's petition calling for a new parliament almost led to his removal from the bench. 
The exclusion crisis exacerbated Atkyns's fear of the royal court and the court's fear of him. By 1680 his close connections to William, Lord Russell, and like-minded Englishmen led the government to press for his dismissal from the bench, and early in 1680 he resigned. Atkyns himself attributed his ouster to Sir William Scroggs, chief justice of king's bench, and Sir Francis North, chief justice of common pleas. In fact, he had clashed with North over several cases, including North's naming of a protonotary. Although this right belonged to the chief justice, Atkyns insisted that the entire court be consulted. An altercation ensued in court, with North arguing 'that he knows here was no republic' and Atkyns responding 'no, nor a monarchy' (R. North, 'The Lives of the Right Hon. Francis North...', 1826, 387-91). Testifying to the House of Commons in April 1689, Atkyns further explained that North and Scroggs had objected to his attacks on parliamentary pensions, his opposition to Charles II's policy of censoring books without parliamentary approval, and his support of the right of the people to petition peacefully. A man of his convictions, Atkyns declined a royal offer of $500 for having attended 'diligently in parliament', replying 'I will not accept anything for my attendance'. He added that 'those who took pensions were not fit to be sent up to parliament again' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 5.307-8; A. Grey, 'Debates of the House of Commons, 1667 to 1694', 1763, 9.307-9). 
The political climate of the early 1680s led Atkyns to retire to Lower Swell near Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, but not for long. Friends pressured him to stand for Bristol in the third Exclusion Parliament, which election he and Sir John Knight lost to Charles II's supporters Sir Richard Hart and Sir Thomas Earle. Although determined to carry on the fight before the Commons committee on elections and privileges, Atkyns and Knight once again met defeat when Charles II dissolved the Oxford parliament before the lower house could consider their case. 
Atkyns soon encountered still another political setback. In September 1681, as the government proceeded with the remodelling of the corporations, the citizens of Bristol elected tories to the offices of mayor and sheriff. Soon the corporation indicted Atkyns, along with several other Bristol aldermen, for 'most riotously' creating an alderman without the assent of the mayor, who was his former opponent Richard Hart. Convicted at the assizes, Atkyns exploited his legal connections by appealing to king's bench, where in November 1682 the justices overturned the assize verdict after allowing him to plead his own case while appearing at the front of the court in his robes. Upon learning that the Bristol tories planned another indictment Atkyns resigned the recordership, which had been the purpose of his opponents' attacks all along. He insisted, however, on several conditions: first, that he receive his arrears of salary; second, that Charles II's government order that the corporation drop all further attempts to proceed against him and his friend Sir John Knight. The city agreed, and in January 1683 Atkyns was replaced by Sir John Churchill, attorney-general to the duke of York and a cousin of the future duke of Marlborough. 
Once again Atkyns retreated to Lower Swell, only to be called in June 1683 to aid in the defence of Lord Russell, whom the government charged with treason after the discovery of the Rye House plot. Although he could not officially serve as counsel, Atkyns agreed to help Russell's lawyers Henry Pollexfen and John Holt in their efforts. He entered the fray despite the fact that in the wake of the plot's discovery local officials searched his house and removed all weapons, even the sword with which he had been knighted at the Restoration (it was returned to him in 1689). In letters to Russell's family and friends Atkyns joined Pollexfen and Holt in arguing against Russell's conviction on the ground that not all of the jurors were forty-shilling freeholders or possessed of $100 in goods. Russell was executed on 21 June 1683, too quickly for an appeal to be filed. Shortly before he laid his head on the block he handed the sheriff a document in which he presented an argument that had probably come from Atkyns, namely that, under statute 2 Edward III c. 2, Russell's mere presence when insurrection was being plotted made him guilty of misprision of treason, not treason itself. Atkyns later published some of these letters along with more extensive arguments in two tracts written in reply to the tory Sir Bartholomew Shower's works upholding the verdict against Russell (R. Atkyns, 'Parliamentary and Political Tracts', 1734). 
Atkyns's opposition to the Stuart monarchy continued under James II, whose policies caused him to hone and more fully articulate his political beliefs. At issue for him and the political nation at large was the new king's Catholicizing policy which would soon unite the country against him and lead to his overthrow at the revolution. In order to place his coreligionists in high governmental and military positions, James had to defeat the numerous statutes enjoining religious conformity, including the 'Test Act'. Not content to dispense with these laws on an individual basis, he suspended them wholesale and, in Atkyns's view, thereby imperilled not only the established church but the English constitution itself. More specifically, Atkyns believed that because statutes were made by king and parliament, they must be defeated by the same authority and not by the king alone. Indeed, the dispensing power constituted no part of the royal prerogative, having begun in the reign of Henry III. This followed from the fact that the thirteenth century lay well within the time of legal memory, which early modern common lawyers took to be 3 September 1189, the date of Richard I's coronation. Put differently, kings possessed no prescriptive right to dispense. 
At first glance Atkyns's position regarding the royal dispensing power is puzzling, for in denying the king's right to set aside statutes he turned his back on centuries of legal learning. As even the most cursory examination of medieval and early modern records demonstrates, before 1660 monarchs had freely exercised the dispensing power and its twin the suspending power (which was simply the dispensing power writ large) without serious dissent. Indeed, generations of lawyers and political theorists viewed the right as an essential and inseparable prerogative of the crown. 
Atkyns's disregard of medieval and early modern legal theory and practice can be explained by an examination of the changing ideological climate in the late seventeenth century. According to some modern scholars (Weston and Greenberg, 'Subjects and Sovereigns') the years following the restoration of Charles II saw the waning of one persuasive political ideology and the growing acceptance of another. The first was the 'order' or divine right theory of kingship in which the dispensing power played a central role; the second, favoured by Atkyns and his fellow whigs, was the radical ancient constitutionalist ideology to which the order theory was inimical. First fully articulated during the civil wars of the 1640s by writers such as William Prynne, the theory of the radical ancient constitution held that while government in general was from God, the particular form proceeded from the people. In ancient times the English made a contract with their ruler according to which they gave him their allegiance in return for his promise to govern according to the laws made by king and people. The ruler who broke this original agreement deposed himself and left his subjects free to replace him with a king more to their liking. Importantly, parliamentarians and whigs such as Atkyns further argued that this particular form of government was in place at least as early as the Saxon period and had weathered potential breaks in continuity such as the Norman conquest. 
According to modern scholarship (Greenberg, 'The Confessor's laws', and 'The Radical Face of the Ancient Constitution'), this theory of government rested on several medieval sources that dissidents such as Atkyns held dear, in particular, the 'Modus tenendi parliamentum', the 'Mirror of Justices', and the so-called laws of St Edward the Confessor. Although actually manufactured in the twelfth and fourteenth centuries, all three purported to date from Saxon England, and all three told how Saxon institutions, in particular parliament and the common law, survived the conquest intact. 
Atkyns and his like-minded colleagues also drew inspiration from Charles I's notorious 'Answer to the Nineteen Propositions' (1642), in which the king had fatefully sanctioned the notion of co-ordination and coevality among the legally sovereign estates of king, Lords, and Commons. The ineluctable conclusion of all such theorizing was that because law was made by three co-ordinate estates in ancient times, so it must now be dispensed with by the same authority. In other words, by the late seventeenth century the acceptance of radical ancient constitutionalism among anti-royalists doomed the exercise of the royal dispensing power. 
This version of law, politics, and history Atkyns fully developed in several tracts written in support of William and Mary. Moved by James II's policies and their high tory defence, which took the form of the order theory of kingship, Atkyns argued the now-standard ancient constitutionalist line: according to the 'Modus', the 'Mirror', and St Edward's laws, the governmental contract vested legal sovereignty in king, Lords, and Commons. So England had been continuously ruled since long before the Norman conquest. In his words, 'We ourselves of the present age chose our common law, and consented to the most ancient acts of parliament, for we lived in our ancestors one thousand years ago, and those ancestors are still living in us'. This meant in turn that the community had a hand in making the law, which was the act of the whole body politic, the rule by which the king governed and the subject obeyed. Therefore, Atkyns concluded, James II possessed no power to set aside statutes, since 'none but the law-maker can dispense with the law, not he that hath but a share in the legislature' -- and this by 'grant from the people'. That is, the power to dispense rested in king and parliament, not the king alone. 'The king, the nobles and the commons of the realm present in parliament' could dispense whenever they judged it 'meet and convenient for the wealth of the realm' ('An Enquiry into the Power of Dispensing with Penal Statutes', 1689, 5-7; 'A postscript: being some animadversions upon a book writ by Sir Edward Herbert', in 'State trials', 11.1269; 'The Power and Jurisdiction of Parliament; and the Antiquity of the House of Commons Asserted', 1689, 17-18, 25, 27, 59). 
Enjoying the good will of William and Mary, Atkyns was appointed lord chief baron of the exchequer (1689-94) and speaker of the House of Lords (1689-93). In these positions he took part in the debates concerning the revolution settlement. His radical ancient constitutionalist views proved particularly valuable when the upper house discussed the Commons' declaration of 28 January 1689. One of the points at issue was the declaration's use of the term 'original contract' to describe the nature of government and the relationship between king and subject. Such language provoked extended debate, especially among those lords who worried that it conjured up visions of rebellion. Called upon to give advice to the upper house, Atkyns noted that legal treatises shed no light on the subject. However, he suggested that the phrase must refer 'to the first original of government'. Indeed, kings never ruled without an agreement with their people, which explained how England came to be a 'limited monarchy' ('House of Lords MSS', 2.15; Weston and Greenberg, 255-6). 
Although the ensuing compromise between the two houses dropped references to an original contract, the 'Bill of Rights' itself enshrined Atkyns's views of English law and government. Thus its opening clauses abolished the suspending power outright and the dispensing power 'as it hath been assumed and exercised of late'. Admittedly the qualified language concerning the dispensing power, which the Lords had added (perhaps with Atkyns's counsel), might seem to indicate that they favoured some saving of the royal discretionary authority. But in fact the upper house restricted its exercise only to two circumstances: first, when a statute itself permitted dispensation; and second, if the measure fell within a certain category of statutes that the Convention Parliament provided for at the revolution -- a statute which, however, never passed the two houses. So in the end Atkyns's opinions of kingship, which reflected that of the whigs in general, prevailed. Henceforth, the dispensing power would be exercised in accordance with the will of a sovereign parliament, if at all. 
With the Commons' acceptance of this final wording on 25 November 1689, the 'Bill of Rights' had achieved its final form, and Atkyns's view of the English constitution now constituted the law of the land. Indeed, his entire description of the workings of the English government and its long history summed up the political conclusions of radical ancient constitutionalists from the civil wars down to the revolution of 1688. 
Atkyns retired from public life in 1694, retreating to his manor of Saperton near Cirencester, Gloucestershire. His last public act was to write two works in which he argued for the right of the common-law courts as against the encroachments of the House of Lords and the chancery ('An Enquiry into the Jurisdiction of the Chancery in Causes of Equity', 1695; 'A Treatise of the True and Ancient Jurisdiction of the House of Peers', 1699). He died at Saperton Hall on 18 February 1710 'after half an hour's indisposition' (Foss, 'Judges', 25). A monument to him as well as to his younger brother, Edward, and his father stands in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 867


Atkyns, Sir Robert (bap. 1647, d. 1711), topographer and antiquary, was baptized at Monken Hadley, Middlesex, on 26 August 1647, the eldest son of Sir Robert Atkyns (bap. 1621, d. 1710), lawyer, and his first wife, Mary (died 1681), daughter of Sir George Clerk, of Watford, Northamptonshire. He was a nephew of Sir Edward Atkyns (1630/31-1698). Following family tradition he entered Lincoln's Inn in 1661, but he matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 14 March 1663. He was knighted at Bristol on 5 September that year and in 1664 was made a fellow of the Royal Society. He was called to the bar in 1668, but did not practise. 
By licence dated 5 July 1669 Atkyns married, in Holborn, Louise (1653-1716), daughter of Sir George Carteret of Hawnes, Bedfordshire, and about that time settled at Pinbury Park, Duntisbourne Rouse, Gloucestershire, an estate purchased by his father in 1661. Having been deputy receiver-general of law duties in 1671-2 and receiver-general in 1672-3, he served as comptroller of law duties from 1673 to 1679. He was simultaneously a commissioner for assessment in Gloucestershire (1673-80) and, becoming a JP for the county in 1673, remained so for most of the rest of his life. After an unsuccessful attempt, supported by his father, to enter parliament as member for Cirencester in 1671 he was returned for the seat in the three parliaments of 1679 to 1681, and sat as MP for Gloucestershire from 1685 to 1687. 
Overshadowed by his father, who as chief baron of the exchequer was speaker of the House of Lords between 1689 and 1693, and with whom he had political disagreements, Atkyns refused to take the oath of allegiance to William III and chose to retire to Pinbury Park, where he had the opportunity to explore his topographical interests. The first of the three major Gloucestershire antiquaries -- the other two being Ralph Bigland (1712-1784) and Samuel Rudder (1726-1801) -- Atkyns collected material for parish histories, incorporating manuscripts on church history passed to him by Richard Parsons (1643-1711), chancellor of Gloucester diocese between 1677 and 1711. He compiled comprehensive manorial descents and attempted to record the population of each parish, based on the numbers of houses therein and the yearly birth and burial numbers. The resulting first folio county history of Gloucestershire, his 'Ancient and Present State of Glostershire' (1712), which eulogizes the Stuarts, is especially valuable for its series of sixty-five engravings by Johannes Kip, illustrating the county seats and manor houses in the first decade of the eighteenth century, and preserving a record of features now altered or entirely lost. 
Atkyns contracted dysentery and died on 29 November 1711 at his Westminster house. He was buried on 12 December in Sapperton church, Gloucestershire, where a monument portraying him in life-size effigy was raised in the south transept. Atkyns was survived by his wife, who died in 1716; they had no surviving children. 


@@@@@


doc= 868


Atlay, James (1817-1894), bishop of Hereford, was the second son of the Revd Henry Atlay and his wife, Elizabeth Rayner Hovell. Born on 3 July 1817 at Wakerley in Northamptonshire, he was educated at Grantham and Oakham schools, and entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a foundation scholar in 1836. He was elected to a Bell university scholarship in 1837, and graduated BA in 1840 as a senior optime and ninth classic. In 1842 he was elected to a fellowship, and he proceeded MA in 1843, BD in 1850, and DD in 1859. After being ordained deacon in 1842 and priest in the following year, he held from 1843 to 1846 the curacy of Warsop in Nottinghamshire, and from 1847 to 1852 the vicarage of Madingley near Cambridge. In 1856 he was appointed Whitehall preacher, and in 1858 and the following year was one of the select preachers before the university; but it was by his work and influence as tutor of St John's from 1846 to 1859 that he made a mark among his contemporaries which spread far beyond the walls of his own college. 
In 1859 Atlay married Frances Turner, daughter of Major William Martin of the East India Company; they had several children. Also in 1859 the trustees of the advowson of Leeds elected Atlay as vicar in succession to Walter Farquhar Hook, who had been a strikingly innovative vicar. Atlay carried on the work of his predecessor with conspicuous success. His businesslike qualities won him respect in a great mercantile city. He initiated a great scheme of church extension, and his organizing capacity made Leeds the best-worked parish in the kingdom. He was appointed canon residentiary at Ripon in 1861; in 1867 he refused the bishopric of Calcutta, but in 1868 he accepted Disraeli's offer of the bishopric of Hereford in succession to Renn Dickson Hampden. 
Atlay brought to the management of his diocese the same thoroughness which had marked his career at Leeds and Cambridge. Rarely leaving it except to attend the House of Lords or convocation, he lived and died among his own people. He made a point of officiating in every church of a wide though sparsely populated diocese. His great parochial experience rendered him the trusted counsellor and guide of his clergy; his geniality and frankness, united to a fine presence, endeared him to all who were brought near him. Archbishop Benson described him as 'the most beautiful combination of enthusiasm, manliness, and modesty'. In 1889 Benson selected him as an assessor in the trial of Bishop King of Lincoln for alleged ritual offences. Atlay was a high-churchman of the old school and a conservative in politics; he was one of the four bishops who voted against Frederick Temple when he was appointed bishop of Exeter by Gladstone. He died on 24 December 1894, after a long illness, and was buried in 'the ladye arbour' under the walls of his cathedral. 
One of Atlay's sons, the Revd George William Atlay, attached to the Universities' Mission to Central Africa, was murdered on the shores of Lake Nyasa in August 1895; another, Charles Cecil, died in March 1900 of wounds received at Wagon Hill, Ladysmith, while serving in the Imperial light horse. 


@@@@@


doc= 869


Atmore, Charles (1759-1826), Methodist minister, was born at Heacham, Norfolk, on 17 August 1759, the son of a ship's captain at King's Lynn. His mother died when he was eighteen months and he was brought up by an uncle and aunt and educated at the village school. At the age of fourteen he accompanied his father on a voyage to Rotterdam. He took up farm work at Haddiscoe, where in 1778 he heard his first Methodist preaching and became a Methodist in spite of opposition from his uncle and aunt, who were staunch Anglicans. Joseph Pilmore received him into membership in June 1779 and another of the Methodist itinerants, George Shadford, persuaded him to become a local preacher. On 14 February 1781 he met John Wesley in Norwich and was encouraged to continue preaching locally. At the conference of that year he was taken on as an itinerant and appointed to the Grimsby circuit, being received into full connection three years later. At the conference of 1786 he was ordained by Wesley for work in Scotland, where he became friends with Lady Maxwell and Dr John Gillies and built the first Methodist preaching-house in Glasgow. In 1787 he married Elizabeth Crane (died 1794) of Preston, publishing a memoir of her after her death. He then married Harriet Chadwick (died 1862) of Halifax in 1795; the couple had more than one child. 
Wesley thought so highly of Atmore as to include him in the legal hundred: preachers named in the 'Deed of Declaration' (1784), the document in which Wesley named the members of the conference who should inherit his powers of stationing preachers after his death and identify the legal conference should a schismatic conference appear. He thus became a member of the legally constituted Methodist conference in 1791. As one of the younger and more progressive ministers, he played an active part in the developments that followed Wesley's death, helping to shape the polity and ecclesiastical status of Methodism. Anticipating future decisions, he exercised the authority he believed to be his by virtue of his ordination by administering the sacrament to the Methodist society at Alnwick and joining with others in ordinations without conference authorization. His circuit ministry was exercised mainly in northern circuits. As superintendent of the Leeds circuit in 1811 he made the judicious purchase of what became the site of Woodhouse Grove School and in the same year was elected president of the conference. In 1813 he took the lead in establishing a district missionary society in Halifax to organize financial support for the overseas missions launched by Dr Thomas Coke. A close friend and confidant of the veteran preacher John Pawson, he corresponded extensively with him, and Pawson contributed much first-hand detail to Atmore's 'Methodist Memorial' (1801; with an appendix on American Methodism, 1802), a series of short but informative biographies of early Methodist itinerants. He also published 'Discourses on the Lord's Prayer' (1807) and edited new editions of 'The Whole Duty of Man' and Oliver Heywood's 'Family Altar'. 
Atmore spent his closing days in London, dying on 1 July 1826 at a hotel run by his two eldest daughters in Fountain Court, Cheapside. He was buried in the graveyard of Wesley's City Road Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 870


Atslowe, Edward (d. 1594), physician, probably from Eversholt, Bedfordshire, was educated at Winchester College, and admitted BA at New College, Oxford, in 1555. After being elected to a fellowship at his college he was created MD at Oxford on 27 August 1566, and was one of the four doctors appointed by convocation to dispute before Queen Elizabeth I when she was entertained at the university in September of that year. Shortly afterwards Atslowe settled in London and was admitted a fellow of the College of Physicians; between 1569 and 1583 he was appointed censor and named elect and consiliarius. On 2 November 1573 Atslowe married Frances Wingfield (died 1605) at Stoke Newington; they had six children. Among his patients were many of the nobility, and he was probably attached for some years as physician to the household of the earl of Sussex. In 1572 Edward's brother, Luke, had been appointed by Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford, as one of his four commissioners to conduct courts of survey of his lands; the Atslowes were soon after related to Oxford through Edward's marriage to Frances Wingfield. 
Edward Atslowe was an ardent Catholic and supporter of Mary, queen of Scots. As early as December 1570 he paid her a visit at Tutbury. For many years it was alleged that he aided the earls of Arundel, Northumberland, and others, in a conspiracy to obtain assistance on her behalf from the continent, and in 1579 he was arrested on that charge, but released. In 1585 he was again sent to the Tower; but on being privately examined by the lord chancellor and other officials as to his relations with the papists, he vehemently denied having had any treasonable 'intelligence' with any of them. A spy of Mary's wrote to her, however, in July of the same year: 'I heare that Dr Atslowe was racked twice almost to the death in the Towre about the Earl of Arundell his matters and intentions to depart Englande, wherein he was betrayed' (Murdin, 'State Papers', 2.452). Atslowe was apparently released soon afterwards, as he attended to a son of the earl of Northumberland during a fatal illness in 1587. 
Atslowe is described in a private letter as being 'newly deade' on 2 May 1594 and was buried in the parish church of Clerkenwell, Middlesex. His estate, worth $561 16's'. 2died, was granted to his widow on 6 May 1594 and the earl of Arundel settled an annuity on her. 


@@@@@


doc= 871


Atterbury, Francis (1663-1732), bishop of Rochester, politician, and Jacobite conspirator, was born on 6 March 1663 at Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, the younger son of Lewis Atterbury (1630/31-1693) ['see under 'Atterbury, Lewis (1656-1731)], then rector of Milton Keynes, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Giffard (died 1668). 
After early education at home Atterbury was chosen in 1674 as a king's scholar at Westminster School, then at the height of its reputation under the headmastership of Richard Busby. Atterbury's intelligence and ready wit made him a favourite of Busby, and in 1680 he passed to Christ Church, Oxford, at the head of that year's intake of Westminsters, matriculating on 17 December that year. At Christ Church, which was in size and influence the greatest college in the university, Atterbury and his fellow Westminsters formed an intellectual elite. His mentor now was the high tory subdean, Henry Aldrich, who encouraged his literary talent. In 1682 Atterbury published a Latin translation of John Dryden's 'Absalom and Achitophel', and two years later a small anthology of Latin verse. In 1684 he graduated BA, and began to take pupils of his own. Presumably under Aldrich's guidance, he contributed to the counter-offensive undertaken by Anglican polemicists at Oxford against the Catholic party in the university. His 'Answer to some Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther' (1687) was an effective rebuttal of anti-Lutheran tracts issued by the press controlled by the Catholic master of University College, Obadiah Walker. Although Atterbury was careful not to endorse everything in Lutheran doctrine, he vigorously defended Luther's own character, and won admiration far beyond the university. In Oxford itself his reputation was such that he was entrusted in the summer of 1688 with composing verses in honour of the visiting Princess Anne. Aldrich's promotion to the deanery of Christ Church at the revolution of 1688 secured his protege's position within the college: more pupils now came Atterbury's way, among them Charles Boyle, later fourth earl of Orrery, whose education became his particular care. But he found the limitations of college life frustrating, and became fractious, confiding to his father in October 1690 that 'I'm perfectly weary with this nauseous circle of small affairs, that can neither divert nor instruct me. I was made, I am sure, for another scene and another sort of conversation, though it has been my hard luck to be pinned down to this. I have thought and thought again, Sir, and for some years: now I have never been able to think otherwise, than that I am losing time every minute I stay here. ('Epistolary Correspondence', 'Miscellaneous Works', 1.15-16)' Atterbury had been ordained in 1687, the year that he graduated MA, and in October 1691 he took the first step on the ladder of ecclesiastical preferment when Henry Compton, bishop of London, recommended him to the vestry of St Bride's, Fleet Street, as a lecturer. His performances in the pulpit soon brought him notice, and on Restoration Day (29 May) 1692 he preached before Queen Mary II in the Chapel Royal, his sermon being subsequently printed. In October 1693 he was elected minister of the Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals, and appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to the king and queen. Financially secure, he resigned his studentship at Christ Church and moved to London, marrying in 1695 Catherine Osborne (died 1722), herself the daughter of a country parson, who brought him domestic security and great personal happiness. They rented a house in Chelsea, where Atterbury's three children (two daughters and a son, the latter, Osborne, destined to be a huge disappointment to his father) were born between 1698 and 1701. 
Atterbury was a clear and forceful preacher, whose straightforward and doctrinally conservative sermons were popular with his congregations, as they emphasized the reality of sin and salvation through grace, in contrast to what he termed the 'very easy and comfortable divinity' (Bennett, 'Tory Crisis', 37) of low-church ecclesiastics. But it was to be through his writing that he attained national celebrity. His style and wit, of which glimpses could be seen in his earlier productions, were displayed in full view in the pamphlet he 'ghosted' for his former pupil Boyle, 'Dr Bentley's Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris Examined' (1698), and its successor, 'A Short View of the Controversy...' (1701), both of which were written to extricate Boyle from a scholarly dispute with the formidable and destructive Richard Bentley over a spurious classical text, the 'epistles' of 'Phalaris', that Boyle had edited and Bentley had denounced. Although Bentley was clearly in the right, Atterbury's meretricious arguments muddied the waters sufficiently to deceive many contemporaries. More significant, however, was the 'Letter to a Convocation Man' of 1696, which, by setting out the case for the right of the convocation of the Church of England to meet alongside parliament, set in train the so-called 'convocation controversy', and launched not only the high-church agitation for ecclesiastical reform, but Atterbury's own career in ecclesiastical politics. The pamphlet was published anonymously, and although some suspected Atterbury as the author, none could be sure. Its effect was sensational, and Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury, alarmed at the political implications of any popular pressure for the recall of convocation, encouraged William Wake, himself a future archbishop, to publish a response. Wake's scholarship exposed a fundamental flaw in Atterbury's case -- the historical discontinuity between the medieval convocations summoned alongside parliament and the modern provincial convocations, which were of a different, non-parliamentary, order -- but this crucial point was lost in the furore aroused by the near-Erastianism of some of Wake's other arguments, that since Roman times Christian rulers had possessed absolute control over church synods. To many readers Wake seemed to be advocating the total subordination of church to state. Provoked by the rough treatment his own efforts had received at the hands of his antagonist, Atterbury determined to hit back. He prepared the ground carefully, reading up on the materials of English parliamentary history in the library of Lincoln's Inn, access to which was granted through the good offices of his friend Francis Gastrell, reader in the chapel. After two years' endeavour he was able to publish, again anonymously, 'The Rights, Powers, and Privileges of an English Convocation' (1700), which purported to answer Wake point by point. In reality, there was much legerdemain in Atterbury's exposition, but weaknesses were hidden by the brilliance of his style. His own observation, excusing his 'barbarous' treatment of Wake on the grounds that such personal vituperation was necessary 'to inspirit a dull and dry subject' ('London Diaries of William Nicolson', 458), hints at his impatience with the demands of scholarship. He also benefited from the fact that his trenchant demands for constitutional rights struck a chord with his audience, both clerical and lay. The work was a great popular success, and helped to persuade leading tories like Laurence Hyde, first earl of Rochester, to insist on the recall of convocation as part of their price for joining the ministry at the end of 1700. This time Atterbury's authorship was an open secret, and he soon abandoned any pretence of anonymity. When a second, enlarged edition appeared the following year, his name was attached. With typical effrontery he added (without permission) a dedication to Archbishop Tenison. As with the Phalaris controversy, Atterbury's journalistic flair had secured him an undeserved short-term victory. Wake, like Bentley, eventually produced a comprehensive rebuttal, but by the time he brought this work to the press, in 1703, it had been overtaken by events. 
Atterbury was now the acknowledged champion of the high-church cause, not least because his own brand of high-churchmanship was practical (and it must be said, political), rather than theological. His concerns were to recover the influence of the established church in English society, the status of the clerical order, and also the incomes of the lower clergy, not to advance high-flying doctrines. Although he extolled 'the re-establishment of the beauty and praise in our sanctuary' brought about at the Restoration (Atterbury, 'Sermons', 33), he also spoke in the pulpit of the salvation of the 'elect' and reiterated standard denunciations of 'popish' superstitions, which presumably indicates an orthodox Calvinist theology of salvation. As the meeting of convocation approached, he busied himself in mobilizing clerical opinion, but he did not have to stand for election himself, since his friend Sir Jonathan Trelawny, bt, bishop of Exeter, was able to advance him to the vacant archdeaconry of Exeter and thus an 'ex officio' seat. To his chagrin, Atterbury found that he was considered too brash and unreliable to be entirely trusted by the new ministry. He was not consulted by Rochester before the meeting of convocation and was bypassed in the election for prolocutor of the lower house in favour of George Hooper, dean of Canterbury. But he was not easily cowed, and set out to undermine Hooper by urging the lower house to extreme measures in defiance of the prolocutor's caution. His particular target was Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, whose commentary on the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' was denounced as heresy. The central issue, however, was the wording of the loyal address, which embroiled the lower house in a conflict with the bishops. Hooper was made to appear hopelessly weak in comparison to Atterbury, the 'de facto' leader of the lower clergy. In a pointed gesture the lower house proposed a vote of thanks to Atterbury for his pains in asserting the rights of convocation, and sent a letter to Oxford proposing that he be awarded the degree of DD by diploma, which sympathetic high-churchmen in the university were more than willing to grant. 
Atterbury's resentment against Rochester propelled him into the company of a group of younger tory politicians, including Oxford figures like the lawyer and future lord chancellor Simon Harcourt. The most important member of this circle was the speaker of the House of Commons, Robert Harley, a politician of legendary deviousness, whose career became intertwined with Atterbury's. Atterbury became Harley's chief ally among the clergy, a clerical equivalent of the bright young tory MPs whom Harley was gathering around him in order to supplant the older tory chieftains like Rochester and Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham. But while Harley's parliamentary faction was cultivating moderation in its politics, Atterbury's party in the church took a consistently radical line. Atterbury shouldered much of the weight of the high-church cause himself, publishing at least nine pamphlets in 1701-2 against such powerful low-church antagonists as Edmund Gibson and White Kennett. He also organized, directed, and led the high-churchmen in the lower house of convocation. The elections of November and December had returned a clear high-church majority, but the short session which accompanied the last parliament of William III in the early months of 1702 proved deeply disappointing. Hooper and his allies had been so alienated by Atterbury's behaviour that they absented themselves from proceedings, and Atterbury had barely enough supporters to overcome the determined efforts of Kennett and other low-churchmen. Then, by refusing to sanction the election of a new prolocutor to replace the deceased Robert Woodward, Archbishop Tenison effectively suspended the sitting. Atterbury gave vent to his frustrations in a series of published attacks on Tenison, culminating in the anonymous 'The Parliamentary Original and Rights of the Lower House of Convocation' (1702), which portrayed the archbishop as the clerical instrument of a political faction, the whig junto, bent on the destruction of the church. 
By this time Queen Anne had succeeded to the throne and the political scene had been transformed with the appointment of a tory ministry. Tenison was sufficiently alarmed at the vehemence of Atterbury's attacks to approach Lord Treasurer Godolphin, who in turn passed the matter over to Harley, his trusted lieutenant in the Commons. This was Harley's chance. He concluded a secret agreement with Atterbury for the settlement of the crisis in the church: the queen was to declare her sympathy for the high-church cause; Tenison was to be persuaded into concessions; the constitutional disputes would be resolved, and convocation would proceed with its work of reforming and reviving the church. The immediate fruit of this agreement was a 'rapprochement' between Atterbury and Hooper, engineered by Harley, and high-church unity behind the election of Henry Aldrich as prolocutor. But the promised concessions from the archbishop were not forthcoming, and Atterbury found himself outmanoeuvred by his old college tutor in convocation. Hooper, of all people, usurped his place as the ministry's chief adviser among the lower clergy; and to make matters worse, the Harleyites showed their moderate side and opposed the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' in parliament. 
Furious that he had been duped by his friends, Atterbury broke with Harley in the summer of 1703 and threw his weight behind the high-church campaign in the following parliamentary session in support of the reintroduced 'Occasional Conformity Bill'. When it, too, was rejected, he took the battle into convocation, and in January 1704 persuaded the lower house to agree on two controversial documents: a 'representation' of the grievances of the clergy, laying the blame for the ills of the church squarely on the bishops; and a 'protestation of right', embodying Atterbury's own doctrines on the rights and powers of convocation. The formal delivery of these offensive documents to the upper house was followed by a message of thanks to all MPs who had voted for the 'Occasional Conformity Bill'. A triumphant session for Atterbury was crowned when he preached by invitation before the Commons. 
Atterbury's star was very much in the ascendant, and a by-product of the ministerial reconstruction that followed the parliamentary session was his promotion. Harley, now secretary of state, saw the necessity of a reliable clerical lieutenant and fixed on Atterbury, who in June 1704 was advanced to the deanery of Carlisle. However, this was to prove in many respects an unwise step for Atterbury. It was a poorly endowed preferment, even if presented as a token of greater rewards to come; and his acceptance placed him in a difficult position, where he was distrusted by both political parties: by the whigs as a firebrand, by many tories as a turncoat, and altogether too dependent on Harley personally. Moreover, he did not get on with his bishop, the redoubtable whig William Nicolson, with whom he clashed repeatedly. Their quarrels culminated in 1707 in an unprecedented decision by Nicolson to include the cathedral in his episcopal visitation. In response Atterbury petitioned the queen, and the dispute, which as usual with Atterbury was pursued in the press as well as through official channels, was only resolved in 1708 when whigs in parliament pushed through a bill to validate Nicolson's actions. In convocation Atterbury, bridled by his preferment, could only stand by as Tenison carried all before him, although in the autumn of 1705 even he rebelled at an attempt by Tenison to force the lower house to concur in the bishops' draft of a loyal address, and was unusually vociferous in his protests. In doing so, however, he led the high-churchmen straight into a whig trap, and shared the mortification of the entire lower house when they were publicly rebuked by royal letter. In the following session he was able to exercise more restraint, and did what he could to moderate the protestation of the lower house at being prorogued during the passage through parliament of the Anglo-Scottish Union. Even so, the clergy's carefully worded 'application' incurred another formal rebuke by royal letter in April 1707. This was all too much for Atterbury, and he relieved his frustrations with a short anonymous pamphlet putting the clergy's case, 'An Account and Defence of the Protestation' (1707). 
The possibility of relief from Atterbury's embarrassments and frustrations came with the political crisis in the winter of 1707-8, as Harley sought to persuade the queen to reconstruct her administration in such a way as to exclude the increasingly influential whig junto, and instead rely upon a coalition of moderates of both parties. Atterbury saw a role for himself as the new ministry's ecclesiastical lieutenant, and it has been suggested that the edition of his collected sermons, which he published at this time, was contrived to read as a manifesto of a new ministerial order. The preface declared the queen ready to embrace a high-church programme of ecclesiastical reform. As Atterbury told Harley, this would be 'likely to arouse the clergy, with whom it is necessary to establish a confidence, in order to the promoting any public service' (Bennett, 'Tory Crisis', 93). After such hopes, the failure of Harley's schemes must have been a bitter disappointment, but his patron's dismissal from office in February 1708, and the consequent reuniting of tories in church and state, did at least clarify Atterbury's position with his own party. He abandoned his previous restraint, and went into print with a vigorous denunciation of the primate's behaviour towards the lower house of convocation, 'Some Proceedings in Convocation, AD' 1705 (1708), and the general expectation that he would be chosen prolocutor when the new convocation assembled was only dashed when the whig ministry decided at the last minute to prorogue convocation rather than risk his election. A renewed self-confidence was also apparent in Atterbury's willingness to refute publicly the uncompromisingly whig constitutional doctrines espoused by his fellow clergyman Benjamin Hoadly. Atterbury had been stung by gratuitous criticism by Hoadly of some slapdash theology in one of his own hastily published funeral sermons, and determined to have his revenge. He used the occasion of a public sermon in September 1708, on the installation of a new lord mayor of London, to reiterate the providentialist version of 'Revolution principles' he had first enunciated in a sermon before the House of Commons in 1701. The City of London corporation was outraged, and refused either to thank him or to request the printing of the sermon. Undaunted, he preached it again before a clerical audience, and put it into print afterwards. Hoadly's eventual response, in 1710, received the public gratitude of the whig-dominated House of Commons, much to Atterbury's disgust, but by this time the impeachment of Dr Henry Sacheverell was under way, and Atterbury's earlier sermon had been embroiled in the surrounding controversy. Though not by any means as extreme or intemperate as Sacheverell in his attitude to the Revolution, Atterbury naturally came to the aid of a fellow high-churchman in distress, and is said to have played a part in helping to prepare the doctor's speech in his own defence to the House of Lords. 
The ministerial revolution of 1710, which brought Robert Harley to power, seemed at first to open a vista of opportunities. Atterbury belonged in the charmed circle of Harley's friends and associates, and helped the new ministry's propaganda efforts by contributing one or two numbers to the fledgeling 'Examiner'. But Harley's slowness in ordering major changes exasperated the hotter tories and in September 1710 Atterbury was sent as an emissary to represent their concerns to him. He received an unexpectedly brusque answer and, allegedly, a coolness entered permanently into the relations between the two men. The consequences were not immediately apparent, however. Harley recommended Atterbury in December 1710 to succeed Aldrich as dean of Christ Church, though for the time being nothing was done. Then, when Atterbury was elected prolocutor of the lower house of convocation and sought at last to inaugurate the comprehensive scheme for church reform that had been envisaged when convocation had been recalled in 1700, Harley supplied the necessary preliminaries. Unfortunately for Atterbury, the determined opposition of low-churchmen in both houses, and the extremism of his own supporters, frustrated his grand designs, and very little of the anticipated programme was carried through. The 'Fifty New Churches Act', passed by parliament on convocation's initiative, was in the long run the most impressive achievement. But the session of 1711 was best-known for the production of the 'Representation of the present state of religion', a work largely of Atterbury's draftsmanship which embodied the full range of high-church grievances, ecclesiastical and political, but which was never formally presented to Queen Anne. The house of bishops offered their own anodyne version instead, and, no compromise being possible, the matter was dropped when convocation was prorogued. Although the lower house's 'Representation' was published, it had no official status. 
Atterbury thus had reason to share the dissatisfaction of tory back-benchers in parliament in the summer of 1711. His own frustrations were made worse by the slow progress of the Christ Church appointment. At this point he seems to have aligned himself with the secretary of state, Henry St John, fast emerging as Harley's rival within the ministry. In September 1711, at long last, Atterbury was declared dean of Christ Church. His stint at the head of his old college, like so much else in his career, proved disappointing. Within the governing body his determination to reform, enshrined in a permanently overbearing manner, naturally made him enemies. Within the university at large he also entertained grand ambitions, namely to break the stranglehold of a ruling clique of minor college heads, and create a new ascendancy based on Christ Church and Magdalen (where Sacheverell was his ally), naturally enough under his own leadership. Behind this scheme was the figure of Lord Keeper Harcourt, whose own ambitions to establish a controlling political interest in the university constituency Atterbury was keen to serve. None of these ambitions was satisfied. Atterbury failed to reform his college, relations with the fellows breaking down spectacularly, and he failed to take over university politics and reconstruct the tory interest under Harcourt's protection. Meanwhile, the factionalism in convocation was going from bad to worse, and much of Atterbury's time as prolocutor was taken up with trying to restrain the extravagances of the extremists on his own side, whose high-flying theology could be interpreted as tending towards Jacobitism. 
The political crisis that engulfed the ministry in the summer of 1713 gave Atterbury, as he saw it, an opportunity to break free from the shackles of an unsupportive government. Along with Harcourt, he 'fell into a strict alliance' with St John (now Viscount Bolingbroke), 'and endeavoured to raise a great prejudice in the Church party against the treasurer' ('Portland MSS', 5.660), otherwise Harley, now earl of Oxford. Atterbury's part in this intrigue was to devise a project which could unite high-churchmen, and he found it in a parliamentary bill to reinvigorate the ecclesiastical courts. Atterbury drafted the bill and sought, without success, to interest Lord Nottingham in its passage. This scheme was soon overtaken by the more serious crisis over the French commerce treaty, but Atterbury was sufficiently at the heart of things to be offered the bishopric of Rochester, which became vacant in June 1713. While the income from the bishopric was nugatory, its incumbent also held the more lucrative and prestigious deanery of Westminster. Atterbury leapt at the opportunity, his own pleasure being matched, it must be said, by that of the Christ Church chapter, and on 7 July he took his seat in the House of Lords. 
For Bolingbroke and Harcourt this was a Pyrrhic victory, as in the autumn of 1713 Oxford launched into a broader political reconstruction that temporarily restored his political supremacy. But his grip was failing, as was the queen's health. In the final months of Anne's reign, with the ministry bitterly divided and the tory party pulling itself apart into Jacobite and Hanoverian factions, Atterbury remained close to Bolingbroke. It was he who devised the 'Schism Bill', designed to suppress nonconformist academies, as another expedient to unite the tories. In July 1714 it was said once again that he had formed, with Bolingbroke and Harcourt, a 'scheme, to out the Treasurer' (Bennett, 'Tory Crisis', 179). This does not seem to have extended to bringing in the queen's half-brother, James Francis Edward Stuart, the Pretender -- indeed, after the queen's death, Atterbury was a member of the Lords committee that drew up an address of congratulation to King George I -- but contemporary gossip, and worse still, opinion at the Hanoverian court, thought otherwise. 
Atterbury's reaction to the collapse of the tory interest was characteristically spirited. He published his 'Considerations upon the Secret History of the White Staff', which rehearsed all the high tories' grievances over the past four years, and blamed Oxford as the author of the party's misfortunes. He was also obliged to defend himself from accusations of Jacobitism levelled by Daniel Defoe, and did what he could to rally the party faithful, both privately and in print. As the general election approached, early in 1715, he published 'English Advice to the Freeholders of England', which painted a dismal picture of a country governed by the whigs, and rashly included a vehement personal attack on George I, which so enraged the government that a proclamation was issued against it and a reward offered for information. Fortunately for Atterbury, his tracks were well covered and his friends discreet. Despite debilitating attacks of gout, he proved an effective leader of the tories in the House of Lords. He was not involved in Jacobite conspiracy leading up to the Fifteen, but the government's treatment of the rebels may have proved a turning point for him. His pamphlet (again anonymous) 'An argument to prove the affections of the people of England to be the best security of government' was an appeal for mercy for the six peers taken at Preston, and also a comprehensive indictment of unfettered whig rule. 
Atterbury's spell as bishop of Rochester seems to have been among the most personally rewarding phases of his ecclesiastical career, at least in relation to diocesan business. A conscientious administrator, he was careful to ensure the episcopal act book was properly maintained, and though he found it necessary to conduct only one primary visitation, the diocese was small enough for him to get to know his clergy personally. Moreover, for once in his career he encountered little opposition: his sole visitation was uncontroversial, and his scrupulous examination of ordinands ensured that the new clerical recruits were unexceptionable. He did not find the Westminster deanery so congenial, and indeed it was the scene of the last great quarrel of his career, over the siting of a new dormitory at Westminster School. A dispute with Dr Robert Freind, the headmaster, was taken by Atterbury all the way to the Lords, on appeal, before he won his case. Politically, he was becoming more and more bitter. In the spring of 1716, seemingly convinced that the Hanoverian regime was irrevocably whig and inimical to the true interest of church and people, he finally responded to approaches from the Jacobites, though his decided opinion was that nothing could be done without an armed invasion from abroad. Later that year, when the Swedish plot was taking shape, led by the Swedish ambassador Count Gyllenborg, he became more actively involved, seeking to recruit Lord Oxford's co-operation and participating in various clandestine efforts to raise funds. However, he soon decided that the plan was likely to come to nothing. When intercepted letters came to the notice of the government, he ceased all correspondence with the Jacobites. Instead, he pinned his faith on the domestic revival of the tory interest, encouraged by the whig schism of 1717 and by ministerial attacks on the church. Despite recurrent attacks of gout, Atterbury organized resistance to the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts' in the winter of 1718-19, though his hopes of making political capital for the tories out of whig divisions were not realized. With Harcourt, he was reckoned the leader of the main body of his party, distinguished by the diarist Lady Cowper from 'the moderate Tories' ('Diary of Mary, Countess Cowper', 144). 
After the South Sea Bubble had burst, the Jacobites launched another initiative. Atterbury took part in early discussions with the Jacobite agent George Kelly, but as always counselled caution, and insisted that the essential prerequisite was a military invasion from abroad. During the winter of 1720-21 he was also drawn into negotiations with the beleaguered chief minister, Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland, who at this point was anxious to secure tory support to save his own political career. The attraction for Atterbury was some ministerial favour for his own case in the Lords about the Westminster School dormitory, but although this was forthcoming, there was no sign of any more substantial benefits for the tories as a party, especially the so-called 'free parliament' (the government abstaining from the use of improper influence in elections), which was the cornerstone of their demands. By the time parliament reassembled in the autumn of 1721 even Atterbury realized that he and his friends had been used by Sunderland for the minister's own purposes. The bishop joined heartily in the new opposition in the Lords headed by the dissident whig William Cowper, first Earl Cowper, which harried the ministry throughout the session, entering protests at every defeat and subsequently publishing them, in order to appeal to public opinion in advance of the forthcoming election. At the same time Atterbury was gambling on a different kind of political initiative. With unexpected rashness he had agreed in November 1721 to proposals presented by the Pretender's agents for an armed landing in England, even though the details of the scheme were not worked out and did not seem to fulfil the requirements he himself had frequently specified. His involvement brought in other prominent Jacobites: William, Lord North and Grey, Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, and Sir Henry Goring. But these were incompetent, even timorous, conspirators, whose collective caution amounted to inertia. When months had passed and the necessary funds from the English side showed no sign of being realized, Atterbury lost patience, quarrelled violently with his fellow plotters, and entirely broke off from them. The fact that his wife was seriously ill at this time may have affected his behaviour; certainly her death in April 1722 completed his emotional prostration. 
Removing himself from the intrigues of the Jacobites did not save Atterbury, for the British ministers, and in particular Sir Robert Walpole, had the scent of the conspiracy in their nostrils. From all quarters information was falling into their hands. John Erskine, earl of Mar, the meddlesome Jacobite secretary of state, betrayed Atterbury to an English agent. Enciphered letters from George Kelly, Mar's go-between, were intercepted, and Kelly was himself arrested in London. Other minor Jacobite agents, some self-appointed, were also arrested, including a young Norfolk lawyer, Christopher Layer, who had been peddling fantastic schemes of his own. Mar's evidence had to be kept confidential, but the enciphered letters could be used, especially after Kelly's landlady identified Atterbury as one of the principals mentioned. Atterbury was arrested in his deanery on 24 August, and confined in the Tower of London, while Walpole and the ministers worked to prise incriminating evidence out of their various prisoners. The process was long-drawn-out, but in January 1723 Walpole was confident enough to secure the appointment of a select committee of the House of Commons to investigate the affair, which essentially traced the steps he and his colleagues had already taken. The select committee reported on 1 March, and the Commons, at Walpole's insistence, resolved to proceed against Atterbury not by trial and execution, as with the lesser fry, but by a bill of pains and penalties, which would deprive the bishop of all his preferments and impose a perpetual exile. Despite a valiant effort in the House of Lords, when Atterbury was heard by counsel before the third reading of the bill and turned the proceedings into a kind of state trial, at one point cross-examining Walpole, his chief accuser, in a memorable exchange, the result was a foregone conclusion. The bill was passed, and Atterbury departed for the continent, accompanied by his daughter Mary and her husband William Morice, and endowed with a capital sum of around $10,000 partly made up of collections from tory friends. 
Atterbury acted for many years as the Old Pretender's secretary of state, but it was an unhappy situation for him: he found the Catholicism of the court-in-exile not at all to his taste, distrusted (with good reason) many of his colleagues, and was exasperated at their lack of realism and sheer incompetence. At one point, after the failure of plans for a landing in Scotland in 1725, followed by news of a quarrel between James III and his queen, he was reported to have said that 'he has met with nothing but vexation since he undertook to concern himself with the 'chevalier''s affairs, but as he has begun with them he meant to go through with them, though he believed himself upon his decline, and that he should soon leave this troublesome world for an everlasting enjoyment of heaven. (Bennett, 'Tory Crisis', 289)' In 1728, exhausted by the apparent hopelessness of the Jacobite cause, and enraged at the way in which James himself had been deceiving him, he resigned. He was, in any case, an old and sick man. He even addressed himself to Walpole, indirectly, hoping for royal permission to return home to see his family, but the appeal fell on deaf ears. Having travelled to Montpellier, in order to put some distance between himself and the Jacobites, he arranged to meet Mary and William Morice there but, tragically, Mary arrived after a gruelling journey mortally ill. Atterbury returned to Paris a broken man. He died there, of a seizure, on 22 February 1732. His remains were conveyed back to England, to be buried beside those of his wife and two daughters in Westminster Abbey, though by royal command the funeral, on 22 May 1732, was a very private affair. Nor was Atterbury permitted the inscription he had himself composed for his tomb, a long account of the injustices he had undergone at Walpole's hands. His scapegrace son Osborne had at first followed in his father's footsteps at Westminster School and Christ Church, but had left university without a degree and, falling into debt, had become a merchant seaman. He eventually redeemed himself, was ordained a clergyman, and in 1746 became rector of a Warwickshire parish. 
Atterbury was neither a great theologian and scholar, nor an exemplar of Christian piety, though he was genuinely devout. As a writer and preacher he showed surface brilliance but no real depth; and his hot temper, quarrelsomeness, and vanity made him a very difficult man. Instead, he was the model of a political prelate, in an age when religion, and in particular relations between church and dissent, constituted the stuff of political debate. Indeed it is hard to distinguish his devotion to the Church of England from his party-political allegiance. That he should chiefly be remembered as an unsuccessful Jacobite conspirator and unhappy exile does less than justice to his achievements before 1714, when for fifteen years he was at the centre of ecclesiastical politics in England. More than anyone else he gave life and purpose to the high-church movement. His most poignant failure, therefore, was not the collapse of his schemes to restore the Stuarts, which in any case were the product of political desperation, but the previous failures of the high-church party: the inability of the convocation he had spent so much time, energy, and ink in trying to revive, to carry out the programme of reform for which he had hoped; and the inability of the tory politicians in 1714 to forestall the inception of the long whig ascendancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 872


Lewis Atterbury (1630/31-1693), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Elizabeth Giffard (died 1668). 


@@@@@


doc= 873


Atterbury, Lewis (1656-1731), Church of England clergyman, was born on 2 May 1656 at Caldecote, near Newport Pagnell in Buckinghamshire, the son of 
The elder Lewis Atterbury was the son of Francis Atterbury ('b'. 1603/4), rector of Middleton Malsor, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Alice ('c'.1628-1704). He matriculated at Oxford on 7 April 1647, at the age of sixteen; he was elected a student of Christ Church in 1648, graduated BA in 1650, and proceeded MA in 1652. He followed his father's example in conforming to the ecclesiastical requirements of the Commonwealth and protectorate, in his own case with evident eagerness: in 1654 he was rewarded with a lucrative living, Great Rissington in Gloucestershire, and three years later added to this the rectory of Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, which he held in plurality. At the Restoration he changed tack again, secured a doctorate in divinity from Oxford in 1660 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1664), and a place as chaplain to Henry, duke of Gloucester. But this orientation was not entirely successful: though keeping Milton Keynes he lost the more valuable rectory of Great Rissington and was denied any greater preferment than a prebendary's stall in Lincoln Cathedral, which came to him only in 1690. Going to law on almost any pretext became his consolation. He died on 7 December 1693 in a drowning accident near his home at Milton Keynes. He had published three sermons, including 'A Good Subject, or, The Right Test of Religion and Loyalty' (1684), which he had delivered at the Buckinghamshire assizes in 1684; and after the revolution of 1688 the retrospective 'Babylon's Downfall, or, England's Happy Deliverance from Popery and Slavery' (1691). He first preached the latter, a heavily apocalyptic reading of the events of 1688, at Milton Keynes on 17 February 1689, and was sufficiently pleased with it to repeat the performance at the London Guildhall in June 1691. 
Lewis Atterbury the younger was educated at Westminster School under the care of his father's friend Richard Busby. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1674. Having graduated BA in 1679 he was ordained deacon in the same year, proceeded MA in 1680, and a year later took priest's orders. His first step on the ladder of preferment came in 1684 when he was made chaplain to the mayor of London, Sir William Pritchard (who owned an estate in Buckinghamshire), and the following year he was given the rectory of Sywell in Northamptonshire. He strengthened his City contacts still further in December 1688, when he married Penelope ('b'. in or before 1665, died 1723), daughter of John Bedingfield and niece of Robert Bedingfield, a future mayor of London, and in 1691 Atterbury was appointed lecturer at St Mary-at-Hill, London. Evidently an absentee rector he settled at Highgate, officiating for the preacher at Highgate chapel, whom he eventually succeeded in 1695. 
To judge from the text of his printed sermons Atterbury was an accomplished, if not a rousing, performer in the pulpit: a safe choice as chaplain to the Princess Anne, whom he continued to serve in this capacity after her accession to the throne. In 1707 the queen granted him the rectory of Shepperton, Middlesex, after the deprivation of its nonjuring incumbent, but he does not seem ever to have been considered for any higher ecclesiastical dignity. Although probably a moderate tory, in so far as he displayed any partisan sympathies at all in his public life, he avoided controversy so successfully that he was continued as a royal chaplain under George I, while his high-flying younger brother Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, became a political pariah. Not surprisingly, perhaps, relations between the brothers cooled somewhat, the more so when in 1720 Lewis applied to Francis for episcopal recommendation to the deanery of Rochester, whose holder was mortally ill, and Francis refused, claiming to be pre-engaged to another and also suggesting that there was something 'indecent' in discussing the matter while the dean was still alive. Lewis bridled at the word 'indecent' but swallowed his disappointment. As long as his health remained he made a point of preaching every Sunday; in other respects, too, he was the picture of the solid and conscientious pastor, studying medicine in order to be able to relieve the Highgate poor of some of their earthly sufferings. 
After turning seventy Lewis became markedly feebler, and suffered a mild stroke, which necessitated frequent visits to Bath, where he died after a short illness on 20 October 1731. He was buried at Highgate chapel. His wife and four children (three sons and a daughter) had all predeceased him and, after his only granddaughter (who in any case did not survive him long), he made Francis's son Osborne Atterbury his heir. The bishop, now in exile, received $100, and there were small legacies to various charitable causes. The bulk of Atterbury's library went to Christ Church. During his lifetime he had published over twenty of his sermons (including a thanksgiving for the victory at Blenheim, in 1705, and another for the defeat of the Jacobite invasion attempt, in 1716), two devotional works translated from French, and items of anti-Catholic polemic, including a response (in 1709) to the Irish Catholic priest Cornelius Nary's 'True and modest account of the chief points of controversy between the Roman Catholics and the protestants', itself an attack on the writings of the late Archbishop John Tillotson. A selection of Atterbury's own manuscript sermons and papers was prepared for the press by Edward Yardley, archdeacon of Cardigan, and published in two volumes in 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 874


Atterbury, Luffman (1740-1796), composer and builder, was probably the son of Abraham and Elizabeth Atterbury who was baptized at St Sepulchre, London, on 5 January 1740. A carpenter and builder by trade, based at Turn Again Lane, Fleet Market, London, he acquired considerable proficiency in music, and when he was left well off by the death of his father he retired to Teddington to pursue this interest. Between 1778 and 1780 he obtained five prizes for catches and glees from the Catch Club. Many of his works appeared in E. T. Warren's 'Collection of Catches, Canons and Glees' (1763-94). 'Come let us all a-Maying' and 'Hot cross buns' enjoyed long popularity. He was appointed a musician-in-ordinary to George III, and was a performing member of the Madrigal Society. His oratorio 'Goliath' was performed at the Haymarket Theatre on 5 May 1773 and again at West Wycombe church on 13 August 1775 on the occasion of the burial of the heart of the satirist Paul Whitehead in the mausoleum, but it was not a success. 
In 1780 Atterbury was employed by Francis Dashwood, eleventh Baron Le Despencer, to build the rectory (later Mere House) at Mereworth, Kent, from the design of Nicholas Revett. This was Atterbury's only recorded new building. He also worked for Le Despencer in 1780 at Hall Place, Bexley, Kent. 
Atterbury sang in the chorus at the Handel commemoration in 1784, and in 1790 was one of the original members of the glee club at the Newcastle Coffee House, Castle Street, Strand. He published 'A Collection of Twelve Glees' in 1790 and on 25 September that year he married Elizabeth Ancell at St Martin-in-the-Fields. He was obliged, by improvidence, to move from Teddington to Marsham Street, Westminster, and to give concerts to improve his finances. In the middle of one of these concerts he died, on 11 June 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 875


Attersoll, William (d. 1640), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Tonbridge, Kent, and received his early education there. He matriculated from Peterhouse, Cambridge, in Michaelmas term 1579, graduated BA from Clare College early in 1583, and proceeded MA from Peterhouse in 1586. Ordained deacon and priest at Chichester on 6 October 1588, he became curate of Buxted, Sussex, the following year. About this time he married his first wife; initials on spoons willed to their sons indicated that her name began with A. From 1600 Attersoll was rector of Isfield, near Lewes, Sussex, where he had, or came to have, kin, and where his father was buried. 
Over a period of thirty years Attersoll published a number of lengthy and systematic works of biblical commentary and of exposition of fundamental doctrines dedicated to leading godly gentry in the county. 'The Badges of Christianity, or, A Treatise of the Sacraments' (1606) was dedicated to Sir Robert Shurley of Isfield, a signatory to the Sussex petition of 1604 for an educated, godly, and resident ministry. In a context where 'the adversaries of the grace of God as a pestilent brood of vipers mightily... increase and multiply' (dedication), Attersoll offered ten sermons on 'Corinthians', emphasizing the role of sacraments as seals and instruments of grace, but as appurtenances to the Word. As a 'corollary', evidently intended as a direct attack on Roman Catholic doctrine, he appended 'The principles of the Christian religion... to be learned before... [admittance] to the Lords Supper'. Both works subsequently appeared separately in amended and amplified versions. A series of commentaries on the book of 'Numbers' was inaugurated with 'The Pathway to Canaan' (1609), dedicated to Shurley and his wife, 'Dorothea'; as was characteristic of his work, it was prefaced by a table of the doctrines discussed in it. 'A continuation of the exposition of... Numbers, or, The historie of Balak the K. and Balaam the prophet' appeared the following year, dedicated to Sir Henry Fanshawe, a contemporary at Peterhouse. 'A Commentarie upon the Epistle of Paule to Philemon' (1612), dedicated to Sir Thomas Pelham of Halland, encompassed a discussion of 'oeconomicall, politicall and ecclesiasticall' duties running to 500 pages. In similar style, although over twice as long, was 'A commentarie upon the fourth booke of Moses... containing the foundation of the church and commonwealth of the Israelites' (1618), dedicated to Pelham's friend Sir Walter Covert of Slaugham and his wife, Jane. Covering the whole book of 'Numbers', it claimed that 'more than five hundred Theological Questions [were] decided and determined', treating 'dogmaticall', 'ceremoniall', and 'polemicall' matters such as the place of the sabbath, tithes, the relationship between magistrates and ministry, and controversy between the Church of England and the Church of Rome. Attersoll's line was conservative and orthodox: he chided discontent with governors set over the church by God, emphasized the high calling of the ministry, the importance of partaking of the sacraments, and the observance of comely order and reverence, and called for the excommunication of obstinate sinners. 
It was fourteen years before the appearance of Attersoll's next, and final, work, 'Three Treatises' (1632). In the first, 'The conversion of Nineveh', he described himself in the dedication to Sir John Rivers of Kent as 'being now in yeares, and... preparing for a nunc dimittis', but his message in this and in 'Gods Trumpet Sounding the Alarum' was a familiar one of faith and repentance, and of preaching as a means to effect these. 'Physicke against famine', dedicated to 'Dorothy', Lady Shurley, was an exhortation to godliness in a world that had little time for it. A second edition of this, and of the commentary on 'Philemon', was published the following year; 'The Principles of the Christian Religion' was reissued in 1635. 
Attersoll implied that he had spent the intervening years at least partly in the important work of teaching; he may also have had family preoccupations. By 17 July 1636, when he drew up his will, he had one surviving daughter, Mary -- wife successively of Nicholas Culpeper (died 1616) and of one Delve -- four sons, William, John, Thomas, and Samuel, and several grandchildren. His children's mother having died, he had married his second wife, also Mary, who herself had children and a granddaughter Mary Smith, 'the little child who hath oftimes refreshed me' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/183, fols. 187'r'-188'r'). At some point Attersoll seems to have assumed some responsibility, with his daughter, for the upbringing of her son, Nicholas Culpeper (1616-1654), the future physician and astrologer. According to Culpeper's biographer, Attersoll, disappointed in his hopes that his grandson would enter the ministry, and dismayed by his taste for astrology and occult philosophy, instead of settling his estate on the youth, as had been expected, left him a mere 40's'. While that was indeed the sum specified in Attersoll's will, and other grandchildren received $5, Attersoll, who was clearly not a rich man, had many potential heirs, and, on the biographer's own account, some time in the later 1630s spent $50 securing an apprenticeship for Culpeper with a London apothecary. Attersoll died in 1640, and was buried at Isfield on 30 May. 
Attersoll's will was proved on 25 June by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 876


William Attersoll (1590/91-1664), clergyman and ejected minister, who was born at Mayfield, Sussex. He attended Tonbridge School before matriculating from Peterhouse, Cambridge, in the Easter term of 1608. He graduated BA early in 1612, proceeded MA in 1615, and was ordained deacon in London, aged twenty-four, on 24 December that year, and priest in Chichester on 26 May 1616. Instituted in 1633 vicar of Laughton, Sussex, a living only a few miles from his father's, he was by 1653 rector of nearby East Hoathly. By this time he had married. In 1662 he was ejected from East Hoathly, his successor being instituted on 12 October. He was living in Burwash, in the same county, when, on 27 January 1664, he made a will which named his wife, Elizabeth, and son, William. He died soon afterwards, his will being proved on 5 May. His son, who graduated from Cambridge in 1673, was vicar of Bishopstone, also in Sussex, in 1679. 


@@@@@


doc= 877


Attwood, Thomas (1765-1838), composer and organist, was born on 23 November 1765, probably at 20 Eaton Street, Pimlico, Middlesex. He was the second of the six children of Thomas Attwood (died 1825), a coal merchant and musician who played trumpet, horn, and viola in the king's band, and his wife, Ann. At the age of nine he became a chorister in the Chapel Royal, where he received his earliest musical education from James Nares and Edmund Ayrton. Here he came to the attention of the prince of Wales, who invited him to perform at Buckingham House and, impressed by his musical talent, paid for him to continue his studies abroad. 
Between 1783 and 1785 Attwood studied in Naples under Felipe Cinque and Gaetano Latilla. In August 1785 he moved to Vienna, where he took lessons with Mozart. According to the not always reliable 'Reminiscences' of Michael Kelly, Mozart thought highly of him, remarking that 'Attwood is a young man for whom I have a sincere affection and esteem; he conducts himself with great propriety, and I feel much pleasure in telling you, that he partakes more of my style than any scholar I ever had; and I predict that he will prove a sound musician. (Kelly, 228)' His harmony and counterpoint exercises, annotated with Mozart's model examples and corrections, provide a unique insight into the latter's activities as a teacher. Attwood's warm relationship with Mozart and his family at this time is attested by a letter of 5 February 1821 to him from Mozart's widow, Constanze, in which she remembered with affection their former acquaintance in Vienna and assured him of her continued friendship. 
During his time in Vienna Attwood was part of a group of English-speaking musicians that included the composer Stephen Storace, his sister Ann, or Nancy, as she was generally known (the first Susanna in Mozart's 'Le nozze di Figaro'), and Michael Kelly (the first Don Basilio and Curzio). When he returned to London in March 1787, three weeks after leaving Vienna, it was in the company of the Storaces. 
Attwood quickly resumed his musical career in London and renewed his connections with the royal family. He was briefly one of the chamber musicians of the prince of Wales until the prince's perilous finances obliged him to dismiss his private band. He was appointed music teacher to Princess Frederika of Prussia in December 1791 following her marriage to the duke of York. Similarly, he became the teacher of Princess Caroline following her marriage to the prince of Wales in April 1795. Both of these appointments are said to have been far from sinecures and to have taken a good deal of his time. According to Attwood's lengthy obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1838, vol. 9), his association with Princess Caroline cost him dearly, for after her estrangement from the prince of Wales the prince 'lost sight of him' and did not renew his patronage until after his coronation as George IV in July 1821. 
Attwood also pursued his career outside the court. Soon after his return to England he had become deputy organist to F. C. Rheinhold at the church of St George the Martyr, Queen Square, Bloomsbury. This was a relatively insignificant appointment. The possibility of a more important position arose from the death on 17 February 1796 of John Jones, who simultaneously held the posts of organist of the Charterhouse, St Paul's Cathedral, and the Inner Temple. According to his friend and colleague R. J. S. Stevens, who had the information from Attwood himself, Attwood's first ambition was for the Charterhouse position. He expressed his interest to the prince of Wales, who after making some enquiries informed him that 'he was sorry he could not assist him in his application for the Charterhouse Organ, for that Stevens, Lord Thurlow's man, would undoubtedly have the place'. Stevens, who had been Jones's deputy at the Charterhouse, was duly appointed, but Attwood was shortly afterwards appointed to St Paul's, despite being apparently an organist of only very modest abilities. He held this position until his death. On the death of Thomas Sanders Dupuis later in 1796 he succeeded him as composer to the Chapel Royal. 
Attwood composed a good deal of Anglican church music, including three morning and evening services, eighteen anthems, and numerous psalm tunes, chants, responses, and hymns. In many of these Mozart's influence can be discerned. His anthem 'Turn thy face from my sins' (1835) and his hymn 'Come holy ghost' (1831) remain in the repertories of cathedral and church choirs at the end of the twentieth century. His most ambitious compositions for the church were the anthems with orchestral accompaniment written for the coronations of George IV and William IV. The 'Magnificat' and 'Nunc dimittis' from his evening service in F of 1796 were used at the funeral of Lord Nelson in 1805 and at Attwood's own funeral. 
For a time, principally in the 1790s, Attwood pursued an active career as a theatre musician and was responsible for part or all of the music for more than thirty productions, largely pasticcios or afterpieces. In his own contributions to these pieces the effect of Mozart's teaching can again be heard. Many of them also contain Mozart's own music, adapted to English words: a notable example is the appearance in 'The Prisoner' (1792) of the aria 'Non piu andrai' from 'Le nozze di Figaro'. The composer was probably the Attwood who appears in the manuscript account books of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, as having been paid $28 15's'. on 29 October 1792 and $33 4's'. 4died on 5 May 1794 for copying music parts and for 'attendance' at the theatre. He was the house composer at Covent Garden in the 1798-9 and 1799-1800 seasons, for which he was paid $6 per week. After 1801 his involvement with the theatres declined as his commitment to other forms of music increased. 
Attwood was active in London concert life. Shortly after his return to England he was involved with J. B. Cramer and Muzio Clementi in performances of Mozart's piano concertos and chamber music at the semi-private concerts of the Anacreontic Society. In 1789-90 he was pianist at the oratorio concerts at Drury Lane, and on 25 March 1790 he played a piano concerto of his own composition there. Two sets of his piano trios were published in 1787 and 1791; in their idiom and in the independent writing for the violin and cello they show an unmistakable debt to similar works by Mozart. 
On 9 July 1793 Attwood married Mary Denton, the only daughter of Matthew Denton of Stotfold, Bedfordshire, at St John-at-Wapping. They had five sons and a daughter. His wife and four of his children survived him. 
In addition to his commitments at St Paul's, at court, and in the theatre, Attwood also found time for private instrumental teaching of a relatively lowly nature. Stevens records that Attwood took over his pupils at Mrs Ray's school, Streatham, in 1800, and his private pupils in 1805. In his leisure hours he was active in the glee clubs, which provided opportunities for dining and sociable singing in the company of his fellow musicians. He was a member of the Harmonists' Society, where he was for many years Stevens's deputy as conductor, and of the Concentores Sodales. 
Attwood was admitted as a member of the Royal Society of Musicians on 7 June 1789. He was a member of the court of assistants in 1813, 1814, and 1821, and a governor in 1821. He was one of the thirty original members of the Philharmonic Society on its foundation in 1813, a director from 1816 to 1820 and from 1824 to 1832, and treasurer in 1820. For many years he directed one Philharmonic Society concert every season; included in his programmes were the last five symphonies of Mozart and the first English performance of Beethoven's fifth symphony. He was one of the first professors at the Royal Academy of Music at its foundation in 1823. 
Attwood's fortunes at court revived in 1821. For the coronation of George IV he had written an anthem, 'The king shall rejoice'. This brought him once again to the notice of the king, who subsequently appointed him organist to his private chapel at the Brighton Pavilion, a position described in his obituary as 'a post of honour, as leading to frequent intercourse with royalty, but unaccompanied by profit, the expenses attending it far exceeding the amount of the salary'. On the death of his father in 1825 he succeeded him as musician in ordinary to the king. In 1836 he succeeded Stafford Smith as organist of the Chapel Royal. He wrote a further anthem ('O Lord grant the king a long life') for the coronation of William IV in 1831, and is said to have left a third, commissioned for the coronation of Victoria, unfinished at his death. 
Attwood was a genial and sociable man with a wide circle of friends. In later life he was a close friend of Mendelssohn, who during his first visit to Britain in 1829 convalesced at Attwood's home in Norwood following an accident, and stayed with him there on a number of subsequent occasions. Mendelssohn's capriccio in E minor, op. 16 no. 2, was composed at Norwood during his 1829 stay, and his three preludes and fugues, op. 37, are dedicated to Attwood 'with reverence and gratitude'. Among Attwood's many pupils were John Goss, George Bridgetower, Cipriani Potter, and his godson Thomas Attwood Walmisley, who published 'Attwood's Cathedral Music', a memorial collection of his church music compositions, in 1852. 
Attwood died at his house at 17 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, on 24 March 1838. Shortly after Christmas 1837 he had been 'attacked by a malady which required prompt treatment; but, unhappily for his family and friends, his predilection for a new system of medicine prevented his having recourse to sanctioned remedies, till his disease had attained the mastery, and his case had become hopeless. ('GM')' His funeral was at St Paul's Cathedral on 31 March 1838 and was attended by members of the cathedral choir, the gentlemen and children of the Chapel Royal, part of the choir of Westminster Abbey, and a considerable number of pupils and friends. The large attendance indicates the esteem and affection in which he was held. According to his obituary, 'only those personally acquainted with him could form a perfect estimate of his private character. Affectionate to his family, faithful to his friends, benevolent to all, and honourable in every transaction of life, he was no less to be valued as a member of society than as an artist who did honour to the country of his birth. (ibid., 551)' He was buried in St Paul's, close to the organ, where a memorial tablet was later erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 878


Attwood, Thomas (1783-1856), politician and currency theorist, was born on 6 October 1783 at Hawne House, near Halesowen, Shropshire, the third son and fifth child of Matthias Attwood (1746-1836), banker, and his wife, Ann Adams (1752-1835), the daughter of Thomas Adams of Cakemore, near Halesowen, a yeoman farmer. Charles Attwood, the ironmaster, was among his siblings. 
The Attwood family was heavily involved in promoting the industrialization of the region around Birmingham. Thomas's grandfather George Attwood began mining the iron ore deposits of Halesowen in the middle of the eighteenth century, and opened the Corngreaves steel furnaces in 1771. By 1797 he had also opened a steel mill and a copper and rolling mill in Birmingham and he left a flourishing business to his sons Matthias and James on his death in 1817. Matthias, Thomas's father, bought the mineral rights to a 250 acre estate, close to Hawne, and a further estate of 175 acres in 1806. The Attwood family concerns flourished in the expansion of trade and industry in the west midlands in the last quarter of the eighteenth century. Using capital built on the profits of the iron trade, Matthias opened a bank in Birmingham in 1791, in partnership with Issac Spooner, who drew his capital from a similar series of concerns. After attending the free school in Halesowen and later the Wolverhampton grammar school, Thomas entered the family bank in New Street, Birmingham, in 1799. His personal position, within an already wealthy family, was consolidated on 12 May 1806, when he married Elizabeth Carless (1784/5-1840), who brought with her a marriage settlement of around $20,000. 
By 1811 Thomas Attwood, at only twenty-eight, had gained sufficient local recognition to be appointed high bailiff, the highest office of local government then available in the unincorporated town of Birmingham. In 1812 the town's major markets were threatened by the orders in council which placed an embargo on trade with America and parts of Europe. Attwood led a successful local movement to revoke the orders, and headed a deputation to London which gave evidence to a select committee of the House of Commons. To mark his central contribution to this movement, and its importance for the trade of the town, the artisans of Birmingham raised $300 and presented him with an engraved silver plate. 
Despite this early and positive contact with the working population of the town, there was little in his professed opinions in these years to suggest the radical positions Attwood would later adopt. His political background was that of a 'church and king' tory and he displayed a corresponding mistrust of the growing popular movement for political reform. In 1810, during a period of food rioting in the town, he confided in a letter to his wife that 'there is no knowing what a parcel of hungry Burdettites may take into their heads' (Wakefield, 21). In 1822 he refused an invitation to join a celebratory dinner in the town to mark the release of the radical journalist T. J. Wooler from Warwick gaol because he felt that the popular radical commitment to universal suffrage 'would necessarily lead to the right of sitting in Parliament without the qualification of property'. Nevertheless, by the 1820s Attwood, along with many members of the urban elite at the time, came to recognize the need for a reform of parliament that would extend the franchise to men of the middle class. The lack of direct representation for large and growing towns such as Birmingham, Manchester, and Leeds was widely seen to signal the exclusion of the industrial interest from the deliberations of Westminster. For Attwood this was particularly expressed by the unwillingness of Lord Liverpool's government to heed his advice in currency matters in a period which experienced periods of severe distress. In 1816 he wrote the first of a series of pamphlets on the subject of currency reform, 'The Remedy, or, Thoughts on the Present Distress'. This dealt with the relationship between production, prosperity, and the ready availability of paper money. Over the next three years he published a total of seven pamphlets on the subject. Following the suspension of cash payments in 1797 the issue of the money supply had become a topic of great controversy. Attwood argued an underconsumptionist case: that the lack of available money limited the purchasing power of the population and that this, in turn, artificially limited levels of production. Unlike Malthus, he took the view that the system of production could always be expanded to meet the current need, but that this was possible only with a paper-based currency which could be augmented by a government issue at appropriate moments. He was condemned at the time as a 'currency crank' by Francis Place, and his economic theories have led to his being seen as a 'crude inflationist'. Nevertheless, this approach to economics enabled him to adopt a political position from which to argue convincingly for a cross-class alliance between employers and workers for political reform. Both groups, he argued, stood to gain from a high-profit/high-wage economy, but a government of landowners would not take the necessary steps. 
In 1827 Attwood was part of a committee of leading local men formed to support Tennyson's private member's bill to transfer the parliamentary representation from the rotten borough of East Retford to Birmingham. The failure of this gentlemanly initiative and the success of O'Connell's popular Catholic Association in pushing through Roman Catholic emancipation in 1828, convinced Attwood that widespread support for both currency reform and limited parliamentary reform might be tapped by an effectively organized popular campaign. On 25 January 1830, at a public meeting at Beardsworth's Repository attended by between 10,000 and 20,000 people, he launched the Birmingham Political Union (BPU). From the start the union's political programme was ill defined, beyond a general commitment to wider representation for the industrial interest. Nevertheless, Attwood was clear that its programme would not include universal suffrage or annual parliaments (though he was persuaded, in December 1830, to include the secret ballot as an objective). By August 1830 membership stood at only 6000 -- far from his stated aim to mobilize 'two millions of people to think, speak and act as one man'. But the fall of Wellington's government in November 1830, and the advent of the whig government of Earl Grey committed to introducing a reform bill, gave the BPU the political programme and the impetus that it had previously lacked. Attwood now became, in Place's words, 'the most influential man in England' (Brock, 62). Through his role as leader of the BPU he now led the extraparliamentary support for the parliamentary endeavours of the whigs. Aware that many of the union's working-class supporters wished to go beyond the limited objectives of the projected whig legislation, Attwood was careful to stress the common interests of employers and employees. At this time in his speeches he constantly referred to the 'industrious classes'. This was a common enough term in the radical lexicon at the time, but Attwood used it to include 'productive capital' in the same class as 'productive labour'. As he put it, 'the interests of masters and men are, in fact one. If the masters flourish the men flourish with them; and if the masters suffer difficulties their difficulties must shortly affect the workmen in a threefold degree' (Briggs, 191). Nevertheless, he was careful to ensure that the leading political council of the union was made up exclusively of middle-class men. As he explained in later years, 'there is no instance in history in which political movements have been successful without leaders and in almost every instance those leaders have been men of wealth and influence' (Behagg, 75). 
This strategy was remarkably effective both in Birmingham and in the many towns throughout the country which established political unions along Birmingham lines. Through 1831 and 1832 Attwood regularly addressed open-air reform meetings of between 50,000 and 200,000 people. At these he proved himself an effective platform orator, often making contact with his audiences by use of violent imagery. The use of the 'rhetoric of violence', or what Attwood himself referred to as 'wholesome violence', was a radical strategy established by a line of platform orators from Henry Hunt onwards, through which the people's right to resort to defensive violence was invoked. In November, following the rejection of the 'Reform Bill' by the Lords and riots in Bristol, Nottingham, and Derby, Attwood announced that the BPU was to arm itself as a sort of 'national guard'. The scheme was abandoned when declared illegal by royal proclamation, but the scene was set for the 'Days of May' in 1832, when a refashioned 'Reform Bill', passed by the Commons, was to come before the Lords. At a meeting at Newhall Hill, just outside Birmingham, in May 1832, Attwood announced to a cheering crowd of 200,000 that 'I would rather die than see the great bill of reform rejected or mutilated' (Wakefield, 201). Two days later Grey resigned when the king refused to create the whig peers needed to push the bill through the Lords. With the expectation that Wellington would become prime minister, and rumours that a warrant was already issued for Attwood's arrest, all work ceased in Birmingham and 100,000 people gathered spontaneously at Newhall Hill to hear Attwood declare Wellington's 'incompetency to govern' and invoke the 'right to arm' from the 'Bill of Rights' (Wakefield, 207, 209). Over the next, tense, days Attwood's house was guarded by armed men. In the event Wellington stood down and the bill was pushed through to become law in June 1832. 
'King Tom', as Attwood was dubbed by Cobbett, was the obvious choice as one of the new borough's first members of parliament, alongside the merchant Joshua Scholefield, another BPU activist; they were returned unopposed, and Attwood topped the poll at the subsequent contested elections of 1835 and 1837. Yet entry to parliament was profoundly disillusioning for Attwood. The focus of power had not moved to 'productive capital', and he soon found that addressing a hostile House of Commons, without party affiliations, was a very different experience from BPU oratory. Nor was there a sympathetic reception for his currency theories; the prolixity of his speeches will have alienated many. His disappointment was shared by his working-class supporters and the BPU broke up acrimoniously in June 1834. 
Attwood was, however, behind a move to revive the union in 1837, this time to petition for the award of a charter of incorporation for the town under the provisions of the 'Municipal Corporations Act' of 1835. Attwood saw a future town council as a permanent and official version of the old BPU. There was a good deal of local tory opposition to the move, and Attwood saw that an 1832-style alliance between the working class and that section of middle-class opinion which supported him would be powerful enough to carry the measure. A revamped BPU was launched in May 1837, ostensibly to consider the declining state of trade. At this point, while conceding that further reform of parliament might be necessary, Attwood would not be committed beyond a call for household suffrage. Without an acceptance of universal suffrage, however, working people would not now join the BPU. In October 1837 Attwood spoke to a town's meeting on incorporation which attracted a mere 2500 people. In January 1838 he declared his conversion to universal suffrage, adding, 'and if ever I uttered a word against it I now altogether retract it' (Behagg, 74). Working people now joined the union in their thousands, and on the back of this support a successful petition for incorporation was submitted to the privy council, which ensured that Birmingham was declared an incorporated borough. The town's first council was elected in November 1838, when BPU candidates swept the board. 
As a convert to universal manhood suffrage, at the head of the revived BPU, Attwood now found himself welcomed wholeheartedly into the arms of the developing Chartist movement. The public respect paid to him by radicals such as Feargus O'Connor was real enough since he was seen in popular memory as the man who had successfully confronted the duke of Wellington in May 1832. On 21 May 1838 he joined representatives of the anti-poor law movement from Lancashire and Yorkshire, and of the London Working Men's Association, to speak at a mass rally in Glasgow. Here the idea of a national petition was floated. The petition would endorse the six points of the 'People's Charter' drawn up the year before: universal manhood suffrage, annual parliaments, vote by ballot, the creation of equal electoral districts, the payment of wages for members of parliament, and the abolition of the property qualification. This petition would be drawn up by delegates from the regions, who would meet in London as a national Chartist convention. Attwood would then present the petition to the House of Commons. By this stage he had accepted the one point of the 'Charter' about which he had continued to express doubts: that equal electoral districts would distort representation in favour of Ireland. 
The Chartist movement grew in the summer of 1838. Attwood and O'Connor spoke on the same platform to a meeting of 150,000 people at Newhall Hill in August that year. Here they launched the local campaign to collect signatures for the petition and elect delegates to the Chartist convention. At this meeting both O'Connor and Attwood spoke of the importance of peaceful petitioning to achieve the 'Charter', but both also invoked the people's right to self-defence. As Attwood put it, 'No blood shall be shed by us; but if our enemies shed blood -- if they attack the people -- they must take the consequences on their own heads' (Behagg, 76). For Attwood this was a return to the platform oratory, and the strategy of 'wholesome violence', that had been so effective in the 'Reform Bill' campaign. This time, however, there were problems. Local working-class Chartists objected to the exclusively middle-class membership of the BPU's governing political council and pushed through the election of working men. Having attended some of the Chartist convention's meetings in London, early in 1839, the middle-class delegates from Birmingham resigned 'en bloc', arguing that physical force was being advocated. When Attwood came to present the national petition to the House of Commons, on 14 June 1839, he found himself in a difficult position. Chartism was a very different political movement from the earlier agitation for the 'Reform Bill'. The middle-class voice was not heard with the same authority and the unity of interests between employers and employees, so long the basis of Attwood's political creed, was not always accepted by working-class Chartists, many of them trade unionists. He had always been a reluctant convert to universal suffrage, arguing pragmatically that it was the only strategy that would ensure mass support. Besides this, the convention debated his currency theories and rejected them, a point that was raised, to his embarrassment, in the House of Commons during the debate on the national petition. His speech on this occasion fell short of unqualified support for Chartism. He endorsed the six points, but made it clear that he washed his hands 'of any talk of physical force or arms' (Wakefield, 348). 
The rejection of the petition by the House of Commons was followed by two weeks of rioting in Birmingham in July 1839. The responsibility for public order locally now fell to a number of the middle-class BPU members, who had been elected to the town council in November 1838, and who had resigned from the Chartist convention by April 1839. With its working-class rank and file disaffected, and its middle-class leadership diverted into municipal politics, the BPU now faded away. Attwood's disillusionment with parliamentary politics was now compounded by his disappointment with popular politics. In December 1839, with his health failing, he announced his retirement from Westminster. He spent the next year in Jersey attempting to recover, but on 26 April 1840 suffered the loss of his wife after a prolonged illness. The following year he discovered that the family bank, under the management of his brother George, had run up debts to the value of $12,000. With the business dissolved to pay the debt Attwood now withdrew to Harborne, Warwickshire, his home since 1823. In August 1843 he was briefly enticed from his lonely retirement in a last attempt to unite the 'industrious classes'. His National Union or General Confederation of All Classes aimed to draw attention to the underlying causes of the current economic distress. The initiative had failed by November 1843, its non-political stance alienating the local Chartist groups for whom acceptance of the 'Charter' had become the touchstone for their support of any organization. 
On 30 June 1844, at the age of sixty, Attwood married Elizabeth Grice, who had been a family friend for some years. By this stage he was still suffering financial difficulties and the first stages of what was probably Parkinson's disease. In 1848 the couple moved to the village of Allesley, but Attwood's condition was deteriorating. In 1855 he moved to Ellerslie, Great Malvern, to attend a clinic run by a Dr Johnson, where he remained until his death on 6 March 1856. He was buried in Hanley churchyard in Upton upon Severn. His second wife survived him. 
By the time of his death Attwood's fame of the 1830s had receded. It proved difficult to collect the $800 necessary to raise a memorial to him in Birmingham, but on 7 June 1858 a statue was unveiled in Stephenson Place with an inscription which recalled his role as the BPU's founder. He was largely ignored by historians for another century, but then a growing interest in radical movements and their manifestations in the localities drew attention to his achievements in this field. Research by Asa Briggs and a biographical study by G. D. H. Cole led the way to an authoritative biography by David Moss in 1990. Historians have acknowledged Attwood's role as a leader of the new industrial middle class in the growing industrial towns, seeking its place in a society still dominated by landed wealth and political influence. His leadership of the extraparliamentary reform movement in 1830-32 is widely recognized, though its impact on the passage of the 'Reform Act' remains debatable. The notion that his currency ideas were eccentric has been challenged in the wake of Keynesian economics. Nevertheless, Attwood's enduring significance lies in his role as a middle-class man who became a platform agitator at a time of significant economic and social change. 


@@@@@


doc= 879


Atwater, William (d. 1521), bishop of Lincoln, was born probably in 1450 (perhaps ten years earlier), in Somerset. He is connected with Cannington and may have had relatives in Wells. After proceeding to his BA and MA at Oxford by 1476 and to his ordination to the priesthood a year before, he became a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1477 and subsequently served as bursar. He was elected to a fellowship at Eton in July 1482, a turning point in his career. He began to acquire benefices which included a canonry of Wells in 1498 and of St George's Chapel, Windsor, in 1504. He became dean of Salisbury in 1509 as well as a canon of Lincoln and archdeacon of Huntingdon -- all appointments which signalled him for special promotion. They and many other benefices allowed him to pursue scholarly interests and both university and royal service. 
While at Eton, he attracted the notice of William Horman who dedicated his 'Vulgaria', printed by Pynson in 1519, to him. He returned to Oxford in 1489 and became a DD in 1493. He was a commissary of the university, first for Archbishop John Morton of Canterbury in 1497, and subsequently for Bishop William Smith of Lincoln. He served as chancellor of the university intermittently from 1500 to 1503. He gathered together a library, a few volumes of which survive in Brasenose College; it does not suggest he was a humanist, since he knew no Greek, and these books are those of a committed if unadventurous Oxford theologian. His annotations suggest a love for the subject: thus he contrasts theology with the law which goes bad ('vilescerent') on its students. He was known to be a friend of John Gunthorpe and was certainly known to Dean John Colet. More importantly, he was a friend of Thomas Wolsey who probably, with Smith, engineered his move to Henry VII's court: in 1508 he became Dean of the Chapel Royal, and appeared at the court of requests and at significant royal occasions like the funeral of Henry VII and the coronation of Henry VIII. 
Atwater's friendship with Wolsey almost certainly accounts for his elevation to the see of Lincoln by papal bulls of 15 September 1514. He belonged to a group of Wolsey's episcopal proteges who were known for diligence but who were never powerful enough to pose a threat to the cardinal. When appointed, he was in late middle age, and though he was a hard-working administrator, described by Smith as having academic merit and 'industry', he was not prominent at court and was unknown internationally. Yet he was one of several remarkable bishops at this time who, unusually, exercised their ministry by residing mainly in their dioceses. Atwater did not delegate extensively, and is to be found riding the length and breadth of his diocese visiting the clergy and religious, and presiding over his court of audience, either locally or at his favourite manors of Liddington in Rutland, Buckden in Huntingdonshire, and Wooburn in Buckinghamshire. He was punctilious in calling to account those who were not resident in their benefices, requiring appropriate dispensations to be shown; he pursued (somewhat unsuccessfully) priests who found celibacy beyond them, as well as religious who neglected the rule of their order. His activities predate the criticism of the church by Martin Luther in Germany, but suggest a sympathy for the reform envisioned by Colet, Erasmus, and Thomas More, though there is no evidence of close friendship between them. Recent scholarship has highlighted the importance of those bishops who started to reform their dioceses before the English Reformation. Atwater was among the first of these and one of the least known. 
Atwater died at Wooburn in Buckinghamshire on 4 February 1521, and his body was buried in the nave of the cathedral church of Lincoln. The tomb and brass have been destroyed; the record of Atwater's visitations and episcopal activity appropriately survive him. 


@@@@@


doc= 880


Attwell, Hugh (c.1597-1621), actor, was possibly the son of George Attwell, who served as a clown and wrote jigs for Philip Henslowe and the Admiral's Men, one of the two leading adult companies, dying in 1598. Hugh Attwell, if he was George's son, must have been conceived not long before his father died, because he would have been aged ten or eleven when he began as a boy player, probably about 1608, in the Queen's Revels company at the Blackfriars and later the Whitefriars hall playhouses. He is noted in a copy of Jonson's folio edition of his plays in 1616 as taking the role of Sir Amorous La Foole in 'Epicene', first staged at the end of 1609, a fairly mature comic role. The fact that a note in the Jonson folio recorded his name and only one other suggests that he was the most memorable performer in that play. It was La Foole's lines about the prince of Moldavia that got the play banned in February 1610. 
When the boy company was dissolved in 1610 or 1611, Attwell went into the new Lady Elizabeth's Men, a mixture of the ex-boy players and a few adult players from other groups, including his fellow boy star in 'Epicene', the writer William Barksted -- who played the leading gull Morose in that play against Attwell's gallant -- Joseph Taylor, and Nathan Field. The Lady Elizabeth's company merged with Prince Charles's Men in 1615. Nothing much is known about their repertoire of plays, nor what kinds of role Attwell might have played in them, although his role as Sir Amorous suggests that he was elegant and well-spoken, a view confirmed by his fellow player Will Rowley in his elegy written at Attwell's early death in 1621. The same elegy describes him as a 'little man' (Bentley, 2.352). 
The merged company performed at the old Curtain playhouse, as the fourth and least reputable of the companies then trying to make a living in London. The Curtain did not please them. In January 1616 Attwell and six others signed a letter to Edward Alleyn asking for a better playhouse and a loan to keep them going. In 1617, however, their fortunes improved. They took the place of Queen Anne's Men at the Red Bull, one of the two leading amphitheatres, controlled by Christopher Beeston, who was starting his great career as an impresario. In 1619 Beeston gave them a fresh impetus by transferring them to his hall playhouse, the Cockpit, already the chief rival to the King's Men's Blackfriars. They performed at least once at court, playing Thomas Middleton and Samuel Rowley's 'A Fair Quarrell', and Attwell performed with others from the company in a masque, Middleton's 'Masque of Heroes', for the Inner Temple at the beginning of 1619. Otherwise, the records of Attwell's activities as a player are few. 
When he was in his early twenties, on 4 May 1618, Attwell married Mary Partridge, a widow, in Stepney. No child is recorded of his marriage, which happened half-way through the six-year struggle against the debilitating illness of which he died on 25 September 1621. His fellow actor, the clown and writer William Rowley, wrote a verse epitaph which asked: '
But did he not play fair? Held he not out 

With courage beyond his bone? Full six years 

To wrestle and tug with Death! 

' Rowley's celebration concluded 'His heart a Saint's, his tongue a silver bell', and described his voice as having: '
Mongst living Princes... sweetly sung, 

(While they have sung his praise). 
(Bentley, 2.352)' 



@@@@@


doc= 881


Atwood, George (bap. 1745, d. 1807), mathematician, was baptized at St Clement Danes, Westminster, London, on 15 October 1745, the son of Thomas Atwood, the parish curate, and his wife, Isabella Sells of Inglesham, Wiltshire. He was apparently the eldest son, with at least two younger brothers: James, who followed him to Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge, and subsequently became East India Company chaplain in Madras, and Thomas, who after schooling at Westminster eventually succeeded his father as curate at St Margaret's, Westminster. George entered Westminster School as king's scholar in 1759, became captain of the school in 1764, entered Trinity College as a pensioner on 5 June 1765, and was elected a scholar on 2 May 1766. He graduated in 1769 as third wrangler and first Smith's prizeman, gained a fellowship in October 1770, proceeded MA in 1772, and became tutor the next year. 
Atwood then took an active part in reviving natural philosophy teaching in Cambridge. On 13 June 1776 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In that year the Cambridge natural philosophy professor Anthony Shepherd finally ceased his rather desultory triennial lectures, and reform proposals by the radical mathematician John Jebb for overhauling teaching were defeated. In November 1776 Atwood published a description of a regular lecture course he had started in the observatory over the great gate of his college, to whose master the pamphlet was dedicated. He demonstrated elementary mechanics and hydrostatics with pulleys, pendulums, and air-pumps, as well as electricity, magnetism, and optics, including Leonhard Euler's principles of achromatic lenses. He also taught astronomy, mentioning recent surveys of the earth's density by the mathematician Charles Hutton and the astronomer royal Nevil Maskelyne, plus Maskelyne's favoured lunar method for longitude. The lectures drew large audiences, including William Pitt, and complemented the reform of 1779 that overhauled the Senate House examination and highlighted mathematical expertise. In November 1779 Atwood gave up his tutorship and sent a copy of his course description to Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society, as part of an unsuccessful bid for the remunerative secretaryship of the board of longitude. 
Atwood's reputation spread beyond his university, principally because of his design of a pulley machine to demonstrate motions of bodies under constant forces. Built by the London instrument maker George Adams the younger, it consisted of a 6 foot column carrying conical pivots for two pairs of brass wheel-bearings to minimize friction at a brass pulley. On the pulley ran a long silk cord, at each end of which was a stack of weights. Fitted to the column was a pendulum clock, and set behind the cord was a rule with movable stops, one to terminate the weights' fall, the other to remove weights instantaneously from the stack as it fell. Demonstrations showed the proportionality of impressed force and change of motion, the innate passivity of matter, and the behaviour of bodies in collision. The first public account of Atwood's machine was published in French in 1780 by Adams's colleague Jean Hyacinthe de Magellan, who dispatched machines to Spain and in the spring of 1781 to Pavia University, where his client was Alessandro Volta, the new natural philosophy professor. Magellan complained of Atwood's delay in printing a description, and in 1781 the mathematics professor Gregorio Fontana, a colleague of Volta's at Pavia, instead adapted Atwood's course outline into Italian, adding sections on mechanics and the treatment of observational errors. In the summer of 1781 Atwood himself sent the Royal Society methods for correcting sightings through sextant mirrors, and commended this work to Banks as an example of the practical application of abstruse geometry. 
Atwood became an increasingly public figure in London. In the autumn of 1783 he supported an abortive attack on Banks's Royal Society regime by Hutton, Maskelyne, and other mathematicians. In the spring of 1784 he at last published two accounts of his lectures and machine. One was a lengthier version of his course outline with treatment of his demonstration equipment and new remarks on collision, thermometry, and lightning rods. The other was a treatise published by the university press that based discussions of impact and simple harmonic motion on elementary mechanics, criticized past scientific reliance on conservation principles, then gave a long account and fine picture of his machine. Atwood insisted that geometrical mechanics could be made consistent with practical engineering. In such cases, especially the work on water-wheels by the engineer John Smeaton in 1776, Atwood used estimates of friction to reconcile academic and field trials. He also discussed work by the gunner Benjamin Robins on projectile velocities and by the Scottish natural philosopher Joseph Black on latent heat and fixed air in bodies' cohesion. Atwood's publications helped him to a post in London: in February 1784 his former student Pitt was elected for Cambridge University, and as prime minister soon offered him a lucrative appointment in the customs at $500 per year. 
During the 1790s Atwood's machine was widely distributed by London instrument makers to virtuosi and lecturers, while its inventor contributed papers to the Royal Society on the pressing problems of horology and navigation. In each case he relied on comparisons between his own geometrical analysis and scale models of complex artefacts. Maskelyne's tests of marine clocks at the board of longitude provided almost frictionless devices compatible with Atwood's rational mechanics. In 1793-4 Atwood worked with the leading clockmaker Thomas Earnshaw to compare his mathematics of cylindrical balances with the spring-driven watches made by Larcum Kendall, which James Cook had taken on his Pacific voyages. In early 1796 he published a long paper on stable and unstable equilibria in floating bodies, discussed and criticized Euler's work on the problem because it ignored ship displacement through large angles, and repeated that resistance to motion could not be assumed to be proportional to the square of ships' speeds. He won the Royal Society's Copley medal for this essay, then followed it in early 1798 with another lengthy study on ship stability, in which his mathematics of flotation was compared with the performance of an East India Company vessel built by the naval architects Randall and Brent. Atwood also worked on excise problems. In 1790 he was made inspector of tontine certificates, and during violent wartime struggles over corn prices in 1800-01 he compiled a vast survey of the assize of bread, the system of price regulation in force since the thirteenth century, including trials of the grain quantity in standard loaves, and of data on bakers' profits, designed to support the tory government's new policy on price regulation. It was said that this intense work and calculation had broken Atwood's health. 
Atwood's last public commission was prompted in April 1801 by a parliamentary enquiry into Thomas Telford's scheme for a single span 600 foot cast-iron bridge across the Thames at Blackfriars. A select committee sent queries to Maskelyne, Hutton, Atwood, and others, and the inconclusive report based on their replies appeared in June 1801. Atwood consulted Telford on bridge loading and in the same year independently issued his own views, with rules for calculating arch thrust based on the assumption that the bridge was made of hard, rigid, separable wedges. He ignored friction, which he reckoned could only increase bridge stability. In a supplement finished in late 1803 and printed the next year, Atwood compared his calculations with a model made by Berge, a London mechanic, using pulleys to estimate bridge thrust. Hutton, who issued his own report, charged that bridge work was obviously a new topic for Atwood, that the Cambridge mathematician claimed results already well known to engineers as his own, and that Atwood's report was a sign of failing powers. Atwood died, unmarried, in Westminster at the age of sixty-one, and was buried at St Margaret's, where his brother was curate, on 11 July 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 882


Atwood, John (1643-1712), Dominican friar, was born in Warwickshire. His mother's maiden name was Pitts, a name he adopted later as an alias. He was a pupil at St Omer in the Spanish Netherlands, in the Jesuit college founded by Father Robert Persons for the education of English Catholic youths. He entered the Dominican order and was professed at the English Dominican priory at Bornhem, near Antwerp, on 4 February 1664. Having completed his studies in philosophy he went on to Louvain to study theology in 1666. He was ordained priest in May 1669 and returned to Bornhem until 1673. In that year he was working in London, where he remained for most of his active priestly life. On 23 October 1680 he was arrested on the evidence of Thomas Dangerfield, an associate of Titus Oates, and imprisoned on the grounds of involvement in the Popish Plot. Atwood was tried before the king's bench on 8 February 1681 and condemned for his priesthood on the testimony of Dangerfield and Oates. On 10 February he was sentenced to death for treason, a judgment which he received 'very contentedly' (Luttrell, 1.67). He was one of eleven English Dominicans cited as conspirators by Oates and his confederates. On 15 February 1681 Atwood was reprieved by Charles II, allegedly as he was about to step onto the hurdle which was to draw him to Tyburn. It is reported that he felt his failure to suffer martyrdom to be a great misfortune. He was once more arrested in 1697 and condemned to death but was released in 1698. He acted as vicar of the English Dominican provincial from 1697 to 1708. He died in London on 12 August 1712 and was buried in the churchyard of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, next to Father Albert Anderson, who had also been accused and tried for association with the Popish Plot in 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 883


Atwood, Thomas (d. 1793), judge in Dominica and the Bahamas and writer on economics and history, wrote that he spent several years of his life in Dominica, but his origins, as most of his other biographical details, are unknown. He was chief judge of Dominica, and afterwards of the Bahamas. He wrote 'The History of the Island of Dominica', published in 1791, and a pamphlet, 'Observations on the true method of treatment and usage of the Negro slaves in the British West India Islands'. Dominica had been conquered by the British from the French in 1759 and formally ceded to Britain in the treaty of Paris in 1763. Atwood, in what was the first historical and general account of Dominica, wanted to demonstrate that the island was 'capable of being rendered one of the chief, if not the best, the English have in the West Indies' (Atwood, iii). It had more fertile and uncultivated land than the older colonies in the eastern Caribbean. He argued that the lack of cattle and of slaves were the main obstacles to the development of sugar plantations. It was briefly 'in a very flourishing situation' (ibid., 104) in the five years prior to the American War of Independence thanks to the free port at Roseau. It declined, with some three-fifths of the original sugar plantations abandoned, owing to rash speculation in the early years, mismanagement, and 'the great disadvantages this island laboured under, while it was in possession of the French' (ibid., 72) who captured the island between 1778 and 1783. The American War of Independence led to a 'total ruin of trade fatal to the welfare of this island in particular, as being then only in a state of infancy with respect of its settlement' (ibid., 106). Many English settlers emigrated, leaving 'half the number that there were' (ibid., 281). In his discussion of slavery Atwood defended the planters against their abolitionist critics, claiming that the slaves were better treated than labourers in England. Atwood died, presumably in debt, in the king's bench prison, London, at an advanced age, 'broken down with misfortunes' ('GM', 1st ser., 63/1, 1793, 576) on 27 May 1793. His history became a standard source of reference for early Dominica that was used by later historians of the British West Indies such as Bryan Edwards and Captain Thomas Southey. 


@@@@@


doc= 884


Atwood, William (d. 1712), lawyer and writer on politics, son of John Atwood, of Broomfield, Essex, was admitted as a pensioner at Queens' College, Cambridge, on 23 March 1669. He was admitted at the Inner Temple on 2 December 1669 and at Gray's Inn on 11 June 1670. Atwood was master of the revels at Gray's Inn (1674-5), became a barrister in 1674 and an ancient in 1701. During his time at Gray's Inn, Atwood became acquainted with William Petyt, a rising whig barrister, who encouraged Atwood to study England's constitutional history. Atwood became highly proficient in early English law and administration and, like Petyt, used his knowledge of English history and law to uphold the rights of parliament and promote England's ancient constitution. In the early 1680s he published several anonymous pamphlets attacking the works of Sir Robert Filmer and the staunch tory ideologue Dr Robert Brady, whose sole purpose, asserted Atwood, was to 'purge the body politick from the chronical ['sic'] disease of liberty and oppressing load of property' ('Jus Anglorum ab antiquo', 1681, 2). 
In the summer of 1683 Atwood came to the defence of the whig divine the Revd Samuel Johnson. Of the many tory replies to Johnson's antipapist, pro-exclusion tract, 'Julian the Apostate', the Revd George Hickes's 'Jovian, or, An Answer to Julian the Apostate' was seen as the strongest. Hickes refuted the efficacy of Johnson's story of the apostasy of Julian and set forth an extreme Filmerian political statement in which he declared that kings alone made law and that the succession was divine and unalterable. In 'A Letter of Remarks upon Jovian' Atwood defended Johnson's tale of early Christian resistance to the apostate Roman emperor. He asserted that any examination of the original customs and constitution of the English government proved that the succession was always alterable and that law making required the consent of the people. Although Atwood proclaimed himself a loyal son of the church in 'A Seasonable Vindication of the Truly Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England' (1683), he went on vigorously to attack the Anglican hierarchy. In particular he targeted the lower clergy for their incessant preaching of passive obedience and divine kingship. Atwood further defended protestant nonconformity, asserting that it was foolish to allow a few rituals and different procedures to keep protestants apart. These things 'indifferent' were not worth the price of disunity. 
Like many whigs after the Rye House plot trials and executions, Atwood stopped publishing political tracts after 1683. But the revolution of 1688-9 brought Atwood's polemical career back to life. His post-revolution propaganda burst with enthusiasm for the new regime. Atwood signed his new pieces and acknowledged his old. He first set out his defence of the revolution in the preface of his versified translation of Nostradamus, which he believed foretold the revolution. Atwood argued that James II had uncrowned himself. James's abdication was the result of his breach of the 'original contract' between himself and the people. Thus 'the people' had promoted William and Mary in his place, exercising a power which was rightfully and legally theirs. The original contract, which James had abrogated by his arbitrary actions, was embodied in the coronation oath: 'The King's oath is the real contract on his side; and his accepting the government as a legal King' ('Wonderful Predictions of Nostredamus... wherein the Grandeur of their Present Majesties... are Foretold', preface). In 1690 Atwood elaborated upon these arguments in 'The Fundamental Constitution of the English Government', a thoroughgoing declaration of the ancient constitution. Like fellow ancient constitutionalists, Atwood maintained that freeborn Englishmen had inherited a set of ancient liberties and privileges passed down and reaffirmed by each successive nation. These liberties were embodied in the laws of Edward the Confessor and each successive monarch vowed to uphold those laws at the swearing of the coronation oath. This was England's ancient heritage, and it was exactly this that James II had violated. 'All civil societies', Atwood argued, 'are founded upon CONTRACTS and COVENANTS made between them'. It is 'warranted by that noble transcript of the original contract, the Confessor's Law, which shews if a king does not answer the true end for which he was chosen, he looses the name or ceases to be king' ('The Fundamental Constitution', 4.4). In such cases the people are discharged of their allegiance and must resist this self-abdicated king. 
Atwood was well aware that in such cases, wherein a king ceases to be the king, the anonymous author (John Locke) of the 'Two Treatises of Government' had argued that all civil power returned to the people, who were themselves returned to their original pre-civil state of nature. Atwood had no qualms over Locke's argument that power devolved to the people. But no ancient constitutionalist could countenance the idea of a full dissolution of the government. The ancient constitution never dissolves. If it did, every subject's rights and liberties were lost. The ancient constitution had to remain an unbroken continuum. This being the case, what had happened between 22 December, when James had fled, and 13 February, when William and Mary were proclaimed king and queen? Atwood argued that the 'dissolution of the contract between James II and his former subjects' did not destroy the form of government. True, James's flight had produced 'a vacancy'. But the government had not dissolved in December 1688. Rather, power had devolved 'to the people of legal interests in the government' and they had chosen a successor and through their representatives in parliament they had 'duly exercised their rights'. For Atwood the legality of the convention was beyond question. Parliament was the organ of continuity linking the past with the future ('Wonderful Predictions', preface; 'Fundamental Constitution', 79). 
In the 1690s and early 1700s, Atwood continued to publish whig propaganda as well as tracts on trade, empire, and coinage reform. In June 1700 he was appointed lord chief justice of New York, 'a place of considerable profit' (Luttrell, 4.657). Atwood went to New York with his son, who was also a lawyer, and immediately fell foul of local politicians for 'taking too much upon himself' ('London Diaries of William Nicolson', 172-3). He was accused of corruption and dismissed by the governor, Lord Cornbury. In his defence Atwood published a pamphlet describing the lawlessness and factionalism he found in New York and how he and his son had to race back to England in fear of their lives. He concluded by stating that it was a 'hazardous post of no profit' (Atwood, 17). In 1704 Atwood published 'The superiority and direct dominion of the imperial crown of England over the crown and kingdom of Scotland', a work 'directed against the Scottish attempt to assert an independent succession to the northern crown, and against George Ridpath's republication of the writings of Sir Thomas Craig' (Pocock, 'Atwood'). The Scottish parliament ordered Atwood's work to be burned. Thomas Hearne recorded Atwood's death on 22 October 1712, noting that Atwood was 'a learned antiquary and a very curious man' ('Remarks', 3.475). 


@@@@@


doc= 885


Aubert, Alexander (bap. 1730, d. 1805), merchant and astronomer, was born at Austin Friars, London, and baptized on 11 May 1730 at St Peter-le-Poer, Old Broad Street, London, the second of seven children and eldest of the four sons of Claude Aubert (1692-1774), merchant, of Austin Friars, and his wife, Mary Dorothy, daughter of the Revd James Gilbert, king's chaplain. Claude Aubert, originally of Crest, Dauphine, had fled France following the revocation of the edict of Nantes. Alexander was educated at Cheam Academy, Surrey, before spending six or seven years among other members of the Aubert family who had sought exile in Geneva. There, in 1744, the sight of a comet sparked his lifelong interest in astronomy. In the course of his mercantile training at Geneva, briefly at London, then at Leghorn and Genoa, Aubert became fluent in French and Italian. He then spent three years on his grand tour in Italy, was in Rome for the jubilee of 1750, and aged twenty-one was taken into partnership with his father. The following year he was elected a director of the London Assurance Company (of which he was later a governor). 
On 31 December 1768 at St Matthew, Bethnal Green, Middlesex, Aubert married Sarah Clarke, with whom he had at least two daughters and a son, Alexander (died 1798), who also became a merchant in Shoreditch, London, and may also have worked in France. It is uncertain whether Aubert's wife and daughters predeceased him or parted company from him: certainly they were not mentioned in Aubert's will, and he was considered to have died a bachelor. He was elected to the Royal Society in 1772 and joined its dining club, to which he invited a stream of eminent foreign visitors. His portly figure owed much to his hospitality and enjoyment of good living. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1774, and received a diploma of membership of the Imperial Academy of St Petersburg in 1773, or in 1793 -- sources differ. 
Supported by his inheritance and a dependable income from the London Assurance Company, Aubert was able to indulge his passion for astronomy. In 1771 he built an observatory at his country house at Loampit Hill, Deptford, which he fitted out with fine instruments, many by John Bird (died 1776), whose executor Aubert later was, and from whom he inherited a clock. At Austin Friars he had observed the transit of Venus in 1769; from Deptford he observed the transit of Mercury in 1786, and sent his report to the Royal Society. Aubert's knowledge of mechanics led to his appointment as a trustee, and in 1787 as chairman, for the completion of Ramsgate harbour. John Smeaton was the engineer for this project, and on one occasion he and Aubert descended together in a diving bell to examine the foundations of the pier. Aubert also revised for publication Smeaton's account of the building of the Eddystone lighthouse. 
In 1788 Aubert bought Highbury House, Islington, London, for 6000 guineas, and settled there with two of his sisters. He set about improving the 74 acre estate with its orchards, hothouses, pastures, and outbuildings for livestock, carriages, and brewing. When the church of St Peter-le-Poer was rebuilt, Aubert kept its redundant tower clock as a feature near the house. With Smeaton's help, a tall observatory wing, with a flat roof for accommodating telescopes, was added to the house. Here Aubert created the finest private observatory of its day. A stone pillar rose from ground to roof, supporting the delicate instruments, which were undisturbed by any movement of the building itself. The lower floors were fitted out as workshops, with lathes and a profusion of hand tools. Many of Aubert's instruments were acquired at the sales of notable professionals and virtuosi. John Brown, a Scottish visitor, noted in his diary: 'Sunday 18th April 1802, walked to Mr Aubert's observatory near Islington and saw with pleasure all his excellent instruments and his observatory most admirably contrived. His transit is on stone pillars and St Paul's is his meridian mark. The transit is by Dollond, 44 inch focus, treble object glass of four inches diameter, of those telescopes he has several made by old [John] Dollond... His quadrant seems an excellent one made by Bird 4 ft radius fixed on a stone pillar reflecting telescopes are very numerous and said to be excellent, some of them seven feet long and nine inches in aperture. There is one very short in proportion to its length and thus called Dumpy, made by Short... 7 or 8 feet long which from its being mounted in a particular manner for use, is perhaps the best, it is nine inches aperture [this was Short's only Cassegrain; like the 44 inch Dollond, it had formerly belonged to Topham Beauclerk (died 1788)]. An equatorial which was made by Ramsden for General Roy and purchased by Mr Aubert... is seen capitally mounted on a stone pillar under a moveable cupola contrived by Mr Smeaton, the cupole is nine feet diameter... (NL Scot., MS 1867, 34)' When the French Revolution threatened corresponding unrest in England, various local societies were founded to combat sedition. Aubert formed the Loyal Islington Volunteers in 1797, being commissioned as lieutenant-colonel commandant; they were disbanded in 1801. Among his other duties, Aubert acted as senior esquire to Sir John Blaquiere at his installation, and was a governor of St Thomas's, Guy's, and Christ's hospitals. He held a commission of lieutenancy for the City in 1793. While staying with his friend John Lloyd of Wigfair, St Asaph, Flintshire, Aubert visited a nearby glassworks, where he became overheated, caught a chill on leaving, and died at Wigfair on 19 October 1805. His body was returned for interment in the chancel of St Mary's, Islington, on 5 November. The sale of Aubert's extensive collection of books and instruments fetched well over $3000. 


@@@@@


doc= 886


Aubrey, John (1626-1697), antiquary and biographer, was born on 12 March 1626 at Easton Pierse near Kington St Michael in north Wiltshire, the eldest of the three surviving sons of Richard Aubrey (1603-1652), who owned estates at Burleton in Herefordshire and at Broad Chalke in south Wiltshire, and his wife, Deborah (1610-1686), the daughter and heir of Isaac Lyte (1577-1660) and Israel, 'nee' Browne (1578-1662). The Aubreys were a long-established Welsh family but their fortunes latterly owed much to John Aubrey's great-grandfather William ('c'.1529-1595), the illustrious Elizabethan lawyer. 
A sickly child with a slight stammer, Aubrey grew up mostly at Easton Pierse and after local education, notably under the rector of Leigh Delamere, Robert Latimer, was sent in 1637 or 1638 to board at the grammar school in Blandford St Mary, Dorset. On 3 May 1642 he was entered as a gentleman commoner at Trinity College, Oxford, although his studies were interrupted by the civil war, and on 6 April 1646 he enrolled at the Middle Temple to begin a legal training which he likewise never completed. On his father's death in October 1652 he inherited not only his estates but also his debts, totalling some $1800, which embroiled him in lawsuits for the next fifteen years. Relief was offered by the prospect of marriage to the wealthy Katherine Ryves but was then withdrawn by her death in November 1657, and in 1661-2 he was forced to sell his Herefordshire properties. On 1 November 1665 he became acquainted, 'in an ill howre', with Joan Sumner, and in April 1666 a licence was taken out at Salisbury for their marriage. This never took place, however, and instead there followed five years of recriminations and legal entanglements which dissipated the last of Aubrey's remaining assets. In 1671 he had no choice but to part with the residue of his inheritance and was reduced thereafter to the life of a peripatetic scholar, reliant on the hospitality of various patrons and friends. In some ways he felt the deliverance from his mortgages and litigation an 'absconding' and a 'happy delitescency'; in other ways he found dependence a blow to his self-respect and sometimes an impediment to his work. The constant 'danger of arrests' must have made all the more attractive the prospect of emigration raised by offers of lands in the colonies in 1674 and 1686, but he decided to stay in England. The enforced sale of his books in 1677 indicates that he barely subsisted, and continued poverty helps to account for the money-making ideas which are discussed in his small volume 'Faber fortunae' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 26). 
Aubrey was never much interested in politics and sympathized with the credo of his friend George Ent: 'a pox take parties'. He was a member of the Rota Club founded by James Harrington which met in London at the Turk's Head in New Palace Yard between November 1659 and February 1660, but the focus of his associational life was always more academic than political (Powell, 92-5, 180). He was elected to the Royal Society on 21 January 1663 and thereafter became an active member, reading a paper on Wiltshire springs on 7 April 1668, a paper on the 'cloudy star' in February 1669, and one on winds in February 1673. His 'Natural History of Wiltshire' was submitted to the society in 1675 and copied in 1691 (RS, MS 92). 
Opposed to sects and parties in religion no less than in politics, Aubrey's antiquarian writings often lament the iconoclasm perpetrated by 'puritanicall zealotts' during the civil war years. His views on religion were set out in 'Hypothesis ethicorum et scala religionis', or 'Religio naturalis', as he also termed it. Although the manuscript has not survived, it is clear from his other writings that he shared the eirenic, sceptical, and anti-clerical views of many Restoration intellectuals. He was tolerant, rational, and fideistic, favouring a kind of natural theology which held it 'a profound part of religion to glorifie God in his workes' (Hunter, 57). His ethics were very much 'doe as you would be done to', a 'little rule' which he thought should be taught to all children as 'the basis of right reason and justice, and consequently all other vertues'. 
It was this tolerance and humanity that so endeared Aubrey to most of the people with whom he came into contact. He was clearly a man capable of inspiring great regard in others and was, for his part, someone who both valued and needed friendship. Among the wide network of people with whom he shared affection, association, or acquaintance were the fourteen special 'amici' listed in his autobiographical notes: Anthony Ettrick, John Lydall, Francis Potter, Sir John Hoskyns, Edmund Wyld, Robert Hooke, Thomas Hobbes, Anthony Wood, Sir William Petty, Sir James Long of Draycot, Charles Seymour, Seth Ward, and William Holder. In 1651 he met Mary Wiseman, 'with whom at first sight I was in love' ('Brief Lives', 1.46); he bequeathed her his best diamond ring and she was perhaps the female companion dearest to him in his life. 
The range of Aubrey's intellectual interests and the importance of his contribution to so many fields of study make him difficult to classify. He was one 'whose boundlesse mind / Scarce within Learnings compasse is confin'd', as his friend George Ent put it ('Three Prose Works', 309). He may with justice be said to be the founding father of three academic disciplines in Britain, being the author of the first English books entirely devoted to archaeology, place names, and folklore. At the same time he pioneered a new kind of fieldwork in the study of natural phenomena and anticipated many of the interests of modern historical scholarship. In his 'Brief Lives', moreover, he penned one of the great literary works of his age. Its intimate and minutely observed biographical sketches of many of the great personalities of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries are unrivalled and represent a unique source for much of the personal and anecdotal information which they contain. 
Aubrey's interest in antiquities was kindled and nurtured amid the Wiltshire landscape before the civil wars. 'I was inclin'd by my genius, from my childhood to the love of antiquities', he later wrote, 'and my fate dropt me in a countrey most suitable for such enquiries' ('Monumenta', 17). He developed a fascination with past ways of life and an obsession to record and conserve as much of it as he could. Such tendencies were already evident when, as an undergraduate in 1643, he employed a hedge-priest named Hesketh to make several drawings of the ruins of Osney Abbey, thus preserving an impression of them before they were destroyed. One was engraved by Wenceslaus Hollar for volume two of Dodsworth's and Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum' (1661). 
It was on 6 January 1649, while on a return trip from Oxford to Wiltshire, that Aubrey 'discovered' the megalithic monument at Avebury. The posthumous publication of Inigo Jones's book on Stonehenge in 1655 stimulated his further investigations of ancient megaliths, and when Walter Charleton published a rebuttal of Jones's theory in 1663 he recommended Aubrey to Charles II. Aubrey waited on the king during his trip to the west country that year and at his request surveyed Avebury in September 'with a plaine-table and afterwards tooke a review of Stoneheng' where he discovered the ring of holes just inside the surrounding ditch which now bears his name. The resulting papers, 'Templa druidum' and 'Review of Stonehenge', were completed in 1665 and by 1693 had developed into the 'Monumenta Britannica, or, A miscellanie of British antiquities' (Bodl. Oxf., MSS top. gen. c.24 and 25). The first part of the work, 'Templa druidum', discusses supposed druid temples, especially Avebury and Stonehenge; part 2, 'Chorographia antiquaria', deals with Roman towns, castles, camps, and other military architecture; part 3 concerns sepulchral monuments, roads and ditches, coins and urns; and part 4 includes 'Chronologia architectonica', an attempt to trace a sequence of architectural styles, written in 1671. 
In its descriptions and surveys of ancient sites across Britain, many of which have since disappeared or been significantly altered, the 'Monumenta Britannica' remains the foundation text of modern archaeology. Aubrey's suggestion that Avebury and Stonehenge might be druidical represented a major advance on contemporary orthodoxy which usually attributed them either to the Danes or the Romans. Furthermore, his studies of architectural history were almost unique in their day and his attempt to delineate the chronology of evolution in building forms would not be surpassed until the early nineteenth century. Finally, the mass of interspersed comment on the way in which prices, weights and measures, technology, dress, popular customs and beliefs, language, handwriting, and many other features of everyday life had changed over the centuries marks him out as not merely an antiquarian collector of miscellaneous information but an important figure in the development of modern historical scholarship. 
Aubrey pursued a similar approach to natural history, with equally precursive results. 'My head was alwaies working; never idle, and even travelling (which from 1649 till 1670 was never off my horsback) did gleane som observations, of which I have a collection in folio of 2 quiers of paper + a dust basket, some wherof are to be valued' ('Brief Lives', 1.42). From 1656 onwards much of this research was being undertaken for 'The naturall historie of Wiltshire' which he seems to have continued until 1691 when a rough draft in two volumes was left in the Ashmolean. In it he made a list of the county's trees and plants with their medicinal and practical uses; he noted its different stones and minerals, clays and soil types with their particular properties; and he catalogued its fauna and medicinal springs, as well as its winds, mists, and storms. The holograph manuscript, now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford (MSS Aubrey 1-2), incorporates his latest additions and also contains notes by Ray, Evelyn, Tanner, and Gale. Before his death, however, Aubrey removed most of the chapter on air which remains in the earlier version submitted to the Royal Society. 
In 1660 it was decided that a work on the antiquities of Wiltshire in the style of Dugdale's 'Warwickshire' should be written in which Aubrey would undertake the north of the county. Over the next ten years much of his time at home was spent gathering material for his 'Essay towards the description of the north division of Wiltshire' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 3). The work was eventually deposited in the Ashmolean under the title 'Hypomnemata antiquaria' in two volumes, 'liber A' and 'liber B', although the latter is now lost, having being borrowed by Aubrey's brother William in 1703 and never returned. In May 1673, meanwhile, the royal cosmographer, John Ogilby, granted Aubrey a licence to survey the county of Surrey. He undertook his 'Perambulation of Surrey' between July and October, although he continued to revise the manuscript until 1692 when he left it unfinished (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 4). The material was rearranged, with both excisions and additions, by Richard Rawlinson and printed with a memoir of Aubrey as 'The Natural History and Antiquities of the County of Surrey' (5 vols., 1718-19). It was also in this period, between 1670 and 1690, that Aubrey was gathering material for 'The interpretation of villare Anglicanum' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 5), the first work entirely devoted to English place names. 
Aubrey's fieldwork yielded new findings not only in archaeology and natural history but also in folklore. His seminal 'Remaines of gentilisme and Judaisme' (BL, Lansdowne MS 231) contains a mass of gleanings on customs and ceremonies, folk traditions and popular beliefs, old wives' tales and children's rhymes, many of which he considered to be ancient survivals and compared with references in classical authors. He finally wrote up his treatise in three parts between February 1687 and March 1689 and thereafter lent it out to Edward Lhwyd, John Toland, White Kennett, and John Evelyn, the last two of whom added notes to it, as did B. G. Cramer, a German scholar and secretary to the Royal Society. On his death it was in the hands of Kennett and it was to go with the rest of his papers into the Lansdowne manuscripts at the British Museum. 
Aubrey played an instrumental part in the scientific movement of the period more broadly. He maintained a keen amateur interest in astronomy, navigation, and applied mathematics and made a significant contribution to the milieu in which new ideas in these and other areas were being debated and disseminated. In the early 1650s he met William Harvey and Samuel Hartlib, with whom he corresponded; he engaged with the ideas of Sir Kenelm Digby and John Wilkins; and he numbered among his closest friends some of the greatest scientists of the age, including Hobbes, Hooke, Pell, Petty, Ward, and Wren. His association with Hartlib and with John Durie helped to form some of the progressive ideas on educational reform which he wrote up in 1669 as 'Idea filioli seu educatio pueri' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 10, fols. 162 ff.) and which had developed by 1671 into 'An idea of the education of a young gentleman viz from the age of nine or ten years; till seventeen or eighteen' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 10), finally completed in 1684. 
Characteristic of his time, Aubrey was fascinated by the supernatural and the occult. In 1674 he copied 'Zecorbeni, sive, Claviculae Salmonis libri IV' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 24), a treatise from which to learn magical rites and conjurations, at the end of which he added several pages of other recipes and nostrums. He was no less a typical product of the age in his absorption in astrology. He believed that 'we are governed by the planets, as the wheeles and weights move the index of the clock' (Hunter, 118) and he constructed his 'Brief Lives' around the individual's horoscope, both figuratively and on the page. He often consulted his friend Henry Coley, one of the foremost astrologers of the day, and he himself cast a collection of figures with brief remarks on their subjects, entitled 'Collectio gentiturarum' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 23), bearing the date 1677 although begun rather earlier (Hunter, 118, plate 9, 118-21, 145-6). His 'Miscellanies', 'a collection of hermetick philosophy', was an investigation into a variety of psychic and supernatural phenomena such as omens and prophecies, dreams and apparitions, day fatality and second sight, all of which he was concerned to explore and explain, verify or discredit. Aubrey's brother William possessed the original manuscript which has not survived but the work was printed in 1696 by the London bookseller Edward Castle and reprinted in 1721, incorporating Aubrey's own additions and corrections. 
On 31 August 1667 Aubrey met Anthony Wood in Oxford, and this was the beginning of an academic collaboration which lasted for the next twenty-five years. Late in 1669 Wood began working on his 'Athenae Oxonienses', biographies of Oxford alumni since 1500. Over the following decade Aubrey acted as Wood's research assistant, regularly supplying him with biographical information by letter, but in so doing he was also compiling the material which was to form the basis of his own 'minutes of lives'. The transition to author in his own right may have been precipitated by the death of Hobbes in December 1679 which impelled Aubrey to write his biography, a service which he had promised his great friend as early as 1667. His 'Life of Mr Thomas Hobbes of Malmesburie' was to become the fullest of the 'Brief Lives' but Aubrey chose not to publish it, lending it instead to Richard Blackbourne of Trinity College, Cambridge, who used it to produce his own life of Hobbes in Latin in 1681. In 1680 Wood suggested that Aubrey write a 'book of lives' of his own, a project which he set about with such purpose that by 1690 he had sufficient material to contemplate a separate 'Lives of our English mathematical writers'. When he finally sent his completed manuscript to the Ashmolean in 1693, it amounted to four folio volumes containing biographies of over 400 luminaries, many of whom Aubrey had known personally or about whom he could impart contemporary gossip (Bodl. Oxf., MSS Aubrey 6-9). In them he wrote with candour and without prejudice, 'like Almansar in the play, that spare neither friend nor foe, but a religious John Tell-troth', infusing them with an intimacy and attention to detail for which he was right to realize future generations would 'be gratefull' (Powell, 182). The 'minutes of lives' were first printed, in large part, in 1813 as 'Letters Written by Eminent Persons in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries'. 
Among Aubrey's other works were two plays. 'I am writing a Comedy for Th[omas] Shadwell which I have now almost finished...', he wrote in October 1671, 'and I shall fitt him with another the Countrey Revell: both humours untoucht, which I in my tumbling up and downe have collected' (Hunter, 241). The first of these has not survived and the second, 'Countrey Revell, or, The Revell of Aldford, a Comedy by and in the Hand of John Aubrey' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 21), remained a fragmentary attempt at a typical Restoration comedy involving caricatures inspired by his Wiltshire neighbours. He also wrote 'Elements of architecture' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1819, item 43), an incomplete broadsheet on the principles of neo-classical architecture which he desired all young men to study. In 'Designatio de Easton-Piers in com. Wilts' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 17) he left behind a series of coloured drawings of the house and grounds of Easton Pierse done in 1669 when he knew he was to lose the property. 'If ever I had been good for anything', he wrote with typical self-deprecation, ''twould have been a painter' (Hunter, 39). A now lost work, 'Villa, or, A Description of the Prospects from Easton-Piers', was evidently a literary companion to the 'Designatio', apparently a short prose eulogy, interspersed with fragments of verse, in praise of his beloved home, written in 1671. He left three manuscript volumes to Gloucester Hall, Oxford, full of arithmetical and algebraic calculations done between the 1650s and 1680s, together with notes and extracts from mathematical treatises (Worcester College, MSS 4.9, 5.4, 5.5). He compiled a sort of scientific commonplace book which he called the 'Adversaria physica', and which by 1692 amounted to a 'fol[io] an inch thick'. Although now lost, an idea of its contents in the 1670s can be gained from a transcription of part of it in the hand of Henry Oldenburg preserved in the classified papers of the Royal Society, and also by a copy taken by Thomas Hearne in the late 1720s of some notes from it made by Robert Plot in his 'Analecta Ro[berti] Plot' of 1675-6 (Bodl. Oxf., Hearne's diaries, 158-9). 'A collection of approved receipts', of which he makes mention in his 'Naturall Historie of Wiltshire', has not survived. 
In 1689 Aubrey sent his papers and books to the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, where a list of them was drawn up. In November 1692 Edward Lhwyd made a catalogue, 'Books written by Mr Aubrey', totalling twenty-two items (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 5, fol. 123'v'), and, although much of his library had been sold or given away by this time, at least fifty-one volumes now in the Ashmole series of manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, and sixty-six in the Ashmolean Museum's A-H series, bear Aubrey's signature. His substantive and informative letters to Wood, Tanner, Lhwyd, and others are also preserved in the Bodleian Library (MS Wood F 39; MS Tanner 25; MS Tanner 456a; MS Ashmole 1814; MS Ballard 14), as is a collection of letters written to him from a total of ninety-eight correspondents (MSS Aubrey 12-13). 
Aubrey's quick wit and fund of stories must have made him the most convivial of company and in his amusing eccentricities he had something of the archetypal academic about him. Ralph Sheldon once remarked that he was 'as mad as anyone almost in the university of Bedlam' (Powell, 174) and when he met him in the street 'talking to himselfe and passing forward without regarding anybody' he thought him 'a little crazed' (ibid., 187). He suffered a fit of apoplexy in January 1694 and it may have been a repeat attack of this which eventually caused his death on a journey from London to Wiltshire. He was buried in the parish church of St Mary Magdalene at Oxford on 7 June 1697. 
It was only in the second half of the twentieth century that the significance of Aubrey's contribution to so many branches of scholarship began to be appreciated. The reasons for the overlooking or undervaluing of his importance are varied. As with so many people of genuine originality, much of what he achieved went unrecognized by contemporaries because unorthodox. Moreover his reputation long suffered as a consequence of the bitter and unfair remarks made about him by Anthony Wood following Wood's prosecution for libelling the first earl of Clarendon in his 'Athenae Oxonienses' on the basis of information supplied to him by Aubrey. In addition the range and breadth of Aubrey's work was insufficiently known. Of all his writings only the 'Miscellanies' appeared in print during his lifetime and this gave later generations with no taste for 'hermetick philosophy' the occasion to brand him as credulous and superstitious. Edward Lhwyd persuaded him to allow material from the 'Monumenta Britannica' to be included in the new edition of Camden's 'Britannia' being prepared by Edmund Gibson, but Aubrey's attempt to raise subscriptions for the printing of his own volume failed, and on his death the manuscript was left with the London bookseller Awnsham Churchill. There were, however, good reasons why so little of his output got into print. For all his prolific note-taking, minute observation, original insights, and capacity for natural prose, Aubrey often lacked the ability to organize, edit, and shape his materials into the coherent and polished form necessary for publication. He made repeated efforts, especially towards the end of his life when he became worried about the fate of his manuscripts and the future of his reputation, to 'methodise' his works, but these met with only partial success. 
Few scholarly lives reflect the ferment of ideas in the seventeenth century better than John Aubrey's. His writings epitomize the evolving relationship between older and novel modes of thought which characterized the period, and in the course of his eclectic intellectual explorations he made original and lasting contributions in several fields. Beyond this, in his propensity to record the minutiae of everyday life, he conveys, better than almost any other contemporary, a sense of what it was like to live at the time. Acutely aware of change in the present, no less than in the past, his observations amount to a vivid commentary on the social and cultural impact of the momentous events through which he lived. 


@@@@@


doc= 887


Aubrey, William (c.1529-1595), civil lawyer, was born at Cantref in Brecknockshire, the second son of Thomas Aubrey, of an old Brecknockshire family, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Thomas Vaughan. After attending what would become Christ College, Brecon, he was educated at Oxford University, and became a fellow of All Souls (1547), BCL (1549), principal of New Inn Hall (1550), professor of civil law (1553), and DCL (16 August 1554). At about this time he married Wilgiford, daughter of John Williams of Tainton, Oxfordshire. He became a master in chancery in 1555, and was admitted an advocate of the court of arches (9 January 1556) and to Doctors' Commons five days later. In 1557 he went with William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, as judge-advocate on the St Quentin expedition. Having discharged the duties of his Oxford chair by deputies, Aubrey was permitted by Queen Elizabeth to alienate it to John Griffith (23 February 1559). The antiquary John Aubrey, the civil lawyer's great-grandson, records that he was beloved of the queen, who called him 'her little doctor', and he served on Archbishop Parker's commission (1562) which declared unlawful Lady Katherine Grey's marriage to the earl of Hertford, a case involving questions relating to the royal succession. Entering parliament -- perhaps through Pembroke's patronage -- he was MP for Carmarthen Boroughs (1554), Brecon (1558), Hindon (1559), Arundel (1563), and Taunton (1592). He became treasurer of Doctors' Commons in 1573, and complained in 1576 that half the advocates had insufficient work to make a living. 
Having a considerable reputation in international and constitutional matters, in 1571 Aubrey signed the opinion that John Leslie, bishop of Ross and ambassador of Mary, queen of Scots, was triable in England for intriguing against Queen Elizabeth. His maritime decisions during the war with Spain had important international connotations. This expertise is manifest in the letter to his neighbour and kinsman John Dee, concerning the latter's 'Soveraigntie of the Sea'. He maintained that the proceedings of the high commission were warranted by canon law and not merely by the statute of 1559. He served on the council in the marches of Wales from 1586. 
Auditor and vicar-general of the province of Canterbury under Archbishop Grindal, Aubrey wrote an opinion for him on the reform of the church courts. On Grindal's sequestration he became joint administrator (1577) and then sole vicar-general (1582), retaining the office under Archbishop Whitgift after 1583. Opposed to puritanism and Brownism in church and university (1587-90), he participated in the condemnation of his distant relative John Penry in 1593. A master of requests with Sir John Herbert from 1590, in 1592 he became judge of audience in the court of Canterbury. 
Aubrey acquired extensive estates in Brecon and south Wales by purchase and royal grant. He died in London on 25 June 1595 and was buried in old St Paul's on 24 July, a bas-relief monument showing him surrounded by his three sons and six daughters, one of whom married Daniel Dun. The memorial described him as 'a man of exquisite erudition, singular prudence and great courtesy', but John Aubrey thought the figure too big, a picture he possessed showing 'a delicate, quick, lively, and piercing black eie, a severe eie browe, and a fresh complexioun' ('Brief Lives', 60). 
Aubrey's cousin 


@@@@@


doc= 888


Aucher, John (bap. 1619, d. 1701), Church of England clergyman, was baptized at Bishopsbourne, Kent, on 28 October 1619, a younger son of Sir Anthony Aucher of Hautsborne in the same county, and his wife, Hester, daughter and coheir of Peter Collett of London. In 1634 Archbishop Laud nominated Aucher to a Canterbury scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he matriculated the following year. He graduated BA in 1640, took up a fellowship at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1640 and proceeded MA in 1641. His royalism led to his ejection from Peterhouse in 1645. In 1650 he weighed into the controversy over the engagement, the declaration of obedience to the new regime, when he published anonymously 'Arguments and Reasons to Prove the Inconvenience and Unlawfulness of Taking the New Engagement'. 
At the Restoration the masters of Peterhouse and its neighbour Queen's College wrote to the government in June 1660 arguing that Aucher, Isaac Barrow, John Barwick, and William Chamberlain were 'constant sufferers for their Conscience & Loyalty ever since the beginning of the Warr, and particularly having been ejected & excluded from the University of Cambridge & hindered from taking their Degree of Doctors, of which they were capable by the Statutes & orders of the University many years since, are now by us for their Conversation, Learning & Services in the Church, thought every way meete & worthy of such their degrees and of all favours & dispensations whereby they may att this time bee admitted thereto. (TNA: PRO, SP 29/4/96)' Aucher was created DD by royal mandate soon afterwards. In June 1660 he petitioned for a prebend in Canterbury Cathedral, and was appointed canon of the sixth prebend on 9 July, a position he held until his death. In 1661 he was restored to his fellowship at Peterhouse. In a letter to Secretary of State Sir Edward Nicholas, dated 19 October 1661, he styled himself 'Vice-Dean' of Canterbury Cathedral (TNA: PRO, SP 29/43/53). He was rector of Westbere in Kent between 1661 and 1681, and of All Hallows, Lombard Street, London, between 1663 and 1685. 
In 1684 Aucher published 'The Arraignment of Rebellion, or, The Irresistibility of Sovereign Powers'. Aucher claimed that this book had been written 'in the time of Oliver's Usurpation' and that his 'honoured Friend and acquaintance' Dr Henry Hammond had encouraged him to publish it. He then apparently went to London and approached two stationers, who declined it as 'too hot... too heavy; too dangerous' to publish (Aucher, 'Arraignment', sig. A3'v'). He returned home and apparently forgot about the manuscript until 30 January 1683 (the anniversary of the execution of Charles I), when, 'searching for a Paper I had formerly writ on the occasion of that sad day, These likewise fell into my hands' (ibid., sig. A4'r'). He then showed the manuscript to 'a Learned, and Judicious Neighbour' (ibid.) who told him 'that these times having likewise a strong tendency to Rebellion, nothing that had been said, or could be said, on that point, would be unfit, or unseasonable to obstruct against it' (ibid.). Aucher's book, which had originally been intended as an attack on the regicides, was, therefore, like Filmer's 'Patriarchia', published as part of the tory reaction against the whigs. 
Aucher died in Canterbury on 12 March 1701 and was buried in the cathedral. He left $80 a year 'for ever for the Maintenance of Clergymen's Widows' (Barwick, 283). A second edition of 'The Arraignment of Rebellion' appeared in 1718. 


@@@@@


doc= 889


Auchmuty, Sir Samuel (1758-1822), army officer, was born on 22 June 1758 at New York city, the second son of Dr Samuel Auchmuty (1722-1777), rector of Trinity Church, New York, and Mary Tucker, 'nee' Nicholls. The family were of Scottish origin, Dr Auchmuty's father, a lawyer, having emigrated to Massachusetts about 1720. This background, together with a family tradition of legal employment in government service, probably ensured that the family was loyalist. Having graduated BA at the college of New York, Auchmuty joined the British army, first as a volunteer, and was appointed ensign in the 45th regiment of foot on 11 January 1777. He was promoted lieutenant a year later, whereupon he returned to England with the 45th. 
Following British defeat in the American War of Independence, Auchmuty's elder brother stayed in New York but one of his sisters and his uncle went to Britain as loyalist refugees; his sister married into a Kentish gentry family. Auchmuty chose to remain in the army but, without influence or wealth, his only route to promotion was service in India. In 1783 he transferred to the 52nd foot, then under orders for India, and was made adjutant. In 1788 he moved to the 75th foot, as captain. At this point, aged thirty, his career was effectively at a standstill. 
Salvation came from the new governor-general, Lord Cornwallis, who may have had a soft spot for an American loyalist but who above all needed efficient and uncorrupt men such as Auchmuty in his campaign to promote reform in British India. Auchmuty served in the war against Tipu, sultan of Mysore (1790-92) -- meanwhile gaining promotion to major -- right through to the siege of Seringapatam in 1792. Then he went to Calcutta as Cornwallis's deputy quartermaster-general to the king's forces in India. The next commander-in-chief, Sir Robert Abercromby, was also colonel of the 75th and soon made Auchmuty his military secretary, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel; Auchmuty saw more service in the Rohilla war of 1796. He returned to Britain in 1797 with Abercromby and the remnants of the 75th. 
With influence on his side at last (Cornwallis in the government and Abercromby in high military rank) Auchmuty was made lieutenant-colonel of the 10th foot in 1800 and went to the Cape of Good Hope as brevet colonel to take command of a force that was to sail to the Red Sea and, with troops from India, attack the French in Egypt. Sir David Baird, whom he had known in India, made Auchmuty adjutant-general of his force, and he took part in the desert march and the voyage down the Nile that captured popular imagination in Britain. He remained in Egypt until 1803, eventually as adjutant-general for the whole British force, and left with the evacuating forces. He was knighted on his return to Britain. 
Auchmuty's next appointment was as commander in the Isle of Thanet, a post of danger between 1803 and 1806 with the threatened invasion by Napoleon. In 1806 he was promoted brigadier-general and was given command of reinforcements sent to the River Plate after news of the capture of Buenos Aires by an unauthorized expedition from the Cape. On arrival Auchmuty discovered that Buenos Aires had been retaken by the Spanish and the 71st foot captured. Reinforcements however had also arrived from the Cape, and with a force of 5000 men Auchmuty had an opportunity to make his name. 
Auchmuty used his whole force to attack the walled city of Montevideo. He made an opposed landing, defeated a large sortie (having a horse shot under him), and mounted a siege. Resistance was strong, a relieving force was approaching, and stocks of powder were soon almost exhausted. A small breach in the city wall was perforce deemed practicable, and on the night of 2-3 February 1807 it was stormed. The cost was high but the city was taken. Auchmuty took especial pride in noting that the British troops kept their discipline; within hours the life of the city had returned to normal. 
Auchmuty did not have sufficient men to attack Buenos Aires but a detachment took Colonia and so he gained control of the whole north coast. He was then succeeded in command by Lieutenant-General John Whitelocke, who took the whole force to attack Buenos Aires. Auchmuty commanded the left wing of the attack and reached all his objectives but other units were destroyed or captured. He fully agreed that Whitelocke was correct in giving up the assault but his opinion on Whitelocke's decision to evacuate Montevideo is not known -- although he is recorded as having spent much of the voyage to Britain drinking hard. 
Given the thanks of parliament for Montevideo, on his return to Britain Auchmuty was promoted major-general and made colonel of the 103rd foot. In 1810 he went back to India as commander-in-chief at Madras, a delicate post for many in the Madras army were disaffected, following the 'white mutiny' against the authority of the governor, Sir George Barlow. Auchmuty insisted on the local rank of lieutenant-general to enhance his authority but his correspondence is full of apprehensions about the state of feeling among his officers; he insisted on receiving written expressions of loyalty from them. 
The governor-general, Lord Minto, planned to eliminate all enemy bases in the Indian Ocean. The Cape was taken in 1806 and Auchmuty was intended to command the expedition to take Mauritius and Bourbon but when Minto sent the expedition off before he arrived Auchmuty graciously withdrew his claim. Minto then organized an expedition to take Java from the Dutch, and this Auchmuty commanded. 
The Dutch had assembled a formidable defence force but Auchmuty got his troops ashore at Chillingching, east of the capital, Batavia, without interference and the city fell without a fight. The Dutch forces were entrenched at Cornelis, a few miles south, a well-fortified position. Auchmuty organized assaults from all directions, one of which, under Colonel Rollo Gillespie, broke into the fort. A relentless pursuit destroyed the Dutch army as a fighting force; three weeks later the capture of Samarang and the surrender of the Dutch governor, General Janssens, ended the fighting. 
Auchmuty returned to Madras in October 1811 and to Britain in 1813, where his local rank of lieutenant-general was made full. He received the thanks of parliament for Java, was made GCB, and was given the colonelcy of the 78th foot. The prize money from Java made him independently wealthy. His final post, from 1821, was commander-in-chief in Ireland. Riding in Phoenix Park, Dublin, on 11 August 1822 he fell dead from his horse; he was buried in Christ Church Cathedral. He never married; his heirs were his nephews and nieces. 


@@@@@


doc= 890


Audinet, Philip (1766-1837), engraver, was baptized on 7 December 1766 at St Anne's, Soho, the son of Philip Audinet and his wife, Elizabeth. He was descended from a French family who emigrated to England at the revocation of the edict of Nantes. After having served his apprenticeship with the distinguished engraver John Hall, he was employed to engrave the portraits for Harrison's 'Biographical Magazine' (1794) and other works. Audinet was primarily a portrait and figure engraver who worked mainly in the line manner, but he also produced works in mezzotint and aquatint. His subjects included 'Lear with the Dead Body of Cordelia', after Henry Fuseli, for Bell's 'British Theatre' (1791-5) and several portraits after pictures by Henri-Pierre Danloux, a French painter who resided in England during the time of the revolution in France. Among his later works are larger book-plate portraits of Sir Benjamin Hobhouse, bt, after Thomas Phillips (1825), and Sir William Domville, bt, lord mayor of London, after William Owen, and an excellent engraving of James Barry's unfinished portrait of Dr Johnson. His 'Henry 5th, his Queen and Family' was published in Horace Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting' (1827). Audinet also engraved eight plates in the 'Industry and Idleness series', after William Hogarth, in 'Hogarth Moralized' (1831). There is one plate in mezzotinto by him, a portrait of his brother, Samuel Audinet ('b'. 1759), a watchmaker. It is said to have been done for improvement when the artist was a boy, and to be the only impression that was taken off the plate. Audinet died a bachelor at his home, 56 Great Russell Street, on 18 December 1837 and was buried in the church of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Holborn. 


@@@@@


doc= 891


Audley, Edmund (c.1439-1524), bishop of Salisbury, was the second son of James Tuchet, fifth Baron Audley, and his second wife, Eleanor Holland. His father was killed on 23 September 1459, leading Margaret of Anjou's forces at Bloreheath, but his elder half-brother, John Tuchet, sixth Baron Audley, deserted to the Yorkist earls at Calais in the following year, to become one of Edward IV's most consistent supporters. This may explain the rapid rise of his younger half-brother (who took the surname Audley) up the ecclesiastical hierarchy. Edmund was probably resident at Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1463, and graduated BA in 1467, subsequently proceeding MA by 1471 and DTh by 1482/3. Collated to the prebend of Colwall in Hereford Cathedral in June 1464, he was subsequently presented to a number of livings, and to prebends in Shaftesbury Abbey and in Lincoln, Salisbury, Lichfield, Wells, St Paul's, and York cathedrals. He became archdeacon of the East Riding of Yorkshire in 1475, and of Essex in 1479. By 1471 he was described as a royal clerk, and on 8 February 1474 received a clear sign of royal favour when he was admitted canon and prebendary of St George's Chapel, Windsor. On 21 February 1476 he received a papal dispensation to hold three incompatible benefices. All these preferments Audley resigned when on 7 July 1480 he was provided to the see of Rochester, being consecrated on 1 October following. He was the only bishop not of gentry or mercantile origins to be promoted under Edward IV; his prospects were not adversely affected by the change of dynasty in 1485. On 22 June 1492 he was translated to Hereford by bull of provision, receiving his temporalities on 26 December, and on 10 January 1502 was translated by the pope to Salisbury, the temporalities being restored on 2 April. Signs of continuing royal favour included his naming among Henry VII's executors. 
In May 1519 Cardinal Campeggi, who was waiting to succeed Audley as bishop of Salisbury, wrote from London to his brother, observing, perhaps inaccurately, that the bishop was eighty and in failing health. In the event Audley lived another five years. So experienced a churchman inevitably exercised a conservative influence within his diocese, as he showed in his vigorous persecution of Lollardy, which had persisted in Berkshire since the early fifteenth century. During Audley's episcopate there were seventy prosecutions of people holding a variety of unorthodox opinions, with regular burnings of relapsed heretics, usually in Salisbury, in most years from 1502 to 1520. Audley's inquiries brought to light families and groups of friends who were able to sustain their beliefs without the help of itinerant preachers, and maintained sophisticated networks for the transmission of forbidden English books. 
Audley's commitment to the pastoral office is beyond question. He owned a copy of the fourteenth-century preaching manual 'Summa predicantium' by John Bromyard, was a trustee for the Savoy Hospital, founded by Henry VII in 1505, and even suppressed the nunnery of Brome Hall in his diocese on account of the immorality of the inmates (a prioress and two nuns), for which he received a letter of thanks in December 1521 from Henry VIII. His zealous persecution of heretics, however, points to the way the concept of pastoral duty had evolved since the end of the fourteenth century, from a responsibility for providing moral and doctrinal instruction to an inquisitorial determination to ascertain what people were thinking. This is demonstrated by Audley's willingness to involve even young children in his investigations. Edward Parker, aged eleven, appeared before him in 1508 because he had been discussing Lollard doctrine with his playmates: 'He said publicly when there were others present playing with him that the body of Christ was not in the sacrament of the altar -- and also that images of saints were not to be adored because they were stones' (Reg. Audley, fol. 148'v'). When asked by the bishop where he had learned these things, the child finally revealed that it was from his father. 
A vigorous defender of the church's power and prestige, Audley was also in touch with humanist learning. He gave Lincoln College a Greek manuscript of the gospels (Lincoln College, Oxford, Greek MS 18), 'De situ orbis' by Strabo, and the 'Astronomia' of Julius Formicus Siculus (Lincoln College, Oxford, Latin MS 114), and a number of printed books of historical and theological learning. Oxford University regularly wrote to him as an important benefactor, complimenting him as a patron of learning for having collated Dr Edward Powell to a prebend in Salisbury Cathedral, and soliciting his assistance over the appointment of a bedel in 1481 and for contributions to the rebuilding of the nave of the university church in 1490. Audley defrayed the cost of the reconstruction of the old house of congregation in 1507/8; he gave 200 marks for the endowment of the Chichele chest in 1509; and in June 1518 he gave $400 to Lincoln College as provision for the observance of his obit. Audley drew up his will on 11 June 1523, making provision for a chantry on the south side of the lady chapel of Hereford Cathedral, and for another on the north side of the presbytery of Salisbury Cathedral. It was in the latter that he was buried, four days after his death at Ramsbury on 23 August 1524. 


@@@@@


doc= 892


Audley, Henry (d. 1246), baron, was the second son of Adam de Audley (d. 1203), son of Liulf de Audley ['see under 'Audley family]. The Audleys, of Anglo-Saxon ancestry, took their name from their Staffordshire manor of Audley, or Heleigh (Aldithelegh and many variants), granted to Henry's great-grandfather by Nicholas de Verdon in Stephen's reign. Henry's elder brother, Adam de Audley ['see under 'Audley family], was the constable of Hugh de Lacy, earl of Ulster (died 1242), and Henry may also have served the earl since both brothers received lands in Ulster. Audley had succeeded both his father and his brother by 1212, and in 1217 he married Bertred, daughter of Ralph Mainwaring, county justice of Chester. During the civil war of 1215-17 he served the powerful royalist Ranulf (III), earl of Chester (died 1232), who granted him lands in Cheshire and Staffordshire. Between 1217 and 1220 Audley was sheriff of Shropshire and Staffordshire as the earl's deputy. Briefly bailiff of Carmarthen in 1226, he was again sheriff of the two counties between 1227 and 1232 and constable of Shrewsbury and Bridgnorth. Early in 1234 he garrisoned Shrewsbury Castle but failed to prevent the Welsh from burning the town. After the death of John, earl of Chester, Henry was one of the royal keepers of the county palatine and constable of Chester and Beeston. 
Between 1217 and 1245 Audley was regularly employed on the Welsh marches, frequently negotiating truces with the Welsh and arbitrating on breaches of the truce and on boundary disputes. In 1245 he took part in the relief of Diserth Castle. On the king's behalf he repaired the castles at Shrawardine (1220) and Mold (1241-2): on his own he strengthened Audley and Hodnet castles and built the new fortress of Redcastle in Shropshire, licensed in 1237. In 1219 he founded and endowed the Cistercian abbey at Hulton, Staffordshire. By gift and purchase he steadily built up his estates, mainly in Shropshire and Staffordshire. He was not a marcher lord, nor, until Henry III granted him the Shropshire manors of Edgmond and Newport in 1227 and Ford in 1230, was he a tenant-in-chief. But such was his activity in the royal service that he won for the Audleys an influence in border affairs out of proportion to their modest estates. Significantly, his daughter Emma married Gruffudd ap Madog, the powerful lord of Bromfield. On his death in the autumn of 1246 Henry Audley was succeeded by his son James Audley. 


@@@@@


doc= 893


Audley, Hugh (bap. 1577, d. 1662), moneylender, was baptized on 13 January 1577 at St Michael, Wood Street, London, the tenth of the eleven children of John Audley (died 1577?), mercer, and his wife, Maudlin or Margaret (died 1594), daughter of John Hare of London, mercer, and a kinswoman of the first Baron Coleraine. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1603, and in the following year obtained the reversion of a clerkship of the court of wards and liveries, in which his maternal uncle was a protonotary. He is alleged to have paid $3000 for his position ('Way to be Rich', 12), which he exploited systematically for his personal gain. A close colleague, whose career in the court was exactly contemporaneous with Audley's, and who dedicated himself scrupulously to his duty, died in poverty; Audley became 'infinitely rich', rich enough to afford the loss of more than $100,000, which he is said to have suffered by the suppression of the court in 1646 (ibid., 17). Years after this took place, moneys due to the court, and its records, were still in his keeping. 
Audley's practice as a moneylender was extensive: at his death he was owed at least $30,000. He also invested in land, notably the manor of Ebury, in Westminster. He bought this cheaply from Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex (1575-1645), who was in debt and desperate for money, after prolonged negotiations in 1625-6, in which he was described as 'barbarous', a man whose 'looks show his disposition', and one who bore himself 'loftily, respectless and peremptory' (Prestwich, 479f.). After Audley's death, the estate passed by inheritance to his great-grandniece Mary Davies, wife of Sir Thomas Grosvenor, whose descendants it was to enrich: Audley Street, which runs through it, is named after Hugh Audley. When Audley took advantage of the financial distress of another landowner to buy land at Buckenham in Norfolk, he appears to have withheld payments which he had promised, and to have harassed one of his creditors with vexatious suits. 
The anonymous author of 'The Way to be Rich, According to the Practice of the Great Audley' wrote that Audley lived: 'a life of intricacies and misteries, wherein he walked as in a maze; and went on as in a labyrinth with the clue of a resolved mind, which made plaine to him all the rough passages he met with; he with a round and solid mind fashioned his own fate, fixed and unmoveable in the great tumults and stir of business, the hard 'Rocke' in the middest of Waves.' This pamphlet is not altogether reliable, and was attacked in apologetic discussions of Audley's career by Gatty and Reade, but the 'intricacies' of his dealings, and the trouble and sorrow they brought to the men and women from whom he profited, are well attested. He died on 15 November 1662 at the house of the rector of St Clement Danes, in Milford Lane, London, and was buried on 21 November at the Temple Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 894


Audley, James (d. 1272), magnate, was the son and heir of Henry Audley and Bertred, daughter of Ralph Mainwaring, county justice of Chester. He had paid homage to Henry III for his father's lands by 19 November 1246. He had one brother, Ralph (died before 1240), and his sister Alice married Peter de Montfort. In 1244 Audley married Ela (died 1299) daughter of William (II) Longespee (c.1209-1250), claimant to the earldom of Salisbury and cousin of Henry III. The couple had five sons, James, Henry, William, Nicholas, and Hugh, who succeeded to the family estates, which were overwhelmingly concentrated in Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Cheshire. 
Audley's service to the crown began in 1250, when he was appointed keeper of the town and castle of Newcastle under Lyme, and was commissioned to settle a dispute in the Welsh marches concerning Fulk Fitzwarine and Thomas Corbet. Similar commissions followed in the next few years. On 29 April 1257 he accompanied Richard, earl of Cornwall, at his coronation as king of the Romans at Aachen. The Welsh took advantage of his absence and ravaged his estates, but he exacted particularly savage retribution on his return, around Michaelmas 1257. Audley's regional power and closeness to the royal family help to explain the more significant role that he played in the following turbulent decade. He was one of the royalist members of the council of fifteen appointed to advise Henry III in accordance with the provisions of Oxford (1258), and witnessed the king's confirmation of their powers on 18 October 1258. However, his involvement in marcher affairs, as relations with the Welsh deteriorated and as the situation in the marches became more volatile, largely accounts for the limited role that he played in purely English affairs in the next few years. In particular he was appointed in November 1259 to visit Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire with Giles of Erdington, as part of the general eyre stipulated in the provisions of Westminster (October 1259), but after duly visiting Northamptonshire he was replaced by Philip Marmion. Already, in 1258, he had been commissioned to arrange a truce with Llywelyn and to settle disputes; in June 1259 he was sent to prolong the truce and negotiate a peace; and in 1260, 1262, 1263, and 1265 he was employed in further negotiations. As the rule of the baronial council disintegrated, Audley emerged as a leading royalist partisan in the Welsh marches. In May 1261 he was appointed keeper of Bridgnorth and Shrewsbury castles and in July he was made sheriff of Shropshire and Staffordshire. He met with some considerable resistance, and in 1262 his lands were seized by the rebels. They were restored in late 1263 on his agreeing to uphold the provisions of Oxford. In August 1263 he was removed by the baronial party from the two shrievalties, but in December 1263 he was appointed a royal 'custos pacis' (keeper of the peace) in the two counties. He was one of the royalists who swore (16 December 1263) to uphold Louis IX of France's judgment in the quarrel between Henry III and the baronial party. He fought for the king at Northampton (6 April 1264) and at Lewes (14 May), where he was captured. He was quickly released, but with most of his fellow marchers he refused to attend the parliament summoned in early July. When Simon de Montfort marched against them, they were forced to submit, and Audley was obliged to hand over his son Nicholas as a hostage (25 August 1264). He remained in arms in support of the royalist cause, establishing close relations with the Lord Edward in this critical period. After the battle of Evesham he acted as Edward's justiciar for Chester (1265-7). 
Audley almost certainly went on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in 1268, and as a crusader he received a judicial protection on 10 July 1270 to accompany the Lord Edward to the Holy Land. But he never went, as he was appointed Edward's justiciar for Ireland on or before 8 August. He held the post until his death in Ireland, which resulted from a broken neck, on or about 11 June 1272. He was succeeded by his son James, who did homage on 29 July 1272. 


@@@@@


doc= 895


Audley, Sir James (c.1318-1369), soldier, was an outstanding exemplar of chivalry, and one of the heroes of the chronicler Froissart. He was the illegitimate son of Sir James Audley (died 1334) of Stratton Audley, Oxfordshire, and Eva, daughter of Sir John Clavering. Study of his life is complicated by homonymity; in particular he has frequently been confused with his relative James Audley (died 1386), lord of Heighley, but there were also several other contemporaries of the same name. Fortunately, though there are differences of detail, Froissart's account of Audley's exploits at the battle of Poitiers (19 September 1356), on which his enduring reputation rests, receives support in other independent contemporary narratives, especially Geoffrey le Baker's, and from the rewards heaped on him by the prince of Wales, so that his leading part in the battle cannot be doubted. He may also have shown the great magnanimity on which Froissart remarks, in immediately making over the prince's initial gift of a generous pension to his four attendant esquires, though their names elude scholars: the tradition that they were Delves of Doddington, Foulehurst of Barthomley, Hawkestone of Wrinehill, and Dutton of Dutton -- all men of Cheshire -- cannot be traced before the late seventeenth century. 
The earliest certain reference to Audley is in a protection granted in June 1346 when he was about to go abroad in the retinue of Edward, prince of Wales, and it was in the latter's service that he passed most of his life. He was at Crecy, and Froissart claims him as one of four knights of the prince's body who witnessed Edward III confer knighthood on his son before the battle. Afterwards he remained in the field until Calais was taken (1347) and was named on the prince's side among the founding knights of the Garter. He may (or may not) have been the Sir James whose arrest was sought in July 1348 for failure to come to the royal council to discuss matters concerning the welfare of the realm. Some versions of Froissart, but not all, relate that he was present at the battle of Winchelsea (1350) and at the relief of St Jean d'Angely in the next year. More certainly, he was with the prince in London in June 1351 and was rewarded with armour for attending a tournament at Eltham on 31 December 1353 along with Sir John Chandos, with whom he is almost always inseparably linked by chroniclers. 
From 1355 Audley's career comes more closely into focus: he was already in receipt of an above average annual pension of $80 when he accompanied the prince to Bordeaux. His presence on the raid that reached Narbonne in the autumn is attested by a letter from Edward on Christmas day 1355 which mentions him operating with Chandos against the count of Armagnac in the Toulouse region, while early in 1356 the same knights used Moissac (Lot-et-Garonne) as a base for attacks on the Agenais, taking and holding nearby Castelsagrat. When the prince launched the campaign that culminated at Poitiers, Audley and Chandos again accomplished several bold deeds and were members of the prince's 'etat majeur'. Near Vierzon on 28 August they routed a company under Philippe de Chambly. Audley also took part in discussions on the eve of the battle, aimed at avoiding conflict, though when it came he was in the forefront, having, according to Froissart, made a vow to strike the first blow. Both he and Baker confirm that Audley was found exhausted after the battle, bleeding profusely and more dead than alive, only reviving after he had been borne to the prince, who allegedly rose from supper with the French king, Jean II, to minister to him and praise his gallantry. 
Confirmation of the prince's gratitude for Audley's services that day is provided by a grant of $400 p.a. for life in December 1356 on the stannaries, confirmed by Edward III in 1359. He was later granted 600 ecus on the customs of Marmande and became lord of Oleron (Charente-Maritime). After recuperating, he may have served at the siege of Rennes in 1357 but his next major opportunity for distinction was the Rheims campaign of 1359-60 where, with Chandos again, he is credited with leading several minor sorties in the Soissonais and capturing the castle of Ferte-sous-Jouarre (Seine-et-Marne), which he used as a base for further exploits. He was present at Calais on 24 October 1360 to witness the Anglo-French treaty and the release of Jean II and was still abroad in 1361. After a brief visit to England (where his main office from 1360 was constable of Gloucester Castle), he returned to Guyenne with Prince Edward in 1362. The last definite occasion when he was back in England was in April 1363; thereafter he spent his time in France probably because his wife, Margaret Bereford, had already died. They had no children and he possessed no extensive English estates. 
Audley was at Poitiers on 26 February 1364 when the Black Prince attempted to mediate between John de Montfort and Charles de Blois, in their dispute over the ducal throne of Brittany. When Edward went to the support of Pedro I of Castile in the autumn of 1366, Audley remained in Guyenne as governor. On the renewed outbreak of war in 1369, he was the prince's lieutenant in Poitou and the Limousin and wasted parts of Berry and the Touraine before besieging La Roche-sur-Yon (Vendee) with Edmund, earl of Cambridge. After the town was taken, he retired, perhaps already sick, to Fontenay-le-Comte (Vendee) where he died around 23 August, a few months before his lifelong brother-in-arms, Chandos, was killed at Lussac (1 December). A widely praised paragon of chivalry, Audley was mourned on his death by friend and foe alike and his obsequies were held with great pomp at Poitiers. His tomb in the cathedral there was destroyed in 1562. 


@@@@@


doc= 896


Audley, Thomas, Baron Audley of Walden (1487/8-1544), lord chancellor, was born at Hay House, Earls Colne, Essex, the son of Geoffrey Audley, administrator, of Berechurch, Essex. At an unknown date he was sent to Buckingham College, Cambridge, which he re-established as Magdalene College in April 1542. On 7 July 1510 he was admitted to the Inner Temple, and he served as autumn reader there in 1526. He was reader again in April 1530. He was also a master of the bench and as late as 1530 still had chambers at the temple. 
In 1514 Audley became town clerk of Colchester, a post he held jointly for the first year with John Barnaby, and then by himself until he resigned it in 1532. About 1519 he married Christina (died 1538), daughter of Sir Thomas Barnardiston of Kedington, Suffolk, and his wife, Elizabeth. They had no children. Audley was first appointed JP for Essex in November 1520, and was named repeatedly to that commission of the peace until his death. On 31 March 1523 he became the first person who was not an alderman to be returned to parliament for the borough of Colchester. When the speaker, Sir Thomas More, defended the rights of the common people against Cardinal Thomas Wolsey's tax demands, Audley took the latter's side, and thus came to the attention of the minister and of Henry VIII (1491-1547). 
From that point a succession of appointments, honours, and offices marked Audley's rise to prominence. In August and November 1523 he was named for Colchester to subsidy commissions and in July 1525 was one of six learned counsel appointed to the king's council in the marches of Wales, nominally headed by Princess Mary. He was made attorney-general during pleasure of the duchy of Lancaster on 11 December 1526, and continued in office until 30 September 1531, when he was granted a life annuity instead. On 24 July 1540 he was also made duchy steward for Essex, Hertfordshire, and Middlesex and appointed constable of Hertford Castle. By March 1527 he was a member of Wolsey's household, and in July he became a groom of the king's chamber. Audley is said to have 'hoped for the great seal on Wolsey's fall', but if such was his ambition, it was thwarted by the appointment of More to the office on 26 October 1529 (Purnell, 32). 
In 1529 Audley was returned as knight of the shire for Essex, and on 4 December that year was named speaker, reputedly at the instigation of the king. He proved his worth during the Reformation Parliament, playing a key role in steering through the Commons the legislation that led to the break with Rome and permitted Henry to divorce Katherine of Aragon. Audley was so successful in this that John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, accused the Commons of promoting the church's destruction. Audley led a group of thirty men to protest to the king at being compared to heathens and infidels, and Henry warned Fisher to moderate his comments. Audley's triumphs in oratory were matched by further advancement: he was elevated to serjeant-at-law on 12 or 13 November 1531. 
Audley was knighted and made keeper of the great seal on 20 May 1532, four days after More resigned as lord chancellor. However, he had to wait until 26 January 1533 before being named lord chancellor himself. E. K. Purnell claimed that Audley's talents as a parliamentary manager delayed his appointment as lord chancellor. Another conjecture is that he was finally named to the office because of the discovery of Anne Boleyn's pregnancy, which meant that a compliant lord chancellor was needed to speed the divorce. These arguments are symbiotic; Anne's secret marriage, due to the discovery of her pregnancy, took place in the period between two sessions of the parliament (December 1532 to January 1533). The impending birth of an heir gave the king greater impetus for a legislative break with Rome and the foundation of a separate Church of England. Consequently, Audley's promotion gave him a greater platform for influence, particularly in the House of Lords, where he is credited with smoothing the path for the king's legislative programme. 
Promotion to lord chancellor did not immediately increase Audley's intimacy with Henry. His role appears to have been as a conduit between the council and the courts, when he was not away on local business. Already by October 1532 he was managing royal business in the absence of Thomas Cromwell and the king, who were both at Calais at the time. During the 1530s Audley's letters containing legal advice for the king and requests for grants for himself were addressed to Cromwell, who would then pass them to Henry. Such requests were generally couched in the most humble and submissive of terms, yet his letters regarding legal affairs suggest that Audley was confident, even aggressive, in promoting his professional opinion, and also that he was thorough and well prepared, providing ample examples from legal precedent to back up his arguments but also suggesting alternative stratagems. Upon Cromwell's fall in 1540 and the division of his responsibilities among the privy council Audley was given primary authority over 'affairs of justice'. This elevation was disparaged by the French ambassador, Charles de Marillac, bishop of Vienne, who said Audley 'can neither speak French nor Latin, and has the reputation of being a good seller of justice whenever he can find a buyer' ('LP Henry VIII', 15, no. 804). Marillac's judgement hardly seems fair or credible. Audley was a good servant and an astute politician, but decisions rarely appear motivated by profit rather than justice. In 1532 he disagreed with Cromwell and Sir William Paulet over their method of handling one of Henry's suits, saying that he felt they could take a more just approach and still maintain 'the king's honour and profit' ('LP Henry VIII', 9, no. 1721). Justice and its accomplishment formed a common theme of his correspondence; in May 1537 he requested Cromwell to countermand an order to deliver a prisoner to Sir William Brereton. Audley feared that Brereton would attempt to save the man from execution, as he had done before, and protested that it would not serve justice. 
Audley's parliamentary orations were masterful. In one speech in 1531 he represented the Commons as grieved over losing the king's favour, rather than aggrieved in the matter of the supplication of the ordinaries; in another, in 1536, he persuaded MPs eager for the dissolution of parliament of Henry's great need of their continued services in order to resolve the succession, portraying their duty as aiding the king for the benefit of the commonwealth. Audley has been accused of obsequiousness: certainly, he would put off decisions to await the king's pleasure; but this could be better characterized as prudence, a quality he had in abundance. He neither hesitated to call attention to his clever means of achieving the best result for Henry, nor failed to disagree with other royal servants over an issue he perceived could be settled by more equitable, or more legalistic, solutions. He also had his own interests in legal reform, independent from Cromwell's. Although the two men formed an effective partnership, crafting bills which Audley then did his best to pass through parliament, in 1540 the lord chancellor was the instigator of a major attempt at law reform -- particularly land law -- which resulted in an act to prohibit wrongful disseisin by inheritance, and another strengthening the rights of lessees of land. After Cromwell's fall Audley became the prime instigator and manager of parliamentary legislation. 
Audley also defended his position against encroachment, and refused to be made a scapegoat for others' mistakes. When told that Henry had been informed that certain acquittances had been lost because of his negligence, Audley protested he had no control over the dispatches once they had left his hands, and would not accept blame. He argued at length with Cromwell over the right to nominate the under-sheriff of London in 1535, and held his ground in the matter, despite accusations against him of ingratitude. He also did not hesitate to speak the blunt truth to supplicants for his help. In September 1537 the London clothmakers complained to him of the disastrous effects to their business if the suspended act regulating the manufacture of cloth was allowed to take force, and threatened to cease doing business if the suspension was not continued. Though Audley did write to Cromwell recommending that the suspension be extended, he told the clothmakers that they were capable of complying with the act if they so willed, and that if business did cease and people were angered by the loss of jobs, it would be on their heads. 
Audley's willingness and ability to pursue courses that were satisfactory to the royal will were balanced by his desire to preserve the power of parliament and the exactitude of the law. He has been called a man 'anxious for the right and true meaning of the law' to prevail, and Sir Geoffrey Elton identified him as one of the 'great chancellor-judges of the sixteenth century... [who] defined and developed the principles on which the seventeenth century erected a coherent system of law' (Guy, 'Cardinal's Court', 107; Elton, 'England under the Tudors', 81). These objectives sometimes brought him into conflict with others. When Arthur Plantagenet, sixth Viscount Lisle, protested against the subpoena of two of his men at Calais in 1535 Audley firmly upheld the letter of the law against his apparent request to drop process so that the men would not have to return to England. In 1547 Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, in a letter to Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector to Edward VI, recounted an exchange with Audley during a case of 'praemunire' against John Veysey, bishop of Exeter, and his chancellor. Audley directed Gardiner to cease his persistent arguments in their favour lest he be accused of the same crime, whereupon the bishop 'concluded it seemed to me strange that a man authorized by the king (as since the King's Majesty hath taken upon him the supremacy every bishop is such one) could fall in a praemunire'. Gardiner claimed Audley told him privately that without 'praemunire' Henry and his bishops could combine their jurisdictions to 'order the laity as ye listed'. Instead, said Audley, 'we will provide... that the praemunire shall ever hang over your heads, and so we laymen shall be sure to enjoy our inheritance by the common laws and acts of Parliament' (Elton, 'Tudor Constitution', 25). At More's trial on 1 July 1535 Audley's riposte to the defendant's declaration that the 'Act of Supremacy' went against natural law and reason was that the prelates, universities, and lawyers of the realm had all agreed to its validity. Such blunt and matter-of-fact confrontations may have been one reason why Audley complained of being 'accepted better as a poor, honest man before he became Chancellor' ('LP Henry VIII', 9, no. 528). 
Further elevation came in the form of Audley's creation as Baron Audley of Walden on 29 November 1538 and his election on 23 April and installation on 19 May 1540 as a knight of the Garter. The 'Act of Precedence' passed by the 1539 parliament also elevated Audley's political importance, giving him precedence over all but dukes of royal blood in parliament, privy council, and Star Chamber. Lady Audley died on 23 January 1538. Three months later, on 22 April 1538, Audley married Lady Elizabeth (died 1557), daughter of Thomas Grey, second marquess of Dorset (1477-1530), and his second wife, Margaret. Audley's second marriage may have brought as much grief as good. Though it made him cousin by marriage to the king, his father-in-law had been in and out of favour with both Henry VII and Henry VIII during a chequered career, and on 28 June 1541 Dorset's brother Leonard Grey, Viscount Graney ('c'.1490-1541), was executed for treason. Audley himself insisted, in a letter in which he sued for grants of former monastic land in order to ensure an estate for his heirs, that he had married at the king's command. He used similar pleas about how he expected Henry to support his marriage in a letter of 1539 or 1540, requesting a favourable exchange of lands with the king to compensate himself for the loss of the manors of St Osyth's and St John's in Essex. Such hard-nosed petitioning may help explain Audley's reputation as rapacious and grasping, but his complaints sound less like rapacity than anxiety over the cost of maintaining the substantial establishment necessary for a leading royal servant. He does appear to have been obsessed by fears of penury, and he was quick to spot opportunity and to pursue it. On writing to Cromwell enclosing letters patent for a grant of Essex manors to Anne, he asked him to beg the queen for the keepership of one of the parks. 
Audley and his second wife had two daughters, Mary (died 'c'.1546), who remained unmarried, and Margaret (1540-1564), who married first Henry Dudley (1531?-1557), then Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, and died on 10 January 1564. Audley had kinsmen to provide for, including two brothers, Thomas and Henry Audley. He later left Thomas his manor of Berechurch. Often, Audley's letters requesting grants of benefices or offices included the comment that they would not enrich him but rather provide for a kinsman or servant. One John Green complained to Thomas Wriothesley in January 1538 that Audley had not helped him to gain the offices and benefits he hoped for while in his service, as 'my Lord has so many of my Lady his last wife's kindred looking to him for promotion' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/1, no. 866). 
Cromwell's execution did not change the focus of Audley's duties. Audley appears to have still been the mainstay of the privy council based in London, where he served as a contact for foreign ambassadors, received orders through the privy councillors at court regarding business to be done, passed information on to them regarding London issues, and responded to their summons to debate specific matters in which his legal expertise was presumably desired. In particular, he appears to have been considered the expert on issues of treason. His London house at Christ Church in Aldgate became a convenient meeting place and informal gaol: Agnes, duchess of Norfolk, was detained there during the investigation of Katherine Howard, and in June 1543 one of Marillac's messengers was to be intercepted, and 'brought privily to the lord Chancellor's house and kept in secret custody' ('LP Henry VIII', 18/1, no. 727). Though not among the first rank of politicians, Audley moved in exalted circles, particularly where his expertise was called into use. In June 1543 he was one of the commissioners appointed to negotiate peace between England and Scotland and between Mary, queen of Scots, and Edward, prince of Wales, and he was present at such great ceremonies as Edward's baptism and the arrival in England of Anne of Cleves. In September 1538 he was also granted permission by Henry to visit Edward at Havering in Essex. He wrote a chatty description of the occasion, complimenting the child, observing that Edward's attendants were inclined to be a bit overprotective, and expressing his relief that the prince's household would be moving from Havering before the winter cold set in. He enjoyed greater local consequence and was appointed to county commissions along with the other leading nobles, including the wealthiest and most powerful man in Essex, John de Vere, fifteenth earl of Oxford. In 1539 both men were included on the commission for the defence of the coast along the Thames estuary and in Essex. He enjoyed his new status, writing to Cromwell in September 1538 that he was off to visit Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, at Framlingham in Suffolk, 'to kill some of his bucks there' (Cook, 196). 
Audley facilitated the removal of many of the human obstacles to the achievement of Henry's desires, in particular when dealing with queens who had outlived their usefulness as far as the king was concerned. He drafted bills with Cromwell in 1531-2 dealing with the issues of the English archiepiscopal power to grant divorce and denial of papal authority over the prelacy, and secured passage of the act in restraint of appeals, the 'Act of Supremacy', and the other statutes that made possible the break with Rome. In his dealings with Anne Boleyn and her successors, Audley was given the thankless task of first arranging successful marriages, and later facilitating divorces or executions, and he tended to both sides of this business in his straightforward, lawyerly fashion. At the beginning of Anne's rise to power Audley was regarded by some as one of her allies and supporters. After her fall in 1536, as lord chancellor he tried her alleged accomplices, and attended her own trial as adviser to the panel of peers on legal matters. He was also present at her execution on 19 May. In the same fashion Audley negotiated the king's marriage to Anne of Cleves. However, on 6 July 1540 he was among those who informed Anne of the parliamentary suit for examination of her marriage by the clergy, and gave deposition the following day to convocation regarding impediments to the union. He was also one of the men who interrogated Katherine Howard and others in November and December 1541 regarding accusations of her infidelity and wantonness, and was ordered to reveal to the privy council in Star Chamber the queen's 'abominable demeanour' ('LP Henry VIII', 16, nos. 1331, 1334, 1408, 1422). Audley was appointed a commissioner for the trial of her accomplices Thomas Culpeper and Francis Dereham, as well as that of her uncle Lord William Howard, and others accused of misprision in the case. This particular aspect of Audley's career supports the view of him as a pragmatist, concerned above all with peace and order, the authority of crown and parliament, and the ascendancy of the royal interest. 
The event that contributed most to Audley's negative historical reputation was one of the first major state trials of his career. In 1535 Audley issued the commissions for and directed the trials of Fisher and More for treason in their refusal to take the oath of succession. In particular, Audley is condemned over his handling of More's trial. He is accused of permitting the weight of the conviction to rest on the unsubstantiated testimony of Richard Rich, for overruling More's objections to this in his defence, and for beginning to pass sentence on him without allowing the former lord chancellor the opportunity to argue against conviction. Audley was also the person entrusted with attainting Cromwell, his former friend and ally, through a parliamentary act of 19 June 1540, a device that offered the defendant no chance to defend himself. Audley also served as lord high steward for the trials of Henry Pole, Baron Montagu, and Henry Courtenay, marquess of Exeter, on 2 December 1538, and Thomas Fiennes, ninth Baron Dacre of the South, on 27 June 1541. In any legal issue, Henry could rely on his lord chancellor to provide the best solution for him, taking into account both his wishes and the course of justice, and doing his best to reconcile the two. 
In matters of religion, Audley was assiduous in orchestrating the break with Rome, but it is difficult to support the view of him as protestant. When discussing in a letter to Cromwell a book on iconoclasm he had seen, he expressed anxiety over it and said he intended to stop its publication, fearing its effects on law and order. He said it would be well for people to hold off their opinions of such 'until the King has put a final order' in the light of the report of his commissioners ('LP Henry VIII', 9, no. 358). Audley's precise views on theology and doctrine in relation to his private worship are obscure, but royal and parliamentary decisions were his guide to action. He has been claimed as radical and evangelical, but his status as champion of the protestant faith may be due to his office, which brought him into the central arena of the legislative programme that changed the religion of the kingdom. 
Audley's close partnership with Cromwell, with both men being regarded as reformist, may also have had its effect on estimations of the lord chancellor's religious affinities. Franz Burchard, the Saxon vice-chancellor, explained in a letter to Philip Melanchthon that the 'Act of Six Articles' had been promoted by men who desired Cromwell's downfall, Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, and Audley, whom he still called 'excellent men, and most friendly to the purer doctrine of the gospel' ('LP Henry VIII', 14/2, no. 423). Testimony regarding the Lincolnshire rising of 1536 indicated that rhymes which 'had been sung abroad by minstrels' about the men blamed for schism and dissolution included Audley's name, and a servant of Thomas Marshall, abbot of Colchester, testified in November 1539 that his master had said 'I would to Christ that the rebels in the North country had the bishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, and the lord Privy Seal [Cromwell] amongst them and then I trust we should have a merry world again' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/2, no. 1021, 3-4; 'LP Henry VIII', 14/2, no. 439). Still, Audley's temper in religious matters appears moderate; he was not regarded as a sacramentarian like Cromwell in 1540, and was appointed, with the conservatives Norfolk and William Fitzwilliam, earl of Southampton, to interrogate Cromwell regarding Anne of Cleves's betrothal. In 1539 he also received from Gardiner the right of a presentation to a living, and considering the bishop's conservatism, it seems doubtful that he would have given such opportunity to an evangelical, even if he were wooing him for political reasons. David Lloyd commented in his seventeenth-century biographical sketch of the lord chancellor, 'Cromwell pulled down Popery with his power: Audley kept it down with his policy' (Lloyd, 75). 
The dissolution of the monasteries was of great personal benefit to Audley. Thomas Fuller, in his 'Church History', said that Audley received the grant of Christ Church in London, the first priory to be suppressed, 'to clear his voice, to make him speak shrill and loud for his master' (Fuller, 358-9). Richard Griffin, third Baron Braybrooke, called Audley the 'principal actor of the dissolution', and credited him with drawing up, with Rich's help, the 'Act of Dissolution' of 1536, which also created the court of augmentations (Braybrooke, 10). However, Marillac credited Rich and Cromwell with the invention and authorization of the dissolution. In September 1540 Audley did gain the lucrative augmentations office of high steward of all lands formerly belonging to religious houses north of the Trent. 
From the dissolved houses Audley, a man of modest origins, built up a substantial estate. On 26 May 1536 he was granted St Botolph's in Colchester, and two days later he received the priory of Prittlewell, also in Essex. In April 1542 he was given the priory of Colchester and the abbey of Tilty in Essex. Fears of dissolution also helped expand his holdings: the manor at Berechurch was allegedly given to him in 1531 by Sir William Weston, prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England, for help in preventing the dissolution of the order. Such may also have been the case with the exchanges made by Weston in 1538 of the manors of Rye in Essex and Gosbeck in Suffolk to Audley in return for a rectory and advowson in Warwickshire. It certainly was the case in an exchange by John, abbot of St Osyth, in 1538 of the manors of Abberton and Abbots, as well as other properties in Essex and Suffolk, for lands belonging to Audley. Additionally, Audley purchased manors and lands from the nunnery of Holywell, Hertfordshire, in 1537, and received a grant of lands in Hertfordshire in December 1538, to be held from the king, from the abbey of St Mary by the Tower. The most valued of his acquisitions was Walden Abbey, the source of his title, which was granted to him in March 1538, and renamed Audley End in 1616 by his grandson Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk, in honour of his eminent forebear. 
Arguments regarding Audley's sympathy towards the floundering abbeys have been advanced, relative to his plea to the king not to dissolve St John's and St Osyth's but rather turn them into collegiate churches. Audley's actions suggest that rather than having sympathy for all victims of the dissolution, he was concerned with protecting, as best he could, interests in his local domain of Colchester, or at least softening the blow he knew would come. In September 1535 he wrote asking Cromwell to excuse Barking Abbey in Essex from examination by Sir Thomas Legh until Audley could speak privately to Cromwell regarding the matter. In July 1539 an inventory of the goods of St Osyth indicated that several articles of plate were delivered to the abbot 'by my Lord Chancellor's command', and a letter from Audley of 4 August 1539 requested speedy execution of the patents for pensions for the late abbot and convent ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 14/1, no. 1326). He also is said to have advised St Mary's, his parish in Colchester, to sell off its church goods in advance of possible dissolution in order to benefit the parish. None the less, Marshall was implacably resentful towards Audley; examinations of Colchester men in 1539 indicated that the abbot wished vengeance on the lord chancellor and others for the destruction of the abbeys, calling them 'arch-heretics' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 14/2, nos. 439, 454, 458). It has also been asserted that Audley was offered handsome bribes by the abbot of St Osyth and by Weston if he would plead with the king to spare their religious houses, and certainly he held out the inducement to Henry of $2000 promised by those abbeys in exchange for their survival. Though he held St Osyth's and St John's at pleasure by 1539, and asked for the grant of St Osyth for life upon its dissolution, Audley did not ultimately gain the properties. 
Audley appears to have enjoyed the visible trappings of success. Among the notations in Cromwell's accounts of 1537-9 are some to Audley's company of players or minstrels, and his bargemen. Audley had amassed a substantial landed estate by his death (valuing it as worth about $800 per annum in 1539/40), but he complained incessantly that he was also at the mercy of the expense of office. In suing to the king for St Osyth, he wrote to Cromwell that the lord chancellorship, though 'high and honourable', was also 'cumbrous and chargeable', and that he had no other offices or fees to enhance his income (Cook, 183). An example of his fiscal burdens may be seen in the observation made by the imperial ambassador, Eustache Chapuys, in 1542 that Audley was one of those wealthy enough for Henry to request from him a loan. The figure in question was $4000; only Norfolk and Charles Brandon, first duke of Suffolk, paid more. Audley himself stated in a letter of 1538 that he had advanced more than $1000 from his own fees of office in pensions to former inmates of religious houses and spent more than 1100 marks on the 'charges of the rebellion', for which he knew he could not expect repayment (ibid., 204). Audley's early obscurity and consequent obsession with acquiring wealth and status, the great expense that his elevated position then entailed, and his hopes of further consideration by Henry in terms of lands or gifts are constant themes of his correspondence. 
Historical judgement of Audley is mixed. Fuller said of the black marble tomb at Saffron Walden containing his remains, 'the stone is not harder, nor the marble blacker, than the heart of him who lies beneath' (Purnell, 37). With regard to his personal attributes, Lloyd described Audley as 'one whose Austerity was allayed with debonairness, whose Gravity was sweetened with pleasantness; whose knowledge was as large as his authority, whose wit was equal with his wisdom', and added that Audley's soul was 'quick, solid, apprehensive and judicious', his body 'tall and majestic' (Lloyd, 72). The most positive judgement of Audley is one that also rings true: he weathered the political storms by knowing how to bend to them, and by being temperate, calm, and judicious. 'Patience can weather out the most turbulent age, and a solid judgment the most intricate times; the reserved and quiet man is the most secure' (ibid., 75). Audley retained Henry's favour throughout his life, a rare accomplishment for royal servants of the second Tudor king. On 21 April 1544 Audley gave up the great seal, professing himself uncertain of his ability to perform his duties 'through infirmity of body', an unsurprising decision, considering he had been absent from most of the parliamentary meetings of 1543 and 1544 owing to illness ('LP Henry VIII', 19/1, no. 459). He died peacefully, aged fifty-six, at his home at Christ Church, Aldgate, London, on 30 April 1544, and was buried at Saffron Walden, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 897


Aufrere, Anthony (1756-1833), translator and antiquary in Europe, was the eldest son of Anthony Aufrere (1730-1814), landowner and magistrate, of Hoveton Hall, Norfolk, and Anna (1735-1816), the only daughter of John Norris (died 1734), of Witton, Norfolk, and Anna Carthew. His mother was the sister of John Norris (1733/4-1777), founder of the Norrisian professorship at Cambridge. Little is known about Aufrere's early life, but by 1785 he was forced to leave his home of Old Foulsham Hall in Norfolk and to flee the country to escape his creditors, his debts having 'exceeded all Reason' (Ingamells, 34). He travelled widely in Italy, where, in Pisa, he met General James Lockhart, of Lee and Carnwath, and his daughter Marianna. On 19 February 1791 he married Marianna, with whom he had two children, George and Louisa. His son married the youngest daughter of a Hamburg merchant named Whertman, and his daughter married George Barclay, a New York merchant. 
By 1792 Aufrere and his wife were living in Heidelberg, and the following year they moved to Mannheim. From an early age Aufrere had showed a great aptitude for learning languages, and he published several translations. His first publication was 'A Tribute to the Memory of Ulric of Hutten' (1795), translated from a work then attributed to Goethe, but now known to have been by Herder. In 1795 he translated a German work by Anton von Salis-Marschlins, published as 'Travels through Various Provinces of the Kingdom of Naples, in 1789', and in 1822 an Italian work by Paolo della Cella, published as 'Narrative of an Expedition from Tripoli... to the Western Frontier of Egypt'. A small work which attracted much attention was his 'Warning to Britons against French perfidy and cruelty, or, A short account of the treacherous and inhuman conduct of the French officers and soldiers towards the peasants of Suabia, during the invasion of Germany in 1796' (1798), which was reprinted several times. Aufrere was a frequent contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' under the pseudonym of Viator A, but his most significant work was his edition of the letters and papers of George Lockhart and other Jacobites at the time of the risings of 1715 and 1745. He had been entrusted with this task by his brother-in-law Charles Lockhart, Count Lockhart, in 1799, and the papers were published in two volumes in 1817. Aufrere, who returned to Pisa in 1815, died there on 29 November 1833, aged seventy-six, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 898


Princess Augusta Sophia (1768-1840), born on 8 November 1768, and 


@@@@@


doc= 899


Augustine (d. 604), missionary and archbishop of Canterbury, was the leader of the first official Christian mission to the Anglo-Saxons. He was sent by Pope Gregory the Great, arrived in Kent in 597, and became the first archbishop of Canterbury. Nothing is known of his parentage or antecedents, beyond that he was a monk, presumably of Gregory's own foundation of St Andrew on the Coelian Hill in Rome, before being appointed to head the group of monks sent from Rome in 596. Gregory's missionary purposes towards these Germanic pagans may not be unconnected to the missionary challenge posed by the Lombards who had overrun much of Italy in his time. As to the use of monks, there were many precedents for monks as missionaries and Gregory believed that the contemplative life was good preparation for a fruitful and active career. When the party lost heart in the winter of 596-7, he formally appointed Augustine their abbot and sent them a firm letter to go on. Their intended journey may be traced by Gregory's letters of recommendation to the bishops of Marseilles, Vienne, and Autun (among others), and of Tours, on the Loire. Tours had the shrine of St Martin, a saint greatly venerated by Gregory. Martin was a monk and bishop, who had dealt boldly with secular authorities and had retreated often to renew himself spiritually in prayer and meditation, a model of how Gregory would advise Augustine and his followers to live in Kent. They doubtless went to Tours to pray in 596-7. 
AEthelberht, king of Kent, received Augustine and his party of forty or so in friendly manner. It is said that his reason for receiving them out of doors was to prevent their casting magical spells on him. As he must have been married to his Christian Frankish wife, Bertha, for over eight years by then, the story, if true, seems to have more to do with public saving of face than with any real fear of Christian magic. There is strong reason to believe that AEthelberht was not converted immediately in 597, but equally strong reason to think that he had been converted by 601. Bede, from whom, together with letters of Gregory, comes all that is to be known about Augustine, tells in his 'Historia ecclesiastica' (completed in 731) that Augustine brought with him Frankish interpreters, and modern historians have shown that Frankish involvement in the mission was altogether far-reaching. Where and when was Augustine consecrated bishop? It has been argued that it must have been on the journey to Britain (and at Autun, rather than at Arles as Bede would have it), for Gregory first refers to Augustine as a bishop in a letter of 4 September 597 addressed to Syagrius, bishop of Autun, which implies that he was consecrated at latest in July. But the arguments for a consecration before Augustine's arrival in Kent (probably spring 597) are weak. Gregory clearly intended the mission to be established first. The arguments for Autun as the place, however, are telling. In any case Bede must be mistaken in naming Aetherius, bishop of Arles, as consecrator, for the name is mixed up with that of a bishop of Lyons. Whatever the place, a return to Gaul 'after' his arrival in Kent would have enabled Augustine, in consultation with AEthelberht, to choose a consecrator well away from Bertha's region (the kingdom of her father, Charibert I, was based on Paris), hence implying no threat of political subordination to Franks. 
Although Canterbury, where AEthelberht settled the mission from the start, could boast little civic or economic continuity with the Roman city, archaeology has shown earlier Germanic settlement, and it was the administrative centre of AEthelberht's kingdom. Moreover, whatever the previous lack of ecclesiastical organization, there were at least two Christian churches (or buildings used as churches) surviving from earlier: St Martin's, where the mission first held its services; and another Roman church (or other building) which Augustine perhaps rebuilt ('recuperavit'), dedicated to the Saviour (that is, Christ Church), and made his cathedral. Since Gregory attached importance to Augustine and his monks continuing to lead a life of monastic community, it was probably for this reason that just to the east of the city the monastery of St Peter and St Paul (later St Augustine's) was also established. Bede, following Canterbury traditions, gives a glowing testimony to the apostolic simplicity of life led by Augustine and his companions, their preaching and 'unceasing prayer', in these early days. A school was established and the Roman chants were introduced. Augustine by no means neglected the material consolidation of his churches. The beginning of AEthelberht's law code, drawn up under the influence of the Roman mission, concerns compensation for the violation of church property; and a strong case has been made that Augustine played a part, though not the only part, in introducing charters to England, with the obvious motive of giving legal protection to the grants made to the church by AEthelberht and others. 
Augustine was anxious to lay his pastorate on a sound legal basis and elicited a series of answers from Gregory to questions he posed concerning church discipline, such as punishment for theft of church property, forbidden degrees of kinship in marriage, and proper dealings with bishops in Britain and Gaul (he was given authority over all bishops in Britain). Suso Brechter branded the text of these 'Responsiones' a forgery made in Bede's time by the Canterbury priest, Nothhelm, but Paul Meyvaert has proved that their manuscript tradition cannot support that view and that they are probably genuine. Bede gave the text, which also found its way into several later canon law collections. Gregory outlined his plan for the English church when he sent the pallium to Augustine. There were to be metropolitan bishops at London and York with twelve suffragans each. Augustine was clearly intended to be archbishop at London, but in his time this scheme got no further than the appointments of Mellitus and Justus to London and Rochester respectively, and the metropolitan see always remained at Canterbury. Mellitus was sent from Rome in 601, with other Romans, to reinforce the mission, with many relics, church ornaments, and books, and with advice that the methods of conversion should be gentle and gradualist. 
What kind of person was Augustine? It is well-nigh impossible to answer this question. It is clear that the miraculous element played no small part in his missionary methods. Historians have sometimes suggested that Gregory's letter to Augustine, exhorting him not to glory in his miracles but always to judge his inner self strictly, casts Augustine in a vainglorious light; but Gregory never lost an opportunity to convey the lesson of this letter as a general principle, so that one cannot read into it an adverse reflection on Augustine, virtually none of whose miracles actually survive on historical record. Again, Bede's celebrated account of Augustine's meeting near the River Severn with the British bishops (those from Wales and the British west) to bring them under his authority, when they took his failure to rise and greet them as a sign of pride, is difficult to interpret, for it derives from a hostile, seemingly non-Canterbury, source. The best that can be said is that in matters such as the balance of action and contemplation, right attitude to miracles, and devotion to teaching, the ideals of his mission were those of Pope Gregory the Great. This is likely to be more than the mere retrospective perception of Bede and his Canterbury informants, considering the close relation of the Roman monks to Gregory, and Gregory's 'hands on' attitude to the enterprise. 
Augustine died on 26 May 604 (the same year as Gregory) and was buried first outside the church of St Peter and St Paul, and then, after its completion, in its north chapel. After the Norman conquest his cult was newly promoted. The initial stimulus to this was the primacy dispute between Canterbury and York, but in the translation (1091) of St Augustine's remains to a new shrine in the central apse of the east end of what had now become St Augustine's Abbey, Abbot Wido seems also to have been making a point to enhance the prestige of his abbey within the context of rivalry between it and the cathedral priory of Christ Church, Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 900


Augustus Frederick, Prince, duke of Sussex (1773-1843), sixth son and ninth child of George III and Queen Charlotte, was born at Buckingham House (later Palace) on 27 January 1773. From 1786, when he entered the University of Gottingen, until 1804, he mostly resided abroad. As a young man, he suffered severely from asthma; too delicate to join the army or navy, at one stage he considered entering the church. His lengthy sojourn on the continent fostered his intellectual tastes, radical sympathies, and social horizons. 
While living in Rome in the winter of 1792, the prince met and proposed to Lady Augusta Murray ('bap'. 1761, died 1830), second daughter of the fourth earl of Dunmore. At first she refused, fearing his family's disapproval; but on 4 April 1793 they underwent a secret marriage ceremony, performed by a clergyman of the Church of England named Gunn, without any witnesses present. To guard against the possibility of objections to the marriage from the fact that it had taken place in Roman jurisdiction, the ceremony was repeated at St George's, Hanover Square, London, on 5 December following, under the disguised names of Augustus Frederick and Augusta Murray. This contravened the provisions of the 'Royal Marriages Act' of 1772, and their union was declared void by the king in August 1794. There were two children of the marriage, Augustus Frederick (1794-1848), and Augusta Emma (1801-1866), who married Sir Thomas Wilde, later Lord Truro and lord chancellor. The children took the surname of D'Este, after Italian ancestors common to their parents, for Lady Augusta Murray was also of royal descent. For some years the prince ignored the decision of the court, but ultimately he acquiesced. In 1809 he applied for the custody of his children, because he had heard that their mother was bringing them up to believe that 'they were princes and princesses'. In 1806 Lady Augusta received royal licence to assume the name of D'Ameland instead of Murray. The son, Sir Augustus Frederick D'Este, made various efforts to get his claims recognized, and in 1831 filed a bill in chancery, 'to prove the marriage good and valid'. 
In 1801 Prince Augustus was created duke of Sussex, earl of Inverness, and Baron Arklow. His liberal political views estranged him from his father and the court, and excluded him from lucrative employments similar to those enjoyed by the other royal dukes. He supported the progressive political policies of his time, including the abolition of the slave trade, Catholic emancipation, the removal of the civil disabilities of Jews and dissenters, the abolition of the corn laws, and parliamentary reform. Once, when speaking to the House of Lords at inordinate length on Catholic emancipation and its historical precedents in the middle ages, a tory peer whispered to his neighbour that 'His Royal Highness is deep in the Councils of Trent'. His colleague replied wearily, 'I could wish it was the river' (Fulford, 260). Such endorsement of whig principles often brought him into conflict with the prince regent and most of their more conservatively minded brothers. 
The duke's interest in the advancement of art and science was genuine and enlightened, and he readily lent his influence to promote charitable schemes. In his later years he was in great demand as chairman at anniversary dinners. He became grand master of the freemasons in 1811. He was elected president of the Society of Arts in 1816, and from 1830 to 1838 was president of the Royal Society. In the latter capacity he gave brilliant receptions in his apartments at Kensington Palace, but the resulting expense induced him to resign the presidentship, as he preferred spending the money on his library. This collection, over 50,000 volumes strong, included about 1000 editions of the 'Bible', and many ancient manuscripts. 
With the accession in 1830 of William IV (with whom he was on better terms than with George IV) the duke was restored to favour at court, and appointed ranger of the royal parks. On 2 May 1831 he married (again outside the terms of the 'Royal Marriages Act') Lady Cecilia (1793-1873), daughter of the second earl of Arran, and widow of Sir George Buggin. In 1840 she was created duchess of Inverness. There were no children of this marriage. The duke died from erysipelas on 21 April 1843, at Kensington Palace. 'The Times' commented that 'No death in the royal family short of the actual demise of a monarch could have occasioned a stronger feeling of deprivation' (22 April 1843). In his will he asked that his remains should not be interred with the royal family at Windsor, from which his wife would be excluded; he was buried in the public cemetery at Kensal Green on 4 May 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 901


Aurelius, Abraham (1574x6-1631), Reformed minister, was born in London, the son of Giovanni Battista Aureli ('c'.1540-1596), better known as Jean-Baptiste Aurelius, a Calvinist divine from Calabria, Italy, and minister to the Italian refugee church in London from 1570, and his wife, Maria van den Corput. Early destined for the ministry of the foreign refugee churches in London, Aurelius studied, apparently intermittently, at Leiden from 1594 to 1604 and then spent some months at Geneva in 1604 in order to improve his French and Italian. He was appointed the fourth minister of the French and Walloon congregation in London in April 1605, joining Robert le Macon de la Fontaine, Aaron Cappel, and Nathaniel Marie. He was also entrusted with ministering to the smaller Italian protestant community of London, which was then affiliated with the French church. On 13 August 1605 he married Jeanne Hersent (died 1641), with whom he had several children over the following fifteen years. The first of these, Jean, was born in Sanvic, near Le Havre, in France, whose church Aurelius served temporarily as minister from February 1606 to April 1607. Thereafter he spent the rest of his career and life in the French church of London. 
As a pastor, Aurelius won the approval of Isaac Casaubon for his theology and preaching. Apart from performing these and other regular pastoral duties, Aurelius was a published poet in Latin. In 1613 he published a brief epithalamium for the marriage of Frederick, the elector palatine, to Princess Elizabeth, 'In nuptias Frederici comitis palatini... et Elizabethae... regis filiae, epithalamium'. 
According to a letter from Gilbert Primrose of 11 April 1631, Aurelius had recently died after an illness. He was buried in the parish of St Helen, Bishopsgate, on 16 July of that year. His verse paraphrase of the book of 'Job', 'Jobus, sive, De patientia liber poetica metaphrasi explicatus', appeared posthumously in 1632. The work, which includes a 1618 engraving of Aurelius aged forty-three (or in his forty-third year), is dedicated to the ambassador of the Spanish Netherlands, Albert Joachim, and is preceded by verse eulogies to Aurelius from Primrose, who was later to marry Aurelius's widow, Jeanne, and from Cesar Calandrini, the principal minister of the Dutch church, and Peter du Moulin the younger, whom Aurelius had helped to educate in the French church. 


@@@@@


doc= 902


Murray, Sarah (1744-1811), travel writer, is of unknown parentage. It has been suggested that she may have been the Sarah Maese who ran a girls' school in Beaufort Square, Bath, in the 1760s and published 'The School: being a Series of Letters, between a Young Lady and her Mother' in 1766 but there is no conclusive evidence and no record of the school has survived. A letter exists which may link Sarah Maese to the bluestocking Elizabeth Montagu (Montagu letters) but this link remains unproven. She married her first husband, the Hon. William Murray (1734-1786), a naval officer, brother of the earl of Dunmore, by special licence on 11 August 1783. From 1782 to 1793 she lived at 23 Kensington Square, Kensington, London. She then moved to 19 Kensington Square and while living there, in 1802, she married again. George Aust (died 1829), her second husband, served as under-secretary of state for foreign affairs from 1790 until 1796 and as secretary and registrar of Chelsea Royal Hospital. She remained at 19 Kensington Square until 1806, when she and George Aust moved to Noel House on the site of Palace Gate; there George had built a new house for which Sarah laid out the grounds. 
In May 1796 Sarah Murray began a five-month tour of Scotland with the specific aim of writing a guidebook. Travelling by carriage with a maid and manservant, Murray set out to 'see every thing worth seeing' (Murray, 43). 'A companion, and useful guide to the beauties of Scotland, to the lakes of Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Lancashire' was published in 1799. As well as giving a full description of Murray's own travels, the book provided specific information about inns, horses, road conditions, prices, equipment, and mileages. Reviews of the book appeared in the 'British Critic' (October 1799) and the 'Monthly Review' (April 1800). It was well received by the critics, who considered its detailed practical information to be of particular interest. They also expressed their admiration for Murray's intrepidness, although the 'Monthly Review' commented 'that she rather over-rates the difficulties and dangers which it was necessary to encounter, before a perfect view of the country could be obtained' (p. 404). 
Until the 1790s no guidebooks were available to guide the English tourist in his or her own travels around the highlands. Earlier travellers had relied on human guides, often Gaelic-speaking, together with descriptions by those few who had gone before, such as Martin Martin and Thomas Pennant. Murray's 'Companion, and Useful Guide to the Beauties of Scotland', although not the first guidebook, was certainly one of the earliest to be published. 
Murray depicted herself as a model for 'adventurers, who may follow my steps' (Murray, vii), and her frequent inclusion of advice aimed specifically at women made it evident that she expected both women and men to read and follow her. She demanded considerable physical courage and fitness from her followers sending them up mountains, into boats, and across rickety foot-bridges, and advising them to 'creep' to the foot of waterfalls, 'skip' from rock to rock in fast-moving rivers, and 'scramble' up and down difficult ascents and descents. They were also expected to tolerate the discomfort of bad inns, all for the sake of beauty. 
Murray frequently claimed to be a true 'lover of nature' (Murray, 111) whose enthusiasm for the landscape made her oblivious of hazards. The book is replete with descriptions of Murray, a widow of fifty-two at the time of the trip, engaged in adventurous and physically demanding travel. 
A second series of journeys resulted in the 1803 publication of 'A companion and useful guide to the beauties in the western highlands of Scotland, and in the Hebrides. To which is added, a description of part of the main land of Scotland, and of the Isles of Mull, Ulva, Staffa, I-Columbkill, Tirii, Coll, Eigg, Skye, Raza, and Scalpa'. During one of these journeys, in 1801, she became the first woman to ascend one of the Cairngorms, a feat she carried out on horseback. This new volume was reviewed in the 'Annual Review' (1803), 'Monthly Review' (February 1804), and 'British Critic' (June 1804). Although the reviews were a little less favourable than the previous set, a second edition of both volumes was published in 1805. In 1810 Murray published a combined and updated edition of the two guidebooks under the name 'The Hon. Mrs. Murray Aust'. 
Sarah Aust died childless on 5 November 1811 at Noel House and was buried on 11 November 1811 with William Murray, her first husband, in St Mary Abbots Church, Kensington. A marble tablet to her memory was erected within the church by George Aust, her second husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 903


Austen, Sir Francis William (1774-1865), naval officer, fifth son of the Revd George Austen (1731-1805), rector of Steventon in Hampshire, and his wife, Cassandra (1739-1827), daughter of the Revd Thomas Leigh, was born at Steventon on 23 April 1774. He was the brother of Admiral Charles Austen and of Jane Austen. In April 1786 he entered the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth, where his exemplary work earned him an early promotion. In December 1788 he joined the frigate 'Perseverance', and served aboard her in the East Indies. On 28 December 1792 he was promoted lieutenant, and after six years of active service was promoted to commander on 3 January 1799. On 13 May he was promoted captain following a brilliant single ship action in March, when he captured a French brig of war attempting to break the British blockade of Napoleon's army in Egypt. Between 1800 and 1802 he served as flag-captain to Admiral Gambier, aboard the 'Leopard', engaging the French invasion flotilla then being built up around Boulogne. He subsequently transferred to serve under Admiral Louis in the 'Canopus'. Here he took part in Nelson's long blockade of Toulon and the pursuit of Villeneuve across the Atlantic. To Austen's intense mortification, Louis's squadron was detached to re-provision shortly before the battle of Trafalgar, and so missed it. Subsequently the 'Canopus' took part in Admiral Duckworth's Atlantic operations, culminating in the decisive battle off San Domingo on 6 February 1806, in which she played a crucial role. 
Austen returned home shortly afterwards and in July that year married Mary, eldest daughter of John Gibson, at Ramsgate; they had eight children who survived infancy. Between 1807 and 1809 he made at least two voyages to the East Indies commanding the 'St Albans' (64 guns), in charge of convoys. His success in settling a dispute with the Chinese in 1809 earned him the approbation of the Admiralty and a present of $1000 from the East India Company. In December 1810 he became temporary flag captain to his long-term patron Lord Gambier, then commanding the Channel Fleet. Between 1811 and 1814 he commanded the 'Elephant' (74 guns) in the North Sea and the Baltic. In 1823 his first wife died, and on 2 July 1828 he married Martha (died January 1843), eldest daughter of the Revd Noyes Lloyd. Having held a colonelcy of marines from 1825, as a senior captain, Austen reached the rank of rear-admiral on 22 July 1830. He was appointed KCB in February 1837 and became a vice-admiral on 28 June 1838. His only peacetime sea service was as commander-in-chief in the West Indies between December 1844 and June 1848. He became full admiral on 1 August 1848. 
In 1854 Austen refused the post of commander-in-chief at Portsmouth on the grounds of advanced age. He was gazetted GCB in May 1860, rear-admiral of the United Kingdom on 5 June 1862, vice-admiral of the United Kingdom on 11 December 1862, and admiral of the fleet on 27 April 1863. He died at his home, Portsdown Lodge, Portsmouth, on 10 August 1865. Austen's career was distinguished, although he never had an opportunity to display abilities beyond those of a good captain. The fame of his sister and her use of naval characters in her novels has aroused interest in his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 904


Austen, Jane (1775-1817), novelist, was born on 16 December 1775 at the rectory in Steventon, near Basingstoke, Hampshire, the seventh child and younger daughter of George Austen (1731-1805), rector of Deane and Steventon and private tutor, and his wife, Cassandra (1739-1827), youngest daughter of the Revd Thomas Leigh (1696-1764) and Jane Walker (died 1768). George Austen was the only son of William Austen (1701-1737), a surgeon of Tonbridge, Kent, and Rebecca, daughter of the Gloucester physician Sir George Hampson, bt, who died in 1733. When William Austen died less than five years later, the responsibility for George and his sisters Philadelphia (1730-1792) and Leonora (1732-1783) was shouldered by their uncle Francis Austen (1698-1791). George was educated at Tonbridge School at his uncle's expense, and thereafter by a scholarship at St John's College, Oxford. He was ordained deacon at Oxford in March 1754 and priest at Rochester, Kent, in May 1755. Returning to Kent renewed George's contacts with his uncle Francis, who by the early 1750s had become an influential figure in county affairs. He easily arranged for George to serve as a curate at Shipbourne, near Tonbridge, and as an assistant master at his old school. In 1761 another family benefactor, Thomas Knight of Godmersham, Kent, presented George to the living of Steventon, Hampshire. Francis Austen purchased two livings adjacent to Steventon, Deane and Ashe, so that George could take on the first to fall vacant (this would be Deane in 1773). Absent for the first few years, George's move to Steventon in 1764 was prompted by his marriage to Cassandra Leigh, whom he probably met at Oxford. Cassandra came from a large family of prosperous clerics and successful Oxford scholars. Her father, a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, was rector of Harpsden, Oxfordshire, and her mother was connected to the wealthy and old-established Oxfordshire family of Perrot. From their great-aunt Anne Perrot, Cassandra and her sister Jane (1736-1783) each inherited $200, while a moderate fortune went at sixteen to their brother James (1735-1817), who now added 'Perrot' to his name. Her younger brother Thomas (1747-1821) was born with a mental disability, and was cared for outside the family circle. 
George Austen and Cassandra Leigh were married on 26 April 1764 at St Swithin's Church, Bath, and moved first into the rectory at Deane, which was vacant; Steventon's was dilapidated. They had six sons: James (1765-1819), who became a curate and was rector of Steventon from his father's death; George (1766-1838), who was epileptic, and at six was sent to join Cassandra's brother Thomas; Edward (1767-1852), who in 1783 became heir to the property of his second cousin Thomas Knight, took his name, and was the steady benefactor of his mother, brothers, and sisters; Henry Thomas (1771-1850), militia officer, banker, entrepreneur, and finally clergyman; Francis William (Frank) Austen (1774-1865); and Charles John (1779-1852), who both entered the navy and rose to be admirals. Their elder daughter, Cassandra Elizabeth (1773-1845), died unmarried as did Jane. 
George Austen and his wife each inherited about $1000 during their early married years. With a growing family they moved in 1768 to the Steventon rectory, but found that they were living beyond their means. Immediate help came from a legacy left by Cassandra's mother, which her brother, James Leigh-Perrot, a trustee, released for the couple to invest. In 1773 George decided to take boys 'of good family' as boarders, preparing them for university, where they would meet a largely classical syllabus. Meanwhile his wife kept a bull and cows and grew vegetables in order to feed their large household. Cheerful and optimistic like her husband, Cassandra lacked formal education but had a homespun wit, and for thirty years managed her domestic world competently and energetically. 
Jane Austen was born a month later than her parents expected; like the other Austen children, she was baptized at Steventon rectory on the day of her birth by George Austen. The formal ceremony took place on 5 April 1776 at St Nicholas's Church, which stood on the rising ground behind the rectory. The Austens' resident children divided into two groups. The three eldest boys (not counting George) commanded respect from the younger ones and were being prepared, like their father and maternal grandfather, for Oxford University. The boys qualified, on Cassandra's side, as 'founder's kin' at St John's College, which entitled them against competition to free tuition. Edward did not go. He was adopted instead by Thomas Knight and his wife, Catherine, and sent for four years on the grand tour of Europe to qualify him for the life of a landed gentleman in the Austens' native Kent. The younger group, two girls and two boys, formed a companionable and less competitive little community under the effective leadership of the practical, self-confident Cassandra, who from an early age could hold her own in adult company. Both parents and the trio of older boys seem to have been kind to the little ones, who were all healthy and active. 
The standard picture of Jane Austen's happy childhood in a pastoral idyll derives from her nephew (James) Edward Austen-Leigh (1798-1874), who with the help of his half-sister Anna Austen 
(later Lefroy; 1793-1872)
and sister Caroline Austen (1805-1880) wrote the first extended memoir of the author (1870). Edward evoked the big, rather shabby, three-storey house, the kitchen gardens, the farmyard, and a grassy bank down which children could roll. In the evenings the parents joined their children in board games, card games, puzzles, and charades. From time to time they entertained neighbours -- and when the boarders were absent, house guests -- to dinner. Both adults and children enjoyed dancing afterwards. When on their own they read aloud, often novels, to the circle before bedtime. (Nothing is said in the 'Memoir' of Jane's performances of her juvenilia.) Mrs Austen and the two girls sewed dresses for themselves, shirts for the brothers. From 1782 to 1789 there were theatricals, almost without exception comedies then in the stage repertory, invariably produced by James. 
The 'Memoir' reveals that the family could be obtuse about the two sisters, though more perspicacious in the case of the brothers. Mrs Austen almost always spoke of 'the girls' as a pair or, if forced to single out Jane, mentioned her attachment to her sister. Anna Lefroy remembered her grandmother saying that 'if Cassandra were going to have her head cut off, Jane would insist on sharing her fate' (Austen-Leigh, 'Memoir', chap. 1). George and Cassandra Austen valued family cohesion, which led them to indulge the very young Jane in her reluctance to be parted from her sister. As Cassandra grew up, this was sometimes difficult for Jane herself. Chronically shy in early adolescence, she compensated by remaining silent, or by showing off, speaking affectedly, and conspicuously flirting. Observers commented on her unpredictability in public, to which Jane lightly confessed in the earliest of her letters to Cassandra that survive. The family barely referred to her awkwardness in society. On the contrary, one former member recalled that while Cassandra 'had the 'merit' of having her temper always under command', Jane had 'the 'happiness' of a temper that never required to be commanded' (ibid.). Cassandra, who knew her best, received letters in which Jane sounded dissatisfied with her lot, impatient, angry, or unhappy: 'Theo... came back in time to shew his usual, nothing-meaning, harmless, heartless Civility' ('Letters', 179); 'the Lances... live in a handsome style and are rich, and she [Mrs Lance] seemed to like to be rich... she will soon feel therefore that we are not worth her acquaintance' (ibid., 117). 
Serious, judicious, and familial, Jane's nephew Edward saw his aunt and her talent for writing as part of a rounded family achievement. Their scholarly father educated his daughters as well as his sons, and the older brothers discussed books with the younger children. Edward commented that 'she certainly enjoyed that important element of mental training, associating at home with persons of cultivated intellect' (Austen-Leigh, 'Memoir', chap. 3). Even so, in spring 1783, at the very age when Jane could read for herself, her parents dispatched their daughters and their cousin Jane Cooper to Oxford to be tutored, with apparently little aptitude, by Mrs Ann Cawley, the widow of a former principal of Brasenose College and a sister of the Revd Dr Edward Cooper (Mrs Austen's kinsman by marriage). Jane did not get on well with Mrs Cawley. In the girls' second term (summer to autumn 1783), without informing their parents, she moved her pupils to Southampton, presumably to economize. The sea port was in the grip of an epidemic, probably typhoid, which all three girls caught. After Jane Cooper managed to get a message home, the two mothers came to fetch their daughters away. The girls recovered, but Mrs Cooper caught the disease and died on 25 October 1783. 
Despite this miserable experience, after they had spent a further year at home George Austen decided that his daughters should attend the Abbey House School, Reading, from spring 1785 to December 1786. It was a boarding-school patronized by wealthy merchants and tradesmen, and in the mornings offered instruction in English (including spelling but not punctuation), French, some Italian, history, and needlework. There were dancing classes, and some special end-of-half-year events such as theatricals and recitations, which the headmistress organized jointly with the adjoining boys' school, Valpy's. But other Abbey House girls afterwards best remembered the school for its long leisurely afternoons, allowing visits to the nearby lending library, which catered adeptly for the tastes and imaginations of girls and young women by way of romance, adventure, and much male greed and villainy. 
In his 'Memoir of Jane Austen', Edward Austen-Leigh planted the tradition, subscribed to by most twentieth-century critics and biographers, that Austen the novelist was substantially created at home. Thanks to tuition by her father and brothers Jane was exposed as a child to the essayists Joseph Addison, Richard Steele, and Samuel Johnson and to the novelists Samuel Richardson and Fanny Burney. It is probably true that the clarity, sharpness, and wit of the prose of Austen's juvenilia indicate attentive reading in the century's stylists, a good ear for the balance of a sentence, and sound regard for verbal economy. Her seniors did right by her on these counts, but they cannot have done everything. Austen's immersion in contemporary popular fiction began at school and was equally fundamental. At the Abbey House School she amused herself as her socially mixed classmates did in following the adventures and trials of modern woman, as these were purveyed most readily and cheaply in a handful of specialist magazines, such as George Robinson's monthly miscellany, the 'Lady's Magazine' (established 1770). In his first issue Robinson boasted that he catered for the widest possible range of taste, status, and income, from a duchess to a newly literate housemaid. In each issue from a quarter to a third of the space was likely to be occupied by fiction, much of it sent in by readers, who might set their narratives in stylized exotic worlds or in common domestic life among the middling sort. But the standard plotline for most longer fiction, whether published in multi-volume book form or serialized in a magazine, was the courtship of lovers of unequal rank and means, involving the woman particularly in picaresque adventures and trials, with a happy ending always in jeopardy from the economic and social differences between the protagonists. Austen's first three novels conform to these archetypal features of the fiction of the 1780s and 1790s. 
At the age of eleven, however, Jane Austen was not concerned with novels but with reinstating herself among the people and activities of the crowded rectory at Steventon. In December 1786 Jane and Cassandra left school for good, to find a household populated with exotic visitors. Their father's sister Philadelphia Hancock had brought to Steventon her 25-year-old daughter Eliza (1761-1813) who, by her marriage in 1781, had become Comtesse Eliza de Feuillide. Eliza's experiences in Paris and Versailles, where she had attended court, had given her style, polish, and the French language, almost irresistible attractions for her young Steventon cousins; she had also performed amateur dramatics at the family home near Nerac in south-west France. With a trust set up for her as a child by Warren Hastings, governor-general of Bengal and a friend of her parents, Eliza was able to lead an independent life in Paris, London, and the English resort towns of Bath and Tunbridge Wells. But, family-minded like other Austens, Eliza also became over the next decade a frequent visitor to Steventon and a powerful influence on her cousins, the girls as well as the boys. 
Jane Austen, her sister, and even her brother Henry 'came out' socially while under the wing of their exotic cousin Eliza. Her hospitality in the West End houses she rented, her tireless mobility, and her appetite for flirtation were never more in evidence than in the year in which she made plans for an ambitious theatrical programme at Steventon the following Christmas, 1787. Eliza was already well briefed in the playwright Hannah Cowley's recent London stage successes, beginning with 'The Belle's Stratagem' (1780), which had two vigorous and intelligent female roles, and an undoubtedly feminist message. It was, however, Lady Bell Bloomer, the intelligent and kindly heroine of Cowley's 'Which is the Man?' (1783), that Eliza had studied, by sponsoring a performance of the play at Tunbridge Wells Theatre in September 1787, and that she meant to act at Steventon. Unfortunately Eliza's plans included an acting part for a Kent cousin of about her own age, Philadelphia (Phila) Walter, who positively refused to act. She was taken at Steventon to have an objection to the particular play, or to acting on principle. Eliza with her customary amiability gave up her choice of play, and a safe old favourite, Susanna Centlivre's 'The Wonder: a Woman Keeps a Secret' (1714), was chosen instead, with James producing, Henry the leading man, and Eliza the leading woman. By comparison with the jealous resentments of the Bertram family in 'Mansfield Park', the Steventon theatricals of 1787 appear to have passed off decorously, except that Cassandra and Jane were on hand to observe Eliza flirting finely with both James and Henry during the rehearsals and performances of a mildly saucy play. 
The following year was busy theatrically, but it was also the last season, because all the brothers but Charles had left home. After Eliza returned to London, Henry Fielding's burlesque 'The Tragedy of Tragedies, or, The Life and Death of Tom Thumb the Great' (1731) was performed in March 1788. James Townley's rumbustious 'High Life below Stairs' (1759) and Isaac Bickerstaff's farce 'The Sultan' (1775), a likely future source for 'Pride and Prejudice', followed at the end of the year. The first of the three projects parodies the exaggerated conventions and rhetoric of John Dryden's heroic dramas, and, in a new contemporary version, ends with a battle scene in which the entire cast dies, orating as they fall. The other two have popular settings and situations: servants take on the roles of their masters; or an Englishwoman, finding herself a captive in a harem, cheekily teaches the sultan how to become agreeable to his subjects. Traces of the knockabout humour, caricature, and mockery calculated to please adolescent schoolboy boarders are evident in the plays put on in 1788 largely for their amusement, but Cassandra and Jane also took part. 
From early 1787 to June 1793 Jane wrote a large number of sketches, burlesque playlets (which may have been acted by others or by herself), epistolary novellas, and short picaresque adventures. Usually they were dedicated to a member of the household. Those she wished to keep she copied into three blank copy-books given to her by her father, which she named 'Volume the First', 'Volume the Second', and 'Volume the Third'. The twenty-seven pieces in these copy-books resemble exercises in many kinds of literary form, and they had a function, since they were read out to or more likely performed for the family audience by the author, who was, according to her brother Henry, a confident speaker and a natural comic. Unfortunately there is no direct description of her performances, and since none is dedicated to boarders it seems likely that they were excluded. All the same, boarders were taken in at Steventon until 1796, and the presence in the house of adolescent boys, as well as her youngest brother, Charles, is worth considering as an almost certain influence on her early writing. 
The juvenilia are full of self-confident and errant young women: Laura, Elfrida, Alice, the 'Beautifull Cassandra' (a milliner's daughter), and Charlotte Lutterell at Lesley Castle. There is something of Austen herself in all the heroines of her mature novels, and, surely, also in the bold, energized adventuresses of the juvenilia. It may be her physical appearance that is conveyed, or her coolness and cynicism. Rebelliousness and an anti-social impatience are qualities she confesses to in her correspondence with Cassandra, and seems to identify with in Marianne Dashwood in 'Sense and Sensibility'. This intolerance of mediocrity is also the offence committed by Emma Woodhouse, 'the heroine whom no one but myself will much like' (Austen-Leigh, 'Memoir', chap. 10). These brief hints are recognizable by readers as self-portraiture and are enjoyed for this reason. An obvious case is Alice Johnson of 'Jack and Alice', a heroine maddeningly badgered by Lady Williams because she has unfashionably full red cheeks, like Austen's own. A red face is also a sign of inebriety, and sure enough not just Alice but the entire Johnson family is soon alleged to be addicted to the bottle. Jane in real life probably endured jokes along these lines, and may even have found herself typecast in the production of Fielding's 'Tom Thumb', by being allotted the part of King Arthur's consort, Queen Dollallolla, a woman 'entirely faultless, saving that she is a little given to drink' and in love with Tom Thumb. 
Jane Austen was always an exact writer. She alludes to specifics, from real-life people and events or from books in use in the household. Her early twentieth-century editor R. W. Chapman observed that she was 'exceptionally and even surprisingly dependent' on reality and 'family and biographical truth' as the 'basis of imaginary construction' ('TLS', 10 Dec 1931). She was locked into family experience, as an observer of the relationships between siblings and a critic of richer members of the larger Austen and Leigh family. Her inner family circle, the three or four always on hand as an audience, could recognize, enjoy, or even correct these shared memories. 
No doubt her parents and her elder brothers -- brought up to value quick wit and puns, and to ridicule blunders -- helped to lend Austen's writing its sharpness. The brothers and their contemporaries, the boarders, may also have encouraged the interest in caricature that both Cassandra and Jane displayed in adolescence. Cassandra exercised an uncertain taste in graphic satire in her illustrations for Jane's 'History of England' (November 1791), and was perhaps joking in Jane's manner when in 1804 she sketched Jane from behind, her face hidden by a large bonnet. 
Later Jane took pleasure in the role of aunt, and resumed her adolescent practice of inventing stories, games, and puzzles, now to entertain nephews and nieces. One explanation for the surreal, violent, insubordinate world of her juvenilia could be that it originated with oral tales she made up perhaps while still at school to tell other children. Here and there her adventurous plots echo oriental fantasy, Swift's 'Gulliver's Travels' (1726), and Horace Walpole's 'Hieroglyphic Tales' (1785). Other current items are satirical, in the vein of burlesque and ridicule that Jane picked up from Henry Fielding and more contemporary wits, among them Fanny Burney. Members of the household, including the boarders, would be as familiar as she was with the books in her father's circumscribed library. Oliver Goldsmith's 'History of England' (1771) and especially Samuel Richardson's 'Sir Charles Grandison' (1753-4) offered a fine opportunity for parody, a form that required a knowing audience, or simply challenged young readers to identify a source. Throughout her writing career Austen teased and puzzled her readers by mimicking other novelists, recycling and neatly improving on her materials, amusing readers who could still spot the original -- devices learned at home to activate her readers of school age and make them her allies. 
Austen's three volumes of juvenilia constitute a miscellany of the conventions and cliches of late eighteenth-century fiction, drama, and stage farce: they contain characters, incidents, and scenes out of a largely picaresque tradition, straight or comic; stereotypical fools or villains from different ends of the social scale; haughty or cruel aristocrats and parents, conceited young males, pleasure-seeking women. Only in 'Catharine, or, The Bower' (dedication dated August 1792, 'Volume the Third') does Austen at this stage employ the central convention of the novel, a sympathetic protagonist. More typically it is the scenic aspect and broad brush of eighteenth-century novels, their vivid social panorama, that is evoked by Austen's crowd of minor characters, and their familiar venues: the visit, the day excursion, the journey, the spa, the ball, along with a short list of dramatic incidents, such as an accident to a carriage or a boat, a robbery, or a murder. Jane Austen's tastes were at this time as tomboyish as the vigorous practices she attributes in 'Northanger Abbey' to Catherine Morland -- of rolling down the grassy bank behind the house, and playing cricket with the boys. 
In summer 1788 the Steventon Austens decided that it would be a timely gesture to visit George's uncle and boyhood patron 'Old Francis' Austen. Cassandra at fifteen and a half could be described as of an age to 'come out'. And if she went, then Jane, though only twelve and a half, must also go. On 21 July Francis gave a grand dinner at the Red House, his handsome Georgian home in Sevenoaks, Kent, for them to meet their second cousins and contemporaries from the senior and wealthiest branch of Kent Austens, later known as the Austens of Kippington. The occasion must have been gruelling for Jane, if, as seems likely, it is recalled by the dinner party at the Grants' rectory in 'Mansfield Park'. Here Fanny Price, who suffers from agonizing shyness, is put through a series of 'coming-out' occasions, though, like her creator at twelve, she dreads conversing with strangers. As more and more strangers appear Fanny tells herself that numbers help, 'since every addition to the party must rather forward her favourite indulgence of being suffered to sit silent and unattended to' (vol. 2, chap. 5). 
Yet Jane at the Red House was not silent enough, according to her cousin the censorious Phila Walter. But Phila already knew something to the discredit of Jane's brother Henry (the vigorous flirtation he had conducted with Eliza for a year and a half), and seemed determined to dislike the Austen sisters. She compared Cassandra to herself: 'As it's pure Nature to love ourselves I may be allowed to give the preference to the Eldest who is generally reckoned a most striking resemblance of me in features, complexion & manners. I never found myself so disposed to be vain, as I can't help thinking her very pretty.' Jane, however, was barely tolerable. Phila's assessment is the first full description of her behaviour in company: 'The youngest (Jane) is very like her brother Henry, not at all pretty & very prim, unlike a girl of twelve' ('Austen Papers', 131). Phila completed her resume of the family by noting: 'My aunt has lost several fore-teeth which makes her look old; my uncle is quite white-haired, but looks vastly well: all in high spirits & disposed to be pleased with each other'. On the following day Phila entertained the Steventon Austens at her home, Seal, and revoked her criticism of the younger Cassandra. 'She keeps up conversation in a very sensible & pleasing manner.' Otherwise her first impressions stuck: 'Jane is whimsical & affected' (ibid.). 
From 1791 to the summer of 1793, when Jane Austen wrote the last of her juvenilia, the Steventon Austens experienced a season of marriages in the family, which was also darkened by several deaths. In December 1791 Jane's brother Edward married Elizabeth Bridges, from a wealthy Kent family, and in March 1792 James married Anne Mathew, daughter of a general and granddaughter of a duke. About this time the most significant union of all for the Austen sisters occurred, Cassandra's engagement to one of George Austen's pupils, Tom Fowle, who, as verses by Mrs Austen show, was and continued to be a family favourite. Old Francis Austen died on 21 June 1791. Sympathetic and watchful of deserving young relatives in the past, Francis had in his last arrangements followed the established practice of concentrating the family capital on his eldest son and male heirs. As a partial exception George Austen received $500. In an exchange of letters later that summer between Mrs Cassandra Austen and her sister-in-law Philadelphia Hancock, with Eliza participating, the bitterness of Francis's overlooked nieces and great-nieces was vigorously expressed. They saw his policy as poor recompense for the attention and care the old man had received from his female relatives, and his largess redundant in relation to Francis Motley Austen, who was, Eliza wrote, 'immensely rich before' (1 Aug 1791, 'Austen Papers', 143). 
With scant further prospects of a legacy from Kent, Jane's parents seriously turned their attention in the 1790s to the nearest of the Oxfordshire Leigh connections, Mrs Austen's childless brother, James Leigh-Perrot, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Cholmeley, heiress of a Lincolnshire family of Atlantic traders long resident and prominent in Barbados. In 1793 their parents pressed Jane and Cassandra in vain to visit the couple in Bath. In the privacy of letters to Cassandra in the 1790s and 1800s, Jane often showed reluctance to visit unfamiliar cousins, such as her mother's connections the literary Cookes of Great Bookham. Fanny Burney, then Austen's favourite contemporary author, was living there in a picturesque area close to Boxhill. It had become a refuge for French aristocrats fleeing the revolution. Germaine de Stael, her lover Narbonne, and General D'Arblay, who married Burney in July 1793, visited Bookham at this time. Jane still felt shy at parties full of strangers and, now that she paid visits every second year at least to her brother Edward in Kent, she was made keenly aware of the social gap between 'East Kent wealth' and economies at the Steventon rectory. 'Kent is the only place for happiness. Everybody is rich there', she wrote sourly to Cassandra ('Letters', 28), and, when her parents moved to a yet more unfashionable early dinner hour, 'half after Three... I am afraid you will despise us' (ibid., 27). 
By 1795 Cassandra's long-standing engagement to Tom Fowle had become increasingly frustrating. Although his kinsman Lord Craven, commander-in-chief of the British expeditionary force to the West Indies, had offered him a living at Allington, near Amesbury, Wiltshire, the income could not support a wife and family. In January 1796 Tom accompanied Craven to the West Indies where he had a wealthy uncle who died that summer. Tom himself died of yellow fever on his return journey in February 1797 and was buried at sea off Santo Domingo. He left Cassandra his savings of $1000. Up to that time, especially in the correspondence of Eliza de Feuillide, the Austen sisters -- particularly the poised, good-looking Cassandra -- were thought marriageable with or without a dowry. In her letters to Cassandra, Jane joked about flirtations, and about young men with dark eyes who were, she claimed, in love with Cassandra, or more rarely with herself. One such suitor was Tom Lefroy (1776-1869), the Irish nephew of (Isaac Peter) George Lefroy, rector of Ashe. The rector's wife, Anne, usually known as Madam Lefroy, was a cultivated woman with some scientific as well as literary interests. She was both a stimulating teacher who widened Jane's taste in poetry, and a sympathetic listener to whom Jane went for advice. Between 1795 and 1796 Jane flirted with Tom Lefroy, and enjoyed reporting her progress to Cassandra in the earliest of her lively intimate letters to her sister that survive: 'Imagine to yourself everything most profligate and shocking in the way of dancing and sitting down together', she wrote on 9-10 January 1796 ('Letters', 1). But if Jane hoped for her friend's blessing on the rapidly developing romance, she was quickly disabused: Madam Lefroy was sufficiently alarmed to send Tom precipitately back to London. Jane was also flirting with Tom Fowle's younger brother Charles, another former boarder, shortly before Tom left for the West Indies. Most of this was unserious. The loss of Tom Fowle was not. Cassandra did not contemplate another attachment, and her decision came in due course to stand for Jane as well. 
Having copied and put away her miscellany of juvenilia in June 1793, Jane Austen began work on 'Elinor and Marianne', a very early version of 'Sense and Sensibility', said to have been first written in an epistolary form, and read out to the family about 1795. It was possibly at this time that Austen also began her novella, 'Lady Susan', although the fair copy of the manuscript (now in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York) is untitled and was written on paper of which two leaves are watermarked 1805. A spirited depiction of a woman seeking self-advancement, 'Lady Susan' was first published as an addition to the second edition (1871) of Edward Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir'. In August 1796 Jane visited her brother Edward and his wife, Elizabeth, at their first home, a large farmhouse at Rowling in Kent. It was while there, or immediately after returning home that October, that she began 'Pride and Prejudice' under the title 'First Impressions', perhaps as an instinctive reaction against Kent hauteur. The author was the same age as her heroine Elizabeth Bennet at the start of composition ('not one and twenty'). This, the first of her novels to be completed, was finished in August 1797, and offered by her father to the publisher Thomas Cadell on 1 November 1797 as a novel in three volumes 'about the length of Miss Burney's 'Evelina'' (Austen-Leigh, 'Memoir', chap. 8). The publisher declined without asking to see the manuscript. 'First Impressions' remained a family favourite, a fact confirmed by regular rereadings by Cassandra and Jane's close friend Martha Lloyd ('Letters', 35, 44). The title had to be changed, however, after the publication of Margaret Holford's novel 'First Impressions, or, The Portrait' in 1801. Austen replaced it with 'Pride and Prejudice', taking a phrase from Burney's 'Cecilia' (1782) as her new title. 
George Austen might have sought another publisher for Jane's 'First Impressions', but did not; Jane turned stoically to her other novel-in-waiting, the tale of the two sisters Elinor and Marianne. The treatment of scenes between two sympathetic marriageable sisters in each of these early novels must in some way have been affected by the news of Tom's death that reached Steventon about 1 May 1797, while Jane still had the closing chapters of 'Pride and Prejudice' to write. But Jane seemed already to have a policy of observing the conventions of two types of stage comedy -- witty or 'laughing' comedy, and the comedy of sentiment, which is likely to include pathos and touches of tragedy. Each mode had its appropriate heroine, a tender melancholic romantic for the comedy of sentiment, and conversely an independent-minded woman of the world for laughing comedy. Another convention observable in the theatre governs minor characters, and this too Austen observes in her early pair of novels; the comic minor characters in 'Pride and Prejudice', Mrs Bennet, Mr Collins, Lady Catherine, are broader and much more developed than their equivalents in 'Sense and Sensibility', Sir John Middleton, Mrs Jennings, Mrs Palmer, and Miss Steele. 
For her laughing comedy 'First Impressions' Austen looked for an outstanding heroine in the stage tradition of comedy and farce of the 1780s, and understandably borrowed from Eliza de Feuillide's favourite, the warm, mature, and generous Lady Bell Bloomer in Cowley's 'Which is the Man?'. Lizzy Bennet, unheroically placed as the second of five sisters, has the intelligence of Cowley's Letitia and Lady Bell. She even takes on a similar leading role in her own domestic world, which is anarchic thanks to the idleness of her father and the limited capacities of her mother. Lizzy stands up to the uncivil Darcy and his flatterer, Miss Bingley, and loyally champions her elder sister Jane's depth of feeling for Bingley. Female camaraderie of this type was also a central theme of Susanna Centlivre's play 'The Wonder'. 
But the relationship Austen develops between Lizzy and Darcy has a nearer model in Roxalana, heroine of Bickerstaff's farce 'The Sultan', one of the last plays acted at Steventon late in 1788. Roxalana is a sensible, self-reliant Englishwoman, unfazed by finding herself in the harem of a sultan who comes to prefer her stout advice to that of the cronies and flatterers at his court. She is by no means aristocratic, as Cowley's heroines are, but of the trading class. Osmyn the vizier reflects on this after her triumph: 'who would have thought that a little cock'd-up nose would have overturn'd the customs of a mighty empire!' (act 2) In fact, though 'Pride and Prejudice' was recognized as a fine comedy in the mainstream tradition and was a runaway success on publication in 1813, a minority of readers throughout the nineteenth century could not stomach Lizzy's vulgar mother and aunt, still less her own pert answers to Darcy and to his aunt Lady Catherine. 
Unusually for Austen the novel is also grounded in real-life public events: southern England at the outset of a major war, when threatened with a French invasion. The circumstances are the arrival in county towns of regiments of militia from other regions, following France's declaration of war in February 1793. By the winter of 1794-5 three such regiments -- the South Devonshires, Oxfordshires, and Derbyshires -- were billeted in counties near north Hampshire, and they caused trouble locally through riotousness, drunkenness, lechery, and bad debts. Their senior officers were either professional soldiers or gentlemen but the men and junior officers were inexperienced and, like Lieutenant Wickham in 'Pride and Prejudice', might be disreputable. Jane's brother Henry, though intended for the church, had enlisted in the Oxfordshire militia, which was mostly billeted further south in Hampshire. Gregarious and socially ambitious, Henry fed Jane with tales about the different militias; the South Devonshires, available for her to meet in Basingstoke nearby; the superior rank and wealth of the Derbyshires' officers, which ensured good billets in the county town of Hertford (the novel's Meryton); and the debacle the Oxfordshires experienced when, in the freezing winter of 1794-5, they moved to new unready barracks near Brighton and rioted to such effect that the regulars and subsequently the courts had to deal with them. 
Jane Austen's enhanced social understanding of her southern English world went deeper than the mere act of tracing the movements of soldiers on the map. Disguised by their uniform, handsome young men turned out to be villains and could wreck a family's peace. 'Pride and Prejudice' is a story full of movement and instability, thanks partly to the dastardly escapades of Wickham with Georgiana Darcy at Ramsgate and with Lydia Bennet at Brighton and London, and eventually as a junior officer in the regulars at Newcastle. But it also pencils in respectable social gradations, as in the case of the worthy Gardiners, the kind of City of London couple who in real life were business associates at this time of the Austen cousins, moving into mansions near Sevenoaks. To match Mr Darcy's concessions to the City, Lizzy travels to Derbyshire, is admitted to Pemberley as a mere tourist, and learns from the housekeeper that Darcy is not seen at home as an arrogant snob or despot, but as a good-natured boy who has grown up to be a protective affectionate brother. The successful weave of the many strands of this ambitious plot is one of the causes of its lasting charm. 
There are signs of Jane Austen's sisterly concern and shared grieving with Cassandra in the later dialogues between Jane and Lizzy Bennet in 'First Impressions' and, more extensively, in 'Sense and Sensibility' in Elinor's tender concern for her sister Marianne when she loses Willoughby and falls seriously ill. Jane Bennet is only a secondary heroine in 'Pride and Prejudice', but she fits all the stereotyped features of the classic sentimental heroine: beautiful, virtuous, domestic, and reticent. Like so many heroines, she appears to have lost her lover, Bingley, after she is traduced by his sisters, false friends to Jane, and by Darcy. When Jane thinks Bingley has gone, she stoically performs her domestic duties, as Cassandra did in Kent through her early adulthood. Family relationships and above all sisterhood are regular features of Austen's novels, but the emotion generated by a sympathetic sister's share in another's pain at the loss of a lover is more sustained and raw in these two novels of the 1790s than anywhere else in her work. 
Female friendship and sisterliness are also commonly found in other women's novels of the 1790s. To fill out her plot in 'Sense and Sensibility' Austen borrowed freely from Jane West's 'A Gossip's Story' (1796), a novel of small-town, semi-rural living centred on two motherless sisters, Louisa and Marianne Dudley. West's Marianne contributes substantially to Austen's character of the same name: she is the younger sister, brought up by an over-indulgent grandmother, whose education has been almost entirely in romantic and poetic reading. The thoughtful and considerate Louisa has an 'informed, well-regulated mind', while Marianne's sensibilities are 'tremblingly alive to the softer passions'. Marianne is intolerant of vulgar, uneducated company, a trait that costs her friends in a village and fosters malicious gossip. A steady mature man, Henry Pelham, proposes to Marianne, but she tells her father 'he is not the tender, respectful sympathizing lover... necessary for my future repose'. More to her liking, a gentleman called Clermont saves her from a runaway horse, and at once the romantic pair discover shared tastes -- 'whatever was passionate, elegant and sentimental in art, or beautiful, pensive and enchanting in nature'. Each of these episodes or features is present in the story of Marianne as Austen tells it. 
Jane West's writing also conveys positive religious guidance: she advises her readers 'to expect with diffidence, enjoy with gratitude and resign with submission'. Austen steadily resists the use of religious vocabulary in fiction; but she does towards the end of the first volume of 'Sense and Sensibility' introduce a rationalist, sententious strain into Elinor's conversations with Marianne and Edward Ferrars that is enough to weigh down this part of the novel. Much more successful are the late scenes in which the sisters come to see their sufferings as shared. Elinor emerges as a figure like the real-life Cassandra, selfless, reticent, enduring, the most orthodox and virtuous of the Austen heroines. Thanks to her, 'Sense and Sensibility' gives a guarded but very inward account of women's tribulations, and takes its place as one of the most representative of women's classic novels in the 1790s -- reasons, no doubt, why Austen preferred it in 1811 to 'Pride and Prejudice' as the novel to launch her career as a published writer. 
After one novel of laughing comedy and one of sentimental comedy, Austen motioned next at burlesque. The two-volume novel she first called 'Susan' -- and which was published posthumously as 'Northanger Abbey' -- was, according to Cassandra, written in 1798-9. Though apparently accepted for publication by Benjamin Crosby & Son (it was announced as being 'in the press' in 'Flowers of Literature for 1801 and 1802', 1803), 'Susan: a Novel' did not appear. Still in manuscript, its title was later changed to 'Catherine' following the publication of an anonymous novel, 'Susan', early in 1809. The work that became 'Northanger Abbey' is a story of three potential heroines: Catherine Morland, the naive, adventurous daughter of a Wiltshire parson; Isabella Thorpe, a duplicitous, thrusting anti-heroine, first encountered in a fashionable Bath ballroom; and Eleanor Tilney, a stereotypical oppressed Gothic heroine, who lives with a despotic father in a converted abbey in Gloucestershire. Each sister has a brother; courtships, all but one unsuccessful, develop among the three families. Catherine does not in the end confuse the real world with one of fantasy and romance. Nor does she pretentiously imagine herself a heroine. Instead her new world is a routine series of Burneyesque disappointments -- crowded ballrooms, a boring chaperone (Mrs Allen), a rude and stupid suitor (John Thorpe), and soon the suitor's clumsy attempt at a Richardsonian abduction, with the doubtful help of his overrated carriage and very slow horse. Catherine has the sense to know from the outset that she has met a man she greatly prefers, Henry Tilney. Henry entertains her by talking to her about books, and simultaneously he entertains bookish readers by his, that is Austen's, talent for parody, notably the excellent pastiche of Ann Radcliffe's 'The Romance of the Forest' (1791), merged with her 'Mysteries of Udolpho' (1794), with which he regales Catherine on the journey to Northanger Abbey. The charm of the story, finally, is in the naturalness and good-heartedness of Catherine Morland; her loyalty to her brother when he is jilted by Isabella; her lack of any mercenary instincts, still less guile; her emerging solid good sense; and, not least, her sensitively drawn sisterly affection for Eleanor Tilney as well as for her brother. 
In April 1809 Austen wrote to Benjamin Crosby & Son to complain of their delay in publishing 'Catherine' and to threaten to take the novel elsewhere if they did not honour their commitment. Richard Crosby replied on his father's behalf that they were not obliged to publish, but would certainly go to law if she attempted to publish elsewhere. He did, however, also offer to part with the manuscript and the copyright at the price the firm had paid, $10. Austen put the matter and the book aside and returned to it only in 1815-16. It finally came out posthumously with 'Persuasion' in 1817 (published by John Murray), in Austen's corrected version but with Henry's and Cassandra's title: 'Northanger Abbey'. 
In 1801 George Austen suddenly determined without consultation to move his family to Bath, while his eldest son, James, took over as his curate in the parish of Steventon. Jane suspected James's second wife, Mary Lloyd (1771-1843), the sister of her friend Martha Lloyd, of persuading their parents to vacate the parsonage and of coveting some of its contents. It seems that her parents had a plan, not shared with the sisters -- or not at least with Jane -- to travel light and to sublet their Bath accommodation for the summer months. Arriving in May 1801, they acquired their first Bath home, 4 Sydney Place, for the three-and-three-quarter-year remnant of the lease and, while the landlord redecorated, Jane, Cassandra, and their parents set off to visit seaside towns in Devon. They may have stayed at Sidmouth and certainly went to Colyton in south Devon, paying a visit to the Revd Richard Buller, one of George Austen's former boarders. By visiting friends and relatives a great deal in these summer wanderings and possibly earning rent in Bath, the family no doubt lived economically. In 1802 Charles, on leave during the nineteen-month peace of Amiens (1802-3), accompanied them on holiday. They visited Dawlish and Teignmouth in Devon, then explored the Welsh coast, going to Tenby and perhaps as far north as Barmouth. Jane and Cassandra, still travelling with Charles, spent September and October at Godmersham with Edward and November at Steventon with James and Mary. On 25 November 1802 the sisters went at the invitation of their friends Catherine and Alethea Bigg to stay at Manydown Park, at Wootton St Lawrence, north of Basingstoke and about 6 miles from Steventon. A week after their arrival, on the evening of Thursday 2 December, Jane Austen accepted a proposal of marriage from Harris Bigg-Wither, the Bigg sisters' younger brother. 
If she had gone through with a marriage to this stuttering, awkward man, six years younger than herself, Jane Austen at twenty-seven could have housed and provided for her parents, who were facing a fairly straitened old age in lodgings at Bath, and Cassandra too if she wished it. On the death of his father, Harris Bigg-Wither would have inherited Manydown, and Jane would have become its mistress. She was already comfortable in the house and with its attractive owners. But there were problems at Manydown. Harris did not get on with his father, and really wanted to remove himself with Jane or another wife to a home of his own. For whatever reason, Jane thought better of her acceptance overnight, and early the following morning she and Cassandra departed precipitately for Steventon to save further embarrassment. After a brief explanation to James and Mary, they returned with James to Bath on 4 December. 
Jane and Cassandra said enough to James and Mary that day for the episode to pass down to young Austen women of subsequent generations, including their niece Catherine Hubback, a daughter of the sailor brother Frank, and Caroline Austen, the sister of Edward Austen-Leigh. Mary seems to have been surprised that Jane refused so desirable an offer. Catherine Hubback gathered from letters she saw that it was 'in a momentary fit of self-delusion' that Jane accepted him -- 'I am sure she had no attachment to him' ('Jane Austen: a Family Record', 2004, 138). Caroline as so often was more forthright. Harris was 'very plain in person -- awkward, & even uncouth in manner... nothing but his size to recommend him... one need not look about for secret reasons to account for a young lady's 'not' loving him' (ibid., 137). Thereafter, as David Nokes adds, 'the story became the stuff of family legend' (Nokes, 258). 
It was, however, the nearest Jane Austen appears to have come to marriage. In her youth she enjoyed flirting as much as she enjoyed dancing. But it was the era in her life when she was seeing much of Eliza, another witty woman who loved to tease but also meant to retain her independence even after her marriage, in December 1797, to Jane's brother Henry, Eliza's first husband having been executed in France in 1794. After Jane's death, Cassandra told the nieces the story of a man Jane met on holiday in a south-west resort in the early 1800s, who appeared seriously attached to Jane, as she was to him; they never saw him again, and only later discovered that he had died. Much the same story was retold in Sir Francis Hasting Doyle's 'Reminiscences and Opinions' (1886) as emanating from a resident of Chawton, though on this occasion the lovelorn suitor was encountered by the Austens on a mythical trip to Switzerland during the peace of Amiens. In either version the tale has the flavour of Cassandra's making rather than Jane's. 
Countering the sentimental stories are the many occasions in Jane's letters in which she expresses aversion from marriage and childbearing ('Poor Woman! how can she be honestly breeding again?'; 'Letters', 140), makes fun of unappealing newly-weds, or complains of spoilt and tiresome children. Of her nephew George she said: 'I shall think with tenderness & delight on his beautiful & smiling Countenance & interesting Manners, till a few years have turned him into an ungovernable, ungracious fellow' (ibid., 17). She was also a 'good aunt' to three nieces and a nephew, but these were hand-picked children old enough and thoughtful enough to share her own literary interests -- James's children Anna, Edward, and Caroline, and the motherless eldest niece Fanny Knight, to whom Austen gave unsentimental advice on love and marriage. Except in the case of the Crofts in 'Persuasion', Austen in her fiction is hesitant about the long-term satisfactions of marriage. Older couples, the Sir Thomas Bertrams, the Allens, and the Bennets, have long since forgotten youthful rapture, if they ever experienced it. 
Austen must have handed over the manuscript of 'Susan' -- the future 'Northanger Abbey' -- shortly after the painful Bigg-Wither episode in December 1802. Though Catherine Morland will make an ingenuous, sweet-natured bride, Henry Tilney's reasons for pursuing her are oddly casual: 'a persuasion of her partiality for him had been the only cause of giving her a serious thought' (vol. 2, chap. 15). That is not very far from Jane's cool diagnosis, at the beginning of 'Northanger Abbey', of Mr Allen's marriage: 'Mrs Allen was one of that numerous class of females, whose society can raise no other emotion than surprise at there being any men in the world who could like them well enough to marry them' (vol. 1, chap. 2). One of the issues arising from the Bigg-Wither proposal was its bearing not only on Jane's future but on Cassandra's too. At some point the sisters must have seriously debated the possibility of a marriage of convenience rather than love, that is, a 'comfortable' establishment for one of them, which might (like Harris's proposal) provide a secure future for the other. The once-romantic Marianne's marriage to the wealthy Colonel Brandon in 'Sense and Sensibility' ironically proves desirable to the extent of securing Elinor's future nearby. The worst outcome for Jane would probably have been separation from her sister. Better than one of them marrying and the other remaining at home was the option Jane took on 3 December: to remain unmarried and together. This preference is acknowledged in Mrs Austen's phrase, they were 'wedded to each other' (Lefroy family history, quoted in Honan, 186). Gradually it was a choice they signalled to others by adopting a prematurely middle-aged style of dress. 
Jane Austen's peripatetic pattern of life operated throughout George Austen's remaining years, though usually the family now came back to Bath by the end of October. Three months after settling into a new address, at 3 Green Park Buildings, George Austen died after a short illness on 21 January 1805. His loss was felt deeply, and it changed their lives. Mrs Austen, Cassandra, and Jane were caught in the familiar trap for dependent women of the professional classes when they lost the male breadwinner. It fell to James and Henry Austen to take charge of the discussions on how the brothers would contribute a sum sufficient to maintain 'the dear trio'. Mrs Austen would still have an income of $210, but that, even with Tom Fowle's legacy of $1000 for Cassandra, was insufficient. James and Henry each pledged $50 a year, which was probably difficult for both of them. Edward, as expected, gave $100. Frank stoutly offered $100, which his mother halved. 
In that year Mrs Austen, Cassandra, Jane, and Martha Lloyd stayed at Worthing from mid-September to early November, and only then returned to Bath. On 2 July 1806 they left the spa town for good and spent the rest of the summer with relatives, beginning with the Leighs of Adlestrop. In August the Austens moved with Thomas Leigh to stay at Stoneleigh Abbey, the setting for hard negotiations concerning the will of the recently deceased Mary Leigh of Stoneleigh. In the event James Leigh-Perrot, one of the two possible heirs -- both in their seventies -- renounced his life interest in Stoneleigh to Thomas Leigh, in favour of a sum of $24,000 for himself, together with an annuity of $2000. Mrs Austen was severely disappointed when, after this windfall, no generous gift from the Leigh-Perrots for the three women was forthcoming. The plight of a woman denied an inheritance forms the subject of Austen's abandoned fragment of a novel, written on paper watermarked 1803 and subsequently published as 'The Watsons' in the second edition of Edward Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir'. The heroine, Emma Watson, expects to be the heir or at least a beneficiary of the uncle and aunt who brought her up, but her uncle leaves everything to his wife, believing that she will look after Emma. She in turn falls in love with an Irishman, implicitly an adventurer, and her money reverts to him. 
Between mid-August and late September 1806 the women visited Edward Cooper and his family at Hamstall Ridware in Staffordshire, where Jane caught whooping cough from her cousins. After this they went to Steventon rectory and on 10 October, along with Frank Austen and his wife, Mary Gibson, they moved to lodgings in Southampton. In February 1807 they found a suitable house in Castle Square, which they shared for two years with Frank, Mary, and their children. Then a long-term solution was organized by Edward: he found a roomy, unpretentious house with six bedrooms in the centre of the Hampshire village of Chawton, near the large manor house that he himself owned. The Austen sisters, their mother, and Martha Lloyd moved there on 7 July 1809, and from this point Austen's career as a published writer could begin. 
Before the end of her stay at Southampton Jane Austen was preparing for the writing she meant to return to once at Chawton. In her new home she was able to establish a routine for her own work with a minimal place in it for housework. Her nephew Edward Austen-Leigh does not comment on the marked generosity of three older women, who agreed to manage the household while Jane wrote. Instead he admired Jane's ladylike discretion in covering her work with blotting paper in order to keep her secret, that she was writing for publication, from the neighbours. This was rather like her brother Henry's disingenuous claim that she was prevailed upon with difficulty to publish. Jane Austen dealt directly and firmly with her two publishers, Thomas Egerton and John Murray, complained when they were dilatory, and took a close interest in the progress of each of her publications, the costs of printing and paper (for which she was liable), and the copyrights and subsequent editions. She was not ashamed of meaning to make money. 
Thomas Egerton, a friend of Jane's brother Henry, had distributed James Austen's mildly satirical monthly magazine 'The Loiterer' (January 1789-March 1790) in London. In the winter of 1810-11 a standard agreement was reached with him that 'Sense and Sensibility' would 'be published on commission', which meant in practice that the author took a percentage of any profits, but had to bear the losses. But, though the novel duly went to press in January 1811, the printers proceeded slowly for much of the year. 'Sense and Sensibility' was eventually advertised from 30 October 1811 in 'The Star', and on 31 October in the 'Morning Chronicle'. Published in three volumes and priced at 15's'., it probably had a print run of 1000 or fewer. It was also anonymous, with the attribution on the title-page 'By a Lady'. Still the first edition sold out, and brought Austen '$140 beside the copyright'. It was reviewed favourably in the 'Critical Review' in February 1812 and in the 'British Critic' in May. The former praised Austen for her 'knowledge of character' and her expert blending of 'a great deal of good sense with the lighter matter of the piece' (4th ser., 1.149). A second edition, revised by the author, was first advertised in 'The Star' on 29 October 1813 at 18's'. but sold slowly. 
According to Edward Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir', 'Pride and Prejudice' was also revised in 1809-10 at the same time as 'Sense and Sensibility', although cuts were still being made later. R. W. Chapman argues that the plot fits the calendars of 1811 and 1812, pointing to some major revisions, but others doubt that a significant overhaul could have occurred so late, especially if Austen was already working on 'Mansfield Park' in 1811. The copyright of the novel was sold to Egerton in autumn 1812 for $110, not for the $150 that Austen wanted. She received her first published copy on 27 January 1813, saying that she had 'got my own darling Child from London' ('Letters', 201), and on the next day it was advertised in the 'Morning Chronicle' as being 'published this day', priced 18's'. The print run is not known, but Geoffrey Keynes suggests 1500 copies. Austen could not correct mistakes in the reprinted second edition because she had lost the copyright. She declared that the book was 'rather too light & bright & sparkling', and that it required 'shade', but on the whole she was 'quite vain enough & well satisfied enough' ('Letters', 203). Elizabeth Bennet was 'as delightful a creature as ever appeared in print, & how I shall be able to tolerate those who do not like 'her' at least, I do not know' (ibid., 201). The three reviews -- in the 'British Critic' (21 Feb 1813), 'Critical Review' (March 1813), and 'New Review' (1 April 1813) -- were favourable. Thanks to his purchase of the copyright, indeed cheap at the price, Egerton was able to print a second edition in October 1813 and a third in 1817 from which Austen was unable to profit. It was the runaway success among her publications. 
The planning of 'Mansfield Park' -- her most ambitious novel yet, and the first to be written at Chawton -- began some time before 1811, and according to Cassandra the work was finished soon after June 1813, although Jane's letters concerning 'Mansfield Park' to her siblings and to Martha Lloyd were (despite Cassandra's comments) most frequent between January and September 1813. It was offered to Thomas Egerton possibly in January 1814, and Henry was reading the proof copy early in March. According to an advertisement in 'The Star' it was published 'this day', 9 May 1814, priced 18's'., most probably with a print run of 1250 copies. By 14 November all copies were sold, and Austen's profit was at least $320 -- more than she received in her lifetime for any other novel. 
Austen's fourth novel, 'Emma', which followed in 1816, was longer but was written rapidly in fourteen months between 21 January 1814 and 29 March 1815, according to Cassandra. Annoyed by Egerton's inattention, Austen offered 'Emma' in August or September 1815 to John Murray, who on 15 October volunteered $450 for the copyright of 'Emma', 'Mansfield Park', and 'Sense and Sensibility'. Henry Austen protested at the poor terms in November, and this time Jane Austen retained her copyrights. She met Murray, following her letter to him on 3 November: it was agreed that second editions of 'Mansfield Park' and 'Emma' would both be published on standard commission. On 23 November 1815 Austen complained to Murray of printer's delays, but she was soon 'soothed & complimented into tolerable comfort' ('Letters', 298). The reason for Murray's attentiveness could have been the news that the prince regent's librarian, James Stanier Clarke, was encouraging Austen to dedicate her next book to the prince, since he was one of her admirers. On behalf of the prince, Stanier Clarke invited Jane to visit the prince's London residence, Carlton House, and while showing her round conveyed the impression that though she was not obliged to make the dedication it would be civil and almost certainly beneficial financially to do so. She also had to pay for a bound copy for the prince. 'Emma' was duly advertised in December 1815 and published later that month (though dated 1816 on the title pages). Murray printed two thousand copies of 'Emma', which proved too many. With only 1248 sold by October 1816, 539 copies were finally remaindered at 2's'. each in 1820. One likely outcome was that 'Emma' competed with John Murray's second edition of 'Mansfield Park' (19 February 1816), which accordingly did not sell well, and the wholesale price was soon reduced to 11's'. 6died A shocking initial loss of $182 8's'. 3died was set against profits of 'Emma' ($231 1's'. 3died), leaving Austen in her lifetime only $48 13's'. to show for her finest novel. 
Jane Austen was not only a careful businesswoman when dealing with her publishers. In relation first to Egerton and then to Murray she clearly had her own plan to produce several novels from Chawton, at least three more to match the three novels of the 1790s that her Steventon family knew. They were not to come out too fast, or they would tire the public and perhaps compete with one another, as 'Emma' did with the second edition of 'Mansfield Park'. To avoid monotony, each heroine was to be a distinct personality, an individualist and flawed ('pictures of perfection' made Austen 'sick & wicked'; 'Letters', 335). Her biggest decisions, not articulated but visible in some of her fragments, novellas, and novels, were taken between 1809 and 1813. They involved an overhaul of the template from the 1790s to which 'Pride and Prejudice' and 'Sense and Sensibility' adhere. Those early novels, and the most depressed and bitter of her fragments, 'The Watsons', had made common cause with girls looking for legacies, as stated most forthrightly by the adolescent Margaret Dashwood: 'I wish that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece!' (vol. 1, chap. 17). This simplistic theme allowed other authors to dwell on occasionally vulgar and usually immature characters in unappealing settings and circumstances. Austen in her mid-thirties believed she could do better, but in the meantime was content to reissue her novels of the 1790s polished and burnished but not rethought. After them she aimed at more sophisticated readers. She sought to outgrow the poor relatives' chorus. 
In the novels written at Chawton Austen moved her action to large houses, alone or contrasted with other houses -- first to 'Mansfield Park'; next to the suburban comforts of Highbury, Surrey, in 'Emma'; and then, by a backward glance in 'Persuasion', to Kellynch and a more elite, aristocratic Bath (drawing on evenings spent in the inertia of the Leigh-Perrot drawing-room). Technically this change required new models to draw into her text by way of allusion. No longer so tied to the courtship plot -- with its conventional routine of a sequence of frustrating delays and near catastrophes, followed by a sudden resolution -- Austen had to rethink her structure, and marginalize without quite losing novelettish incident. These two projects were strikingly achieved in 'Mansfield Park' and 'Emma'. 
After 'Sense and Sensibility', Austen's next novel of sentiment was 'Mansfield Park'. Here the seat of emotion appears to reside in the desire of lovers but more often lies in the sufferings of siblings and cousins. Behind the facade of a courtship novel, then, 'Mansfield Park''s originality is its base in the lives of the Steventon Austens. The slow, quiet flow of the plot into which the narrative slackens after Sir Thomas Bertram's return from the West Indies throws into relief the unnatural behaviour precipitated by the theatricals, the numerous small acts of social cowardice or treachery between brothers and sisters and cousins; even Edmund Bertram betrays Fanny Price when he fails to stand up for her against his bullying brother and sister. These points of tension, and the young people's conversations, strongly convey real-life experience. Aged about fifteen, Jane's brother Edward had been adopted by a childless couple, the Knights, and spent school holidays in their big silent house at Godmersham until sent abroad in 1786. This is an experience relived by Fanny in the novel. The two youngest boys, Frank and Charles, went aged fourteen to sea in wartime, experiencing both terror and homesickness, though not much is said of this by William Price in the novel. Austen writes an eloquent passage on William's reception when at last he comes back from the Far East to visit his sister: 'Fanny had never known so much felicity in her life, as in this unchecked, equal, fearless intercourse with the brother and friend, who was opening all his heart to her, telling her all his hopes and fears... and with whom... all the evil and good of their earliest years could be gone over again... with the fondest recollection. An advantage this, a strengthener of love in which even the conjugal tie is beneath the fraternal. Children of the same family, the same blood, with the same first associations and habits, have some means of enjoyment in their power, which no subsequent connections can supply. (vol. 2, chap. 6)' Fanny's meditation on family life throws light on Austen's tenderness towards her own sister and brothers. Siblings bond better in her novels than husbands with wives or parents with children. 
In the early chapters of 'Sense and Sensibility' Austen had openly exposed family ruptures -- the unjust will of Old Francis, and the greed of a brother or sister-in-law. From reading between the lines of the letters she wrote as her books came out, it appears that Jane Austen had to fear the reactions of some of her relatives on seeing themselves in print. Understandably, Mary Lloyd and her husband, James Austen, might have wondered whether neighbours were being encouraged to see them as John and Fanny Dashwood. On the appearance of 'Mansfield Park', Jane Austen certainly had to worry about whether the recently widowed Henry would recognize in Mary Crawford traits of his late wife, Eliza, who had died in April 1813. As herself Eliza's first cousin, her sister-in-law, and in the past her friend, Austen had to approach her character Mary Crawford with circumspection. It is Henry Crawford who is alone made fully vicious in the novel, for his cynical project of making first the Bertram sisters, then their younger cousin Fanny, love him at their peril. When Henry Austen was reading the last part of the novel, Jane wrote with apparent relief to Cassandra that their brother was mercifully unsuspicious, that is, he merely 'admires H. Crawford -- I mean properly -- as a clever, pleasant Man' ('Letters', 256). 

'Emma' probably developed as a companion piece to 'Mansfield Park': there are, at any rate, many elegant contrasts as well as variations and similarities between the two novels. Instead of a big-house interior, Austen creates most ingeniously, through many reported conversations, a large, diverse, populated village, recently swollen by an influx of suburbanites. Its scenes are set in a variety of modern-feeling drawing-rooms, in the open air, and in the street, as Highbury residents move about their business. Austen found one lever to start her plot, and a key name: in a story in the 'Lady's Magazine' of 1802 called 'Guilt Pursued by Conscience', a rich Mr Knightly had married a girl of uncertain parentage from a local boarding-school. Another source was a play by the Viennese dramatist August von Kotzebue, 'Die Versohnung', which Austen saw at Bath on 22 June 1799. Translated by Thomas Dibdin as 'The Birthday', this was a sentimental comedy about a faultless daughter, Emma Bertram, whose filial devotion to her invalid father had led her to resolve never to marry. Another play by Kotzebue, adapted for the stage by Elizabeth Inchbald as 'Lovers' Vows', featured in 'Mansfield Park'. 
In 'Emma' Austen makes Harriet Smith a weak, almost burlesque version of the threatening strangers who enter the community in 'Mansfield Park'. She is the unsuspicious simple-minded pawn of Emma Woodhouse, who unsolicited takes on the seemingly benign role of Harriet's match-maker. There are three other strangers, Jane Fairfax, Mrs Elton, and Frank Churchill. Jane seems mysterious because she is secretly engaged to Frank. The mystery tempts Emma and the irresponsible Frank to invent a novelettish romance for Jane. Mrs Elton has ambitions to lead Highbury society and worms her way into organizing or projecting Highbury entertainments at other people's expense. From Yorkshire, Mrs Churchill, a domineering woman who is never seen, controls the comings and goings of the essentially weak Frank Churchill. 
The most striking contrast between Austen's two more innovative novels seems at first sight to lie in the personality of the heroine: Fanny Price, so long shy and apparently uncertain, is succeeded by Emma Woodhouse, energetic and over-confident. Emma is seen at her best as an adult within a trio of observing adults, the others being her erstwhile governess and mother figure, Mrs Weston, and her future husband, Knightley. The conversations between the three seem supremely natural, uncensorious, understanding, mature, as if based on the virtues Austen observed in the people she lived with and best respected, or could confidently claim in herself. Emma as an 'imaginist' expresses Austen's own creative exuberance and her vocational interest in character and plot. But a central impulse behind the treatment of Emma is an unsparing confrontation with faults others saw in Jane Austen, such as impatience, refusal to suffer fools, and a sense of her own superiority, not of rank but of talent. Certainly her family would have conceded that Jane, like Emma, had a dutiful regard for the parish's old ladies. On the other hand Cassandra especially would have seen -- and Jane lets her readers see -- in Emma's affront to Miss Bates the licence Jane permitted herself in the privacy of letters, of making jokes about her neighbours, some of them unkind. She found one such target in the Revd Henry Hall of Monk Sherborne, Hampshire, whose wife 'was brought to bed yesterday of a dead child, some weeks before she expected, oweing to a fright. -- I suppose she happened unawares to look at her husband' ('Letters', 17). Certainly on occasions she could be offensive. 
By 1813 Jane Austen apparently knew that there would be at least three more novels after 'Pride and Prejudice'. The third is 'Persuasion'. Writing began on 8 August 1815, and a first draft was completed by 18 July 1816. It too develops variations on established themes which contemporary readers of novels would be expected to recognize. A romantic plot is triggered by the arrival of a familiar man and former fiance, Captain Wentworth, who resembles the gallant Captain Walsingham in 'Manoeuvring' (1809), a domestic comedy by Maria Edgeworth, then the most successful British novelist, whom Austen regarded highly. In 1814 she wrote to her niece Anna Lefroy: 'I have made up my mind to like no Novels really, but Miss Edgeworth's, Yours & my own' ('Letters', 278). Each of Austen's six published novels, except 'Pride and Prejudice', borrows somewhere from Edgeworth. Thus in 'Persuasion' Wentworth's simultaneous courtship of two Musgrove sisters echoes behaviour resented in Edgeworth's 'Vivian' (1812), while Louisa Musgrove's mistimed leap into Wentworth's arms on the Cobb at Lyme Regis mirrors in 'Vivian' the tumble of the hoydenish Lady Julia into the sea at Plymouth (in later editions, Yarmouth). 
Quietly and wittily allusive, 'Persuasion' is the most elegant of courtship novels, a reflection on romantic love and marriage for men and women, whether in late adolescence or nearing middle age. Anne Elliot has experienced eight years earlier a romance that was broken off, thanks to the disapproval of her father and the negative advice of Lady Russell. Since then she has refused an offer of marriage from a neighbour, Charles Musgrove, after which Charles marries her less appealing sister Mary. The action opens on Anne in her loveless home, Kellynch Hall, living with her cold and snobbish father and elder sister, who neglect her. When these two leave for Bath she moves to Uppercross, where she can reflect on what her life would have been had she married Charles Musgrove: a warmer, noisier, child-ridden, unstimulating existence, the men obsessed with field sports, everyone's days and evenings spent in a crowd. Jane's own brothers, and two of the sons of her brother Edward Knight, were keen on field sports. The sequential settings in 'Persuasion' review the noise and weariness of married life with realism and not much sign of regret. None of the households with children described by Austen seems positively attractive. Only Mrs Croft associates her marriage with energy and adventure, and she is not at home, but with her husband, the admiral, when he goes to sea. The reminiscences, somewhat idealized, are those of Frank Austen's wife, Mary Gibson. 
Austen's swerve into romance as she grew older had little to do with the sentimentalism of the 1790s, and more with close observation and reflection. She had told her motherless niece Fanny Knight that her age, twenty-one, was the time to form a deep and permanent attachment -- a true marriage. But in the same letter Austen had 'no scruple in saying' that Fanny 'cannot be in Love' with her suitor John Plumptre ('Letters', 279), advice that proved as decisive for Fanny as Lady Russell's for Anne at nineteen, though Fanny persevered, to marry Sir Edward Knatchbull in October 1820. 'Persuasion' offers a full complement of experienced older women. It has mother figures for nearly adult daughters; adult daughters entering the years when marriage has become unlikely; and, in the novel's present time but also in women's memories, the experience of being eighteen and of falling in love. In 'Persuasion' the tally of good marriages is small indeed, and is confined to sailors: Admiral and Mrs Croft (the older generation, and now cheerful and prosperous) and Captain and Mrs Harville (hardworked and selfless parents of young children, in cramped accommodation). At first meeting, the literary Captain Benwick seems an arch-romantic: he has loved and been loved by an exceptional woman, Fanny Harville, who has died; and he is as ardent a lover of poetry as Willoughby and Marianne. But Benwick makes what looks like a poor choice by engaging himself to the very ordinary Louisa Musgrove, merely because she fell in his way during the short time in which she is vulnerable, passive, and pale, like a fictional heroine. Louisa and Henrietta Musgrove still regret, and rightly, that their brother Charles is not married to Anne Elliot. Mrs Smith has married the man of her choice, to suffer thereafter because, being spendthrift, weak, and a poor judge of men, he left his property in the hands of the treacherous William Walter Elliot. The last-named is a marital adventurer, in the past supposedly after Elizabeth Elliot, currently in pursuit of Anne. His next liaison with the equally unscrupulous Mrs Clay is not so much a marriage as a business deal. 
Against this panorama of lost illusions or duplicity, mercenariness and betrayal, the gentle but steady courtship of mature lovers is very moving, especially in the rewritten and brilliantly contrived proposal scene at the White Hart. In the conversation regarding Benwick between Anne and Captain Harville about male and female fidelity there is a compacted world of Austen's own family experience, and one of the strongest insights anywhere in her writing into the novelist's sympathy with her sister Cassandra. In an undertone Anne describes Cassandra's fidelity, 'that of loving longest, when existence or when hope is lost' (vol. 2, chap. 11). 
After completing 'Persuasion' in August 1816, Jane Austen wrote a preface for 'Northanger Abbey', describing the previous attempt to publish. Henry had bought back the original manuscript of 'Susan' -- now renamed 'Catherine' -- from Benjamin Crosby that year. But Austen again put it aside: 'Miss Catherine is put upon the Shelve for the present, and I do not know that she will ever come out' ('Letters', 333). She had suffered back pain during the summer of 1816, and that autumn fell ill with a variety of symptoms: nausea, diarrhoea, muscle weakness, and fatigue. Modern medical expertise suggests tuberculosis (of the lungs or stomach) or cancer (of the stomach or bowels). The increased pigmentation of her skin, however, is now regarded as a sign of Addison's disease, and the result of the malfunction of the cortex of the adrenal glands. Good doctors were tried in succession, but there was no cure. 
Austen could barely write that autumn. To Cassandra, on 8 September, she wondered that Jane West could 'have written such Books & collected so many hard words' because 'Composition seems to me Impossible, with a head full of Joints of Mutton & doses of rhubarb' ('Letters', 321). She did, however, pick up a new project, 'Sanditon', in January 1817. Impressively she stuck to her grand plan for her Chawton novels, always to surprise her readers by using a different format from that of the previous novel, or in this case to try a burlesque format newer than 'Northanger Abbey'. The setting is a south-coast seaside village in a state of headlong development. Through the pleasant and sensible Charlotte Heywood the reader encounters one by one the eccentrics who have taken the place over: hypochondriacs (this term then connoted the social maladies of the idle rich) such as three members of the Parker family; entrepreneurs, managers, and advertisers, such as the senior Mr Parker, who once lived in a pleasant, undeveloped house and estate, in a sheltered position; and Lady Denham, a woman of power and authority. A rich widow who has survived two rich husbands, she is a female version of Austen's great-uncle Francis, and like him surrounded by a court of acquisitive nieces and nephews. One of these is a literary poseur, Sir Edward Denham, who models himself on Samuel Richardson's Lovelace, and aspires to seduce Clara Brereton, the novel's nearest approximation to the heroine of melodrama. This is a tough, cynical study of greed, meanness, and 'hypochondria'. It would have been hard in the best circumstances to sustain and finish. Jane Austen lacked the time, and set the tale aside for good on 18 March 1817. Edited by R. W. Chapman, the manuscript was published as 'Fragments of a Novel by Jane Austen' in 1925. 
This was a dreadful winter and spring for other reasons. Henry Austen, like other receivers-general of taxes, had the use of tax money between collection and remission. This customary practice came under severe criticism as the post-war financial crisis deepened. Henry Austen was already pronounced bankrupt on 15 March 1816. His guarantors for the receivership, James Leigh-Perrot ($10,000) and Edward Knight ($20,000), both lost their sureties, and when Edward in particular got into difficulties, the Steventon Austens were faced with losing their home. Other family members -- Frank and Charles -- lost lesser sums. Even Henry's servants had banked with him, and their losses were irreparable. Jane Austen, in the unwitnessed will she wrote on 27 April 1817 making Cassandra her executor, thoughtfully left $50 each for Henry and for his housekeeper Mme Bigeon. 
As the weather grew warmer, Austen claimed to be slowly gathering strength. But her symptoms persisted, and in May the family agreed she should have the best possible advice -- from Giles King Lyford, a surgeon at the county hospital in Winchester. Her last weeks in Winchester witnessed more short rallies, in which she felt alert, even creative. On 13 June, however, Charles found her 'very ill', and Lyford told the family that her case was desperate. On St Swithun's day, 15 July, she composed a comic poem, a curse addressed by the saint to the people of Winchester (Latin name 'Venta'): '
Oh! subjects rebellious! Oh Venta depraved! 

When once we are buried you think we are dead 

But behold me immortal... 

' Her pain returned on the evening of 17 July, as Lyford warned it would. Cassandra asked if she wanted anything, to which Jane replied, typically, with a quotation, in this case from 'Pilgrim's Progress', 'nothing but death'. She died at 8 College Street, Winchester, at 4.30 a.m. on 18 July, Cassandra beside her. Her funeral was held in Winchester Cathedral at 8 a.m. on 24 July 1817. The mourners were her brothers Edward, Henry, and Frank, with James, who was also ill, represented by his son Edward. 
Only two authentic images of Jane Austen are known to exist, both sketches with watercolour by Cassandra. The earliest, dated 1804 and initialled 'C. E. A.', is a rear view which depicts Austen sitting out of doors wearing a blue dress and a large bonnet which comically obscures her face and head. The second sketch ('c'.1810, NPG, London) is the only certain and authentic representation of Jane's face: a mature woman, she is looking away to her right, her dark brown curls escaping from a lace cap. The family had reservations about this image, which had a pursed mouth suggesting secrecy and perhaps anger; Anna Austen (Mrs Lefroy) called it 'so hideously unlike' ('Jane Austen: a Family Record', 2004, 280). In 1869 Edward Austen-Leigh commissioned a softer and more rounded version from a local artist, James Andrews of Maidenhead; however, the same idealization recurred and Cassandra's Jane became, in Margaret Anne Doody's words, 'sweet-faced, big-eyed, placid... the image of the perfect sister and aunt'. An engraving by Lizars of Andrews's watercolour was used in 1870 as the frontispiece to Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir'; this too was criticized by Anna's half-sister Caroline for the treatment of Jane's eyes -- Cassandra had made them too large, round, and naive. 
In addition to Cassandra's two sketches there are three further portraits which, though at times identified as Jane, cannot be claimed as authentic likenesses. Two are silhouettes. The first, entitled 'L'aimable Jane', is now also owned by the National Portrait Gallery, London. It was found in a copy of the second edition of 'Mansfield Park' (1816), pasted to the rear endpaper of volume 2, and is thought possibly to be by a Mrs Collins, an artist working in Bath about 1800. The second silhouette, owned by Winchester Cathedral Library, has been claimed on the basis of its inscription to be the work of Austen herself, dated 1815. The style, however, suggests a much later work of about 1895. A third purported likeness is a watercolour sketch of a woman wearing a large black feathered hat, which occurs in an album compiled between 1791 and 1804 by James Stanier Clarke, the librarian to the prince of Wales. The untitled and undated sketch depicts a youthful woman whose extravagant dress and hat are at odds with the taste of the year 1815 when Austen, at forty, visited Stanier Clarke at Carlton House. 
A further portrait -- the so called Rice portrait -- has generated a long-running debate on whether the sitter may be Jane Austen. A professional studio painting, the portrait depicts a brown-haired girl aged between perhaps thirteen and fifteen. The girl's hair is neatly shaped to her head, the texture healthy and glossy. The eyes are brown and rather narrow, the skin typically brunette but perhaps powdered, the nose straight, the mouth small. 
Doubt over the sitter's identity has focused on differing opinions as to the date of the painting. What has been agreed retrospectively is that in the late 1810s the portrait was in the possession of the Motley Austens of Kippington, Jane Austen's cousins and descendants of her great uncle 'Old Francis' Austen. In 1817 the Kippington estate passed to Colonel Thomas Austen (1775-1859), the second but eldest surviving son of Francis Motley Austen (died 1815) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Wilson. Probably in 1818, Thomas gave the portrait to his friend Thomas Harding Newman of Nelmes, Essex, and his wife-to-be, Eliza Hall, who became its legal owner. The Harding Newman family believed the portrait to be the work of Zoffany (a description that would be contemporary shorthand for a family picture) and to portray the young Jane Austen. With the death of Harding Newman in 1856 the portrait passed to his son (Eliza's stepson), also named Thomas (1811-1882). In December 1880 the younger Thomas wrote to his friend J. R. Bloxham about the painting: 'I should like to give [a] painting, of Jane Austen the novelist by Zoffany to her relative, your neighbour Morland Rice. It is of a girl about fifteen & came into my family, the gift of Col. Austen of Chippington [Kippington] to my... stepmother; my father's second wife, who was a great admirer of the novelist. I can remember Colonel Austen visiting this place.' The younger Thomas Harding Newman subsequently bequeathed the painting to his friend John Morland Rice (1823-1897), whom he knew to be a collateral descendant of Jane Austen. The portrait was first published in 1884 in 'The Letters of Jane Austen' edited by Morland Rice's cousin Lord Brabourne. It remains in the possession of the Rice family, who argue that the painting is of Austen and dates from the late 1780s. It has been suggested that the portrait was commissioned from Ozias Humphry by Old Francis shortly after the Steventon Austens' visit to Sevenoaks in 1788. Thomas Austen, who later gave the portrait away, probably met Jane during this visit. A letter from Henry Morland Rice in September 1884 included a suggestion from Fanny Caroline Lefroy (1820-1885), the daughter of Anna, that the portrait dated from 1788 or 1789 and might be of the novelist aged thirteen. 
Scholarly debate over the sitter's identity arose in the twentieth century. Questions were first raised during the 1930s when the National Portrait Gallery considered that the painting -- which is undated, untitled, and has no discernible signature -- was not by Zoffany but more likely the work of Ozias Humphry. If by Humphry, the work would date from before 1797, when the painter went blind. However, in 1948 R. W. Chapman argued that the child's dress and the painting style dated the portrait 'to about 1805' and therefore that it could not be of Austen, who was then 'thirty or later' (quoted in M. Kirkham, 'Portraits', 'Cambridge Edition', 1.73). Later costume historians have restated this dating, though other researchers note that dresses like that in the portrait were being worn in France from the 1780s. A more general reason for doubt is the absence of first-hand contemporary evidence about the portrait. Who commissioned the portrait and where was it in Austen's lifetime? Who saw it or knew of its existence in the immediate family circle, from Jane's adolescence and after? The suggestion of a later dating was reiterated in the 1990s, notably by Deirdre Le Faye, who argued that the portrait is probably by Matthew William Peters, and the sitter not Jane Austen but Colonel Thomas Austen's niece Mary Anne Campion (1797-1825). In 1998 Jacob Simon, chief curator at the National Portrait Gallery, revealed that the Rice portrait's canvas bore the artists' colourman's stamp of 'Wm. Legg, High Holborn, London'. Subsequent research has established that the colourman William Legg (1760-1823) was baptized and married in Reading, and that his eight children were also baptized in the town between 1 June 1789 and 7 May 1800, prompting Simon to conclude that Legg became a colourman in London ' probably in late 1801' ('TLS', 4 May 2007) and therefore that the portrait was painted after this date. 



'Persuasion' and 'Northanger Abbey' were published together in four volumes by John Murray, prefaced by Henry Austen's 'Biographical notice of the author' (dated 13 December 1817), the first acknowledgement in print of Jane Austen as the author of her six novels. The publication was organized by Henry and Cassandra, but the decision to pair the youthful, satirical 'Northanger Abbey' with the mature, autumnal 'Persuasion' was probably Jane Austen's, since it matched her steady practice, by then, of pairing her novels so that the reader saw in them both similarity and contrast. The setting is the same -- Bath -- but the subtlety and sentiment of 'Persuasion' are offset by the sophisticated naivety of 'Northanger Abbey'. 1750 copies were printed in December 1817. The work was advertised in mid- to late December and appeared late in the month, with '1818' on the title-page. Prompt reviews appeared in the 'British Critic' (March 1818) and in the 'Edinburgh Magazine' and 'Literary Miscellany' (May 1818). Initial sales were rapid: the dual publication earned $518 6's'. 5died Jan Fergus calculates Austen's overall literary earnings, including copyrights, to have been at least $1625, most of it received after her death. In her lifetime she received something over $631, perhaps as much as $668. It was insufficient for her to support herself by writing. 
The reception of Jane Austen's novels has always had a private and a public dimension. Her novels were published anonymously: only a favoured few in her immediate family circle knew of the publication of 'Sense and Sensibility' (1811) and 'Pride and Prejudice' (1813). But in spring and summer 1813 her brother Henry Austen gossiped tirelessly to his friends and acquaintances of his sister's novels, which publicized her work and encouraged his upper-class circles to spread her fame further. The care with which Jane Austen kept the comments on 'Mansfield Park' and 'Emma' sent to her by some of these friends clearly indicates that though she had initially wanted to remain anonymous, she enjoyed her public favour as well as her sales. 
Because of her anonymity Austen initially received relatively few reviews. The only notable published review article of her lifetime was one by Walter Scott (as usual unsigned) in the prestigious 'Quarterly Review' (vol. 14, no. 27, dated October 1815, published March 1816, 188-201). While his topic was purportedly 'Emma' (1816), Scott offered an overview of Austen's publications so far, from which, to her irritation, he accidentally omitted 'Mansfield Park'. This was nevertheless to take her seriously, and indeed Scott was plainly prepared to make claims for Austen's importance to the English novel. He even suggests that the 'romance', a Gothic and historical fashion launched in the 1790s by himself and others, was now superseded by novels of ordinary life, village and domestic, with Maria Edgeworth and Jane Austen as its most skilful practitioners. This appears generous and self-effacing, but Scott undercuts his flattery before he is through. He cannot help hinting at the colourfulness of his own fictional world, peopled with 'robbers, smugglers, bailiffs, dungeons and mad-houses' (p. 192). Even Edgeworth sounds relatively lively -- 'the scenes of Miss E are laid in higher life, varied by more romantic incident, and by her remarkable power of embodying and illustrating national character' (p. 193). Austen's speciality is by contrast to remain faithful to 'the middling classes of society' in southern England and to 'the art of copying from nature... in the common walks of life' -- or 'presenting to the reader, instead of the splendid scenes of an imaginary world, a correct and striking representation of that which is daily taking place around him' (p. 193). It is correct then. And it is parochial. These words would be used as reproaches to Austen later in the nineteenth century. 
Austen's effusive brother Henry proved another dubious ally. His eight-page 'Biographical notice' prefacing the posthumous edition of 'Northanger Abbey' and 'Persuasion' (1818) was written in the flush of his new evangelicalism, and unabashedly idealized Austen as a daughter and sister who led an almost wholly private life. 'A life of usefulness, literature, and religion, was not by any means a life of event'. At home she never met reproof or 'an abatement of good-will'. She was modest and retiring: 'An invincible distrust of her own judgment induced her to withhold her works from the public... She could scarcely believe what she termed her great good fortune when 'Sense and Sensibility' produced a clear profit of about $150. Few so gifted were so truly unpretending. She regarded the above sum as a prodigious recompense for that which had cost her nothing.' Her 'personal attractions' were considerable too, 'her stature that of true elegance', her 'complexion was of the finest texture'. 
Henry's unqualified praise was wearisome, and on points of detail the Austen family, at least, knew that he went too far. Cassandra, the main recipient of her sister's letters, could not have said 'she never uttered a hasty, a silly or a severe expression', or 'Faultless herself, as nearly as human nature can be, she always sought in the faults of others something to excuse, to forgive or forget.' Another claim embarrassed the next generation of the family: 'The style of her familiar correspondence was in all respects the same as that of her novels... she never dispatched a note or letter unworthy of publication.' This misleading sentence kept up the pressure for her private letters to be published, and was partly responsible for the disappointment widely felt when in 1932 R. W. Chapman published the first substantial edition of Austen's letters. H. W. Garrod was perhaps the most outspoken critic: 'a desert of trivialities punctuated by occasional oases of clever malice' ('Jane Austen: a depreciation', 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature', new ser., 8, 1928, 23). 
Henry went on to inflate the extent and seriousness of Austen's reading, and to omit her familiarity with humour, burlesque, caricature, and stage farce, not to speak of woman-centred magazine fiction aimed at the lower end of the market. One of the few quotations from Jane and the very best moment in Henry's eulogy was lifted from a letter she wrote to her novel-writing nephew Edward when she was already seriously ill in late 1816. It is her description of the difference between her style and method and his: 'How could I possibly join them on to the little bit (two Inches wide) of Ivory on which I work with so fine a Brush, as produces little effect after much labour?' ('Letters', 323). A more complex legacy left by Henry Austen was his finale, solemnly introduced: 'One trait only remains... she was thoroughly religious and devout; fearful of giving offence to God, and incapable of feeling it towards any fellow creature. On serious subjects well-instructed, both by reading and meditation'. Jane's stoical and quiet death rounds off the intended impression, of a virtuous and private woman who died resigned and grateful with her lot in life. 
The review by Scott and the obituary by Henry figure repeatedly in Jane Austen's nineteenth-century reception, beginning with Richard Whately, the future archbishop of Dublin, and reviewer for the 'Quarterly Review' in January 1821 of Austen's posthumous novels. His piece was much longer and probably more important for her reputation than the pieces by Walter Scott or Henry Austen. Whately praised Austen for her domestic Christian values in contrast to those of other writers, most pointedly Maria Edgeworth: 'Miss Austen has the merit (in our judgment most essential) of being evidently a Christian writer: a merit which is much enhanced, both on the score of good taste and of practical utility, by her religion being not at all obtrusive'. There is also an observant and perceptive paragraph on Fanny Price's ability to resist the overtures of Henry Crawford in 'Mansfield Park': 'Fanny... is armed against Mr Crawford by a stronger feeling than even her disapprobation; by a vehement attachment to Edmund. The silence in which this passion is cherished -- the slender hopes and enjoyments by which it is fed -- the restlessness and jealousy with which it fills a mind naturally active, contented and unsuspicious -- the manner in which it tinges every event and every reflection, are painted with a vividness and a detail of which we can scarcely conceive any one but a female, and we should almost add, a female writing from recollection, capable. ('Quarterly Review', 24, Jan 1821, 359, 366-7)' Private readers had enjoyed Austen's work in her own lifetime, and continued to do so throughout the nineteenth century, with all six of the novels available in new and affordable editions from the early 1830s. The vein of criticism that buoyed her reputation was the claim already voiced by Whately, and after him Thomas Babington Macaulay, that she was a 'prose Shakespeare': a masterly portrayer of character. At the same time, owing partly to Scott's ambivalence, Austen's meticulous treatment of the ordinary exposed her to a steady stream of criticism from, for example, the many Romantic writers, including almost all the major poets, who strove to transcend the commonplace and literal in their quests for idealism, the sublime, imagination, passionate love, or a form of Christianity more spiritual than Austen's late eighteenth-century Anglicanism. The Romantic reproach levelled at Austen was the simple issue of her scale -- her ordinariness was also littleness, an acceptance of constraint and the mediocre, however exquisite her technique and taste. Charlotte Bronte told G. H. Lewes it was certainly so: 'an accurate daguerreotyped portrait of a common-place face; a carefully-fenced, highly cultivated garden... Miss Austen, being, as you say, without 'sentiment', without 'poetry', may be -- 'is' sensible, real (more 'real' than 'true'), but she cannot be great' (letter, 12 and 18 Jan 1848, 'The Letters of Charlotte Bronte', 2, '1848-1851', ed. M. Smith, 2000, 10, 14). 
Reactions to Austen's achievement varied with the temperament of the reader. Thomas Carlyle intemperately dismissed her work as 'dishwashings'. Slowly the more thoughtful male admirers of her technique, beginning with Macaulay and G. H. Lewes, introduced arguments that widened her range. Lewes especially returned to the comparison with Shakespeare, and went on the offensive against Scott's champions by describing her 'marvellous dramatic power' and the objectivity with which she presents her characters and their relationships ('The novels of Jane Austen', 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', 86, July 1859, 99-113). His insight and good sense prepared the way for the most perceptive essay on Austen so far, that of Richard Simpson, a Roman Catholic friend of John Henry Newman and a Shakespearian scholar, who broke clean out of the reproach of narrowness by presenting both her humour and her irony as the techniques of a social critic rather than a miniaturist. Simpson's essay, for the 'North British Review' (April 1870), considered Edward Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir' (1870) a more elegant and judicious biography than Henry Austen's 'Biographical notice' half a century earlier. Margaret Oliphant's review in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' (March 1870) also made a difference by giving Jane Austen a mind of her own, a task in which Edward Austen-Leigh had failed: 'Mr Austen Leigh, without meaning it, throws out of his dim little lantern a passing gleam of light upon the fine vein of feminine cynicism which pervades his aunt's mind. It is something altogether different from the rude and brutal male quality that bears the same name.... She is not surprised or offended, much less horror-stricken or indignant, when her people show vulgar or mean traits of character,... or even when they fall into those social cruelties which selfish and stupid people are so often guilty of, not without intention, but yet without the power of realising half the pain they inflict. She stands by and looks on, and gives a soft half-smile, and tells the story with an exquisite sense of its ridiculous side, and fine stinging yet soft-voiced contempt for the actors in it.... The position of mind is essentially feminine... It is the natural result of the constant though probably quite unconscious observation in which a young woman, with no active pursuit to occupy her, spends, without knowing it, so much of her time and youth. ('Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', 107, March 1870, 294)' At this time and in the twentieth century it was Simpson's essay that was more admired. Oliphant, however, captured more acutely than any predecessor 'the fine vein of feminine cynicism' which bonds Austen to her female readers, while she matches and to some extent subverts Simpson's confident reading of her humour and irony. 
Edward Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir' had one obvious advantage: it was written by someone who had grown up from 1801 in Steventon rectory, after George and Cassandra moved with their daughters to Bath in May that year. Edward re-created life at Steventon rectory, though it is more the world of his own childhood, in a much smaller family group, than that of Jane Austen's. There should have been a second advantage. From 1813 Edward and his sisters Anna and Caroline showed their aunt their own first attempts to write, and received in return some of her most valuable letters concerning her craft. Yet Edward unaccountably fails to quote in the 'Memoir' from the letters she sent him, even the great comparison of his manner with her own 'painting on ivory'. With misplaced modesty, he says nothing of how he felt when he read her advice to him as an apprentice novelist. His tribute to her is well meant, but formal, and he denies himself what the book most needs, the sound of her voice: ''Aunt Jane' was the delight of all her nephews and nieces. We did not think of her as being clever, still less as being famous; but we valued her as one always kind, sympathising, and amusing' (Austen-Leigh, 'Memoir', chap. 1). His sisters were more demanding and specific in their comments, yet they too seemed to be under an injunction not to go into detail about their relationships with their aunt. Anna in her regrettably brief 'Recollections of Aunt Jane' (1864) observes shrewdly that Jane was 'not' the preferred aunt in Kent, 'not' 'loved' by those conventionally reared nieces and nephews, who preferred the more matter-of-fact, reliable Cassandra. The Godmersham girls, beginning with the eldest, Fanny, were fully aware of the reservations their mother, Elizabeth Bridges, felt regarding Jane's cleverness. As Anna commented sourly, 'a little talent went a long way with the Goodnestone Bridgeses' ('Jane Austen: a Family Record', 2004, 182). 
Despite its omissions Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir' was a stimulus to Austen criticism, and his enlarged second edition -- which reproduced for the first time examples of the juvenilia, the fragment 'The Watsons', and 'Lady Susan' in its entirety -- opened the floodgates to other publications, initially by the family, of the letters and the remaining literary papers. 'Women of letters' were now part of the literary scene, and Austen became what she has since remained, a major writer as popular and accessible to the public as any contemporary. There have also been symptoms of resistance to her pre-eminence. Two sophisticated women writers of the earlier twentieth century, Virginia Woolf and Katherine Mansfield, expressed their reservations about 'Janeites' (a term apparently coined by George Saintsbury in 1894 in his preface to 'Pride and Prejudice'). Even E. M. Forster, who confessed to being himself a Janeite, was embarrassed by the term ('Jane, how shall we ever recollect', 'The Nation and The Athenaeum', 5 Jan 1924). Meanwhile in America, where Austen had not hitherto enjoyed so steady a readership as in Britain, major male writers expressed their decided hostility to the cult they saw gathering strength in Britain: in roughly the same period a wave of male misogyny on both sides of the Atlantic led to an intemperate assault by Mark Twain ('When I take up 'Pride and Prejudice' and 'Sense and Sensibility' I feel like a barkeeper entering the Kingdom of Heaven') and, less predictably, Henry James's cutting denigration of what had hitherto seemed unassailable, Austen's art: 'The tide [of her fame] has risen rather higher, I think, than the high-water mark, the highest, of her intrinsic merit and interest... we are dealing here in some degree... [with] the swift breeze of the commercial... I cannot help seeing her, a good deal, in the same lucky box as the Brontes... a case of popularity... a beguiled infatuation, a sentimentalized vision. ('The lesson of Balzac', 1905, in 'The House of Fiction', 1957, 62-3)' Early to mid-twentieth-century scholars were more sympathetic. Now that classic novels of sufficient seriousness were subjects for study in schools and university, the most thoughtful of the Victorians, Richard Simpson, had important successors in another Shakespearian, A. C. Bradley ('Essays and Studies', 1911), and a brilliant man of letters, Reginald Farrer ('Quarterly Review', July 1917). That most useful compilation by W. and R. A. Austen-Leigh, 'Jane Austen: her Life and Letters' (1913), added substantially to the materials available. They were followed from the 1920s by the steady flow of R. W. Chapman's editions from Oxford University Press: first the six novels (1923), then the 'Minor Works', containing the unfinished works and the juvenilia (between 1925 and 1951), and the 'Letters' (1932). Elizabeth Jenkins wrote an accessible life of Austen in 1938. In 1939 Mary Lascelles published 'Jane Austen and her Art', the first book-length study that was a work both of modern scholarship and of literary criticism and a book that has retained its value for both academic and general readers. 
The 1950s was the first decade in which more academic commentary on Austen emerged from the United States than from Britain. In 1963 a British scholar working in America, Ian Watt, edited a collection of recent articles on Austen by scholars from both sides of the Atlantic in the paperback series 'Twentieth-Century Views'. Watt's selection was fresh, creative, thought-provoking, and analytical; after the limited scope of nineteenth-century Austen criticism, it offered Austen's readers an invigorating range of new perspectives, from Marxist and Freudian interpretations of single novels to influential discussions by leading scholars and philosophers of her use of irony. Without too much exaggeration, Watt in his introduction claimed that the 1950s was the decade in which the sociological combined with the 'New Critical' interest, and in which 'the main literary problems raised by the novels have at last been systematically investigated' (p. 12). Watt picks out for special mention Lionel Trilling's famous essay on 'Mansfield Park' ('Encounter', Sept 1954), which after fifty years still retains its aura, as a deep critical engagement with ethics and duty relating Austen's novels to profound conflicts innate in Western civilization as well as the individual moral life. 
Later in the twentieth century, as women's and feminist studies challenged and to a considerable extent re-routed the priority formerly given to male writers, Austen was for the first time perceived as part of a wave of late eighteenth-century women writers who addressed a growing readership of women. In the 1790s authors such as Elizabeth Inchbald, Charlotte Smith, and Mary Wollstonecraft were already using the conventions of the popular courtship romance to criticize the legal and economic barriers that society erected against women. Though averse to entering London or Bath literary circles, Austen from her schooldays actively availed herself of structures -- reviews, magazines, and circulating libraries -- that could disseminate the productions of the book trade through the countryside as well as the town. As a reader she disliked 'preaching', and as a writer she kept close to the conventions of comedy -- witty, satirical, and sentimental -- as practised in the theatre of her day. She cleverly varied the style of her heroines, yet made each of them, including even Catherine Morland, loyal and eventually self-reliant. By her frequent cross-references to other women-centred plays and novels, Austen was fully part of the stimulating conversation conducted by the literate women of her day. These advances in textual scholarship and in the understanding of Austen's literary and historical context are now fully reflected in the nine-volume 'Cambridge Edition of the Works of Jane Austen' (general editor Janet Todd, 2005-6). 
Jane Austen emerged between 1870 and 1960 as a social critic, a moralist, an incomparable artist, and latterly a popular and universal writer. Today her novels are firm favourites among book buyers and library users and feature prominently in polls of favourite fiction, with a special attachment to 'Pride and Prejudice'. It was the relatively recent recognition of Austen's universality that drove the rapid growth in the 1990s of hotly competing television and film adaptations of all six of her finished novels. 1995 was a particularly notable year, with an ambitious, well-cast, and conscientiously researched 'Pride and Prejudice' made for television, with running time of five hours, produced by Sue Birtwistle and scripted by Andrew Davies, a team that had already succeeded with George Eliot's 'Middlemarch' the preceding year. The production was deliberately literary, and committed to delivering the inward interest and complex relationships of nineteenth-century novels. In the same year Ang Lee directed a stylish and scenic 'Sense and Sensibility', scripted by Emma Thompson, an aesthetic and box-office success. Douglas McGrath's 'Emma' (1996) and Patricia Rozema's 'Mansfield Park' (1999) followed, both of them combining some decided merits with questionable features. Since 'Emma' is very long and has many peripheral characters, the story was heavily cut for the film, which became a vehicle for Gwyneth Paltrow. The opposite fate befell 'Mansfield Park'. Its heroine, Fanny Price, was made unrecognizable, by the imposition of sour traits originating in Austen's letters, mingled with the rebelliousness of a modern teenager; Sir Thomas Bertram became a slave-driver with psychopathic tendencies. 2007 again saw remarkable interest in screen adaptations of Austen, with television versions of 'Mansfield Park', 'Persuasion', and 'Northanger Abbey'. Amy Heckerling's 'Clueless' (1995) may have also set a trend whereby, as with some of Shakespeare's plays, the plot is retained but the setting ingeniously transferred. Inspired by 'Emma' but set in a Californian high school, it has a cult following that few other Austen films command -- a fitting testimony to Jane Austen's remarkable and enduring appeal. 


@@@@@


doc= 905


Austen, Ralph (c.1612-1676), horticulturist and religious radical, was born into a yeoman family in Leek, Staffordshire; his mother was a cousin of Henry Ireton, the parliamentary leader, a connection Austen repeatedly stressed in his attempts to gain offices or land grants. Austen received no university education (unlike Ralph Austen of Magdalen College, Oxford, a Kentish clergyman who died in 1632), though he became a 'privileged person' and lived in Oxford from about 1646 until his death. He helped to enforce the military-backed purge of the university after the siege of 1646, working for the parliamentary visitors as registrar. A religious radical, in 1657 he believed that the 'two witnesses' of Revelation had appeared; and in 1660 he encouraged Anabaptists to preach against the restoration of the monarchy. His main vocation, however, was gardening, which he practised for fifty years. 
Austen contributed to three areas which, in the millenarian atmosphere of the period, he saw as a single manifestation of godly 'light and reformation'. He was a practical nurseryman who greatly increased the range and output of gardens in the Oxford area; he was a radical puritan, rejoicing in the overthrow of the Anglican establishment; and he was a self-taught scientist, who regarded horticulture and fruit-growing as the key to establishing the kingdom of heaven on earth. Like other reformers in the circle of Samuel Hartlib, Austen believed that the nation's problems could be solved by a state-sponsored programme of plantations -- supplied by his nurseries and guided by his textbooks. His correspondence with Hartlib served to convey messages from London to other Oxford experimentalists, and also to engage influential statesmen on behalf of these schemes and to publicize his research into new crops and methods of production. Although the government never rewarded Austen's many appeals, the publication of his 'Treatise of Fruit-Trees' in 1653, 1657, and 1665 did stimulate demand for new plants and orchards, and his letters show increasing confidence in his skill and productivity. 
Austen's radical rhetoric subsided after 1660, but he continued to expand his nursery business and to promote his vision of a fruit-eating England. He was particularly renowned for cider production -- believing that cider would promote health, allay sedition, and eliminate the call for imported wine -- and his customers included Isaac Newton. 
Austen's approach to horticulture was innovative, experimental, and sceptical of the authority of theorists; even Sir Francis Bacon was challenged, in 'Observations upon some Part of Sir Francis Bacon's Naturall History' (1658). Austen taught himself enough botany to enter the controversy about the descent of sap, and he opposed the findings of his friend Robert Boyle. He propagated some seventy-five varieties of fruit-bearing trees, bushes, and vines, and he sowed thousands of timber trees in 1656 to avert a national shortage of wood. His first-hand account of experiments with mulberries and silkworms was published in Hartlib's 'Reformed Virginian Silk-Worm' (1655). 
Austen's 'Treatise of Fruit-Trees' is as much a revolutionary manifesto and a spiritual autobiography as it is a technical handbook. The horticultural part comprised one of the most systematic and detailed treatments of the subject published in England up to that time, and was preceded by an enthusiastic list of proposals to make England 'another 'Canaan, flowing with Milke and hony'' (Austen, 'Treatise', fol. 2'v'); the 'Treatise' was followed by 'The Spirituall Use of an Orchard or Garden of Fruit-Trees' (expanded to book length in 1657 but dropped in 1665 on Boyle's advice). In this devotional exercise on the gardener's work, Austen portrayed wild trees as unregenerate souls and young shoots as believers grafted into Christ; alternatively the stock was the Old Adam and the graft was the spirit of Christ. In a moving passage inspired by the bareness of the trees in winter, Austen, like John Bunyan, also described a period of despair in his own life. The high fruit-yield of small trees proved to him that low-born 'mechanic preachers' made the best ministers and that the established clergy had to be hacked down; the debris of pruning denoted the violent political changes of the revolution, which Austen welcomed as a guarantee that the coming season's crop would be good and that England would soon become the apocalyptic kingdom he desired. 
Austen died in October 1676 at his home, 30 Queen Street, Oxford; he had no children, and left his leasehold and cider factory to his wife, Sarah. He was buried on 26 October in St Peter-le-Bailey parish church, Oxford; plans to erect a memorial to this local hero and horticultural pioneer never materialized. 


@@@@@


doc= 906


Austin, Charles (1799-1874), barrister, was born in Suffolk on 26 March 1799, the second of the five sons and two daughters of Jonathan Austin and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Redhouse, of Ipswich. Jonathan Austin was a miller and corn merchant who made large amounts of money as a government contractor during the Napoleonic wars. He was a handsome, vigorous, self-educated, and astute man who liked to read. Anne Austin, the daughter of a yeoman farmer, was brought up by a rich uncle as his heir. A religious woman, she may have inspired her husband with her 'love of learning' (Ross, 88). Her health was delicate, however, and she was subject to depression, a tendency shared by a number of her children, including Charles. 
Austin was raised as a Unitarian and attended Bury St Edmunds grammar school. He worked as a clerk in Ipswich before matriculating at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1819. Despite his opposition to religious orthodoxy as false and mischievous, he won the Hulsean prize for a long 148-page essay in support of the genuineness and authenticity of the 'Bible'. Although the tone of the essay tends to be dogmatic, it is a remarkable achievement for an undergraduate. The analytical precision, logical rigour, and erudition of the work are particularly impressive. Nevertheless, Austin later expressed regret for the position that he had taken and indicated that he 'could have written a much better essay on the other side' (Tollemache, 332). 
Recollections of Austin while he was at Cambridge indicate that he was indeed 'a king among his fellows' (Trevelyan, 1.49). The poet John Moultrie extolled his keen wit, subtle intellect, 'stores of various learning', and 'huge incumbent weight of understanding' (Moultrie, 426). John Stuart Mill heard him debate at the Cambridge Union Society, and judged him capable of 'dominating the world' ('Autobiography and Literary Essays', 79, 81). Austin also influenced, if he did not dominate, Thomas Babington Macaulay, another formidable debater at Cambridge. On one occasion they argued 'till four in the morning over the comparative merits of the Inductive and the 'a priori' method in politics' (Trevelyan, 2.278; Hamburger, 145-6). A discussion between them at Lord Lansdowne's country estate may have lasted even longer. According to one account: 'When the meal [breakfast] was finished they drew their chairs to either end of the chimney piece... The whole company, ladies, artists, politicians, and diners-out, formed a silent circle round the two Cantabs, and, with a short break for lunch, never stirred till the bell warned them that it was time to dress for dinner. (Trevelyan, 1.51)' Although Austin was an ardent utilitarian as an undergraduate, the precise nature of his beliefs is not altogether clear. Moultrie claimed that Austin: '
Was nobler than his creed, and though he mock'd 

At things, which, to us poets, seem'd almost 

The breath of human life -- romantic love -- 

Chivalrous honour -- patriotic zeal -- 

And loyal self-devotion -- there were times 

When even these very themes would kindle up 

The better soul within, and he became, 

Unconsciously, the enthusiast he despised. 

Courteous he was and gentle, even to those 

Whose intellectual rank beneath his own 

Lay lowest... 
(Moultrie, 427)' Mill painted a somewhat different picture of Austin as presenting the 'Benthamic doctrines' in their most 'startling' form. If this was so, he differed from his elder brother, John Austin, the legal philosopher, who was a more moderate utilitarian ('Autobiography and Literary Essays', 81). Charles Austin claimed, however, that he was never an orthodox Benthamite with regard to universal suffrage, which he opposed (Tollemache, 222, 261). His war against existing institutions has also been described as 'mild', 'constitutional', and 'never... very bitter' ('The Times', 30 Dec 1874, 8). In any case, he graduated from Cambridge in 1823 and proceeded to an MA in 1827. During this period of his life he wrote for a number of short-lived periodicals, but his specific contributions to them have not been conclusively identified. 
Austin decided to become a lawyer and read law in the chambers of Sir William Follett, a distinguished advocate of the day. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1827 and joined the Norfolk circuit. His practice flourished, and he was appointed a queen's counsel in 1841 ('Solicitors' Journal', 158). His reputation was such that he was reputedly offered and refused the solicitor-generalship (Tollemache, 218). He eventually focused his practice on the parliamentary bar, in which he became 'pre-eminent', in the mid-1840s, and his leadership of which was 'absolute' ('Law Times', 147). His success in the committee rooms of parliament was 'spectacular' (Kostal, 124). His intellectual power, articulacy, style, and wit enabled him to stand 'without a rival' ('Suffolk Chronicle', 5). Indeed, his reputation was so high that he allegedly received briefs for the sole purpose of preventing him from representing the other side ('The Times', 30 Dec 1874, 8). Clients virtually fought for his services. According to one account: 'a posse of clients was... ready to march him off to the particular committee room in which the client was engaged... they tugged at his gown whilst he was speaking, they besieged his seat, they almost dragged him where they wanted him. ('Suffolk Chronicle', 5)' It has been estimated that, at the parliamentary bar, Austin made 'one of the largest fortunes recorded in the traditions of the bar' ('Solicitors' Journal', 158). To be sure, the railroad mania of 1845-7 meant that he may have 'floated on the highest tide which ever did or ever can bring fortunes to the parliamentary bar' ('Law Times', 148). Nevertheless, his unrivalled skill in navigating the currents is a tribute to his exceptional talent as an advocate. 
Austin retired from the practice of law in 1848 while he was at the very height of his powers. His decision was primarily due to the deterioration of his health, a by-product of long hours and overwork. His condition was so bad that he apparently thought that he was near death. According to Lionel Tollemache, who was close to Austin in the final fifteen years of his life, 'The seeds of the mischief had been long sown. In early youth, he outgrew his strength; and, like the celebrated John Austin [his brother], he was always nervous and delicate' (Tollemache, 212). 
Austin retired to Brandeston Hall, near Wickham Market, Suffolk, a 'large and elegant' Elizabethan mansion which he caused to be substantially rebuilt and restored (White, 349). Thereafter, he assumed responsibility for the management of the estate, and for the education of his three children with Harriett Jane, 'nee' Ingilby, whom he had married on 10 June 1856. He also largely built and financed a local school and completely restored All Saints' Church, Brandeston (White, 350; Barker, 67). In addition he served as a resident of the Ipswich Mechanics Institution and helped to found Framlingham College, to which his grandson conveyed Brandeston Hall in 1947. Finally he was a bencher of the Middle Temple, high steward of Ipswich, magistrate for Suffolk, and chairman of quarter sessions for east Suffolk. His judicial powers were of 'the highest order' and 'equalled by only some two or three of the highest... judges of Westminster' ('Ipswich Journal', 5, and Gousing, 95). His expeditious disposal of the business before him, his 'remorseless hatred' of irrelevant arguments, and his ability to grasp a 'mass of facts' received special praise ('Ipswich Journal', 5). As a judge, he was said to be 'strictly impartial, and prisoners found in him a considerate exponent of the law. He was never betrayed into severity... The law was applied irrespective of class considerations' ('Suffolk Chronicle', 5). 
While Austin moderated his youthful radicalism as he grew older, he remained a utilitarian and never forgot his debt to Bentham, his 'great master' (Tollemache, 262). He was also much more liberal than his brother John, who ended his life as an arch-conservative. From Charles Austin's evolutionary perspective almost all English institutions were 'mere makeshifts', and the House of Lords was 'not made for perpetuity' (Tollemache, 223). He also favoured the secret ballot, and was 'eager' for a 'Reform Bill' in 1866 (Tollemache, 223, 260-61). However, he drew the line at the rights of women, much of the language in support of which he regarded as 'nauseous' (Tollemache, 227). 
Charles Austin died at Brandeston Hall on 21 December 1874. He was eulogized as the 'most brilliant' man in Suffolk ('Suffolk Chronicle', 5), 'one of the very ablest men of our time' (Tollemache, 211), and a person of 'the greatest capacity and unlimited attainments' ('Law Times', 147). The word 'brilliant' frequently occurs in recollections of him, and with good reason. His extraordinary mastery of the art of conversation particularly impressed his friends and contemporaries (Grote, 254; Tollemache, 213-14; 'Autobiography of Henry Taylor', 77). Charles Austin's performance as an advocate was at least as impressive, however, as his conversational powers. Only an exceptionally talented barrister could have achieved the renown that he enjoyed at the parliamentary bar. If his place in the sun was relatively brief, it had a lustre all its own. 


@@@@@


doc= 907


H. A. (fl. 1613), poet, was the author of 'The Scourge of Venus', an erotic narrative poem printed in 1613 and reissued in 1614 and 1620. A. B. Grosart identified him as Henry Austin, from the following remark by Thomas Heywood prefixed to 'The Brazen Age' (1613): 'What imperfection soever it have, having a brazen face it cannot blush; much like a pedant about this towne, who, when all trades fail'd, turn'd 'pedagogue', once insinuating with me, borrowed from me certaine translations of 'Ovid', as his three books 'De arte amandi', and two 'De remedio amoris' which since, his most brazen face hath most impudently challenged as his own, wherefore I must needs proclaime it as far as 'Ham', where he now keeps schoole, 'Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores', they were things which out of my juniority and want of judgement, I committed to the view of some private friends, but with no purpose of publishing, or further communicating them. Therfore I wold entreate that 'Austin', for so his name is, to acknowledge his wrong to me in shewing them, & his owne impudence, & ignorance in challenging them. But courteous Reader, I can onely excuse him in this, that this is the 'Brazen Age'. (T. Heywood, 'The Dramatic Works of Thomas Heywood', 1874, 3.167-8)' Grosart's identification has not, however, been accepted by subsequent editors. 'The Scourge of Venus' is a reworking of the tale of Cinyras from Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', while Heywood is talking about the 'Ars amatoria' and the 'Remedia amoris'. Heywood's enemy 


@@@@@


doc= 908


Austin, John (1613-1669), religious writer, was born at Walpole, Norfolk, third son of John Austin (died before 1631) of Walpole and Mary Williams of Aswarby, Lincolnshire. During 1629-31 John Austin attended the grammar school of Sleaford, Lincolnshire, and on 31 March 1631 he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge. Austin never received a degree, undoubtedly because he converted to Catholicism, but information about the year of conversion is contradictory. Wood states that Austin left Cambridge and his religion about 1640 when he entered Lincoln's Inn; Wood also states that Austin was a contemporary at St John's of John Sergeant (1622-1707), who remained a lifelong friend. However, in fact, John Austin was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 6 August 1632, whereas Sergeant became a student at St John's College in 1639. If Wood is right in linking Austin's conversion to his departure from Cambridge, this might imply that Austin's conversion took place in 1632 and that his acquaintance with John Sergeant was due to their mutual association with St John's rather than their being contemporaries in the strict sense of the word. 
Subsequently Austin was a tutor to the Catholic Fowler family at St Thomas's Priory, Stafford, probably during the early years of the civil war. Sergeant states that Austin travelled extensively on the continent and this might fit in with the fact that a Mr Austin visited the Ancient English Hospice at Rome in the years 1640-46. By about 1650 Austin had settled in London as can be deduced from a postscript to his 'The Christian Moderator' (2nd edn, 1651), in which he relates that he was suddenly called into the country upon a sad occasion, apologizes for the resultant unfinished state of the book to which the postscript is attached, and expresses his reluctance to leave London. Since after this date Austin lived as a gentleman of independent means, one might guess that the sad occasion was the death of a relative who left him some money. Austin returned to London and became part of a circle of Catholic literary men such as Thomas Blount, Thomas White, Christopher Davenport, John Sergeant, John Belson, and Thomas Keightley. Apart from friendship the group also shared a common conception of the political future of the English Roman Catholic minority. Within the group there were different political emphases and clear temperamental differences, but what united the members was a general willingness to negotiate with the Cromwellian government, offering allegiance in exchange for toleration. 
John Austin's importance as a writer is threefold: he played a major part in the contemporary controversies about toleration for Roman Catholics; he produced one of the most influential seventeenth-century books of private devotion; and he wrote a number of hymns that found their way into prayer books of many different denominations. One of the most striking characteristics of Austin's main controversial works is the writer's eirenic tone: he wants to convince by appealing to reason. That is why one might perhaps have doubts about Austin's authorship of the very first publication attributed to him by Gillow, a pamphlet entitled 'A zealous sermon preached at Amsterdam, by a Jew, whose name is NOT-RUB, it being a Hebrew word, you must read his name backward' (Amsterdam [that is, London] 1642). It is a rather crude attack on Henry Burton, the puritan divine whose anti-episcopal campaign led to imprisonment and to the cutting off of his ears in 1636. 
Attacks of this nature are absent in Austin's 'Christian Moderator' series, which he published under the pseudonym William Birchley. The first of three independently published parts came out in 1651. In this pamphlet Austin poses as a member of the Anglican church who is reviewing the contemporary politico-religious situation in order to establish whether Independents ought to be allowed freedom of worship. A great number of arguments is brought to bear on the question, ranging from the demands of Christian charity, through the unlawfulness to force someone to go against his own conscience, to seemingly illogical elements in the Anglican position: 'Since we have so happily shaken off that intollerable yoak of Popish infallibility... it is become to us, not only tyrannical, but absurd, to compel others to a way, that we ourselves confess may possibly be erronious' (p. 1). As if it were by accident the author discovers that his arguments in favour of toleration for Independents hold equally true in the case of Roman Catholics. Within two years of publication there were at least three new editions of the original 'Moderator', apart from both a second and a third part. In spite of Austin's reasonable tone the book elicited angry Anglican reactions such as 'The Beacon Flameing' (1652) and 'Legenda lignea' (1653). In 1652 a 'fourth edition' was published containing all three parts and, interestingly enough, the sheets of this edition were bound up again in 1659, on the eve of the Restoration, and published under the title 'The Catholiques Plea, or, An Explanation of the Roman Catholick Belief'. In 1718 Austin's text was reprinted in 'An Introduction to the Bishop of Bangor's Intended Collection of Authorities' and thus played a part in the Bangorian controversy of that year. 
Even more influential was Austin's 'Devotions in the Ancient Way of Offices' (1668; subsequent editions in 1672, 1684, 1685, and 1789). 'Devotions' is a prayer book for laymen that takes over the structure and some of the material of the most popular Roman Catholic book of private devotion, 'The Primer, or, Office of the Blessed Virgin Mary'. The book is a good example of the extensive influence that English Roman Catholic devotional books had beyond the small circle of contemporary Catholic users. As early as 1686 'Devotions' was adapted for Anglican use by Theophilus Dorrington. These 'Reform'd Devotions' went through at least eight more editions. In 1700 again a different Anglican adaptation of Austin's text was made, this time by a pious lady, Susanna Hopton, and edited by the nonjuror George Hickes. Hickes's first edition was followed by a series of editions running into the nineteenth century. Nathaniel Spinckes's 'The True Church of England-Man's Companion in the Closet' (1721, with at least nineteen subsequent editions) is to a great extent based on Austin's book, and extracts of 'Devotions' further found their way into 'A selection of hymns and meditations... from the reformed devotions of Austin; entirely cleared of those expressions which savoured of popery' (1791). 
Perhaps the most remarkable feature within 'Devotions' was the forty hymns that Austin wrote. Up to Austin's time English books of private devotion frequently contained translations or poetical paraphrases of Latin hymns, but Austin was the first actually to compose a body of original hymn texts. Their stylistic elegance and emphasis on devotional rather than controversial elements, combined with the fact that their metrical regularity allowed them to be set to tunes, ensured them an independent popularity, so that various hymns found their way into such miscellaneous collections as Samuel Speed's 'Prison Pietie' (1677) and John Wesley's 'Collection of Psalms and Hymns' (1737). 
John Austin died in his lodgings in Bow Street, Covent Garden, and was buried in the parish church of St Paul on 31 March 1669. His friend John Sergeant incorporated a biographical account of Austin in the second edition of 'Devotions' (1672), which includes a number of basic facts of Austin's life and a moving account of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 909


Austin, John (1717-1784), Jesuit, was born in Dublin on 12 April 1717. Said to be a protege of Jonathan Swift, he entered the Society of Jesus in Champagne on 27 November 1735. After completing the higher studies he was for several years employed in teaching humanities and held the office of prefect of the Irish College at Poitiers. In 1750 he returned to Dublin, where he obtained renown as a preacher. He was professed of the four vows on 2 February 1754. Topham Bowden, an English protestant, remarked in his 'Tour through Ireland' (1791): 'Austin was a very remarkable character, of extraordinary learning and piety; he was a great preacher, and injured his health by his exertions in the pulpit'. He opened a seminary in Saul's Court, Dublin, where many distinguished men were educated. A collection of his 'Devotions in the Ancient Way of Offices' was published in Edinburgh in 1789. 
Austin died in Dublin on 29 September 1784 and was buried in St Kevin's churchyard. The inscription over his grave described him as 'pius, doctus, indefessus operarius, apostolicis confectus laboribus. Divites admonuit, pauperes sublevavit, juventutem erudivit, orphanis loco parentis fuit, de omni hominum genere praeclare meruit, omnibus omnia factus ut omnes Christo lucrifaceret'. 


@@@@@


doc= 910


Austin, John (b. 1752, d. before 1838), music stenographer and inventor of a power-loom, was born at Craigton, near Glasgow, on 17 April 1752, the son of the gardener to John Baird, esquire. Nothing is known of Austin's early life or education. On 30 May 1777 he married Janet Graham, with whom he had one son and one daughter. 
Austin is believed to have started in business as a manufacturer with James Monteith, Robert Thomson, and the M'Ilquham firm about 1789. In that year he made his first attempt to invent for the weaving of cloth a power-loom capable of being driven by water or steam. In 1796 the chamber of commerce and manufacturers at Glasgow issued a favourable report on his invention, and in 1798 it was successfully employed at James Monteith's spinning-works at Pollokshaws, 4 miles from Glasgow; Monteith erected first a building to hold 30 looms and afterwards another to hold 200. The power-loom, in a further improved state, was submitted for inspection to the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce in 1806 and won a silver medal. Austin's letter to the society, enumerating twenty-two advantages of his power-loom over traditional looms, was published in 1807 in W. Nicolson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy, Chemistry, and the Arts' (new ser., 17, pp. 175-7). Austin entered a caveat for a patent but abandoned the idea of obtaining one. 
Engaged by artistic as well as scientific pursuits, Austin was 'long known, in an extended circle of acquaintances, for his musical skill, and an inventive, speculative genius. Possessed of a jovial disposition, his company was greatly prized, and he was ever ready to take part in a catch or glee. (Kay, 2.376)' He wrote 'A System of Stenographic Music, Invented by J. Austin, Glasgow' (1820?), a system of shorthand musical notation consisting of the use of six characters on a single line, a method that, 'however ingenious theoretically considered, would have been practically useless' (Baptie, 7). 
A remarkably clever and genial man, with a philosophical temperament, Austin once joked that he wished himself in prison so that he might have time to pursue his ideas undisturbed. Although corpulent, Austin was energetic, capable of gymnastic feats: 'On one occasion, when locked up in a jury case, by way of amusement, he seated himself on the ground, and holding up his feet with his hands, astonished his fellow-jurors by hobbling in this position round the room. (Kay, 2.377)' He was said to bear a striking resemblance to the jolly landlord in 'Smithfield Sharpers', a print engraved by Sherwin after a design by Rowlandson. Although the exact date of Austin's death is unknown, it is certain that he died before 1838 (Baptie). 


@@@@@


doc= 911


Austin, John (1790-1859), legal philosopher, was probably born at Creeting Mill, Suffolk, on 3 March 1790, the eldest of the five sons and two daughters of Jonathan Austin and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Redhouse. Jonathan Austin was a prosperous Suffolk miller and corn merchant who profited greatly from the Napoleonic wars. He was self-educated, intelligent, vigorous, and knowledgeable in history and political economy. Anne Austin has been described as 'well-educated, gently nurtured, and possessed of exceptional abilities' (Ross, 'Three Generations', 88). She was also a deeply religious person with a somewhat melancholic temperament, a trait shared by her eldest child. 
Knowledge of John Austin's childhood is sparse, but he was raised in Ipswich, which was then a garrison town. The patriotic atmosphere there may have influenced his decision to enlist in the army shortly before his seventeenth birthday, and he served under Lord William Bentinck in Malta and Sicily. Although he evidently wasted enormous amounts of time in the military, he decided that his happiness was 'commensurate with and inseparable from... progress... in the acquisition of knowledge' (Waterfield, 13). He read extensively, including John Locke's 'An Essay Concerning Human Understanding'. He was ill suited for military life, however, and, at the urging of his father, he resigned his commission in 1812. Two years later he decided to study for the bar. While information about Austin the man at this stage of his life is minimal, Henry Crabb Robinson's diary fills part of the gap. The two men apparently met in 1813 and Robinson's initial characterizations of Austin were not on balance favourable. He was disputatious, 'offensive', 'confident', 'dictatorial', 'presumptuous', and a 'loud talker', who tried Robinson's patience (Robinson, diary, 14 March 1813). Political economy was Austin's favourite study, a subject with which he was 'ready to bore any one within his reach' (ibid.). Still, Robinson acknowledged that Austin was discerning, talented, and likely to succeed at the bar. Robinson's subsequent accounts of Austin also became progressively more favourable. By 1817 he was said to be 'milder and more companionable every time I see him' (ibid., 14 Oct 1817). 
Legal education in its modern form, or anything close to it, was non-existent in 1814 and for many years thereafter. Instead the student was 'obliged to get his knowledge of law by means of undirected reading and discussion, and by attendance in chambers, in a law office, or in the courts' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 12.77-8). While not much is known about how Austin acquired his legal knowledge, he evidently studied in the office of Godfrey Sykes. Sir John Patteson subsequently recalled the following incident in Sykes's pupil room: 'One day a singular man entered... for the first time, and presently announced to his companions that he had come there, not only to qualify himself as a special pleader, but to study and elucidate the principles of Law. This was John Austin' (Ross, 'Fourth Generation', 73). In 1814 Austin became engaged to Sarah Taylor (1793-1867). His proposal constitutes a most remarkable document -- formal, highly legalistic, and pretentious. It also accurately prophesied his future dependence upon Sarah. He wrote of the need for her to soften his 'technical asperities' and 'wipe the damps of anguish from [his] forehead, or playfully tease [his] sinking spirits into alacrity' (Waterfield, 28). 
Austin was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1818 and one year later married Sarah Taylor. Apparently he was 'remarkably handsome, with splendid eyes and a very erect carriage' (Ross, 'Fourth Generation', 21). Sarah Austin shared with her husband good looks, middle-class origins, intelligence, ability, and a Unitarian upbringing. The differences between them were at least as important, however, as the similarities. He tended to be austere, reclusive, and insecure, while she was very determined, ambitious, energetic, gregarious, and warm. Indeed her affections were so starved that in the early 1830s she had a most unusual 'affair' with Herman Puckler-Muskau, a German prince: it was conducted solely by an exchange of letters and she did not meet her correspondent until her passions had cooled. In time Sarah Austin became her husband's main prop, comforter, and literary agent (of sorts). She also developed a career of her own as a reviewer and translator. Since John Austin's income for most of their married life was small, Sarah's earnings were vital for the support of their family (financial assistance from both of their fathers also helped). Their only child, Lucie, subsequently Lady Duff Gordon, was born in 1821. The novelist George Meredith eulogized her as an independent woman whose 'like is to be met but once or twice in a lifetime' ('Lady Duff Gordon's Letters', xvi). 
The Austins moved to London shortly after their marriage. Their residence in Queen Square Place 'soon collected within its walls as remarkable an assemblage of persons as ever met in a London drawing-room' ('The Times', 12 Aug 1867), including their neighbours Jeremy Bentham and James Mill, with whom they became very friendly. Bentham was the intellectual leader of the utilitarians and no one did more than Mill to spread the gospel. Austin was thus situated at the heart of a vital reform movement. His proximity to it helps to explain his large intellectual debt to Bentham. Not only did the two men share many opinions, but Austin acknowledged that he was 'prone to follow' Bentham's ideas (Austin, 'Lectures on Jurisprudence', 420). However, the influence of Hobbes, Locke, Malthus, Adam Smith, as well as Roman and German jurists is also discernible in Austin's work. Moreover he was no slavish follower of Bentham and eventually became more critical of his doctrines. In 1859 he even asserted that he had come to dissent from 'many' of Bentham's views on the law and on 'the various subjects immediately connected with it' (Austin, 'A Plea for the Constitution', 1859, vi). One such subject was politics, the field in which the differences between the two utilitarians were the most pronounced. Nevertheless, Bentham probably had a heavier impact on Austin's ethical and legal philosophy than any other person. 
Two early articles published by Austin in 1824 and 1826 certainly reflect a Benthamite perspective. The first, published in the 'Westminster Review', was by far the more substantial of the two and included a scathing denunciation of primogeniture. Austin began from a premise to which he adhered throughout his life (for a different interpretation see Hamburger, 'Troubled Lives', 182), stating that 'an institution or custom must be praised or blamed as it tends to increase or diminish the sum of happiness. In a word, the test to which it must be submitted is 'utility'' ('Westminster Review', 2, 1824, 507). This was a test that, according to Austin, the custom of primogeniture miserably failed. Above all else it contributed heavily to 'aristocratical ascendancy and... misgovernment' (ibid., 546). The other article, which appeared in 'Parliamentary History and Review', was a critique of the unlimited liability of partners in joint-stock companies. Such liability was not only unnecessary to protect investors and creditors, but deterred investments useful to the public. 
Austin's prospects as a barrister appeared to be bright, a judgement evidently shared by a number of his contemporaries. He was an equity draftsman and practised at 2 Old Square, Lincoln's Inn. Although little is known about his practice, he was unhappy and had few clients. His comparative failure contrasted sharply with the success of his brother Charles (1799-1874), whose earnings at the bar were legendary. The reasons for John's very different experience are varied, but include his orientation towards legal philosophy. 'John is much cleverer than I,' Charles Austin acknowledged, 'but he is always knocking his head against principles' (Waterfield, 11). John Austin's precarious health was accentuated by his poor response to the normal stress of the courtroom. He was subject throughout his life to severe 'feverish attacks', the effects of which were 'extreme debility and prostration' (S. Austin, 4). Indeed, Sydney Smith once described him as 'the Opprobrium Medicorum. Nothing and Nobody seems to do him any good' (Waterfield, 121). Austin's disposition and temperament also contributed to his lack of success. He was not simply insecure, he was hypersensitive, unduly proud, and a perfectionist. For whatever reason, he became so discouraged that in 1825 he stopped practising law. 
If Austin's situation appeared grim, his prospects brightened immeasurably within a relatively short period of time. The University of London was founded in 1826 and its governing council attached special importance to the department of law. Austin was evidently appointed by 'common consent' to the chair in jurisprudence and the law of nations ('Law Magazine', 9, 1860, 165). He took his responsibilities very seriously and devoted much of the next two or three years to the preparation of his lectures. The task was difficult and to facilitate it he and his wife took up residence in Bonn for part of 1827 and 1828. The atmosphere of this German university town was very congenial to them and they apparently thrived in it. 
Although the impact on Austin of the 'German connection' is subject to different interpretations, it was significant. Austin's disposition became less 'militant and polemic', while his 'views of life' underwent a 'very perceptible change' (Mill, 'Autobiography and Literary Essays', 185). For example, he began to modify his earlier radicalism, thus beginning the first major stage in the evolution of his political conservatism. He also increased his knowledge of Roman law, the study of which was undergoing a revival of interest. Finally, his exposure to German jurisprudence reinforced his drive for the systematization and classification of law. 
Austin was scheduled to begin teaching his course in November 1828. He was unable to complete the preparation of his lectures, however, and received permission to postpone them for a year. He justified the postponement on two grounds, one of which was a recurrence of his periodic bouts of ill health; he also quite understandably complained that he had no model for his innovative attempts to expound the 'principles of jurisprudence' (Austin to Leonard Horner, 30 Oct 1828, University College, London, College Correspondence). He did not actually begin to teach the course until November 1829. His lectures were not about 'particular jurisprudence' or the positive law of a specific nation or nations. Rather, his class dealt with 'general jurisprudence' or the philosophy of positive law. He characterized it as an exposition of abstract legal principles, notions, and distinctions. Some of them were essential, inevitable, and necessary, according to Austin, and might thus be found in all legal systems. Aside from this, his teaching on general jurisprudence focused on 'law as it necessarily 'is', rather than with law as it 'ought' to be' ('Lectures', 32). This notion does not signify, however, that Austin regarded what law ought to be as unimportant. Rather, he viewed it as the subject of the science of legislation, a subdivision of the science of ethics. In any event, each of his lectures reflected his profound conviction that it 'really 'is' important... that men should think distinctly, and speak with a meaning' ('Province', 55). 
Austin's course could not have begun under more auspicious circumstances. Thirty-two students enrolled in what may have constituted 'the most distinguished attendance that ever honoured any lecturer' (Bain, 329). The list included John Stuart Mill, who profoundly admired Austin, was tutored by him in Roman law, wrote copious notes of his lectures, and took his course more than once. However, no more than a few students enrolled in the subsequent three offerings of the course. Austin became very discouraged by this response and stopped teaching the class in 1833. When he taught a course on jurisprudence at the Inner Temple in 1834 the results were equally discouraging. Although his introductory lecture attracted between 200 and 300 persons, an extraordinary number, his delivery was unfortunately so poor that very few of them could hear what he had to say. 'The audience stared at each other, and looked extremely foolish: altogether the scene was truly ludicrous' ('The Legal Examiner and Law Chronicle', 2, 1833-4, 416). It is therefore not surprising that the enrolment dwindled to such a small number that the class was discontinued. 
Various factors contributed to the unpopularity of Austin's courses. They include the small overall enrolment at the University of London, the primitive state of legal education, the highly abstract character of the lectures, and Austin's limitations as a teacher. His introductory lecture was off-putting, his subsequent lectures tended to be repetitive, and all of them were completely written out and read. If Austin had been a more effective teacher, he might have attracted enough students to make his courses viable -- something that his gifted colleague, Andrew Amos, had demonstrated was possible. Amos was professor of English law at the University of London from 1828 to 1834, and more than a hundred students had enrolled in two of his classes. While a course on jurisprudence faced special difficulties, it might have drawn more than six or seven students. 
The low enrolment in Austin's courses profoundly affected him and convinced him that he had to resign his chair, which he did in 1835. His wife characterized his resignation as the 'real and irremediable calamity of his life -- the blow from which he never recovered' (S. Austin, 9). Moreover, Austin concluded that he had no future in the classroom and never taught again. The unpopularity of his courses also contributed to his 'writer's block' on legal philosophy that he developed after the publication of 'The Province of Jurisprudence Determined' in 1832. Although he subsequently contemplated a much more ambitious tome on general jurisprudence and ethics, it never advanced beyond the planning stage. Austin also refused to permit the mere reprinting of 'The Province', the only book he did publish in his lifetime. He had evidently detected numerous defects in it (what he perceived them to be is unknown), and he regarded them as sufficiently important to require a complete rewriting of the work. 
Sarah Austin was instrumental in the publication of 'The Province of Jurisprudence Determined'. She persuaded her husband to permit it, she found a publisher, and she negotiated 'everything' (Ross, 'Three Generations', 83). The book itself is quite literally a compressed version of the first ten lectures of Austin's course at the University of London. The purpose of the work was to distinguish positive from other kinds of laws with which they were often 'blended and confounded' ('Province', 11). The first lecture was an analysis of the nature or essence of a law 'properly so-called', which Austin defined as a general command. The crux of the second, third, and fourth lectures was an explication and defence of the principle of utility. Austin was profoundly convinced of its 'truth', 'importance', and relevance to jurisprudence ('Province', 15). The fifth lecture was a close analysis of positive morality and how it differs from, as well as resembles, positive and divine law. His arguments for the separation of law from morality represented one of the most influential themes of his book. However, this theme overshadowed, if it did not completely obscure, his analysis of the many ways in which law and morality are, and ought to be, related. The final lecture on sovereignty constituted almost half (45 per cent) of the entire book. Austin claimed that every independent political society has a determinate sovereign whose powers are legally unlimited. He concluded by refining his definition of positive law as the expressed or tacit commands of such a person or body of persons. 
Although Austin's 'Province' received some highly laudatory reviews, the two leading journals of the day -- the 'Edinburgh Review' and the 'Quarterly Review' -- ignored it. Their neglect of it was a great disappointment to its author and reinforced his estrangement from his vocation. The 'coup de grace' in this regard may have been Austin's experience as a member of the recently formed criminal law commission. Its purpose was to draft a code of the criminal law, a project that Austin strongly supported. Unfortunately, his appointment did not turn out well, as the other commissioners were practical lawyers who felt that his views were 'too abstract and scientific' ('Law Magazine', 9, 1860, 167). He also believed that he could do by himself what the commission was unlikely to accomplish. He resigned his position in 1836. 
It is no wonder, then, that Austin claimed to be born 'out of time and place', or that he should have been a 'schoolman of the twelfth century -- or a German Professor' (S. Austin, 12). The small number of his accomplishments in the final twenty-four years of his life support his rather self-serving claim. These achievements were all too frequently marred by illnesses, depressions, social isolation, fits and starts of work, and huge wastes of time. In 1842 his wife bitterly complained that the 'first three months of the year passed by (like so many others) in attacks of illness and fruitless attempts at work... Is life so long that one can afford to throw away years? To vegetate, without any sphere of usefulness, any interchange of ideas, any society?' (Ross, 'Three Generations', 177). Thomas Carlyle was even harsher and in 1843 characterized Austin as a 'painful', 'unhealthy', and 'unhappy person' who was 'able to bring it no farther than hard isolated 'Pedant'hood' ('Collected Letters', 16.50). However, Austin's attempts at work were not entirely fruitless during these years. His most notable achievement may have been the reforms that he and George Cornewall Lewis advocated for Malta. Lewis was a former student and great admirer of Austin, and in 1836 they were appointed royal commissioners to Malta. The establishment of the commission was a response by the British government to complaints by the Maltese of colonial misrule. The authority of the commissioners was very broad and comprised the power to recommend far-reaching reforms. Austin decided to observe conditions at first hand, and he and Sarah resided on Malta for almost two years. The commissioners' reports covered a wide range of subjects, their quality tended to be unusually high, and they reflected a deep concern for improving the condition of the Maltese people. Austin and Lewis recommended, among other things, the abolition of sinecures, a preference for natives over Englishmen in appointments to higher offices, a substantial broadening of popular education, reform of the tariff, and abolition of the prevailing censorship. 
While most of the commissioners' recommendations were accepted, Austin's tenure did not conclude on a happy note. For one thing, he and Lewis did not complete all of their reports or inquiries. For another, some of their recommendations were savaged in the House of Lords by such major figures as Lord Brougham and the duke of Wellington. Finally, the British government did not give any public acknowledgement of Austin's services and even resisted compensating him. The resistance was overcome only by the combined efforts of Sarah Austin and Alexander Duff-Gordon, who was Lucie Austin's suitor, the nephew of George Cornewall Lewis, and the holder of a junior clerkship at the Treasury. 
The Austins returned to England in 1838, but lived in Germany and France for most of the 1840s. In 1842 John Austin published in the 'Edinburgh Review' a detailed critique of Friedrich List's 'The National System of Political Economy'. List was a critic of free trade and a staunch advocate of protectionism. As such, he advocated policies that cut deeply against the grain of principles to which Austin attached the highest importance. He profoundly admired the 'inestimable science of political economy', the truths of which are of 'ineffable moment' ('Province', 64). Austin therefore denounced List's views in the strongest possible terms. He published his final article while living in Paris, where he and his wife had moved in 1843. The article itself was a lengthy study and defence of political centralization. In it Austin vigorously denied that centralization was responsible for certain evils frequently attributed to it, such as over-government; and he argued that such a pernicious state of affairs was due instead to false opinions about the 'legitimate province of government' ('Edinburgh Review', 85, 1847, 239). 
During his last years in Paris, Austin became a candidate for the office of reader (that is, lecturer) in jurisprudence and civil law at the Middle Temple. The committee on legal education that was instrumental in creating the position conceived of jurisprudence in a way that could have been taken directly from Austin's lectures: 'By the term... the Committee mean to indicate general Jurisprudence, as distinguished from the particular Jurisprudence of any individual nation... and which... they would divide into positive Jurisprudence, or the philosophy of positive law, and comparative Jurisprudence' (Cocks, 64). This conception would seem to have given Austin an edge over the numerous other candidates for the readership. His candidacy was peculiar, however, in that he did not directly apply for the job. Instead, his friends applied on his behalf. Although their testimonials to his prowess as a jurist were glowing, the benchers of the Middle Temple must have been aware of his shortcomings as a lecturer. Whatever the reason, they decided not to offer Austin the position, to which George Long was appointed in 1846. 
John Austin reacted very unfavourably to the French Revolution of 1848. He was particularly alarmed by what he perceived to be its emphasis on economic, and not merely political, equality (Ross, 'Three Generations', 98). Consequently, the Austins returned to England and eventually settled in Weybridge, Surrey, for the remainder of John Austin's life. The comments of Sarah Austin indicate that these years were the happiest period not only in her husband's life but also of their marriage. Apparently he spent his time reading, walking, meditating, and quite literally cultivating his garden. Moreover, according to Sarah Austin, 'all his youthful and passionate love for me seemed to return... It pleased God, after many years of care and toil and suffering, to permit me to taste of this tranquil happiness -- only to lose it' (Ross, 'Three Generations', 360). 
Austin also retained a strong interest in political events, including the various proposals for the reform of parliament, all of which he opposed. Their inexpediency was the leitmotif of 'A Plea for the Constitution', a pamphlet that he published in 1859 and in which he defended aristocratic power in a way that contrasted sharply with the opinions that he had expressed in the early 1820s. The pamphlet also extolled the British constitution in terms that rivalled those of Edmund Burke, William Paley, and Sir William Blackstone. Austin explained the evolution of his political thought in these words: 'Even before the Reform of 1832, I had rejected [Bentham's]... 'radical' politics... I have since resided in Germany and France, and studied and observed their political institutions and condition; and I therefore am better qualified than most of my countrymen to appreciate the matchless union of order and liberty for which we are indebted to our present incomparable Constitution' ('A Plea', vi). 
Austin died of bronchitis at Weybridge, Surrey, on 17 December 1859, after an illness of almost two months. If his wife's account is accurate, he faced the end with equanimity and serenity. His work was not widely known at the time of his death, but this situation changed dramatically in the next several years. The catalyst of the change was Sarah Austin's decision to edit for publication his lectures and other papers on jurisprudence. It was a task to which she devoted the final eight years of her life. The reasons for her assumption of this onerous responsibility are varied, though she may have had a paramount desire to prove that her marriage to a man whom she once described as 'unhappy... unloving, uncomforting' was not in vain (Hamburger, 'Contemplating Adultery', 251). At least she described the editing of the lectures as the 'greatest consolation' of her 'dreary life' (letter to Lord Brougham, 11 June 1865, University College, London, Brougham MS 26524). 
Sarah Austin's preparation of the edition was no easy task. While the lectures were in good shape, much of the other material was in an 'imperfect', 'half-legible', 'fragmentary', and 'confused' state (S. Austin, 22-3). Nevertheless, she overcame the difficulties and a second edition of 'The Province of Jurisprudence Determined' was published in 1861. In 1863 she edited the remainder of Austin's lectures and other papers, which became indispensable for fully understanding his legal philosophy. Three more editions of his 'Lectures on Jurisprudence' were published in a relatively brief period of time. By 1885 -- the date of the fifth and final edition -- John Austin's work had become a dominant force in English jurisprudence. 
Sarah Austin once characterized her husband's life as one of 'unbroken disappointment and failure' (Ross, 'Three Generations', 373). Although her opinion is hyperbolical, it is readily understandable. John Austin was unsuccessful in the practice of law and he could not earn a living as a teacher of jurisprudence. He was also a relatively unproductive writer who received far more recognition after his death than during his life. Since he had the ability to be a successful barrister, a popular teacher, and a very productive writer, there is an almost tragic quality to his lack of success in these endeavours. Various factors influenced his failure to accomplish more, but the 'personal equation' was crucial. In particular, he lacked the energy, persistence, and determination to overcome the admittedly substantial obstacles that he confronted. 
At the same time, Austin's life is not a record of unbroken disappointment and failure. His work on the philosophy of law constituted by far his greatest accomplishment. It was not only an impressive intellectual achievement in its own right but it also shaped the study of legal theory in England for more than a century after his death. His method of meticulously analysing basic legal concepts -- 'analytical jurisprudence' -- was particularly influential. Yet this influence was achieved at the cost of unduly narrowing the meaning of his legal philosophy: important dimensions of it were ignored (such as his utilitarianism), or harshly criticized. There was more than one Austin and his work is not reducible to simplistic catchwords. In the course of the twentieth century, interest in Austin's philosophy of law both waxed and waned. If nothing else, however, it has proved to be much more enduring and influential than anyone had a right to expect in 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 912


Austin, Robert (bap. 1593, d. 1661), Church of England clergyman and political pamphleteer, was born at Guildford, Surrey, the fifth of seven children of George Austin (died 1621) of Shalford, Surrey, and his second wife, Jane Harrison. He was baptized at Holy Trinity, Guildford. Educated at Eton College (1603-12), Austin was a foundation scholar at King's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1615/16, acquired his DD in 1639, and held a fellowship at King's, probably relinquished on his marriage, about 1626, to Ann, whose surname was probably Wight. They had at least three sons, John ('b'. 1627), Robert (1629-1654), who became an oriental scholar but died insane, and George ('b'. 1635). 
Austin served as chaplain to Archbishop Abbott and rector of Hambledown, Kent, in 1628-43, and as rector of Aldington, Kent, from 1636 until his death. In 1644 he published a tract entitled 'Allegiance not impeached, viz. by the parliament's taking up of arms (though against the king's personall commands) for the just defence of the king's person, crown, and dignity, the laws of the land, liberties of the subject, &c'. In this he attempted to prove that the oath of allegiance as well as natural right justified parliament in arming for the defence of the country and crown, even when it was contrary to the sovereign's wishes. In his 'Address to the reader', Austin protested that he had lost much by siding with parliament, that patriotism had been his only motive, and that he looked forward to the time when the king would 'return in safety and his throne be established in judgement and justice'. In 1647 he published a small pamphlet entitled 'The parliament's rules and directions concerning sacramental knowledge drawn into questions and answers'. He died at Aldington in 1661. 


@@@@@


doc= 913


Austin, Samuel (b. 1605/6), poet, was the son of Thomas Austin of Lostwithiel, Cornwall. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, on 16 July 1625, aged nineteen, and proceeded BA on 21 February 1628 and MA on 9 July 1630. At about this time, Wood notes, he 'was beneficed in his own country' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.499). His reputation rests on a single work written while he was still at Oxford, 'Urania, or, The Heavenly Muse' (1629). The first book is dedicated to John Prideaux, then rector of Exeter College, and describes the fall of man; the second, dedicated to Mr John Robarts, 'son to my Lord Robarts, Baron of Truro', deals with the redemption. Another dedicatee, Mr Andrew Pollexfen, is described as his kinsman. 
Given the overall length of the work (some 4000 lines), Austin's progress was not easy, as can be deduced from the dedication to Prideaux: 'If you knew but the paines I have suffer'd in travell hereof, how many precious houres and dayes I have detain'd from those sports and vanities which are common to others; yea, how much time I have stolne from my other private studies... But now (thankes bee to my God) I have at length finished it.' In a prefatory poem Austin addresses all the poets of the day, and singles out 'those most refined wits and favourers of most exquisite learning, Mr. M. Drayton, Mr Will. Browne', as his 'ever honoured friends'. He exhorts them to turn from secular to divine poetry. It was a subject inspired by his college, Exeter -- which had also been Browne's college -- and Austin praises the college in a separate dedication 'To that famous Nursery of Learning and Religion': we 'Must be Divine that take our births from thee'. Austin's 'Urania' is a committed exegesis on the biblical narratives of fall and redemption, and uses a deep knowledge of the 'Bible' as a basic framework. The poem alludes to specific passages of the 'Bible' which form the foundation of the profoundly meditative 'Urania'. These are referenced in marginal notes and accord with Austin's view of the poem, presented in the dedication, 'wherein is chiefly imitated the powerful expressions of holy Scripture: very necessary to be read of all, both Divines and others, especially those who labour under the heavie burden of their sinnes, and would faine be comforted'. Under Prideaux, Exeter College had become a centre of resistance to Arminianism -- and within the wide-ranging 'Urania' Austin includes a discussion and significantly a refutation of man's free will. To write on this at a time when the authorities were attempting to quell debate on the subject has been seen as a political act (Norbrook, 233). Browne and Drayton were themselves notable examples of men who used their poetry to express opposition to the court. 
No more is known of Austin. The poet Samuel Austin is generally assumed to be his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 914


Austin, Samuel (fl. 1652-1671), poet, was most probably the son of Samuel Austin (b. 1605/6), a religious poet. He became a commoner of Wadham College, Oxford, on 2 October 1652, took his BA in 1656, and afterwards moved to Cambridge. On the evidence of contemporary accounts, his character was not to the taste of those around him. His importance rests on the fact that while he was a commoner at Wadham his poetry was annotated by fellow students and published with satirical commendatory verses. Wood accuses Austin of vanity, saying that his fellow students 'served him as the wits did Tho. Coryat in his time' publishing Austin's poetry under the title 'Naps upon Parnasus: a Sleepy Muse Nipt and Pincht, though not Awakened' (1658). 'Among [Austin's satirists] were Tho. Flatman, Tho. Sprat, and Sam. Woodford [...] Silvanus Taylour and George Castle of Alls. coll. [and] Alexander Amidei a Jew and Florentine born, then a teacher of Hebrew and other tongues in the university' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 2.499, 3.675). 
From this point in history it is difficult to state the extent of the wits' intervention and how much of Austin's work was left untouched by them. The first half of 'Naps' contains the commendatory verse, most of which discusses Austin's obscurity and darkness as a poet, as in 'On Mr Somebody's 'Poetical Naps Upon' Parnasus': '
'Tis vulgar to be 'clear'. 'Tis but a Quibble 

To write a verse that is intelligible. 

But 'Thy' judicious 'Muse' shuns this Offence, 

And 'Scorns' the pedantry of writing 'Sense'. 

' While the second half appears to be Austin's work, there are many marginal notes pointing out the absurdity and meaninglessness of it, and caution must be exercised in attributing the verse as Austin's work alone. He was also mocked for 'A Panegyrick on his Sacred Majesties Royal Person Charles II by the Grace of God King' (1661) which ends with the memorable couplet: '
Then let your Scepter never faile, 

You are the Sun, and I the Snail. 

' Austin promised more in a similar vein, though it never appeared. He may also have written a bitter attack on the Quakers, 'The Character of a Quaker in his True and Proper Colours, or, The Clownish Hypocrite Anatomized' (1671), in which the Quaker is simultaneously claimed to be controlled by 'his 'Holinesses' invisible hand behind the Curtain' and as having 'no more Christianity in him than a 'Turk''. 


@@@@@


doc= 915


Austin, Samuel (1796-1834), watercolour painter, was probably born on 30 September 1796, and baptized on 23 October at the Mount Pleasant Wesleyan Chapel, Liverpool, the son of Samuel (or possibly William) Austin and his wife, Mary. His early years are obscure. He attended the Liverpool Blue Coat School from 1806 to 1809, after which he was apprenticed in the office of a merchant, William Barber, before turning to a career in art. The extent of his formal training is not known, but he is said to have had three lessons in watercolour from Peter DeWint. He exhibited at the Royal Academy only once, in 1820, but from 1824 onwards he regularly showed work in London, first with the Society of British Artists, of which he was a founder member, and then with the Society of Painters in Water Colours. Although he spent time in the capital he lived chiefly in Liverpool and was closely involved with the Liverpool Academy, being an associate from 1815 and a member from 1823, and serving as secretary in 1824-7 and 1830. His exhibited works were mostly landscapes, coastal scenes, and architectural views, of subjects in and around Liverpool and north Wales and as far afield as the channel coast and the Scottish highlands. From 1829 he showed views of towns and scenery in the Netherlands, Germany, and France, presumably travelling to the continent about this time. He worked principally in watercolour, usually in a lively, spirited style, occasionally employing dramatic lighting effects which show the influence of Turner. An outstanding work from the very end of his career is 'East Quay, Princes Dock' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), which vividly evokes the bustle of Liverpool in its early nineteenth-century heyday. He was one of several artists who contributed plates to Robert Wallis's 'Lancashire Illustrated' (1829-31). He was also active as an art teacher, among his pupils being the translator Anna Swanwick. Austin married Elizabeth Sophia Adams (died 1848) and had six children. His eldest daughter, Anna Mary (1821-1909), married the architect Lewis Hornblower and was herself an artist. Austin died at Cefn-y-gribin, Montgomeryshire, on 15 July 1834, and was buried near by at Llanfyllin on 19 July. A portrait in oils by Alexander Mosses and a miniature by Thomas Hargreaves, both in the possession of his descendants, record the good looks that are said to have impressed his contemporaries. A centenary exhibition was held at the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, in 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 916


Austin, Sarah (1793-1867), translator and writer, was born in Colegate, Norwich, on 1 April 1793, the youngest of seven children of John Taylor (1750-1826), a wool and yarn manufacturer, and his wife, Susanna Taylor, nee Cook (1755-1823) ['see under 'Taylor, John]. Among her siblings were: Susan, the mother of Henry Reeve (1813-1895), editor of the 'Edinburgh Review'; Edward Taylor (1784-1863), a vocalist and Gresham professor of music in London; John Taylor (1779-1863), a mining engineer; and Richard Taylor (1781-1858), a printer and publisher, especially of scientific works, and editor of the 'Philosophical Magazine'. 
The Taylors were a prominent and prosperous part of the Unitarian community in Norwich. Sarah's great-grandfather Dr John Taylor (1694-1761), an eminent scholar and author of 'The Hebrew Concordance, Adapted to the English Bible' (1754-7), was the first minister of the architecturally distinguished Octagon Chapel in Norwich. Her father, a composer of hymns and political songs, was active in Norwich politics, promoting civil liberties for dissenters and sympathizing with the French Revolution. Sarah Taylor was intensely proud of her family's achievements, including its part in the struggle against legal barriers to civil equality for dissenters. Family life was demanding but convivial and affectionate. Most of her thorough education was provided at home, where she was encouraged to read widely and to become familiar with Latin, French, Italian, and German. 
The comfort, security, and warmth of this household was given up when Sarah Taylor married the brilliant but deeply flawed John Austin (1790-1859) on 24 August 1819. What appeared during their engagement as melancholy and diffidence were in fact symptoms of pathological depression which became an obstacle to his fulfilling her expectations. He was reclusive, moody, hypercritical of himself and of her, and sometimes suicidal. His career, whatever he tried, foundered, as success eluded him, first at the bar, then as a professor of law, and finally as author. Although ambitious to establish a novel philosophy of law, he found writing difficult, which led Sarah to complain about his 'inert pen'. They were strangely mismatched, and marital harmony was not enhanced by the contrasts between them, for she was self-confident and gregarious, and wrote with great facility. 
John Austin's difficulties became evident gradually. During the early years of their marriage, though they lived impecuniously, Sarah was hopeful that he would make a name for himself, as they were drawn into the circle of radical, utilitarian intellectuals surrounding Jeremy Bentham and James Mill. Sarah Austin's warm-heartedness made her a favourite of the elderly Bentham, and to the youthful John Stuart Mill she was a substitute mother, whom he addressed affectionately as 'Mutterlein'. Her expectations were sustained in 1827, when John Austin was made professor of jurisprudence and the law of nations at the new University of London, and they went to Bonn for more than a year while he prepared his lectures. Fragile hope soon turned to despair, however, for he was ill during much of the four years of teaching and resigned the professorship in 1833. Whereas she had nourished the idea of serving as helpmate to him in a career of scholarship and public service, most of her energies were devoted to making up for his deficiencies. Meanwhile, he became increasingly dependent on her as she tried to lift him out of his gloom, nursed him during his various bouts of illness, and managed every aspect of their life, becoming, she explained, 'the man of business in 'our firm'' ('Troubled Lives', 66). 
Sarah Austin also supplemented their small income by writing for the monthlies and quarterlies and by translating. From the mid-1820s until 1836 she did this incessantly, and the drudgery added further strain to the marriage. Her translations from the French included fragments by Stendhal, Provencal poetry, Voltaire's 'History of Charles XII' (1827), most of Victor Cousin's 'Report on the State of Public Instruction in Prussia' (1834), and 'The History of the Italian Republics' (1832) and 'A History of the Fall of the Roman Empire' (1834) by Sismondi. She also translated German works, her proficiency having increased greatly during her residence at Bonn. At the suggestion of John Sterling, Carlyle's friend, she undertook translations which were later included in her 'Fragments from German Prose Writers' (1841), an anthology that included passages from Grimm, Goethe, Kant, Schiller, Richter, Schlegel, Novalis, and Lessing. Her most important translation during these years was 'Characteristics of Goethe' (1834), which was based on recollections by Falk and others and included some of Goethe's poetry. It prompted Carlyle to exclaim, 'you can 'actually translate' 'Goethe'', something, he added, only a few in England could do ('Troubled Lives', 70). She was already known, according to the publisher Dionysius Lardner, as 'our best living translator' (ibid., 71), and the three volumes on Goethe gave her some celebrity and much more work. She soon did two of the volumes of Frederick von Raumer's 'England in 1835' (1836) and Heinrich Hase's 'The Public and Private Life of the Ancient Greeks' (1836). She could well claim to be 'the busiest woman in the world' (ibid., 70), and she was justified in believing she had 'fought poverty single handed' and that, as she told Brougham, 'my own fingers and my own head such as it is have sufficed to secure us against the want we must otherwise have felt' (ibid., 72). 
During the early 1830s, with middle age approaching, her husband's symptoms at their worst, and his career stalled, Sarah Austin began translating 'Letters from a Dead Man' by Hermann von Puckler-Muskau, a German nobleman who became known for his landscaping and as a travel writer: it was the beginning of an episode that for a few years transformed her life. In this book -- an account of travels and adventures in which the author revealed his many-sided character -- she encountered a man the very opposite of John Austin, for Puckler was light-hearted, bold, unscrupulous, hedonistic, and boastfully erotic. Their correspondence initially concerned her translation, which was published as 'Tour in England, Ireland, and France' (1832), but it soon became personal, as he elicited complaints about her marriage. 'I turn my heart inside out to you' ('Contemplating Adultery', 79), she told him, as she expressed the love and desire that had been unsatisfied during the previous thirteen years of marriage. She wrote more than eighty imprudent letters which conveyed her obsessive love for him but also her fear of being discovered and blackmailed. Plans for a meeting were made when she contemplated a summer journey to Bonn in 1832 and again to Berlin a year later, when her husband resigned his professorship and she expected to be free to travel with him. These plans came to nothing, partly because Puckler showed himself less audacious than he first appeared, and Sarah Austin was left desolate, having experienced nothing but fantasies which were symptoms of her disappointment. Eight years later she and Puckler met in Berlin, but by this time her love for him was only a memory. 
In 1836, as her correspondence with Puckler came to an end, Sarah Austin was in Malta, for John Austin had been appointed head of a commission to recommend changes in the constitutional arrangements for Malta, including its legal system. In contrast to her earlier penury, she suddenly enjoyed the comforts and privileges that accompanied her husband's new position, but in other respects little changed. The reforms recommended by him aroused opposition and engendered controversy, both in Malta and in London, and the turmoil led to a renewal of his illness, which worsened when he was criticized in parliament. Once again, while he foundered, Sarah Austin thrived. She befriended the Maltese, opened new schools, and during a cholera epidemic she heroically ignored risks as she nursed the sick, leading one Maltese to call her 'a mother to us all' ('Troubled Lives', 118). 
After the termination of the Malta appointment in 1838, John Austin never sought employment again, making it possible to live in exile on the continent, away from the expenses and humiliation in London. Before departing, since they still needed money, Sarah Austin resumed translating and quickly completed Leopold von Ranke's 'Ecclesiastical and political history of the popes of Rome during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries' (1840). The couple moved to Dresden in 1841, where they lived comfortably until 1843. While there she wrote for 'The Athenaeum', 'Fraser's Magazine', and the 'Edinburgh Review', including several articles on German history, some later included in her 'Germany from 1760 to 1814, or, Sketches of German Life' (1854), and these contributed to her reputation as an important interpreter of German life and culture for English audiences. In 1843 they moved to Paris, where she continued to translate, this time Ranke's 'History of the Reformation', which appeared in three large volumes in 1845-7. Here she also became hostess of a cosmopolitan salon that attracted literary and political figures, including Mignet, Tocqueville, Saint-Hilaire, Thierry, Bastiat, Faucher, Circourt, Lamartine, Laube, and Normanby. She also was befriended by Guizot, who was head of Louis Philippe's government, and later translated his 'Democracy in France' (1849) and his 'On the Causes of the Success of the English Revolution of 1640-1688' (1850). The Austins left Paris early in 1848, soon after the revolution began. 
On their return to England, the Austins settled at Weybridge, and during the remaining years of her husband's life Sarah Austin encouraged him to complete the work on jurisprudence he had long planned. After he died in 1859 without having done this, Sarah made up for his failure by republishing his 'Province of Jurisprudence Determined' (1832), a book first published through her initiative. She then combined this work, which consisted of the introductory part of his University of London lectures, with the previously unpublished lectures from the same course, producing 'Lectures on Jurisprudence, or, The Philosophy of Positive Law' (1863). She did some editing, added other material, and wrote a long preface, more apologetic than biographical. She thought her work made certain that his 'great thoughts might not perish' ('Troubled Lives', 196). Her enterprise was rewarded, for there were two editions in her lifetime and three more by 1885. The work was reviewed favourably by John Stuart Mill and was used as an examination book at Cambridge and Oxford. Before this Austin was known only in a small circle, but Mrs Austin established his reputation as a legal philosopher and founder of the Austinian theory of law. 
Sarah Austin's last years were saddened by the illness of her only child, Lucie Duff Gordon (1821-1869), who suffered from tuberculosis and lived abroad to escape the harsh British winters, in 1860 at the Cape of Good Hope and a year later in Egypt. Mrs Austin, always able to recognize ideas for books, published her daughter's 'Letters from Egypt' (1865); three editions appeared that year and many more subsequently. During these years her own health deteriorated. She suffered chest pains, the aftermath of a heart attack in Paris in 1844, and she became heavy and was hampered by gout. 
Sarah Austin's translations overshadowed her own writing in the quarterlies on Goethe, Shakespeare, Germany, and French politics, but she chose this course, not only because translations earned more, but to limit the authorship that would have been an affront to her husband, whose own publication record was meagre. Here too she subordinated herself to him, and friends, such as Mill, Carlyle, and Francis Jeffrey, who appreciated her literary talent, recognized her sacrifice, as she did when she referred to 'voluntary abnegations of what [she] might perhaps have attained' ('Troubled Lives', 147). Indications of what that might have been can be found in her lively, poignant, graceful letters, which reveal her complex character, including her unending struggles with vanity, ambition, and desire, as well as her sense of duty, compassion, and self-sacrifice. 
Sarah Austin had strong opinions on many matters. Although her family's Unitarianism and her early association with the Benthamites made her somewhat radical, she became apprehensive about the disintegrating effects of rapid social change on traditional institutions and established authority, and like her husband she became increasingly conservative. She feared revolution, which she witnessed in 1848, and criticized the growing demands for democratic reform: in an analysis that had affinities with Tocqueville's, she forecast that equality would lead to selfishness, anti-authoritarianism, and finally despotism of the kind practised by Louis Napoleon. She advocated compulsory primary education on the Prussian model as a way of instilling a sense of responsibility to the social order. While asserting the intellectual equality of women and condemning their subordination such as she had observed in Germany, she refused to support the feminist movement in Britain and upheld traditional, family-centred roles for women. 
Sarah Austin had great physical beauty, which was enhanced by an outgoing, warm-hearted, engaging personality. As a young woman she was described as 'dazzling, attractive, imposing' ('Troubled Lives', 3), and portraits by Linnell done when she was more than forty still conveyed these features. She was self-confident, energetic, and quick to take initiatives and organize others, which made her somewhat dominating but also quite courageous and resourceful, as shown by her organizing a rescue from a shipwreck at Boulogne and her mobilizing a bucket brigade to put out a hotel fire. 
Mrs Austin also was able to establish rapport with others, which translated into a remarkable gift for friendship. Her sympathy, vitality, and insight were appreciated by Bentham, Anna Barbauld, Harriet Grote, Guizot, Anna Jameson, Sydney Smith (whose letters she edited for publication in 1855), the third marquess of Lansdowne, George Cornewall Lewis, Hermann Heine, Jane Welsh Carlyle, Auguste Comte, John Sterling, Santa Rosa, Saint-Hilaire, Victor Cousin, and Francis Jeffrey, who commissioned one of the Linnell portraits. 
Sarah Austin died at home at Nutfield Cottage, Weybridge, on 8 August 1867, aged seventy-four, from heart and kidney disease. She was buried next to her husband in the Weybridge churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 917


Austin, William (c.1587-1634), author, was the only son of James Austin (died 1602) and his wife, Joyce (1559/60-1626). He probably matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1603, but later moved to London to study at Lincoln's Inn, where he was admitted in October 1604 (at the request of his future stepfather Sir Robert Clerke, one of the barons of the exchequer) and called to the bar in November 1611. After leaving Lincoln's Inn he settled in Paris Garden, Southwark, where he lived for the rest of his life. He was twice married: first, on 6 June 1609, to Anne Grimes, who died in childbirth in 1624, and second, on 1 January 1627, to Anne Bingham, who survived him. He had ten children, of whom four, Joyce ('b'. 1613), Mary ('b'. 1615), James ('b'. 1616), and William Austin (b. 1627/8, d. in or before 1677), survived to adulthood. 
Austin was one of the London wits who contributed prefatory verses to 'Coryat's Crudities' (1611) but most of his surviving works appear to have been written in the 1620s. His essay 'Haec homo, wherein the Excellency of the Creation of Woman is Described', though not published until 1637, is said by its editor, I. A. (probably his son James), to be an early work, and may have been written about 1620 in response to the misogynist pamphlet 'Hic mulier, or, The Man-Woman'. His translation of Cicero, 'Cato Major, or, The Book of Old Age', may also be an early work, though it did not appear in print until 1648, when a manuscript accidentally fell into the hands of the London stationer William Leake. Austin's most significant work, however, is a series of meditations and poems (some dated 1621 and 1622) on the major feast-days of the Christian year. The poems, which include a set of 'Carrols for Christmas Day' and three linked 'Meditations for Good Friday', were circulated in manuscript during Austin's lifetime and at least four contemporary copies survive, all in the hand of the professional scribe Ralph Crane. Writing in 1632 Crane claimed that copies were in short supply, 'there not being three such anywhere extant; and not one (unless surreptitiously gotten) but of my pen' (BL, Harleian MS 3357, fol. 2), but Austin evidently circulated copies among his friends, one of whom, James Howell, urged him to print them, 'for they have an edifying power in them, and may be termed the very quintessence of devotion' (Howell, 5.13). In his will, signed on 19 May 1632, Austin left detailed instructions for the printing of 'my poore meditations' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/165/14), which also included an elegy on his first wife and his dead children, and they were duly published in 1635 by his widow and executor, as 'Devotionis Augustinianae flamma', with an engraved frontispiece after Austin's own design. The will also lists the intended recipients of presentation copies, including John Selden, Thomas Farnaby, and Ben Jonson, thus providing a useful index of Austin's literary friendships. 
Austin was a generous benefactor to the church of St Saviour, Southwark, to which he presented a silver chalice and paten. In the north transept of the church he erected a remarkable emblematic monument to the memory of his mother and first wife, which used agricultural motifs (including harvesters, a wheatsheaf, a winnowing fan, and a corn shovel) to illustrate the text 'Vos estis agricultura dei'. The monument has been attributed to the sculptor Nicholas Stone but was almost certainly designed by Austin himself, who was an amateur artist (his will lists a 'booke of Christ's Passion coloured by me' and a set of 'toyes in paper drawne by my owne hand') and also owned an important collection of paintings on classical and religious subjects. He died on 16 January 1634, 'aetatis suae 47', and was buried on 18 January in the church. His tombstone, underneath the monument, described him in an elegant Latin epitaph as 'an Angel in his thoughts, a Daedalus in his actions... a miracle of patience in illness, an example of faithfulness in death'. 


@@@@@


doc= 918


Austin, William (b. 1627/8, d. in or before 1677), poet and classical scholar, was born in the parish of St Saviour, Southwark, the second son in the family of four children of William Austin (c.1587-1634), writer and barrister, and his second wife, Anne Bingham. He was educated at Eton College and Christ's College, Cambridge (matriculated 1647; BA 1649), and was admitted on 23 June 1648 to Gray's Inn, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
Austin wrote two poems to celebrate the union of Charles II and Catherine of Braganza, which were 'presented to their majesties' on their passage down the Thames from Hampton Court to Whitehall (23 August 1662). The first was entitled 'A joyous welcome to the most serene, and most illustrious queen of brides Catherin, the royal spouse and consort of Charles II' (1662) and the second 'Triumphus Hymenaeus, a panegyrick to the king and queen's most sacred majestie, upon their ever to be remembered passing upon the river of Thames' (1662). Both poems are full of bombastic eulogy, and are crowded with classical allusions, explained in voluminous notes. In an address to the reader Austin not inaptly refers to ''Triumphus hymenaeus'' as 'this thatcht Tugurium of Poesie' (p. 39). 
In 1664 Austin produced 'Atlas under Olympus: an Heroick Poem' which is dedicated to Charles II and Monck, duke of Albemarle, and is a fulsome panegyric on their achievements. Almost every line is based on a classical quotation, and Austin's epistle to the reader describes his poetic method: 'what could not be afforded you from my own fancy, I have endeavoured to supply, by swelling the Margent with the Allusions of some Authors' (sig. B3'v'). Austin's most readable production is a description in verse of the plague of London, entitled ''Epiloimia epe', or, The anatomy of the pestilence. A poem in three parts, describing the deplorable condition of the City of London under its merciless dominion' (1666). Austin here dispenses with classical allusions and annotations. Hazlitt also describes a poem on Austin's nephew, 'Upon the death of Mr. Anthony Austin, younger son to Sir James Austin knight, who died in the flower of his youth, and in the 22th year of his age, December the 30th, 1676', by W. A[ustin?] (1677), but this volume cannot be traced. 
Austin's precise date of death is uncertain, but his will was proved in 1677. He was buried in the parish church of St Saviour, Southwark, near the monument to his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 919


Austin, William (1754-1793), physician, the youngest of the eight children of Isaac Austin, was born at Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire, on 28 December 1754. Several generations of his family had been clothiers in the town. After receiving a classical education at the local grammar school he was admitted as a commoner of Wadham College, Oxford, in 1773. He began to study Hebrew, and made such good progress that he obtained an exhibition. He approached every task with immense physical and mental energy. It is said that he often walked from Oxford to London in a day, and that he could mow an acre of heavy grass in a single day with just his scythe. He became a scholar at his college, and obtained a second exhibition in botany. 
Austin's studies in botany persuaded him to follow medicine as a profession. He did make one digression after graduating BA in 1776; he was elected assistant tutor to Joseph White, Laudian professor of Arabic. After giving some lectures on Arabic, Austin went to London in 1779 and began his medical studies in earnest at St Bartholomew's Hospital. Percivall Pott, the famous surgeon, formed a high opinion of Austin and told his colleague Sir James Earle, 'You will see Austin at the head of his profession'. Austin returned to Oxford, and proceeded MA (1780), MB (1782), and MD (1783). One of his many interests was mathematics and in 1781 he published 'An Examination of the First Six Books of Euclid's Elements'. Later the same year, after he had begun to practise as a physician at Oxford, he lectured on mathematics during the absence of John Smith (died 1797), the Savilian professor of geometry. In 1784 he planned, but never gave, a course of lectures on physiology, and in 1785 he was elected professor of chemistry. He also became physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary. 
In 1786, when a vacancy appeared at St Bartholomew's, Austin was elected physician there and moved to London. He rapidly built up a large private practice, earning more than $4000 a year. He continued his chemical studies and was the first person to give regular chemical lectures in the school at St Bartholomew's. In 1787 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and in 1790 he delivered the Goulstonian lectures there. Two papers (published in 1788 and 1789), on 'Heavy inflammable air', were read before the Royal Society ('PTRS', 80.51). His Goulstonian lectures were printed as 'A Treatise on the Origin and Component Parts of the Stone in the Urinary Bladder' (1791). Austin came to the conclusion, later shown to be incorrect, 'that the stone is formed generally in very small part, and often in no degree whatever, from the urine as secreted by the kidneys, but chiefly from the mucus produced from the sides of the different cavities through which the urine passes.' He went on to say that 'those who suffer this species of the disorder must either bear it for life or submit to a dreadful alternative, to an operation which few surgeons ever acquire the art of performing dexterously, and which, performed even by the most skilful, is by far the most dangerous of any that is practised in surgery.' However, Austin was able correctly to identify how hard deposits in the body are composed. He also correctly observed that the hard matter found in old people's arteries is calcareous, whereas the white substance covering the surface of gouty joints is not. His final remark on lithotomy caused his surgical colleague, Sir James Earle, to write a defence of the operation. This states that Austin later revised his pessimistic views on the treatment of kidney stones. Earle showed his remarks to Austin shortly before the latter's death, and he was also the author of the memoir of Austin prefixed to 'Practical Observations on the Operation for the Stone' (1796). 
Austin was married twice, and he left six children, four from his second marriage, to Miss Margaret Alanson. He wrote a number of sermons, but none of these was published. Austin died suddenly in London, on 21 January 1793, of a fever. 


@@@@@


doc= 920


Austin, William (1721/1733-1820), drawing-master and engraver, was apprenticed to George Bickham junior in 1747. This suggests that he was born about 1733, although he was said to have died aged ninety-eight, and a man named Austin was listed as an eminent painter in 1748. In 1756 Austin launched his career with proposals for a pair of landscape prints after Zuccarelli and Gainsborough, a drawing-book, and a series of prints imitating drawings -- all calculated to advertise his ability as a teacher of drawing and etching, which soon became his principal occupation. Meanwhile he engraved a number of good landscapes and some captivating rococo subscription tickets, including one for the carver Thomas Johnson, some of whose designs he also etched. By April 1757 he was associated with Gerard Vandergucht in a picture shop at the Golden Head in George Street, Hanover Square, London. He advertised himself as 'from Mr. Major' (Anderton catalogues, vol. 1, p. 122), suggesting a background of recent employment with the engraver Thomas Major. 
Austin and Vandergucht continued in partnership until 1763, when Austin set up on his own at the Print Warehouse in Bond Street, where he claimed to have a stock of some 30,000 imported foreign prints, drawings, and etchings. He also cleaned and repaired paintings and kept a printing press to run off urgent work. In November 1767, however, he announced that he was quitting business and that his prints were to be sold by auction. Teaching drawing now became Austin's principal occupation. Later he issued a printed list of the names of 308 pupils since 1768, a list extended in pencil to 400. 
Austin's most arresting and original work was designed to demonstrate his mastery of another fashionable skill that was taught to amateurs: caricature. 'Nature Display'd both Serious and Comic', a set of twelve etchings published in 1773 and dedicated to the satirical actor and dramatist Samuel Foote, contains some of the most vivacious of early English caricatures. Several mocked well-known personalities, just as Foote did on stage. In response, perhaps, Austin himself was attacked in caricature by Matthew Darly, a rival drawing-master who had made caricature his speciality. Austin continued to teach from a bewildering variety of fashionable addresses in Westminster, the western suburbs, and Brighton. In the mid-1780s, around the time of the hotly contested Westminster elections, he re-emerged as a publisher and printseller. Between 1784 and 1790 he issued a series of prints and terracotta busts of whig grandees. He has been identified as the subject of another caricature of this date entitled 'Fox's Fool'. Austin died on 11 May 1820 in Brighton, and was described by his obituarist as, 'in his 99th year... of eccentric memory, well known to the electors of Westminster some years ago, for his singular exertion in support of Mr Fox, when a candidate for that City' ('GM'). A collection of Austin's political prints is in the John Johnson Collection in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 921


Aveling, Thomas William Baxter (1815-1884), Congregational minister, was born on 11 May 1815 at Castletown in the Isle of Man, the son of a soldier and an Irish mother. He received his theological training at Highbury College from 1834, and in 1838 was appointed to the pastorate of the Kingsland Congregational Church, Hackney. During his ministry at Kingsland a new chapel was built and the congregation greatly expanded; his connection with the congregation lasted throughout his life. Aveling acquired a reputation for philanthropy and learning. He was appointed chairman of the Congregational Union in 1874, and for many years he was the honorary secretary of the Asylum for Fatherless Children at Reedham. Some time before his death he received from Washington University the degree of DD. He died at Reedham, near Caterham, on 3 July 1884, and was buried at the Abney Park cemetery, London, on the 9th. He was married to Mary Ann (died 1877), daughter of Thomas Goodall; the couple had eight children, the fifth being the Marxist campaigner Edward Bibbens Aveling. 
Aveling published a large number of sermons and other works, the chief being 'Memorials of the Clayton Family' (1867), containing some previously unpublished correspondence of the countess of Huntingdon. 


@@@@@


doc= 922


Averell, Adam (1754-1847), Primitive Wesleyan Methodist minister, was born on 7 May 1754 at Mullan, co. Tyrone, where his family had settled in the sixteenth century. His parents, Adam Averell, farmer, and Mary Johnston, belonged to the established church and were related to Dr John Averell (died 1771), bishop of Limerick. In 1773 Averell went to Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1774 became private tutor to Sir Richard St George. He was ordained deacon at Clonfert by Bishop Cope on 25 July 1777 but took no charge. At this period he met John Wesley in Dublin and heard him preach but this had little immediate impact upon him. On 18 December 1785 he married Elizabeth Gregory (died 1813), the daughter and heir of the Revd R. Gregory of Tentower, Queen's county. 
Averell's evangelical conversion in 1788 followed his reading of Wesley's 'Appeal' and seems to have been precipitated by a serious illness. Between 1789 and 1791 he acted as curate to Dr Ledwich at Aghaboe, Queen's county, but resigned in order to take up a gratuitous itinerant ministry based at his home in Tentower. On 7 October 1792 he preached for the first time to a Methodist congregation; in 1796 the Dublin conference admitted him to full connection. In December 1797 he separated from his wife -- who appears to have found his new convictions unacceptable -- and his eleven-year-old daughter. 
Although Averell had himself regularly celebrated holy communion as a deacon, arguing that he did not need full ordination to qualify him, he strongly opposed the 1816 proposal that Methodist preachers should administer the sacraments. Concerned to avoid a break with the Irish established church, he declared on 21 January 1818 at Clones that the Methodists 'are not a church but a religious society'. In the resulting split, Averell became leader of the Irish Primitive Wesleyan Methodists, elected as president at their first conference in July 1818 and continuously re-elected until after 1841, when his infirmities led him to decline office. The Primitive Wesleyan body he represented was reunited with the Irish Wesleyan conference in 1878. 
For the first fifteen years of his career as a Methodist preacher Averell kept a journal, which provides important insights into the Methodist response to a turbulent period in Irish history. The journal entries for 1798 are of particular interest as Averell travelled a country torn apart by bloody rebellion. In the midst of fear and turmoil little bands of protestants, isolated in Catholic rural areas, met for both spiritual and physical support. Believing himself to have been protected by providence on more than one occasion, Averell presided over scenes of local religious revivalism, which appear to have been a common Methodist reaction to the crisis. From a more general point of view Averell's response in his journal to the domestic trials precipitated by his conversion, and his defence of Methodist practice, also make fascinating reading. In common with many of his contemporaries he contrasts the 'worthlessness' of the 'great, rich and honourable' and the complacency of the established church with the energizing influence of 'Original' Methodism. He was clear, for example, that street preaching was important not only in facilitating the spread of the gospel but for its good effect on preachers themselves: 'it subdues pride, mortifies self, and begets boldness in the cause of God' (Averell, journal, 1806, 289). The journal reflects his total immersion in a faith sustained by scripture reading, prayer, and the solemn reconsecration of his life on every birthday, and suggests the power of his preaching: 'I was so melted down before God, while at prayer after preaching, that I was unable to give expression to language, and most of my little flock were similarly affected' (ibid., 13 May 1792, 55). 
After fifty years of preaching Averell died at Mount Salem, near Clones, co. Monaghan, on 16 January 1847 aged ninety-two. He outlived his wife, who died in Bristol in 1813, by more than thirty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 923


Avery, Benjamin (bap. 1684?, d. 1764), Presbyterian minister and physician, was probably the son of Timothy Avery (died 1721) and Elizabeth Avery baptized at Newbury, Berkshire, on 1 December 1684. Little is known of his early life or education. James Odgers conjectures that Avery was a pupil of James Peirce (1674-1726), who was the minister at Newbury from 1700 to 1713; this seems very likely as Avery was Peirce's literary executor. In April 1711 Avery was made a doctor of civil laws by Edinburgh University. A week earlier he had been admitted MA in a private ceremony without having previously matriculated, perhaps as part of Principal William Carstares's scheme for attracting English nonconformists to Edinburgh. Avery was an assistant first to Thomas Freke (died 1716) and then to Freke's successor, John Munkley, both ministers of the Presbyterian congregation at Bartholomew Close, London, until he quitted the ministry in 1720 as a consequence of the 1719 Salters' Hall controversy over religious subscription. Avery was against subscription. He briefly served as a clerical manager of the Presbyterian Fund, from 1718 until leaving the ministry. He then practised as a physician and in 1729 was elected a governor of Guy's Hospital, serving as treasurer from 23 December 1742 until his death. He was also a trustee of Dr Williams's Trust (1728-64). He married twice, first, Mary Hodges at St Katharine by the Tower, London, on 3 May 1716, with whom he acquired $600 a year, and second, Mary Kingland at St George's, Hanover Square, on 2 December 1750. 
Avery became the leading manager of the dissenting interest: 'In all public concerns' that affected dissenters 'he for many years took the lead' (Wilson, 3.381). His major contribution was as chairman (1735-64) of the protestant dissenting deputies, of whom he was a founding member. He succeeded Samuel Holden, the first chairman, whose failure to press for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' led to his removal. Avery also undertook the office of treasurer (1738-48). He proved an active and effective chairman assisting dissenters in Ireland and America as well as England. He used his contacts with government ministers not only on behalf of the dissenting interest, but to obtain more general favours. In 1761 he informed the duke of Newcastle that a Mr Sewell 'would be extremely acceptable to the Body of Protestant Dissenters' to fill the vacancy in the solicitor-general's office (BL, Add. MS 32932, fol. 310'r'). He also recommended the rector of Belbroughton for a vacant living at Worcester and sought a landwaterman's place in the port of London. 
Avery made an important contribution to the theological development of English Presbyterianism as one of the anonymous authors of the 'Occasional Papers', also known as the 'Bagweell Papers' from the initials of the authors (namely Simon Browne, Avery, Benjamin Grosvenor, Samuel Wright, John Evans, Jabez Earle, Nathaniel Lardner, and Moses Lowman), which were issued monthly between 1716 and 1718, and later published in three volumes. These essays stressed the importance of personal judgement in matters of doctrine. All the contributors were non-subscribers at the Salters' Hall debate. Avery was the leading promoter of the 'Old Whig, or, The Consistent Protestant', which was issued weekly between March 1735 and March 1738 to maintain what were seen as the political and religious principles of the seventeenth-century whigs. He was assisted in the project by several London ministers, including Benjamin Grosvenor, Samuel Chandler, George Benson, and James Foster, all non-subscribers at Salters' Hall. He also published in 1714 a sermon on 'Micah', preached on 4 November 1713, William III's birthday. Avery's sympathies are evident from his friendship with James Peirce, who was dismissed from Exeter for heterodoxy. He wrote the original Latin inscription for Peirce's gravestone (which the rector refused to allow), and edited a posthumous collection of Peirce's sermons (1728). 
Avery died on 24 July 1764 and left a substantial estate, including farms at Combe in the parish of Bright Walton, Berkshire, and at Winagrove and Rowsham in Buckinghamshire, to his nephew, Thomas Warner, with numerous legacies to friends, including some of the leading London ministers. He was buried in the vault of St Thomas's, Southwark, but in his will asked to be re-buried as near as possible to Thomas Guy, the founder of the hospital, whenever the latter was reinterred in a new chapel at Guy's Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 924


Avery, Henry (bap. 1659, d. 1696?), pirate, the son of John and Anne Evarie, was baptized on 23 August 1659 at Newton Ferrers, near Plymouth. He joined the Royal Navy and was a midshipman in the 'Rupert' and a mate in the 'Albemarle'. In 1693 he joined a privateering expedition as first mate of the 'Charles', one of four armed merchant ships which set off from London to salvage Spanish treasure ships in the West Indies. They were delayed for some months in Corunna, and failure to pay the seamen's wages provoked a mutiny. On 7 May 1694 Avery and sixty-five men seized the 'Charles' while her captain was laid low with fever. They put the captain and sixteen men ashore, renamed the ship 'Fancy', and headed for the Indian Ocean. They looted several ships 'en route', called in at Madagascar for water and provisions, and sailed to the mouth of the Red Sea where they were joined by several other pirate ships. On 8 September 1695 Avery led an attack on the 'Ganj-i-Sawai', a treasure ship belonging to the Mughal emperor of India. Having plundered the ship of huge quantities of gold and silver, Avery and his men sailed to the West Indies where they went their separate ways. Six of the crew were later caught and, after a trial at the Old Bailey in October 1696, five of them were hanged. Avery was never heard of again. Although it is impossible to substantiate, he is reported to have returned to England, settled in Bideford, Devon, and died in poverty in 1696, after being cheated out of his fortune by Bristol merchants. His exploits inspired several books and ballads, including 'The Life and Adventures of Captain John Avery' (1709?), by which name he was sometimes known in publications, and a play by Charles Johnson entitled 'The Successful Pyrate' which opened at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in November 1712 and was published the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 925


Avison, Charles (bap. 1710, d. 1770), composer and writer on music, was baptized on 16 February 1710 in Newcastle upon Tyne, the fifth of nine children of Richard and Ann Avison. His early training in music presumably began at home with his father, a town wait and also practising musician. While in the service of the Newcastle merchant Ralph Jenison, MP for Northumberland from 1724 to 1741 and a patron of the arts, he continued to study; he was additionally supported by Colonel John Blathwayt (or Blaithwaite), once a director of the operatic organization the Royal Academy of Music. William Hayes and Charles Burney both indicate that he studied with Francesco Geminiani in London. Geminiani promoted Avison's career, obtaining for him offers of organist's posts in Dublin in 1733 and again in 1740, and Avison remained loyal to his methods and works. 
The earliest record of Avison's musical activities is for a benefit concert on 20 March 1734 in Hickford's Room, London. That year he was offered the York Minster organist's post, but he rejected it, perhaps because he already intended to return to Newcastle. On 13 October 1735 he was appointed organist of St John's Church, Newcastle, and on 20 October 1736, following the death of Thomas Powell, organist of St Nicholas's Church (later Cathedral), which possessed the largest organ in the north-east. On 15 January 1737, at All Saints, Newcastle, he married Catherine Reynolds. They had nine children, of whom three survived to adulthood: Jane (1744-1773), Edward (1747-1776), and Charles (1751-1795). 
Avison probably initiated the series of subscription concerts that began in Newcastle in August 1736. Documentation is scarce, but by 1750 he was administering annual seasons of fortnightly concerts beginning in October and sometimes continuing until as late as early April; a summer series had begun by 1757. Subscriptions were 10's'. 6died in 1759, rising to 15's'. by 1764. Avison also organized the annual concerts for race week in July and assize week in August, well established by 1750. His reputation as a composer and adapter combined with the success of the concert series to establish Avison's pre-eminence in northern English music. Although very little is known of his repertory, evidence survives that he sought to introduce his Newcastle audience to new composers: the 1751 season saw some of the first performances anywhere in Britain of work by Jean-Philippe Rameau. Surviving advertisements suggest that Avison was hostile towards competition, and other promoters who wished their series to prosper, such as John Garth in Durham, found it wisest to co-operate with him. The two series ran their concerts in alternate weeks from 1758, allowing each to share musicians and perhaps audience members. Avison also established ties with the Edinburgh musical society: Robert Bremner advertised his music publishing business in Newcastle and several Edinburgh musicians performed in the Newcastle series. Prominent London artists to appear in Newcastle included Felice Giardini; Geminiani probably visited Avison in 1760 but it is not known whether he performed. 
Today Avison is known primarily for his compositions and writings on music aesthetics. The former comprise orchestral and chamber pieces, along with a small number of sacred works. The orchestral works consist mainly of concerti grossi for strings and are set out in six opus numbers, ranging in date from 1740 to 1769. The chamber works include four sets of sonatas, dated from 1737 to 1764. The same prolificness is not matched in his sacred music, which includes only a verse anthem, a hymn, and a chant. 
Although Avison published incidental aesthetic and critical writings, he is at his most concentrated in 'An Essay on Musical Expression', first published in London in 1752, and 'A Reply to the Author of Remarks on the 'Essay on Musical Expression'', which appeared the next year. The 'Essay' addresses various aesthetic, critical, and performance-related issues in three parts, the first considering the effect of music upon the emotions and character, and the analogy between music and painting. The second discusses specific composers and their styles, and the third considers instrumental performance practice. Avison's admiration of Geminiani and Benedetto Marcello, to the detriment of Handel, sparked a highly critical response from William Hayes, then Heather professor of music at Oxford. Hayes's criticisms, published anonymously as 'Remarks on Mr Avison's 'Essay on Musical Expression'' (1753), in turn prompted Avison's 'Reply'. The second edition of the 'Reply', published later in 1753, also includes 'A Letter to the Author, Concerning the Music of the Ancients', by the historian John Jortin. Avison's 'Essay' is not, by his own admission, entirely his own work, but reflects the priorities of his musical circle in Newcastle and elsewhere. It included input by Dr John Brown, the Northumberland-born controversialist, the poets Thomas Gray and William Mason, John Jortin, the Newcastle bookseller Joseph Barber, and Robert Shafto, head of a prominent Newcastle family and brother-in-law of Ralph Jenison. 
Avison continued to organize concerts in Newcastle, as well as teach harpsichord, violin, and flute. His supremacy was challenged between 1760 and 1766 by a number of concerts directed by William Herschel, but these ended when Herschel moved to Bath. Avison's standing in Newcastle may have been maintained with the help of a literary and musical club begun by John Brown when he arrived in Newcastle as vicar in 1760. This may have been the ancestor of the Newcastle Musical Society, of which Avison is said to have been the musical director but of which there is no record until 1781. 
Avison died in Newcastle on 9 or 10 May 1770 and was buried in St Andrew's churchyard, Newgate Street. His son Edward took over his concerts for the next season but they ceased in 1771, perhaps because subscriptions were being diverted towards the building of new assembly rooms, eventually opened in 1777. A full series of concerts on the Avison model did not revive in Newcastle until the 1790s, and under the direction of a committee rather than a single professional musician. 
Avison's reputation as a theorist suffered from his rejecting Handel in favour of Geminiani, but his was not a lone voice, as the collective authorship of his 'Essay' shows. Although conventional wisdom decided that his music was 'light and elegant, but wants originality, a consequence of his too close attachment to the style of Geminiani' (Chalmers, 189), several of his compositions remained in the nineteenth-century repertory, some adapted for religious settings, and he is among the most important English-born eighteenth-century composers. In addition, his determined promotion of the Newcastle concert series did more than enhance the cultural life of one city: it helped ensure that British music in the eighteenth century did not function exclusively within a metropolitan milieu. 


@@@@@


doc= 926


Awdelay, John (fl. 1417-1426), poet and Augustinian friar, was chaplain and chantry priest at Haughmond Abbey, Shropshire, and the author of a number of English devotional poems and carols which are preserved in Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 302 (first half of the fifteenth century; the linguistic evidence is said to point to Staffordshire). It is not certain that he was the author of all the poems in the collection, but his name appears some eighteen times. He describes himself several times as 'the blind Awdelay', and also as deaf and sick. The date of 1426, which appears in a colophon on folio 22'v' (in which he is styled 'capellanus'), may simply refer to the composition of the preceding eighteen poems, or to a previous copy of them. He thought of the group as a book of good counsel, suggesting such titles as 'pe cownsel of conseans' or 'pe ladder of heuen'. The following poems (six of which are 'signed') include invocations of saints, moral verses, and a collection of carols. In his final poem he reveals that, now old and infirm, he was the first chantry priest to Richard Lestrange, lord of Knockin (died 1449), whose family had endowed a chantry chapel in the abbey. That previously 'John Audley, chaplain' was accused of being implicated in a scandalous affray caused by Lord Lestrange in a London church on Easter Sunday 1417 suggests a livelier early life far from rural Shropshire. 
Awdelay's poems use the traditional themes of the medieval religious lyric, but are notable for their range of interests (beside two poems on the local saint, Gwenfrewi, one on St Bridget refers to the foundation of Syon Abbey, another to events in Henry V's invasion of France, and two to Lollards) and an occasional intensity of feeling. The tone of the collection is didactic and earnestly penitential, with some apparently personal references to God's 'visitation' and chastisement of him for his sinful living. Even a carol of the joys of childhood (a relatively unusual topic in medieval poetry) is framed as a penitential prayer ('a Child a3ene I wold I were') looking back to a lost age of idealized innocence. It is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 927


Awdely, John (b. in or before 1532, d. 1575), printer and writer, was the younger son of Sampson Awdelie (died 1559/60), verger of Westminster Abbey. He was a king's scholar at Westminster School between 1542 and 1544, and was made free of the Stationers' Company between 1 October and 26 November 1556. On 24 August 1559 he presented his first apprentice, and on 6 November obtained licences for printing his first publication, a 'mornynge and evenynge prayer' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.125). From 1561 to 1571 his name (or sometimes his alias, John Sampson) occurs repeatedly in the Stationers' registers, obtaining licences for printing books and pamphlets, and presenting apprentices; the 'Short-Title Catalogue' shows continuous publication under his name to 1575. In 1564 he was fined for illegally printing 'other mens copyes' (ibid., 1.239). From 1565 to his death in 1575 he was dwelling in Little Britain Street, described on his title-pages as 'without Aldersgate', or 'by Great S. Bartholomew's'. 
Throughout these years Awdely apparently drove a thriving trade. His publications were of an essentially popular kind, and consisted mainly of ballads, news sheets, and religious tracts. One of the most important medical, scientific, and pedagogical tracts he reprinted and published was Fitzherbert's 'Boke of Husbandry'. Several of his publications were of his own composition. One of the earliest of them, 'The Wonders of England' (1559), a folio sheet of eleven ten-line stanzas, related English historical events from the death of Edward VI to the accession of Elizabeth. Such accounts of wonders and prognostications printed by Awdely demonstrated Elizabethan concern with English history and its situation within a natural order. The most important work in his literary effort was a little volume entitled 'The Fraternitie of Vacabondes', licensed about July 1561 and self-published in 1565. It is an elaborate description of the habits and organization of the beggars of the day, including some doggerel verses by the author on the back of the title-page; it was reprinted in 1565 and 1575. Harman's 'Caveat', a book on the same subject published in 1567, was obviously largely indebted to it. Besides pamphlets and ballads, Awdely focused on protestant texts throughout his career; in 1560 he was fined for illegally printing catechisms, and two of his final issues in 1575 were works by Bale and Crowley. Awdely's editions of the gospels and epistles saw press six times, and he printed sixteen editions of Edward Dering's sermons. As an occasional author, godly pamphleteer, and ballad-printer, he served the varied interests of his times. 
Awdely died some time between 4 August and 16 September 1575 (the dates of the signing and proving of his will), leaving a widow, Elizabeth, a son, and five daughters. In his will, consisting mostly of a long religious preamble, he bequeathed his printing house to Sampson, his son, and John Simpson, his son-in-law, 'but the same workehowse to remaine in my wyves hand and disposition till she shall see the one of them able to rule and occupie yt', and during the following year books continued to appear bearing his name in the imprint (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/57, fol. 269'r'). However, in 1582, eleven of his titles were transferred to the printer John Charlewood. 
It is unclear whether Awdely was related to either the printer John Awdely who was buried in St Giles Cripplegate, London, in August 1563 or the John Awdlie who signed a 1577 petition against printing privileges. 


@@@@@


doc= 928


Axtell, Daniel (bap. 1622, d. 1660), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was baptized on 26 May 1622 at Great Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, probably the son of William Axtell (died 1638), chief burgess of the town, and his wife, Dorothy Symons (died 1629). He was apprenticed to a grocer in Watling Street, London, about 1638, and attended William Kiffin's Baptist congregation. He joined the parliamentarian forces during the first civil war, was captain in John Pickering's regiment of foot in April 1644, and major of the regiment, now commanded by John Hewson, in 1646, when he preached in Wallington church. He signed the regimental statement of soldiers' grievances in May 1647. In 1648 he suppressed disturbances in Kent and stormed Maidstone, and was given $100 for being 'extraordinary active and diligent' (Firth and Davies, 2.407) in his capture of Deal Castle. He was the lieutenant-colonel of Hewson's troops at Pride's Purge but in the army council voted for radical motions and against Hewson and Ireton. He commanded the soldiers at the trial of Charles I in January 1649, at which he was later accused of threatening to shoot Lady Fairfax (wife of the lord general) for her interruptions of proceedings, of beating soldiers to make them cry 'justice' and 'execution', and of insulting the king ['see also 'Regicides]. In March 1649, on the command of the council of state, he arrested the Leveller leaders Richard Overton and Thomas Prince. 
Cromwell's expedition for the reconquest of Ireland was launched in 1649 and Axtell accompanied Hewson's regiment, which suffered severe losses at the capture of Drogheda. He then helped Cromwell seize the headquarters of the confederate Catholics at Kilkenny, where he was appointed governor. Given command of a regiment, he marched from Kilkenny towards Athlone with 800 men, but was opposed by the marquess of Clanricarde, the royalist lord deputy. With reinforcements he then advanced to the peninsula of Meelick near Banagher, defended by 3000 Irish troops, and seized it in a hand-to-hand fight. Five hundred Irish were drowned in the Shannon, with only 300 escaping by swimming, and Clanricarde lost the castles he had recently captured. Axtell was suspended by Ireton, then in command in Ireland, and court-martialled for killing prisoners taken at Meelick after promise of quarter; he later justified the action on the grounds that God used him to suppress the Irish. Leaving Ireland, he was captured at sea and carried to the Isles of Scilly, then full of Irish soldiers who wished to kill him. Sir Richard Grenville's advisers, fearing retaliation, spared him, and he returned to Kilkenny as governor after Ireton's death. 
With the rank of colonel Axtell sponsored the spread of the Baptist faith in Ireland by Christopher Blackwood and Thomas Patient. He was one of the representatives sent from Ireland to the first protectorate parliament in 1654. Following the rise to power of Henry Cromwell in Ireland, Axtell was among those who opposed his policies of accommodation and he resigned in November 1656 because 'the Godly were discouraged and wicked men countenanced' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 5.671). He retired to Berkhamsted Place, putting all his Irish lands on long leases, but returned to Ireland in 1658 on a mission to Henry Cromwell, who described him as 'well satisfied with the government' (ibid., 7.306-7). Axtell, whose wife's name was Elizabeth, sent his son William to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1658, and his son Daniel to Lincoln's Inn in 1659. 
With the fall of the protectorate Axtell was reappointed a colonel in Ireland under Edmund Ludlow, but was soon sent back to England to suppress Booth's rising. As divisions emerged within the army leadership he deserted General Lambert and declared for Fleetwood, then retired again, but decided to support Lambert's stand against Monck in April 1660. Although he escaped after the fight at Daventry he was captured, exempted from the bill of indemnity, and arraigned for treason for his actions in the king's trial. He unsuccessfully pleaded that what he had done was by the authority of parliament and that he had played no part in the king's death. Before his execution he prayed for the conversion of Charles II to a godly way of life and said, 'If I had a thousand lives I could lay them all down for the cause' ('State trials', 5.1289). He suffered the full penalties for treason at Tyburn on 19 October 1660 and his head was set up on Westminster Hall; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 929


Aylesbury, Sir Thomas, baronet (1579/80-1658), patron of mathematics, was born probably in early 1580, possibly in London, where some of his siblings were later baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn. He was the second son among at least eight children of William Aylesbury ('c'.1536-1620) and his first wife, Anne (died 1596), daughter of John Poole and niece of Sir Henry Poole of Saperton. His father's occupation is unknown, though descent from the Warwickshire branch of the ancient Aylesbury family is certain. A queen's scholar at Westminster School in 1596, he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in November 1598, aged eighteen, taking his BA in June 1602 and his MA on 19 June 1605. College records evidence his pursuit of mathematical and other studies at Christ Church until 1611, when he married, by licence issued on 3 October, Anne (1589-1661), daughter of Francis Denman, rector of West Retford, Nottinghamshire, and widow of William Darell (died 1610). They had six known children, of whom William Aylesbury (bap. 1612, d. 1656) died in Jamaica, Barbara died at Antwerp in 1652, and Frances ('bap'. 1617, died 1667) married Edward Hyde, later earl of Clarendon, in 1634 and became mother of Anne, first wife of James II and mother of the two queens Mary and Anne. On their mutual offspring's marriage, Aylesbury wrote a warm letter to Hyde's father describing Frances as 'a child that none could have from me but a good man' (MS Clarendon 129). 
After leaving Oxford, Aylesbury became secretary to Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham and lord high admiral of England. Aylesbury was a friend of Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland, and frequently visited him during his fourteen-year confinement in the Tower. His contemporary Richard Corbet admired his studious nature (Corbet, 54-7), noting his friendship with Thomas Harriot, pioneer of modern algebra and perhaps 'the greatest mathematician Oxford has produced' (Fauvel, Flood, and Wilson, 56), whose manuscripts were left to Aylesbury and Robert Sidney, Viscount Lisle, in 1621. Aylesbury was instrumental in the eventual publication of Harriot's 'Artis analyticae praxis' (1631), engaging Walter Warner's work and the patronage of Algernon Percy, by then earl of Northumberland. Warner, with Harriot and Robert Hues, had enjoyed the hospitality and patronage of Henry Percy while he was imprisoned, and together they were known as his 'magi'. Aylesbury took significant part in Edmund Bolton's plans, frustrated by the king's death in 1625, for a royal academy. 
Aylesbury continued as secretary to George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham, when he became lord high admiral, and in 1625 was appointed surveyor-general, being acknowledged six years later by King Charles for 'his good, faithful & acceptable service in the affair of the navy & other ways, before he was Surveyor & since' (Burton). Already a master of requests, Aylesbury was created baronet on 19 April 1627 and warden of Cranborne Chase, in Windsor Great Park. He usually spent the summer at Cranborne Lodge, welcoming men of science and giving, or finding, them patronage. Sadly, his accumulated collection of precious manuscripts and rare books was to be lost during the civil war. Aylesbury's involvement with the Northumberland circle and his Oxford connections, taken with his own employment and learning, combined to place him in a particularly significant position as a channel of communication between, and on behalf of, mathematicians of the period. 
In 1631 Aylesbury was involved in trials of new machinery for improving the coinage by stamping rather than hammering. In 1632 he was granted a patent for life (renewed to him and his son William in 1637) for making and issuing weights and counterpoises for coinage. A small treatise by Aylesbury on the fineness of silver survives with some mathematical notes among Ussher's manuscripts (TCD, MS 794, fols. 51-61). Appointed as a commissioner of the mint in 1635, and later that year incorporated as MA by royal mandate at Cambridge, Aylesbury continued to work on improvements in the uniformity of the coinage. On 11 July 1640 he appears as a master of the mint in the warrant issued for a new standard coinage. 
On 13 January 1643 Aylesbury was given leave to attend on the king as master of requests at Oxford, where his wife and family joined him a few months later. It seems likely that, as Burton conjectures, he took part in meetings while in Oxford which later led to the formation of the Royal Society. Having received on 26 June 1646 Fairfax's pass to leave Oxford with his family, Aylesbury petitioned the commission for compounding of delinquents to compound upon the articles for its surrender, being 'aged and sickly'. He held little property at the time: apart from Cranborne Lodge and another small cottage also in the forest of Windsor, together worth about $22 p.a., held for life and not compounded for, he had only a couple of decayed properties to compound for, together with goods and personal effects worth $80, and the lease of a house in Dean's Yard in Westminster. In December 1646 he was fined $59 and retired to Cranborne Lodge. Just before Aylesbury left England in 1649, he wrote a letter of encouragement to the young Christopher Wren. 
Aylesbury moved first to Antwerp, and then in 1652, after his daughter, Barbara, was buried at Loosduyn, he settled in Breda, where he died on 29 June 1658 and was buried in the Great Church. Without surviving male issue, the baronetcy thus became extinct. The 'rouwbord' (wooden memorial) erected in his honour at Breda by his son-in-law, Edward Hyde, was removed in 1798 but a transcript of the substantial Latin text survives (see Bakker). Wood (1.306) describes Aylesbury as: 'a learned man, and as great a lover and encourager of learning and learned men, especially of mathematicians, as any man in his time', and Burton notes that: 'in more than one instance, the publication of works of Science may justly be attributed to him, which but for his patronage & encouragement would probably never have appeared'. 


@@@@@


doc= 930


Aylesbury, Thomas (bap. 1597, d. 1660/61), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was baptized at St Martin's, Birmingham, on 17 July 1597, the eldest of eight children of William Aylesbury (died in or after 1641) and his wife, Dorothy Walton ('bap'. 1570, died in or after 1611). He was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, before matriculating as a pensioner in the Easter term of 1613 from Christ's College, Cambridge. Having graduated BA early in 1616, from 4 May 1618 he was vicar of Curdworth, Warwickshire. He probably proceeded MA the following year, and was incorporated MA at Oxford in July 1622. 
By this time Aylesbury had gained important patrons. His 'A Sermon Preached at Paules-Crosse' (1623), delivered on 2 June 1622, was dedicated to John Williams, bishop of Lincoln, and to 'my most worthy friend'. He was chosen to act as secretary to the conference held at Sir Humphrey Lynde's house on 27 June 1623 between the Jesuits led by John Fisher and the Church of England clergymen Daniel Featley and Francis White. His own anti-Catholicism was evident in 'Paganisme and Papisme Parallel'd' (1624), an All Saints' day sermon delivered at the Temple Church in 1623 and dedicated to Henry Wriothesley, earl of Southampton. Critical alike of Roman Catholic eucharistic theology and of the separatist followers of men such as Robert Browne, Aylesbury affirmed in near Arminian tone in 'Christus redivivus' (1624) that 'God tenders grace to all, if men joyne but to make it efficacious' (p. 17). 
In June 1625 Aylesbury became rector of Berwick St Leonard, Wiltshire, although he was in London to deliver 'The Passion Sermon at Pauls Crosse' (1626) on Good Friday, 1626. That year he proceeded BD. In 1631 he was granted the prebend of Horningsham and Tytherington in the diocese of Salisbury. By licence dated 11 September 1635 he married Joan Nosse or Moss, 'aged twenty-two', from Maiden Bradley. By 21 October 1639, when he wrote to Robert Long to ask him to insert fresh references in the text, Aylesbury had effectively completed his 'A Treatise of the Confession of Sinne', although it was not published until 1657. While denouncing the abuses associated with confession in the Catholic church, the work seeks to restore to its former integrity the practice of penitential confession, affirming the ministry of reconciliation, in confession and absolution, as integral to the role of a priest or minister. 
In 1643 Aylesbury became rector of Kingston Deverill, Wiltshire; the combined value of his livings was about $200 or $300 a year, according to his son Thomas. In 1645 soldiers intruded on his conduct of a service at Horningsham and cut the prayer book to pieces with their swords. Aylesbury's conservative and royalist sympathies led to his involvement with the 'clubmen', a powerful, overtly neutralist movement in Somerset, Dorset, and Wiltshire. Despite his promises made before the county committee on 3 June 1645, witnesses related that on 25 July at Mere Beacon, Wiltshire, Aylesbury preached paralleling the rebellion of parliament with that of Absalom, and defending the use of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Taken to London, deprived of his livings, and imprisoned for some time, he eventually retired to a small property at Cloford, Somerset, worth less than $12 a year according to John Walker. There he, his wife, and eight children depended on the generosity of Sir George Horner and others. Their patronage allowed him to become vicar of Castle Cary in 1650. Two years after the anonymous publication of 'A Treatise of the Confession of Sinne', there appeared Aylesbury's 'Diatribi de aeterno divini beneplaciti' (1659), dedicated by a 'presbytero Anglo' to his 'most holy mother Church'. It characterized John Calvin as 'too precise and rigid' (p. 87) and, writing of confession, esteemed them 'poor Reformers, that shall weed up both tares and wheat together' (p. 112). His own annotations in a volume of Latin manuscript meditations on the life of Christ (Bodl. Oxf., MS Univ. 18), including 'Ave Maria, gratia plena', hint at his devotional life. 
In poor health when his livings were restored to him in June 1660, Aylesbury died before 29 January 1661. His wife was still living in 1672. Of their sons, at least three survived to adulthood. Thomas (1647-1725) became rector of Corsley, Wiltshire, while William ('c'.1640-1698), already in 1672 the subject of court depositions on his scandalous behaviour, was ejected from his living of East Pennard, Somerset, in 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 931


Aylesbury, William (bap. 1612, d. 1656), translator and government official, was baptized at St Margaret, Lothbury, London, on 13 July 1612, the eldest son of Sir Thomas Aylesbury, baronet (1579/80-1658), and his wife, Anne Darell, 'nee' Denman (1589-1661). On 18 July 1628 he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford; he graduated BA on 27 April 1631. That year he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn; there is no record of his being called to the bar. 
Although possessing a large fortune, Aylesbury soon afterwards became, at the invitation of Charles I, governor to the young duke of Buckingham and his brother, Lord Francis Villiers, and travelled with them through France and Italy. In 1640 Aylesbury was residing at Paris, and in his correspondence with his brother-in-law Sir Edward Hyde (Bodl. Oxf., Clarendon papers) bitterly lamented the course of English politics under the Long Parliament. In the middle of May 1641 he returned from Paris to London with the earl of Leicester, the English ambassador at the French court, with whom he had been apparently living in an official capacity for some months. Shortly afterwards he presented his former pupils to the king at Oxford, who promised him the next vacancy among the grooms of the chambers, but the promise was never fulfilled, and Aylesbury continued in the service of the duke of Buckingham, as his agent, until the final defeat of the royalists. 
During his interview with Charles I, Aylesbury, who was well acquainted with Italian, was urged by the king to continue a translation into English of H. C. Davila's history of the French civil wars, which he had just begun, and during the following years he was mainly engaged in the work; but he was only in England at intervals, and witnessed his royal patron's disasters from the safe distance of Paris or Rome. He and his friend Sir Charles Cotterel, who provided substantial assistance, received, however, frequent encouragement from the king. In spite of his political troubles, Charles read through the whole of the manuscript before the book was printed. The translation was published with a dedication to the king in 1647. 
On the fall of Charles I, Aylesbury sought refuge with his father, first at Amsterdam, and afterwards at Antwerp; and he took under his protection his sister, Lady Hyde. But his poverty, caused by the confiscation of the property of his family, forced him in 1650 to return to England; he retired to the neighbourhood of Oxford, where he lived on the charity of his more fortunate friends. Early in 1656, however, he obtained the office of secretary to Major-General Robert Sedgwick, who had just been appointed governor of Jamaica, and finally left England. Following Sedgwick's death on 24 May for three months he took an especially active part in the government of the island, but he too died on 24 August, in Jamaica, and was probably buried there. A letter reporting the news to John Thurloe, the secretary of state, describes him as 'a man well versed in the weighty affairs of state, who in his counsels and advice, both to army and fleet, was very useful, for the want of which we shall have more and more to grieve' (Thurloe, 5.374). 


@@@@@


doc= 932


Aylett, Robert (c.1582-1655), poet, was the son of Leonard Aylett and Anne Pater of Rivenhall, Essex. He attended Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1605 and MA in 1608; he was incorporated MA at Oxford. Cambridge awarded him the degree of LLD in 1614, and in 1617 he was admitted as an advocate and began his professional career as an ecclesiastical lawyer. 
In 1621 Aylett published his first known volume of poetry, 'The Song of Songs which was Salomons, Metaphrased in English Heroiks by Way of Dialogue'. The volume also contained books 1 and 2 of 'The Brides Ornaments', and an elegy upon the death of John King, bishop of London, who seems to have been his patron. Book 1 of 'The Brides Ornaments' is dedicated to John Argall: this, combined with the initials R.A. under which the work originally appeared, seems to account for Wood's mistaken attribution of the work to Richard Argall. Each of the books of 'The Brides Ornaments' takes five virtues, and offers an extended meditation -- in effect, a doctrinal sermon in Spenserian stanzas -- upon their qualities. 
Further poetry quickly followed. In the next two years Aylett published numerous volumes of religious verse including the meditative 'Peace with her Four Garders' (1622), and the narrative poems 'Susanna' (1622) and 'Joseph, or, Pharoahs Favourite' (1623). 
Nothing is known of Aylett's first wife except what he wrote in his autobiographical eclogue on marriage 'A Wife, not Ready Made, but Bespoke', that she died soon after their marriage of a 'hectic fever'. He married his second wife, Judith Gaell ('bap'. 1594, died 1623), on 23 January 1610. He eulogized her in 'A Wife not Ready Made', which was written ten years after her death (the poem was entered in the Stationers' register in 1633, although no edition is known until 1653). She was buried on 2 December 1623. On 1 June 1624 Aylett married Penelope, 'nee' Wiseman, the widow of John Stephens, a barrister. 
The year 1625 saw the publication of books 3 and 4 of 'The Brides Ornaments', dedicated to King's successor George Montaigne, and to Richard Crakanthorpe, who died before its publication. They were published together with other poems, and dedicated to John Maynard. The volume included a long poetic reworking of Sylvester's translation of Du Bartas's 'Urania'. 
In 1628 Aylett was one of nine appointed by Laud to the court of high commission to push through Laud's reforms and to combat puritanism; he had special responsibility for his home county of Essex. He remained a loyal lieutenant of Laud throughout the years that followed, rising to the post of master in chancery in 1638, in which role he was responsible for legal advice to the House of Lords. Other of his poetical works belong to these years, including 'David's Troubles Remembred', a six-book sacred epic written in 3410 lines of rhymed couplets and published anonymously in 1638. 
The fall of Laud had potentially serious implications for Aylett, who was named among Laud's followers in the articles of impeachment in February 1641. None the less, he retained his post as master in chancery, and in 1642 was appointed master of the faculties, continuing to work for the House of Lords until 1649. 
In 1654 Aylett published 'Divine and Moral Speculations in Metrical Numbers', which represented, in effect, his collected works. The volume is dedicated to Henry, marquess of Dorchester, and bears an engraved portrait of Aylett himself. The volume reprints the four books of 'The Brides Ornaments', although the first two books were pruned from a combined total of 669 stanzas down to a more manageable 440. It also includes Aylett's autobiographical poem on marriage. His 'Devotions' were published posthumously in 1655. Aylett's 'interminable output of uninspired verse' (Padelford, 'Supplement', 478) focuses almost exclusively on religious topics, and is heavily influenced by Spenser. Conservative in tone, it is often competent but rarely exciting. 
Aylett died on 15 March 1655, at Feering, Essex, where he had lived for more than twenty years. He was buried five days later at Great Braxted church, Essex. His memorial in the church gave his age at death as seventy-three, and on a portrait of 1635 he is said to be fifty-two. His will includes benefactions to Penelope, his wife, and to many local Essex gentry. 


@@@@@


doc= 933


Ayliffe, John (1676-1732), lawyer and author, was born at Pember, Hampshire, the son of John Ayliffe. He was educated at Winchester College and New College, Oxford, where he matriculated in February 1696; he became BA (1699), MA (1703), LLB, and LLD (1710). He was a fellow of New College and, between 1704 and 1710, he practised as a proctor in the chancellor's court. In 1706-8 he fought off disciplinary actions, having been accused of professional misconduct. When the case came before the chancellor's court Ayliffe crossed swords with the chancellor's deputy and judge, Dr Thomas Wood. Asked to retract his words, Ayliffe refused and Wood gave an interlocutory sentence depriving him of his office as proctor (3 May 1706). The case came before the delegates of the university's congregation, who were divided, and went henceforth to the convocation house, where a majority of the delegates pronounced judgment in favour of Ayliffe. However, the proctor acting for the chancellor's office challenged that decision before the high court of delegates, who ordered that Ayliffe be reinstated as proctor. Ayliffe himself read out the delegates' judgment in the chancellor's court on 23 January 1708. During the following years and until 1710 he continued to appear regularly as proctor in the university's court. That year a letter to Dr John Irish, acting judge in the chancellor's court, cost him a reprimand for impertinence; also that year, he was being sued for debt in the same court. Whether any of these cases was related to Ayliffe's whig political opinions, or, as he himself put it, his 'adhering to the principles of the Revolution' (J. Ayliffe, 'The Antient and Present State of the University of Oxford', preface), is unknown. There is, however, little doubt that the proceedings, which, a few years later, cost him both his status in the university and his fellowship, were primarily politically motivated by those of a tory disposition. 
In 1714 Ayliffe published a work on the University of Oxford and its colleges ('The Antient and Present State of the University of Oxford', 2 vols.; reissued in 1723). The list of subscribers mentions some 300 names, 30 of whom were members of Ayliffe's own college. The book reflected a dual approach. Part of the work was historical and, as Ayliffe acknowledged, borrowed to a large extent from Anthony Wood's earlier work. The book was very much that of a lawyer: the chapters on the corporate status of the colleges and on the procedural law applied in the chancellor's court and other university bodies were some of the most comprehensive studies on the subject written by an English civil lawyer. On several aspects Ayliffe's expressed views were strongly polemical. As a recurrent theme, Ayliffe denounced the propensity of some heads of colleges and university officials, particularly in his own time, to act beyond their proper powers; that tendency would, in Ayliffe's account, correspond to the political inclination of those (in his own words) 'promoting Arbitrary Power in the Prince'. The argument no doubt had political merits, but may well also have been inspired by Ayliffe's personal grievances while researching his book, in particular when he tried to list the colleges' benefactions and their original purposes; on several occasions, he claimed, he had been denied access to the college archives. In some instances Ayliffe's attacks were more personal. In the last pages of his account he appears to refer to his own successful defence against the decision depriving him of his proctor's office and refers sharply to Thomas Wood. Nevertheless, Ayliffe's demotion from Oxford was provoked by more veiled attacks in his book. 
In November 1714 Ayliffe was sued in the university court by both Dr Bernard Gardiner, at the time vice-chancellor, and Dr Thomas Braithwaite. Both actions were for injury and damage, and in Gardiner's case, the warrant for the defendant's arrest stated the value of the damage at $100. Both plaintiffs may have felt that they were the target of Ayliffe's accusations regarding the maladministration of Clarendon's benefaction. In addition Braithwaite may well have regarded Ayliffe's remarks on the 'supine negligence of a late warden' of New College as referring to himself, whereas the accusation that the keeper of the university archives had been denying access to the records to members of the university who had a legitimate interest clearly referred to Gardiner. This time Ayliffe's legal and procedural skills were no match for the determination of his adversaries. His own demeanour (including an escape from the bedel who had come to New College to serve him with the warrant of his arrest) did not help his cause. The chancellor's court pronounced a decree expelling Ayliffe from the university (7 September 1714/15). The following day the sentence was confirmed by the convocation house, which also pronounced Ayliffe's degradation. 
About the same time Ayliffe's adversaries at New College moved to have him deprived of his fellowship. For several years the fellowship of New College had been divided on political lines. Braithwaite's election as warden in 1703 had been strongly contested by the college's whig minority; in 1712 another tory, Dr John Cobb, was elected as his successor. The charges brought against Ayliffe included his unauthorized absence from Oxford in December 1714 (while he was in London, seeking remedies against the proceedings in the university), persistent disobedience towards the college authorities, and an incident which ensured that the case became notorious, his threat, expressed during a conversation with another member of the college, that he might pistol the warden. Nevertheless, the proceedings failed to secure a majority in favour of his expulsion. The case was brought before the college visitor, the bishop of Winchester, who issued an order requiring Ayliffe to acknowledge that the charges were justified and to submit an apology to those directly concerned (26 July 1715). Ayliffe refused to submit and resigned. His detractors would claim that he had sold his fellowship. 
Both the proceedings in the chancellor's court and in New College were discussed at length in a pamphlet published the following year, 'The Case of Dr. Ayliffe, at Oxford' (1716). The pamphlet, probably written by Ayliffe himself, or at least directly inspired by him, emphasized the political background of the case and argued that the proceedings were marred by irregularities. Its publication provoked Gardiner and Braithwaite, or their supporters, to counter Ayliffe's accusations regarding the alleged malversations at the Clarendon printing house with 'An Answer' ('c'.1716). Ayliffe failed to secure sufficient support either at Oxford or among whig journalists, and eventually abandoned his attempts to challenge the Oxford proceedings either through a writ of prohibition or an appeal to the high court of delegates. 
Ayliffe was appointed a commissioner for licensing hawkers and pedlars, but did not give up his academic interests and ambitions. In 1726 he published a treatise on canon law ('Parergon juris canonici Anglicani, or, A commentary by way of supplement to the canons and constitutions of the Church of England', 1726; 2nd edn, 1734). The 'Parergon' was a traditional commonplace book on canon law and ecclesiastical discipline, alphabetically arranged by keywords. The introduction, based on a wide range of scholarship, outlined the history of the canon law and provided arguments for the general thesis that, subject to restrictions imposed by the common law, by customary and statute law, and by the prerogatives of the king, canon law was part of the law of the realm. Otherwise, the book was aimed at a practical level and tended to avoid arguments which might have involved the author in domestic political controversies. Ayliffe regularly referred to English authorities, both canonistic and lay (such as statutes and law reports); he occasionally drew comparisons with continental legal systems, especially the Netherlands, France, and the empire. He relied in the main, however, on highly traditional canon law and civil law authors, in particular late medieval canonists. 
In 1732 a small publication on the Roman law of pledges was meant to attract sufficient public interest for a larger treatise on Roman law. The project failed to come to fruition in Ayliffe's time and it was only in 1734 that the first volume of his 'New Pandect of Roman Civil Law' was published. The book followed to some extent the structure of the institutional system, but the subdivision in persons, things, and obligations was preceded by a historical introduction and a chapter on 'the law in general'. The book offered a systematic treatment of, mostly, private law, providing numerous references to parallels or differences in English law and in continental legal systems. For Ayliffe the Roman law's importance and authority were mainly founded in its rationality, which also explained why it had exercised a major influence in the law of nations. In a striking passage of the introduction Ayliffe played down the differences between common law and civil law: 'If there is that wide Difference between the 'Common' and 'Civil' Laws, in their Forms of Pleading, and Manner of Trial, this is only the Stile, Practice, and Course of the Courts: But there is a Mixture in the 'Principles', 'Maxims', and 'Reasons' on these two Laws; and indeed, the Laws of all Countries are mixed with the 'Civil' Law, which has arrived to any Degree of Perfection. 'Tis true, that the 'Common' and 'Civil' Laws had not the same Root and Stock; yet, by Inoculating and Grafting, the Body and Branches seem at this Day to be almost of a Piece. (J. Ayliffe, 'A New Pandect of Roman Civil Law', 1734, introduction, xlvii)' Throughout the work a large selection of major civilian authorities were quoted. However, as in the 'Parergon', the civil law authorities Ayliffe referred to were to a large extent typical late medieval and sixteenth-century authors, whom, by early eighteenth-century standards, it was no longer fashionable to quote directly. Thus, in spite of its intrinsic qualities as a modern treatise on Roman law, the book expressed an indebtedness to a scholarship which, already before Ayliffe's time, had largely become obsolete. 
Ayliffe died at his residence in Crane Court, Fleet Street, London, on 5 November 1732, and was buried in St Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street. Ayliffe's influence on legal scholarship was limited. The English translation of Thomas Oughton's work on ecclesiastical procedure (1831) included, among various additions, extracts from the 'Parergon'. The assessment of Ayliffe's work has varied. To some, it is 'dull, tedious and confused' ('DNB'), whereas others have referred to Ayliffe as 'the most learned [English] Romanist before Buckland' (Simpson, 25). A reappraisal has viewed Ayliffe as 'a symbol of... the renaissance of classical Roman law studies in British universities... a pioneer of serious modern Roman law studies in England' (Coquillette, 213). None of these assessments appears to be based on anything more than a cursory reading of Ayliffe's work, or a superficial acquaintance with civil law scholarship in his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 934


Aylmer, Charles (1786-1847), Jesuit, was born at Painstown, co. Kildare, on 29 August 1786; his brother became an officer of the Austrian cuirassiers, and was considered one of its best swordsmen. Aylmer was probably educated at Stonyhurst College, in Lancashire, where he entered the Society of Jesus; he was created DD in 1814 while at Palermo, where he was stationed for several years. With two fellow Jesuits, Paul Ferley and Bartholomew Esmonde, he compiled a short compendium of Catholic doctrine, 'A Short Explanation of the Principal Articles of the Catholic Faith', and a devotional manual, 'The Devout Christian's Daily Companion, being a Selection of Pious Exercises for the Use of Catholics', which were both published in 1812 by the royal printing office at Palermo for the use of English-speaking Catholics there. In 1816 he was made superior of the Jesuit residence in Dublin and in 1817 rector of Clongowes College. He made his final profession as a Jesuit on 16 January 1820, and again acted as superior of the Dublin house in 1822, 1829, and 1841. As well as carrying out the normal duties of a Jesuit priest, he helped to promote a society for the publication of Catholic books in Dublin, his permanent residence from about 1821. He died on 4 July 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 935


Aylmer, John (1520/21-1594), bishop of London, was descended from the Norfolk branch of an ancient family long established in Tivetshall St Mary. The identities of his parents are unknown. He was born in 1520 or 1521, since his funeral inscription recorded his age at death as seventy-three. Before consecration he emphasized his putative Anglo-Saxon origins by signing himself 'AElmer'. Otherwise his name is usually found in contemporary sources as 'Elmer'. 
Thomas Fuller relates that as a schoolboy Aylmer attracted the notice of Henry Grey, third marquess of Dorset and later duke of Suffolk, who subsidized his studies at Cambridge. Although he probably became a fellow of Queens' nothing is definitely known about his university career except that he graduated BA in 1541, proceeding MA in 1545. 
Another of Aylmer's early patrons may have been Dr John Aylmer (died 1550/1559?), presumably both a kinsman and the Cambridge graduate who proceeded BCL in 1514. He held a clutch of west country livings during the 1540s and was doubtless the John Aylmer who was prebendary of Wells from 1543. Although the future bishop has been credited with one or more of these promotions he seems until 1549 to have remained entirely within Dorset's household at Bradgate, Leicestershire, or else at court, as tutor to his daughters. Since Dorset was little interested in such matters Aylmer also apparently served as his 'corresponding secretary' with those leading evangelicals and reformers who took the trouble, for political reasons, to address him. Thus he was able to cultivate friendships with Martin Bucer and Heinrich Bullinger, encouraging Lady Jane Grey to write to them as her education progressed. 
Thomas Becon encountered Aylmer at Bradgate in 1546-7 -- 'a young man singularly well learned both in the Latin and Greek tongue' (Becon, 424) -- and in 1550 Roger Ascham paid a celebrated visit. His account of his last meeting with Lady Jane purports to enshrine a conversation during which she contrasted the harsh treatment she received from her parents with the scholarly blandishments of Aylmer, who taught her 'so gently, so pleasantly, with such fair alluments to learning, that... when I am called from him I fall on weeping because, whatsoever I do else... is full of grief' (Ascham, 47). Ascham's encomium must be treated with caution, however. Even if he recorded these remarks verbatim they were not committed to cold print until 1570, when Aylmer was a candidate for the bishopric of London. Nor, surely, can he have overlooked (even if convention did not allow him to express) the obvious possibility that Jane had developed an adolescent crush on a young man who treated her with consideration and necessarily with deference. 
Aylmer's earliest surviving letters, dating from May and December 1551 and both addressed to Bullinger, suggest a regime more austere than the romantic idyll conjured by later writers from Ascham's narrative. In the latter Aylmer asked that 'with the kindness we have so long experienced, you will instruct my pupil in your next letter as to what embellishment and adornment of person is becoming in young women professing godliness' (Robinson, 'Original Letters', 1.278). 
As the Grey family moved closer to power under Edward VI Aylmer's services were rewarded. Although unordained he received ecclesiastical promotion. No institution records survive but he compounded for the first fruits of the rectory of Pimperne, Dorset, in December 1549; for those of Nailstone, Leicestershire, in July 1552; and, resigning Pimperne, for those of Bosworth, Leicestershire, in April 1553. On 15 June 1553, three weeks before Edward's death, he was installed archdeacon of Stow in Lincoln Cathedral, on the presentation of Thomas Ashton of Old Weston, Huntingdonshire. 
Whilst Aylmer never seems to have recorded his reaction to Northumberland's attempt to place Lady Jane on the throne in July 1553 he grimly endured the consequences, appearing at the first convocation of Mary's reign in October to argue against transubstantiation. His loyalty to the Greys kept him in England for a while thereafter. Implicated in Wyatt's rebellion in January 1554 he was amongst those supporters of Suffolk who on 17 September were indicted for having raised rebellion at Leicester. He was by then in Strasbourg, having been deprived of all his preferments for marriage in March. The identity of his wife is unknown but she was presumably the mother of an (unnamed) daughter who during the 1570s married Adam Squire. She died before December 1561. 
Like many leading exiles Aylmer is credited with a 'miraculous escape': according to Thomas Fuller, when those sent to apprehend Aylmer boarded the vessel in which he was to cross the channel he was hidden in a large wine-vat with a secret compartment. 
Although John Strype asserted that it was Aylmer who in Strasbourg published a letter of Lady Jane Grey's it is more likely that its preserver and publisher was James Haddon, another of her tutors, who died there in 1556. Because Aylmer's name never occurs in the correspondence between the exiles of Frankfurt, Strasbourg, and Zurich the historian of the Marian exile wondered if his Grey connections 'made him think it advisable to remain hidden' (Garrett, 76). This was to overlook his own account of his travels abroad, sent years later to Thomas Cooper when Aylmer was stung into refuting the libels of Martin Marprelate. According to this he visited 'almost all Universities in 'Italie' and 'Germanie', having great conference with the most and best learned men' and finally reaching Jena, Saxony, in 1558 (Cooper, 47). Here, but for the accession of Elizabeth, he would have taken up a lectureship in Hebrew. A testimonial from Johann Friedrich II, elector of Saxony, surviving amongst the state papers, seems to bear out the assertion. 
During his wanderings Aylmer supported himself by taking pupils. One such was Robert Beale, who migrated with him from Strasbourg to Zurich in 1557 and later claimed that although he had acted as Aylmer's servant in lieu of fees Aylmer had nevertheless exacted payment for his studies and thereafter ignored him. On 10 December John Foxe, gathering material which would emerge into print in the first edition of his 'Acts and Monuments' (1563), wrote to Aylmer from Basel requesting information about Lady Jane. In reply Aylmer assured him of a warm welcome in Zurich and promised help with his researches. 
At the beginning of Elizabeth's reign Aylmer attempted to repair the damage inflicted by John Knox's disastrously timed 'First Blast of the Trumpet': his own 'An harborowe for faithfull and trewe subjectes, against the late blowne blaste, concerning the government of women' was published anonymously, and ostensibly in Strasbourg. In fact it was issued in London by John Day in April 1559. As a defence of the queen's title it was scarcely felicitous, observing that women were 'weake in nature, feable in bodie, softe in courage, unskilfull in practise' (sig. B2'v') and thereafter flat-footedly insisting upon Elizabeth's 'personal' credentials as a ruler: here was no empty-headed, chattering gossip. The most scathing of Aylmer's later critics wittily took leave to doubt 'whether any man ever recommended himself to a woman by complimenting her at the expense of her sex' (Maitland, 214-15). 
Elizabeth may also have taken note of the assertion that in England government by a woman could be tolerated because it would be less 'her' government than government in her name and on her behalf. Yet probably more damaging to Aylmer's own immediate prospects was his demand for an end to episcopal lordliness and the equitable distribution of ecclesiastical revenues on behalf of educational projects and the provision of competent preachers throughout the realm. Whilst in choosing her leading advisers Elizabeth wisely overlooked the debacle of Lady Jane she had no intention of making any fundamental alteration of the episcopal order. Aylmer quickly learned his lesson: when after his consecration opponents twitted him with his former iconoclasm he retorted that when he was a child he spake as a child. 
Back in England by March 1559 Aylmer was one of the delegates to the Westminster disputation, intended to discredit the Catholic resistance which was delaying a satisfactory religious settlement in parliament. Thereafter he remained in London with Lord John Grey, principal survivor of Mary's destruction of Lady Jane's family, to whom Elizabeth had restored their property in the Minories. A memorandum of late June or early July indicates that he was being considered by William Cecil for the episcopal bench, but he was passed over and from the Minories on 12 August applied to Lord Robert Dudley for help in recovering property in Norfolk which an 'unthrifty nephew' had illegally sold during the time of his 'grievous exile'; and also for the deanery of Winchester or else Durham 'for now as a misquared stone (I know not by what means) I serve her highness in no part of her building, which is no small grief to me' (BL, Add. MS 32091, fol. 172'r'). 
No deanery was forthcoming. Aylmer therefore returned to Lincoln, where during the royal visitation he was restored to Nailstone, Bosworth, and the archdeaconry of Stow. At the beginning of 1560 he was back in London, where on 25 January he was finally ordained deacon by Edmund Grindal. Thereafter he was in some way embroiled in the 'foolish subject' of the crucifix remaining in the queen's chapel, an issue over which several of the newly appointed bishops threatened to resign or else submit to removal (Robinson, 'Zurich Letters', 1.67-9). Later that year he was ordained priest by Nicholas Bullingham, bishop of Lincoln. 
On 20 November 1561 Aylmer was instituted rector of Cossington, Leicestershire, on the presentation of Thomas Burdett of Bramcote, Warwickshire, another survivor of Wyatt's rebellion. Next month he was one of eight married men suggested by Grindal for the provostship of Eton. The post went to one of the six unmarried candidates, William Day, who would survive to be considered as his successor in London. Thus Aylmer had by this point married his second wife, Judith Bures alias King of Suffolk, daughter of Robert King and widow of Nathaniel Treherne, with whom she appears to have had no children. Her funeral monument specifically states that she married Treherne in Mary's reign and Aylmer during Elizabeth's. They had eight sons and two daughters, the elder of whom, Judith, was born in September 1562. 
On 20 April 1562 Aylmer received letters patent for the archdeaconry of Lincoln and was installed on 6 November. Despite their future differences Aylmer always acknowledged that he was indebted to Cecil for this promotion. It represented a huge increase both in his workload and in his financial status: at almost $200 per annum it was worth more than three of the four Welsh bishoprics and henceforth his personal financial worries can have been few. The fragmentary evidence which survives for his tenure suggests an increasingly stern, conforming administrator -- it is notable that he abstained from the debate on liturgical reform during the convocation of 1563 -- who had displeased his masters and was being kept at arm's length. In the account of himself submitted to Cooper he claimed that he had reformed Lincoln's chapter -- 'a neast of uncleane birdes' -- and that, as both preacher and ecclesiastical commissioner, he had ensured that at his departure there was 'not one recusant... left in the countrey' (Cooper, 48). If this was special pleading he undoubtedly laboured tirelessly on behalf of Elizabeth's settlement, and whilst efforts to evangelize the city itself met with only partial success because of the poverty of its fourteen livings he was a leading light in the reorganization of its two grammar schools and their projected amalgamation during the 1560s. 
With the archdeaconry of Lincoln came capitular duties. Bullingham collated Aylmer to the prebend of St Martin in December 1562. Installed in person on 6 September 1564, during which month he became a canon residentiary, he remained in residence thereafter. In September 1567 he exchanged St Martin for the prebend of Decem Librarum, retaining it until his consecration. Summoned to court to preach at Easter 1565, Aylmer renewed an old friendship with Sir Nicholas Throckmorton. Their meeting prompted his only personal letter to survive from the 1560s and it hints obscurely at a crisis in both their flagging careers. Convinced that Dudley (now earl of Leicester) was his only friend at court and that Cecil was blocking his advancement, Throckmorton seems to have warned Aylmer that his archdeaconry was as much as he could expect from Cecil: higher preferment depended on a new patron. At any rate, Aylmer asserted in reply that he believed that Leicester and Throckmorton were now his 'chiefest friends... in England as God knoweth' (TNA: PRO, SP 15/12/54). Throckmorton probably, if unintentionally, misled him: Leicester's 'friendship' never seems to have produced any tangible result. 
In 1567 Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, asked Aylmer to locate manuscripts in Lincoln Cathedral Library and thereafter it was he who attempted to further Aylmer's career. Some months later he suggested to Leicester that if Grindal were promoted to York, Aylmer would prove 'a good, fast, earnest servitor' in London and 'fit for that busy governance, specially as these times be, when papists... have gotten such courage' (Bruce and Perowne, 350). Addressing Cecil thereafter Parker nevertheless doubted -- perhaps on the basis of Leicester's reaction -- whether Aylmer would be acceptable, and indeed London went to Edwin Sandys, bishop of Worcester, through the joint efforts of Cecil and Leicester. 
Although Aylmer was destined for seven more years in the wilderness Parker had made his point. Aylmer's administrative abilities were increasingly recognized. At about this time he was appointed a JP for Lincolnshire and was perhaps as responsible as Bullingham for the form of clerical subscription introduced into Lincoln diocese in 1570: the articles foreshadow those which John Whitgift would attempt to enforce in 1583-4 on his elevation to Canterbury. In 1571 Aylmer was appointed to the quorum of the long-delayed commission responsible for putting the 'Acts of Uniformity and Supremacy' into full execution in Lincoln and Peterborough dioceses. In 1572, when membership was increased from twenty-seven to seventy, he became an ecclesiastical commissioner. 
Lincoln's affairs came under Parker's scrutiny during the brief vacancy that followed Bullingham's translation to Worcester in January 1571. One Richard Taylor had been presented to the valuable prebend of Corringham by virtue of a grant from Bullingham's predecessor and Parker duly admitted him on 3 February. The chapter, however, headed by its subdean, Michael Renniger, ignored his mandate to induct. Parker dispatched an angry missive threatening Renniger, Aylmer, and two other prebendaries with a summons for contempt of his jurisdiction. 
Thomas Cooper's first act as bishop of Lincoln was to collate Aylmer to Corringham 'pleno jure' (26 April). Despite a further archiepiscopal mandate for Taylor's induction on 2 May Renniger and the chapter inducted Aylmer three days later. Thereafter, in circumstances which remain obscure, resistance to Parker collapsed and in May 1573 Aylmer's bonds for Corringham's first fruits were cancelled on the grounds that Taylor was in possession. In the interim, in November 1571, Aylmer had resigned Nailstone. 
It is difficult to divine whether Cooper was an accomplice in this peculiar episode or in some way the dupe of the chapter. In any event it was an odd baptism of fire and there followed a serious rift between Aylmer and Cooper over their relative jurisdiction within the archdeaconry. In mid-1572 they submitted their respective rights to the determination of Parker and Robert Horne, bishop of Winchester, who on 1 July proposed a judicious division of the spoils whereby Aylmer and Cooper should hold court jointly and so determine all causes except those which were indisputably the prerogative of the bishop. All fees and profits were to be divided except during episcopal visitations. Aylmer proceeded DTh at Cambridge this year and on 10 October 1573 was incorporated BTh and DTh at Oxford after twenty years' study. 
Following Grindal's elevation to Canterbury in February 1576 Elizabeth's long-expressed distrust of 'prophesyings', clerical exercises designed to educate less able clergy, reached crisis point. Widely established throughout the southern province, they were broadly supported by bishops of the stamp of Sandys and Cooper. Although under pressure Cooper had virtually suppressed them in the south of his diocese they survived in Lincolnshire and Leicestershire and alarming reports about them began reaching court. Elizabeth confronted Grindal with an ultimatum: to convince her of their utility and orderliness or else to suppress them totally. Grindal rallied his forces, writing to his diocesans in mid-June for their opinions. 
Cooper's reply voiced some dark suspicions. Elizabeth had apparently been informed that those under his aegis were 'riotous assemblies' where 'unlearned and base persons' were permitted to speak freely. If so he had: 'great cause to fear falsehood in fellowship, that information is made by some by whom in charity it ought not to be... I suspect there be some that seek to creep in favour, not only by their own well-doings but by the discrediting of others' well-doings, and so to suspect, I have greater cause than I can conveniently put in writing. (LPL, MS 2003, fols. 29'r'-30'r')' Grindal evidently instructed Cooper to investigate further and report back. Evidence of the flurry of activity which followed survives in an unsolicited letter of Aylmer's -- the only one Grindal apparently received on the subject that did not come from one of his diocesans. Dated from Cossington on 25 September it spoke of 'a rank of rangers and posting apostles that go from shire to shire, from exercise to exercise', naming Eusebius Paget and Anthony Gilby amongst others. As for Grindal's demand for a report on the exercises, Cooper had committed it 'to one Spark and Willock', who themselves refused the surplice and countenanced other liturgical irregularities: 'therefore your Grace had need take heed how you credit the certificate' (LPL, MS 3470, fol. 22'r'- 'v'). 
Quite apart from his contemptuous dismissal of John Willock, an old comrade-in-arms from Bradgate days, Aylmer was effectively accusing Cooper of dishonesty. Grindal must surely have surmised that it was Aylmer above all whom Cooper suspected of seeking to 'creep in favour' and that he now regarded himself as a bishop-in-waiting, effectively beyond Cooper's reach. It was widely rumoured that he had been marked out by Christopher Hatton for promotion, whilst only months later Edmund Spenser in his 'Shepheardes Calender' characterized him as Morrell -- a goatherd, not a true pastor -- whose chief motivation was to reach the top of the greasy pole and whose motto was 'In summo foelicitas'. Here he was contrasted with Grindal (Algrind), who preferred the 'lowe degree' but, having accepted the higher, was struck down by a glancing blow and now lay 'in lingring payne' ('Poetical Works', 446). 
Whether or not Hatton abetted this apparently blatant attempt to sabotage Cooper's credibility it was undoubtedly Hatton's spectacular rise during the 1570s that provided Aylmer with what he had hitherto conspicuously lacked, a powerful patron. In the wake of Grindal's fatal letter to Elizabeth in December 1576, refusing to suppress the prophesyings, Aylmer's advancement was assured, and only two days after Sandys's confirmation to York on 8 March 1577 the chapter of St Paul's was instructed to elect Aylmer in his stead. He was consecrated by Grindal, Sandys, and John Piers of Rochester on 24 March. 
Since his precipitate elevation meant that it would be impossible to grant him London's revenues retrospectively out of the 'sede vacante' profits -- standard procedure -- Cecil (Lord Burghley since 1572) proposed that Sandys cede them to Aylmer from Michaelmas 1576 as he himself was to receive those of York from the same date. Sandys angrily refused. Aylmer conducted a personal investigation into Sandys's financial affairs, sending Burghley the result and tactlessly attempting to justify his claim to London's revenues on the grounds that otherwise he would be 'naked' and Sandys 'so well left' at York. Burghley -- with malice aforethought? -- passed the letter on to Sandys, whose fury knew no bounds. His rejoinder spoke of 'an envious heart covered with the coat of dissimulation... So soon as [I] had holpen him on with his rochet he was transformed and showed himself in his own nature' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/112/45). 
Compromise, if not harmony, was effected: on 10 May Aylmer duly received the temporalities from Michaelmas 1576, but without favourable terms of composition. Required to compound strictly according to the terms of the 'Act for First Fruits and Tenths' (1559) he had to produce five sureties. Since Hatton's other proteges, John Whitgift of Worcester and John Piers of Rochester, were similarly penalized at this time it is probable that their elevation had been steadily opposed by Burghley, whose own proteges (including Sandys) were not obliged to find sureties. 
In May 1577 Elizabeth suspended Grindal from office for refusing to suppress the prophesyings. In a dramatic reversal of their fortunes the new bishop of London, as dean of the southern province, immediately assumed his functions, exercising a 'de facto' primacy which in the event lasted until Grindal's death. 
It imposed a huge, triple burden -- Aylmer also became chief commissioner for ecclesiastical causes -- and the strain soon began to tell. His naturally pugnacious temper, evidently soured by his years in the wilderness, quickly brought him into conflict with many whose support he could ill afford to forgo. Within weeks he had offended the earl of Lincoln and begun an acrimonious struggle with Sandys over dilapidations for London -- a titanic battle which proved one of the most disreputable episodes of the reign. By 1578 he was in bad odour with Hatton and Elizabeth (who had instructed him to pay equal attention to Catholic recusants and protestant nonconformists) for what they regarded as his over-harsh dealings with the former. By early 1579 Burghley was prepared to listen to reports that Aylmer was despoiling his see by overmuch felling of timber and he was called before the privy council. Encountering dark hints of deprivation Aylmer dispatched a violently intemperate letter, accusing Burghley of deliberately seeking to undermine his authority. 
Despite Burghley's tactful reply Aylmer's future clearly hung in the balance. By December it was rumoured that he was to be translated and he himself frequently requested removal. At first he proposed himself for Ely, which Richard Cox wished to resign, and in March 1580 applied for vacant Winchester. He continued to hanker after Ely following Cox's death in 1581, but in the event the see remained vacant until 1599. Even after Whitgift's elevation to Canterbury he continued to seek translation on the grounds that London needed a younger man. 
Although during these years Aylmer's episcopal duties took third place to his other commitments he instantly made his mark on diocesan administration, appointing as vicar-general the able Edward Stanhope, later characterized by Marprelate as 'Tarquinius Superbus'. Others appointed to his diocesan establishment were William Cotton, future bishop of Exeter, William Hutchinson, and the bishop's own son-in-law Adam Squire, collated archdeacon of Middlesex in June 1577. 
Aylmer conducted his primary visitation in late 1577. Although according to the diarist Thomas Earle he urged a form of subscription which a substantial minority of clergy refused, surviving evidence does not suggest a witch-hunt at this early juncture in the interests of conformity. Those granted preaching licences in the visitation's aftermath included a dozen or so 'moderate puritans' with whom he would clash over the next decade, including Edmund Chapman, George Gifford, Giles Whiting, and Arthur Dent. 
His visitors' findings, however, undoubtedly alerted Aylmer to the circumstance that, as in Lincoln, the strict provisions of the prayer book were widely ignored and even openly flouted. If further proof were needed he soon discovered it at Rochford Hall, the Thames-side seat of Robert, second Lord Rich, Essex's most influential protestant patron. Encouraged by his bastard brother Richard, Lord Rich had been displaying increasing sympathy towards radical preachers, even to the point of promoting quasi-congregational exercises at Rochford. Aylmer later asserted that he had had 'many great storms at his hand for the staying of them' (BL, Lansdowne MS 33, fol. 48'r'), but to no avail. 
Aylmer's response to the endemic radicalism of his vast diocese was to abandon the policy of 'laissez-faire' towards nonconformist practices by means of which Elizabeth's first bench of bishops -- innately sympathetic or else merely grateful for evangelical support -- had sought to implement her settlement. In the summer of 1578 he took the draconian step of placing under an interdict the two radical city of London liberties, Holy Trinity Minories and St Anne Blackfriars, until their ministers and churchwardens should pledge themselves to observe the prayer book ceremonies. William Hutchinson's appointment as archdeacon of St Albans in July 1581 would likewise mark the beginning of the end of that ancient liberty's semi-independent status: ceded to London diocese in 1550 it had hitherto effectively remained a self-regulating outpost under archidiaconal control, its affairs seldom attracting the attention of the bishop. 
Meanwhile Aylmer had struck decisively at the unbeneficed preachers and lecturers of the city, led by the single-minded John Field. Preachers were not obliged to wear the surplice in the pulpit but Aylmer's stipulation in January 1580 that all clergy must administer the sacraments four times a year presented them with a dilemma: either to accept the provisions of the prayer book by using the surplice at administration or to risk suspension. One direct consequence of this policy of divide-and-rule was that he alienated the city fathers, always more sympathetic towards radical than towards conformist courses. In March 1582 Aylmer dispatched a stinging rebuke to the incumbent lord mayor, Sir James Harvey, for indiscreet words used against himself and the late Bishop Horne, as well as for contemptuous behaviour towards conforming city clergy. Within months, he acidly observed, Harvey would be plain Sir James whilst he himself would still be John London. 
Whilst the surviving evidence of his second visitation in 1580 suggests that Aylmer was still placing as much emphasis on recusancy as on protestant nonconformity, he had begun to cast a baleful eye on radical activities in and around Essex's two ancient boroughs, Colchester and Maldon. Colchester's poorly endowed, badly served parishes were subjected to tighter regulation whilst Timothy Fitzallen, vicar of nearby Dedham, was suspended in January 1581, thereafter resigning. A similar intervention in Maldon that year led to the resignation of Fabian Withers (although here Aylmer made what could be construed as a severe tactical blunder, agreeing to institute George Gifford in his place). Probably in equal and opposite reaction to these developments, clandestine clerical conferences were established (probably at Field's direct instigation) as a species of self-help and self-regulation. That which first met in 1582 under the leadership of Edmund Chapman, lecturer of Dedham, drew its membership from southern Suffolk as well as from the environs of Colchester. Another, centred on Braintree, was led by Gifford and Richard Rogers, lecturer of Wethersfield. 
Despite these early skirmishes into radical strongholds it was as senior commissioner for ecclesiastical causes that Aylmer initially gained his reputation as the hammer of the puritans. Although R. G. Usher argued that it was not until the 1580s, under the guidance of Whitgift and Richard Bancroft, that the ecclesiastical commissioners' proceedings developed into a 'court of high commission', it was actually during Aylmer's 'de facto' primacy that it emerged as a fully-fledged court of first instance. In 1580 Aylmer effectively widened its scope by procuring a privy council letter extending to the whole province his diocesan order that all clergy must regularly administer the sacraments. Robert Beale, now clerk of the council, claimed that Aylmer was guilty of sharp practice in securing signatures to the letter, which had never been fully debated, and then issued it under the commission's seal, which closely resembled the council's. 
The high commission's encroaching powers were most forcefully challenged by the Riches, one of whose proteges was Robert Wright. After Lord Rich's death in February 1581 Wright briefly departed for Antwerp, where he was ordained according to a presbyterian rite. On his return Richard Rich and his nephew Robert, the 21-year-old third baron, personally solicited a preaching licence for him, bearding Aylmer in his study at Fulham in September. Aylmer refused to grant one unless fully informed of the nature of Wright's orders and assured that he would subscribe the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. At that point Richard Rich physically assaulted him. The affair led to the trial of Richard Rich and Wright before the high commission and the imprisonment of both in November. 
Unfortunately for Aylmer, Lord Rich had just married Penelope Devereux, sister of Robert, earl of Essex, and could thus count on powerful support at court. In any case Burghley was unhappy on technical grounds with the conduct of the trial. It had turned finally on sworn depositions -- accepted as proven evidence without the possibility of further defence -- that Wright had denounced celebratory sermons on Elizabeth's accession day as tantamount to idolatry. All this, Burghley seems to have reasoned, was to have ridden roughshod over the basic principles of common law and also to have exceeded the commissioners' brief to take cognizance only of cases which specifically concerned breaches of the strict provisions of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. By March 1582 Aylmer, under pressure from the council, released Richard Rich on bail. Elizabeth (who had sided firmly with the commissioners) was furious and Aylmer hastened to justify himself in what was perhaps, Grindal's act of epistolatory self-annihilation excepted, the most remarkable letter she ever received from one of her bishops. He informed her bluntly that there were limits to the commission's authority. 'Your highness thinketh that the Bishop of London may do what he will... wherein I beseech your Majesty to inform yourself better, and not to suppose my authority under you greater than it is' (Nicolas, 246). To instruct Elizabeth that she misunderstood the nature of the legal powers which she had delegated to him was a brave action but Aylmer subsequently assured Leicester that his letter had pacified her. The affair nevertheless dragged on until September when the council finally had the better of the argument: Rich and Wright were both released on promises of good behaviour. 
Although Whitgift's accession to the primacy after Grindal's death on 6 July 1583 must have come as an immense relief Aylmer remained under intense personal pressure. On 2 November he wrote to Leicester of the 'unhappy paroxysm' which had soured relations between them (Nicolas, 348-9). Five days later, nervous about rumours that he was again to be called before the council, he solicited Burghley's unequivocal support: otherwise he must 'give over' sitting as a commissioner: 'I would to God my L. of Cant were in the commission, that I might have some ease for I am deadly weary' (BL, Lansdowne MS 38/86). A new commission, naming Whitgift as primate, was finally issued in January 1584. 
Henceforth Aylmer had more time for diocesan affairs. He had conducted his third visitation in July 1583. The visitors, led by William Hutchinson, carefully scrutinized preaching licences and came down heavily upon those who omitted weekday services -- a shorthand method of browbeating incumbents who placed more emphasis on preaching than upon the prayer book -- and yet, considering what was to follow, the visitors took surprisingly little cognizance of nonconformist practices. Despite further regulation of Colchester's affairs its new town preacher, George Northey, absented himself and was not immediately penalized, whilst of Essex's many radical incumbents only four, including Gifford of Maldon, were called into consistory for refusing the surplice. 
These diocesan measures were swiftly overtaken by national events. Aylmer proved to be Whitgift's principal coadjutor in his drive for conformity following his enthronement -- was this the 'unhappy paroxysm' which had alienated Leicester? -- and the archbishop's divisive articles, enshrining the proposition that the 'Book of Common Prayer' contained nothing contrary to the word of God, were instantly introduced into London diocese. They first appear in the record in October 1583, when Aylmer made use of them in advance of their official promulgation to pounce on, and suspend, Northey of Colchester. Strenuous attempts by the Colchester authorities to have Northey restored included an appeal to Aylmer's old friend William Cole -- their former town preacher and now president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford -- to intercede with him on Northey's behalf. Cole found Aylmer inflexible and flatly advised that Northey should capitulate. 
In early March 1584 Aylmer summoned eight leading Essex nonconformists -- Gifford and Arthur Dent amongst them -- to Fulham. All were shown the articles and asked if they were prepared to subscribe. Two unbeneficed men, Nicholas Ward and Thomas Carew, were immediately suspended upon refusal. The remainder were given time to deliberate. 
If the subscription crisis of 1584 was not quite a storm in a teacup -- it marked the beginning of the end of moderate puritan aspirations for the liberalization of Elizabeth's settlement -- the evidence of John Field's papers argues that only thirteen other Essex incumbents were subsequently disciplined. The principal casualties proved to be Northey and George Gifford, deprived of his benefice in May or June. By September, however, Whitgift's campaign, steadily opposed by Burghley and the majority of the privy council, had collapsed and the case of Richard Rogers of Wethersfield was probably typical: Aylmer restored him after thirty weeks' suspension, apparently without demanding subscription. 
Whilst they remained available as a cat-and-mouse tactic it must be doubted that Whitgift's articles were ever again fully implemented within the diocese of London. Compromise was probably effected by means of a form of limited subscription or else promises of good behaviour on the part of those whom Aylmer chose to pursue. Although never again beneficed Gifford was soon restored to his ministry in Maldon and remained there as town preacher until his death in 1600. Northey was released from suspension in late 1584, dying as Colchester's town preacher in 1593. 
Altogether Aylmer's efforts to subdue his recalcitrant clergy during the 1580s were considerably less successful than was once supposed. John Field's papers, comprehensively quarried by early historians of nonconformity, appeared, for tactical reasons, to paint a picture of nonconformist defeat at every turn. It was one which John Strype, charting Aylmer's progress via his self-justifying letters to Burghley, was content broadly to endorse. Yet Strype failed to recognize that whenever Aylmer was forced to defend himself he had almost invariably lost the battle in advance, however long it may have taken Burghley to wear him down. Essentially Aylmer's efforts boil down to a persistent crusade against about thirty entrenched nonconformists -- the members of the two clerical conferences and their close associates. Most remained in place until their deaths. 
Despite strenuous attempts to alter the 1559 settlement in the parliament which met in November 1584 there appears to have been no sustained, constructive attempt to pursue the supporters of parliamentary puritanism in the rural parishes. During 1585 only half a dozen unbeneficed men -- including Robert Wright, now preaching at Fryerning -- continued under threat in the name of full subscription, and whilst a new tactic was introduced of indicting beneficed nonconformists at assize this policy seems to have been abandoned during 1586. The only other men to draw attention to themselves in these months were William Tunstall, vicar of Great Totham, summoned to answer charges in October 1585; Thomas Carew of Hatfield Peverel; Mark Wiersdale of Maldon; and William Dyke, suspended as preacher of St Albans in June 1586 despite the best efforts of Lady Bacon, Burghley's sister-in-law. 
If 1585 provided a lull before a further storm it was perhaps because in mid-career Aylmer had made a serious political blunder: in April 1585 he fell foul of Elizabeth, Burghley, and Leicester by arresting Thomas Cartwright on his return to England and by August was again defending himself against charges of despoiling his see. 
Aylmer conducted his 1586 visitation himself, narrowly escaping ridicule in Maldon when the authorities foiled a plot to snatch his cap and toss it around the crowd. Otherwise, with uncharacteristic restraint, he reported that 'disorders... were not so great as was feared (though more than is to be wished)' (BL, Lansdowne MS 50, fol. 88'r'). In London, Walter Travers, Thomas Barber, and Field were all suspended and in Essex no fewer than twenty-eight men, 'the painfullest ministers in Essex, whom the Bp. threatneth to deprive, sayinge we shalbe white with him or he wilbe black with us' (Peel, 'Register', 2.260-61). They included Gifford, Wiersdale, Tunstall, Carew, Rogers, and Dyke, as well as Northey of Colchester and several members of the Dedham conference, including Chapman. 
Important also was the re-establishment at this visitation of clerical exercises for the supervision of the less able clergy, strictly under diocesan control: thus, at Whitgift's behest, the 'prophesyings' which had toppled Grindal were reintroduced in a modified form. Yet Aylmer soon discovered that there were those who had managed to obtain preaching licences in order to avoid attending them. This probably accounts for an obscure episode in October 1586, when George Withers was inhibited as archdeacon of Colchester for violating his privilege of granting licences. 
Although a flurry of petitions to the privy council and to parliament followed the suspensions of 1586-7 Aylmer scored two decisive victories. Whilst no specific details of their cases are known, Tunstall of Great Totham, under threat since 1585, and Giles Whiting, rector of Panfield, were deprived by the high commission in May 1587. Later that year, however, Aylmer suffered another personal set-back when his son-in-law Adam Squire, archdeacon of Middlesex, was discovered to be an adulterer. 
Continuing as Whitgift's senior coadjutor on the high commission Aylmer took final responsibility for the deprivation that year of Robert Cawdrey, rector of Luffenham, Rutland. In this crucial test-case Cawdrey brought an action in queen's bench which in essence challenged the commission's competence under the strict provisions of the 'Act of Supremacy'. His defeat 'in effect established the Court of High Commission as a proper and lawful court' (Elton, 221). 
In March 1588 Aylmer again suspended Chapman of Dedham, this time for refusing to take part in an ordination at Fulham. On 6 July 1588 he ordered Stephen Egerton and his churchwardens in Blackfriars not to admit strangers to communion. He also suspended 'silver-tongued' Henry Smith, lecturer at St Clement Danes, inviting yet another head-on collision with Burghley, Smith's kinsman by marriage. Smith was restored. In 1591 Aylmer clashed with his dean, Alexander Nowell, who declined to induct the bishop's son Theophilus as archdeacon of London on the grounds that he was too young for such promotion. Instead Aylmer issued a special mandate to four senior prebendaries, headed by Lancelot Andrewes. Theophilus, only thirty-one at the time, was duly installed. 
Meanwhile the puritan cause in parliament and the conference movement had alike collapsed. The death of Field, and then of Leicester, in 1588 shattered the cohesiveness of the moderate puritan party, and the appearance shortly afterwards of the Martin Marprelate tracts inadvertently tolled its death knell. The pursuit of Martinists and separatists thereafter by Whitgift and Richard Bancroft overwhelmed all organized opposition to their policies as long as Elizabeth lived. Yet the Marprelate tracts themselves bid fair to overwhelm Aylmer, principal butt of their relentless, satirical invective. He was characterized as Dumb John of London for his infrequent preaching and as Mar-elm for that tin-can always tied to his tail, his purported over-exploitation of his timber. Thus the visitation of 1589 took place in a strangely ambivalent atmosphere. The visitors do not appear to have wished to stir up any hornets' nests in the city. Of only three clergymen cited for failing to use the surplice, Stephen Egerton of Blackfriars was enjoined (rather than ordered) to do so but ignored the court's further monitions. Thomas Gataker later claimed that he had never received a summons to attend and ostentatiously left court without petitioning for release from excommunication. Neither seems to have been subsequently pursued. 
In Essex the demise of the Dedham conference had left its members and supporters in disarray. Richard Parker, vicar of Dedham, had been exposed as an adulterer and resigned in 1590. William Tey of Peldon was now suspended by the high commission and Thomas Farrar of Langham threatened with sequestration. George Northey and Stephen Beamont of Easthorpe again came under pressure. Outside this Colchester circle Aylmer's principal target was Ezekiel Culverwell, preacher at Felsted and spiritual mentor to Lord Rich in succession to Robert Wright. Culverwell was now at loggerheads with the vicar of Felsted, William Rust, and accordingly fell victim to Aylmer's continuing feud with the Rich family. At St Albans William Dyke was again suspended. 
All survived, but there is as much evidence of accommodation on both sides as of capitulation by the nonconformists. Edward Stanhope refused to turn the case against Culverwell into a witch-hunt and, mindful of his canonical duty, achieved an ostensible reconciliation between him and Rust. Richard Rogers of Wethersfield, whilst admitting that he had not administered the sacraments, was dismissed on production of a letter from Ambrose, earl of Warwick (whom he never once mentions in his diary), stating that Rogers was the earl's chaplain. 
With the death of Edmund Freake of Worcester in March 1591 the seventy-year-old Aylmer glimpsed a final prospect of escape from London. Within weeks Hatton informed Bancroft that Elizabeth had agreed to translate Aylmer to Worcester and to promote Bancroft in his place. Nothing came of the proposal but, according to Whitgift, Aylmer 'offred thrice, in two years' to resign in Bancroft's favour 'upon certain conditions, w'ch' he refused' (Peel, 'Tracts', xx). 
In the summer of 1592 Aylmer conducted his final visitation. The act book of office does not survive but in the wake of recent events -- eight nonconformist leaders, including Cartwright, had been tried in Star Chamber during the winter of 1590-91 -- there are signs that Aylmer may have been disposed to pour oil on troubled waters. In February 1592 Stanhope had granted a preaching licence to Richard Greenham without any form of subscription or obligation on his part because Thomas Fanshaw, queen's remembrancer, had promised that he would not preach contentiously. It is also instructive that, amongst the thirty-seven preachers described as 'concionator notus', there were some strange bedfellows: Bancroft and archdeacons Hutchinson and Theophilus Aylmer from amongst the hierarchs; long-lived Marian exiles such as Thomas Upcher and Robert Harrington; and nonconformists recently pursued by Aylmer, including Richard Rogers and Northey. 
The 1592 call book also provides evidence of Aylmer's wider achievement in his efforts to promote an educated ministry. After the abuses of 1586 the granting of preaching licences had presumably been strictly monitored and some withdrawn. Yet by 1592 only 146 incumbents outside the city (including all 56 absentees) were not listed as holding one. Of the 90 men actually present 14 were ordered or invited to apply for a diocesan licence whilst only 29 remained 'tied to the exercises', most of them long-serving survivors from the first half of the reign. Many of the absentees can be added to the list of qualified preachers. Although the steady advance of a university-trained ministry was one of the hallmarks of Elizabeth's reign this represents a notable achievement. During his visitation in 1595 Aylmer's successor, Richard Fletcher, declared himself favourably impressed with the overall quality of the country clergy. 
Yet until the end Aylmer remained 'persona non grata' at court. In June 1592, suggesting candidates for the bishopric of Oxford, he sourly observed that he had seldom had any luck in recommending his friends for promotion. It appears to have been the last time he addressed Burghley in writing and his health may have suddenly collapsed, since the government thereafter took the unusual step of providing him with a coadjutor: on 12 November John Sterne was consecrated bishop of Colchester, the last of only three suffragans appointed under Elizabeth, and the last until 1870. 
Aylmer died at Fulham Palace on 3 June 1594 and was buried at St Paul's Cathedral. According to Whitgift he 'signify'd the day before his death' his regret that he had not written to Elizabeth recommending Bancroft as his successor (Peel, 'Tracts', xx). Aylmer's dying voice would have cut little ice with Burghley, who espoused the claims of William Day, or with Essex, who successfully promoted those of Fletcher. 'Many a drye eye for the Byshopp of London', wrote Philip Gawdy to his brother, 'who is deade and buryed, and I feare me not ascended into heaven (saving my charity)'. He added that Aylmer had left $1500 a year to his children ('Seventh Report', HMC, 524), an assessment which must have been close to the truth. In his will, dated 22 April 1594, his three eldest sons, Samuel, Theophilus, and John, received substantial property in Essex, Suffolk, and Lincolnshire respectively. Yet there were also large charitable bequests: $300 for the better maintenance of the Paul's Cross sermons; and to the poor of London ($100) and Fulham ($40). 
Although Fletcher never mentioned the subject, Bancroft, finally consecrated to London in 1597 after Essex lent his support to Whitgift's long-waged campaign on Bancroft's behalf, penned a damning report on Aylmer's stewardship of the bishopric. Since 1576 he had purchased land to the value of $16,000 for his family's benefit whilst surveyors had set dilapidations of episcopal properties at $6500, of which $4000 needed to be spent on St Paul's Cathedral. Aylmer had also profited from timber during his time to the tune of $6000. Bancroft had begun a process against Samuel Aylmer in the court of arches for the recovery of $4210 only to discover that the late bishop had carefully disposed of his liquid assets before his death and that Samuel refused to part with what he naturally claimed was his patrimony. The result was a detailed exchequer inquiry into the relative liability of Samuel and of a corrupt sub-collector for these and other debts, to the tune of $1500. During the course of it Samuel found himself incarcerated in a debtors' prison. 
John Aylmer was small of stature, compact, vigorous, and aggressive. With the understandable exception of John Strype (whose publisher, Brabazon Aylmer, was the bishop's direct descendant) historians have united in concluding that Aylmer's pugnacity made him ill-fitted for the second most politically sensitive post in the Church of England during the heart of Elizabeth's reign. Not for nothing did his funeral monument in St Paul's proclaim him 'bis pugil in causa religionis' ('twice a fighter in the cause of religion'). Vetting or omitting the nastier remarks in the letters which he paraphrased, Strype laboured to present a diligent, learned chief pastor whose only care was for the good of the church-state. Yet he could not conceal the fact that Aylmer had a genius for antagonizing supporters and opponents alike and was in many respects a typical bully: usually sycophantic to superiors, unmerciful with inferiors. Technically a formidable administrator, he never learned the true art of administration itself: that of handling those with whom he had to deal with a modicum of tact or consideration. As late as December 1592, bemoaning the decayed state of the Paul's Cross sermons to the privy council, he laid all the blame on his chaplain of twelve years' standing, William Cotton. 
Although an able and respected scholar Aylmer exhibited no inclination to make a contribution to the major controversies of his time. George Orwell admired the 'Harborowe' as a landmark in the history of political literature (it contains the striking marginal note 'God is English'), but when Walter Travers's 'De disciplina' appeared in early 1574 to pump iron into presbyterian muscles, Aylmer refused Parker's request to answer it and failed to return the copy Parker had sent him. In 1581, pleading ill health, he declined to answer Edmund Campion. 
Strype bent over backwards to emphasize those passages in his letters which spoke of his friendship with and dependence upon Burghley but they were largely drawn from those which show him at his most grovelling. There can be little doubt that in fact Burghley regarded his elevation as an unmitigated disaster, and his long-drawn game of cat-and-mouse with Aylmer must be accounted one of the least glorious strands in his career. It also involves a conundrum. Given Aylmer's divisiveness and his frequent requests for translation to a less burdensome diocese, why was Burghley unable or unwilling to engineer it? 


@@@@@


doc= 936


Aylmer, Matthew, first Baron Aylmer of Balrath (d. 1720), naval officer and politician, was the second son of Sir Christopher Aylmer ('c'.1615-1671), first baronet, of Balrath, co. Meath, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Plunkett (died 1671). In 1672 he entered the regiment of the duke of Buckingham, whose page he was -- at least, according to tradition, which also claims that he subsequently raised troops in Munster to fight for the Dutch against the French. In January 1677 he was appointed an ensign in the Tangier regiment and became a lieutenant in the earl of Inchiquin's regiment of foot at Tangier in August 1678. Aylmer began his naval career in the Mediterranean Fleet at much the same time, becoming a midshipman aboard the galley 'Charles' in October 1677 and her lieutenant in April 1678; he served in her until 9 January 1679 when he was appointed captain of the double sloop 'Chatham' by Arthur Herbert, the admiral on the station and Aylmer's patron. He subsequently held the commands of the prize 'Date Tree' (1679) and the fireship 'Castle' (1679-80) in the Mediterranean, and of the 'Swan' on the Irish coast from July 1680 to 10 January 1682, when he was given command of the prize 'Tiger' by 'his majesty's special command' (TNA: PRO, ADM 3/278, pt 2, p. 5), and returned to the Mediterranean to rejoin Herbert. 
In 1682 Aylmer carried to England the news of Herbert's successful conclusion of a treaty with Algiers. Samuel Pepys encountered him in the Mediterranean in 1683-4, where he was still commanding the 'Tiger', and was distinctly unimpressed. Aylmer's carpenter told Pepys that his captain made 'good voyages' (transporting merchant goods in a warship for a commission) and had also 'made love to a young woman and lain both with her and her mother, and borrowed a great many hundred pounds of them' (Chappell, 137). Aylmer was described as one of Herbert's 'creatures' and one of 'the greatest libertines of the fleet', who regularly badgered his patron for 'good voyages' but was 'a very coward' who would 'stay in the Navy [no] longer than till he has got two or three thousand pounds in his pocket' (ibid., 186-7, 236). Pepys believed that Aylmer, a man of 'mean mind', 'deserved... to be hanged' for striking his flag to the Spanish at Cadiz on 5-6 July 1683, though he and his fellow captain Cloudesley Shovell had been heavily outnumbered (ibid., 167, 184). In the late 1670s or 1680s Aylmer married Sarah Ellis (died 1710); they had at least four children. 
Pepys's hostility (born of his hatred of Aylmer's patron, Herbert), and the groundless charge of being an Irish papist levelled against Aylmer in September 1680 during the Popish Plot crisis, had no discernible effect on his career. From 21 June to 14 July 1685 he commanded the 'Mediterranean', a hired vessel placed in the Severn estuary to search ships during the duke of Monmouth's rebellion, and on 27 September 1685 he was given command of the galley 'Charles'. He held this position alongside a captaincy in the Queen Dowager's regiment of horse, to which he was commissioned on 1 June 1686. On 1 October 1688 Aylmer became captain of the 'Swallow', part of the fleet intended to repel William of Orange's invasion force. Aylmer quickly became one of the heads of the Orangist conspiracy in the fleet, having been recruited by the army officers Percy Kirke (an old Tangier colleague) and the second duke of Ormond. In turn Aylmer became an active recruiter for William among the captains of the fleet, and was described as one of eight who were prepared to defect with their ships to the prince's side. Aylmer smuggled William's letter to James II's admiral, Lord Dartmouth, into the admiral's toilet, and carried back to the prince Dartmouth's reply, effectively surrendering the fleet and praising Aylmer as a man 'entirely devoted to your highness' (Davies, 'Admirals', 86). 
The success of the revolution made Aylmer's career. He was promoted to command the 'Mary' on 22 December 1688 and was subsequently warmly recommended in particular by Herbert's rival, Edward Russell, who said of him in February 1690 that 'I am not biased with friendship to him though I love him extremely, but he is really a very useful man' ('Finch MSS', 2.271). Aylmer commanded the 'Mary' at the battle of Bantry Bay on 1 May 1689; she sustained severe damage to her rigging and sails, as well as taking fourteen shots in the hull, having three guns split, and losing one man dead and seven wounded. He subsequently moved to the 'Suffolk' in Russell's division of the Blue squadron, and in 1690 commanded the 'Royal Katherine' at the battle of Beachy Head. Over the winter of 1690-91 he took fourteen ships to the Mediterranean to confirm the treaties with the Barbary corsairs and to convoy English trade there. In September 1691, in command of the 'Monck' in the North Sea, he took a large Dunkirk privateer off Scarborough. In spring 1692 he took command of the first-rate 'London', serving in her at the battle of Barfleur as second to Russell's flagship, the 'Britannia'. 
Aylmer became a rear-admiral on 8 February 1693 and a vice-admiral following Sir John Ashby's death in June; he was also a commissioner of the navy from 25 March 1694 to 16 July 1702. Throughout the 1690s Aylmer clearly relied heavily on the continuing patronage of Russell, whose whig politics he shared: in 1692 another admiral complained that 'Mr Russell has been tampering with [the earl of Portland] and others on the score of some favourite of his, and I believe it to be Mr Elmour ['sic']' ('Finch MSS', 4.192). In 1694 he was Russell's second-in-command in the Mediterranean, assuming acting command in September when the admiral was struck with dysentery. Following the treaty of Ryswick, Aylmer was elected MP for Dover on 15 December 1697 in the interest of Russell's whig junto, and continued to serve as such, apart from an interruption in 1713-15, until his death; additionally, he became governor of Deal Castle in 1701. 
In 1698-9 Aylmer went again to the Mediterranean to confirm the treaties, flying his flag in the 'Boyne', but his animosity towards George Churchill caused his retirement from active service in November 1699 following the latter's appointment to the Admiralty board. The death of the queen's husband, Prince George, in 1708 permitted Russell's return to the Admiralty, and Churchill's retirement in November 1709 allowed Aylmer to become commander-in-chief. However, a comparatively unsuccessful engagement with a French squadron in July 1710 (only one warship and one merchantman were taken) contributed to his displacement in January 1711. George I's accession, and the consequent return of the whigs to favour, led in 1714 to Aylmer's reappointment as commander-in-chief, in addition to appointments as governor of Greenwich Hospital (6 November 1714) and ranger of Greenwich Park. He was primarily responsible for the establishment of what was to become the Royal Hospital school. He was appointed to the Admiralty board on 16 April 1717, resigning on 19 March 1718 following his appointment on the previous day as rear-admiral of Great Britain. On 1 May 1718 he was created Baron Aylmer of Balrath in the Irish peerage. Aylmer's and his wife's children included a son Henry, who succeeded to the title, and who, along with his son-in-law Sir John Norris and his nephew Sir Peter Warren, also became an admiral; their daughters were Elizabeth, Sarah, and Lucy, the last of whom received a portion of $4000 in Aylmer's will, dated 7 June 1720. A contemporary said of him that he had 'a very good head, indefatigable and designing; is very zealous for the liberties of the people; makes a good figure in the parliament, as well as the fleet; is handsome in his person, a brown man' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 107). However, Jonathan Swift was as uncharitable as Pepys had once been, describing Aylmer as 'a virulent party man, born in Ireland' ('Prose Works', 10.285). Aylmer's brother George was also a prominent naval captain and another of the leading lights in the Williamite conspiracy in the fleet in 1688: originally a page to the earl of Arlington, he became a captain in 1680, was described by Pepys as 'a swearing, idle fellow' (Chappell, 194-5), and was killed as captain of the 'Portland' at the battle of Bantry Bay (1 May 1689). Matthew Aylmer died in the Queen's House at Greenwich on 18 August 1720 and was buried five days later in St Alfege's Church, Greenwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 937


Ayloffe, John (c.1645-1685), satirist and conspirator, was born in Foxley, Wiltshire, the younger son of John Ayliffe ('b'. 1611?). He matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in July 1662 and was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1664. An unyielding opponent of the Stuart monarchy, he was 'one of the most consistently committed radicals of the century' -- according to Sir Roger L'Estrange, there were few 'more daring men for a desperate exploit' (Greaves & Zaller, 'BDBR', 1.31). Ayloffe first became prominent in October 1673, when he placed a wooden shoe in the speaker's chair in the House of Commons, as a symbol of pernicious French influence. 'Nostradamus's Prophecy', a poem probably by Ayloffe and published in 1672, had referred to 'wooden shoes' as a sign of subservience to France, praised 'Venetian liberty', and attacked parliamentary corruption (Lord, 'Poems on Affairs of State', 185-9). 
At the time of the Third Anglo-Dutch War, in 1671-3, Ayloffe was a leading member, along with his close friend and associate Andrew Marvell, in a clandestine organization headed by Peter Du Moulin, working in the interests of William of Orange against France. Ayloffe is probably the author, or co-author with Du Moulin, of the influential pamphlet 'Englands Appeale from the Private Caballe at Whitehall' (1673), which in Haley's words 'did more than anything else to identify the French alliance in foreign affairs with the dangers of Popery at home' (Haley, 97-9). In 1677 he petitioned for pardon for 'printing 'The Appeal' and 'The Votes of Parliament'... for which he has suffered two years exile' ('Fourth Report', HMC, 235). 'The Votes of Parliament' may refer to a detailed satiric attack on parliamentary corruption circulated in 1677 under the title 'A Seasonable Argument' (an earlier version, BL, Lansdowne MS 805, dates from 1672), on which Marvell and Ayloffe are likely to have collaborated (Chernaik, 97, 226). 
During the 'Exclusion Bill' crisis, Ayloffe was a trusted lieutenant of Shaftesbury -- one of the two 'chief agents of the said Earl' -- and an active member of the whig Green Ribbon Club (Lord, 'Satire and sedition', 260-61). He was involved in the Rye House plot in 1683, claiming that 'it was impossible England could ever be happy under such a government as we lived under, for the King designs to bring in arbitrary power', and, under a warrant of arrest for high treason, escaped to Holland; at this time his estates in Wiltshire were confiscated. In Holland, he continued to plot an insurrection against the hated Stuarts (on a secret mission to England to canvass support, he found that his reputation 'as an atheist' made him 'persona non grata' with nonconformist ministers), and in 1685 he served as colonel of a regiment of foot in an unsuccessful invasion of Scotland led by the ninth earl of Argyll, a premature attempt to overthrow James II. After being captured and attempting suicide (stabbing himself with a penknife), he was executed as a traitor at the Temple gate on 30 October 1685, refusing to testify against his fellow conspirators and offering prayers on the scaffold 'to preserve the Protestant Religion' (ibid., 262-5; Greaves & Zaller, 'BDBR', 1.31). 
Nearly all Ayloffe's extant poems are political and attest to his republican sympathies. 'Marvell's Ghost' (1678) imagines the poet returning from the dead to prophesy the downfall of the 'spurious race' of Stuarts, who have 'laid waste the commonweal' and have brought upon themselves 'those resentments... That drove the Tarquins out of Rome' (Lord, 'Poems on Affairs of State', 1.285-6). 'Britannia and Raleigh' (1674), one of a number of satires falsely attributed to Marvell in the early editions of 'Poems on Affairs of State', is generally accepted as Ayloffe's. Explicitly attacking monarchy as an institution, it lavishes praise on 'the sage Venetian state' as well as the two Brutuses, heroes of the republican pantheon, and ends with an open call to rebellion: 'No poisonous tyrant on thy ground shall live' (ibid., 1.228-36). An elegy on Sir Thomas Armstrong, executed in 1684 for his part in the Rye House plot, is attributed to Ayloffe in BL, Harley MS 7319: it is equally uncompromising in its attacks on monarchy, calling for the 'destruction' of the tyrannous Stuarts (''Tarquin' and 'Nero' were but types of thee') and praising Armstrong as 'a worthy Patriot' like ''Brutus' or just 'Cato''. Other poems probably by Ayloffe include two poems attributed to him in 'Poems on Affairs of State' (1697), 'A Litany' (1681), a satire on high tory Anglican clergy, and 'Satyr' (1684?), attacking the duke of York as tyrant-in-waiting. More doubtful attributions to Ayloffe include 'Advice to a Painter to Draw the Duke by' (1673), an anti-Catholic satire on the duke of York, where the weight of evidence favours Henry Savile as author, and 'Oceana and Britannia' (1681). 


@@@@@


doc= 938


Ayloffe, Sir Joseph, sixth baronet (1709/10-1781), antiquary, was the only son of Joseph Ayloffe (1662/3-1726), barrister, of Gray's Inn, London, and Mary Ayliffe (died 1747), daughter of Brian Ayliffe, merchant of London. His father was said to have spent the last years of his life in Kirk Ireton, Derbyshire, in a most miserable state and died in 1726, aged sixty-three. Ayloffe was admitted to Westminster School in 1719 and Lincoln's Inn in 1724. He matriculated as a gentleman commoner at St John's College, Oxford, on 23 April 1726, aged sixteen, but left about 1728 without taking his degree and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1730. Later the same year he succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his unmarried cousin Sir John Ayloffe, fifth baronet. In January 1734 he married Margaret Railton (1704/5-1797), the daughter of Thomas Railton of Carlisle and the widow of Thomas Railton JP of Westminster. They had one son, Joseph, who died of smallpox in 1756, aged twenty-one. 
Ayloffe was described by the Revd Mark Noble as having a better education than fortune, and for much of his life he had salaried employment. In 1736 he was appointed clerk to the commissioners for building Westminster Bridge at $200 p.a. He managed the commission's affairs efficiently and was discharged in 1750, when the bridge was completed. Confusion with Joseph Ayliffe has led to the mistaken claim that he was auditor-general of the Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals in 1750. Ayloffe launched a series of unsuccessful publishing schemes in 1751. His 'Universal Librarian', whose authorship was attributed anonymously 'to a Fellow of the Royal Society', was intended to review the most important new books published in Britain and abroad, but only volume 1, part 1 (1751), was published. He circulated proposals for printing the debates in parliament prior to the Restoration, but never published them. His plan to issue a translation of Diderot's 'Encyclopedie' in parts, with additional articles on English subjects, was severely criticized in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' after the first number was published in 1752, and the project was abandoned. 
Ayloffe's chief interest was antiquarian research. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1731 and of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1732, and served as vice-president of both learned societies. Later in life he established himself as the unofficial legal adviser to the Society of Antiquaries and in 1776 drew up their petition to George III for accommodation in the new Somerset House. He was also a member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society in 1739. In 1764 he found congenial employment with Andrew Ducarel and Thomas Astle as a commissioner for methodizing, regulating, and digesting the records in the state paper office in Whitehall. The salary was $100 p.a., and the following year the task was extended to cover some of the exchequer records for an additional $100 a year. Ayloffe continued this work until his death. The commissioners primarily arranged records rather than digesting or calendaring them, and twentieth-century archivists criticized their method for sorting without maintaining archival integrity. 
In 1764 Ayloffe drew up proposals for a history of Suffolk, which he claimed to have been working on for many years, but according to John Nichols the project did not receive sufficient encouragement to proceed. All Ayloffe's antiquarian publications date from after his appointment at the state paper office. The most substantial were based on the work of others. In 1769 he revised John Thorpe's 'Registrum Roffense' before publication, and in 1771 revised new editions of John Leland's 'Collectanea' and Thomas Hearne's 'Curious Discourses'. The work by which he is best known, 'Calendars of the Ancient Charters... in the Tower of London', was begun by Philip Morant but the 1774 edition is credited to Ayloffe. His friend Richard Gough called Ayloffe the Montfaucon of England for his work in publishing source materials for English history, which he believed was as important as the work of the French Benedictine monk Bernard de Montfaucon. Ayloffe read several papers at meetings of the Society of Antiquaries between 1766 and 1780, the most important of which were published in 'Archaeologia' and separately. In 1769, with Lord Chancellor Hardwicke's encouragement and financial support, he proposed the engraving of the Tudor historical painting then at Windsor Castle, later moved to Hampton Court, 'Henry VIII at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520', and read a paper on it in 1770. The painting was so large that to preserve the detail without joining plates James Basire engraved the largest copperplate and Whatman made the largest sheet of handmade paper (31 in. x 53 in.), known afterwards as antiquarian size. The print was finally distributed in 1775, and was followed by others described by Ayloffe and copied from Tudor historical paintings at Windsor Castle and Cowdray, Sussex. The latter were destroyed by fire in 1793 and the copies provide the only record. In 1772 Ayloffe superintended the opening of the tomb of Edward I in Westminster Abbey and gave an account of the discoveries. 
Ayloffe was described by contemporaries as knowledgeable in history and antiquities, friendly, and sociable. He lived at various addresses in London: Carey Street, Lincoln's Inn, in 1739; Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, in 1762; and Kennington Lane, Lambeth, from at least 1766. He also had a house at Whartons, Framfield, Sussex, from about 1767. He died, aged seventy-one, at Kennington Lane on 19 April 1781, and was buried with his father and son in Hendon churchyard. Some prints and those of his manuscripts which had not been claimed by his friends were sold at Leigh and Sothebys auction sale from 25 February 1782. Ayloffe's widow died on 8 March 1797, aged ninety-two, and was also buried at Hendon. 


@@@@@


doc= 939


Ayloffe, William (c.1535-1584), judge, was the son of William Ayloffe of Hornchurch, Essex, and Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Barnardiston of Ketton, Suffolk. His grandfather William (died 1517) was a bencher of Lincoln's Inn and perhaps the first armigerous member of the family, having received a grant of arms in 1512; he had in 1507 married Audrey, daughter of alderman Sir John Shaa, the London goldsmith, and widow of John Wrytell. It was the grandfather who established the family seat at Brittons in Hornchurch, where William Ayloffe the judge lived. Ayloffe was himself admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1553 and called to the bar in 1560. He was to be of great service to the inn in furthering the purchase of its freehold from his brother-in-law Edward Sulyard. In 1566 he was elected a bencher and in 1571 reader, serving as treasurer in 1573-4. He was created serjeant-at-law in 1577 with six others, and left an account of the elaborate creation ceremonies which was published in 1984. 
On 3 February 1578, less than a year after receiving the coif, Ayloffe was appointed a justice of the queen's bench and continued in that office until his death. He accompanied Chief Justice Dyer three times on the midland circuit, but in 1579 changed to the Oxford, which he rode with Francis Wyndham for the rest of his life. In 1581 he and Wyndham were suspected of being too lenient with recusants on the circuit, but it is likely that the fault lay with the county administration. That he was hardly popular with the Roman Catholics is evident from an absurd legend invented in the same year by some English Catholics in Paris. The story was that, after the trial of Edmund Campion, Ayloffe remained on the bench to await the return of the jury, and on removing his glove found that his ring was covered with blood; however hard he tried to wipe it away, the blood continued to flow as a miraculous sign of the injustice that had polluted the seat of justice. 
Ayloffe seems to have died suddenly on 17 November 1584, having made a short will on the day of his death. Although he appointed his wife as his executor, in 1593 the will was pronounced void, apparently on the grounds that 'my wief' was too imprecise. In fact he seems to have had only one wife, Jane, daughter of Eustace Sulyard, whom he had married by about 1560; they had three sons and at least one daughter. The eldest son, William (died 1627), was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1577, knighted in 1603, and created a baronet in 1612; the baronetcy became extinct in 1787. A namesake admitted to the same inn in 1585 became the king's ancient serjeant-at-law, and as such leader of the English bar, in the later years of Charles I; he was also a great-grandson of the bencher who died in 1517 but by a different line. 


@@@@@


doc= 940


Aylward, Theodore (bap. 1731, d. 1801), musician, was baptized on 25 July 1731 at St Peter's, Chichester, the son of Henry Aylward, gentleman, and his wife, Ann. Of his education nothing is known, though when young he seems to have sung at Drury Lane Theatre; he later composed music for productions at Drury Lane, including 'Harlequin's Invasion', 'Cymbeline' (both 1759), and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1763). He became a member of the Royal Society of Musicians on 3 July 1763 and was elected by a unanimous vote into the Madrigal Society on 15 November 1769. About 1760 he became organist of Oxford Chapel, London, and on 21 May 1762 was also appointed to St Lawrence Jewry. He resigned from Oxford Chapel in 1768 following his appointment to St Michael Cornhill on 29 April. On 5 June 1771 he was appointed professor of music at Gresham College. Aylward was an assistant director at the Handel commemorations of 1784, 1790, and 1791. He became a member of the Chichester Catch Club on 2 November 1787 and a founder member of the Glee Club (London) on 22 December of the same year. On 19 April 1781 he resigned from St Michael Cornhill in order to 'reside out of town' (Dawe, 75). In July 1787 he established his principal residence in South Street, Chichester, 'for the second time' ('John Marsh Journals', 404). His London residence from at least 1782 was 9 Great Square, Gray's Inn. On 10 May 1788 Aylward was appointed organist of St George's Chapel, Windsor, whereupon he moved to a house in the castle. He was also private organist to Queen Charlotte, and taught at a school in Queen Square, London. On 19 and 21 November 1791 he took the accumulated degrees of BMus and DMus at Oxford, submitting the anthem 'I will cry unto God'. He is not believed to have married, but had a daughter by one Susan Small. He died on 27 February 1801 in either Windsor or London and was buried on 5 March in St George's Chapel. At his death his properties included a collection of musical instruments, which were sold to finance bequests of at least $2000. Aylward published a few songs and glees, a set of lessons for the harpsichord (op. 1, 1784), and six string quartets (op. 4, 1795?). Incomplete manuscript copies of two morning services and five anthems survive at St George's Chapel. Described as a 'stout Dutch-built man' (W. Ayrton, Royal College of Music, London, MS 2170), he was said by W. L. Bowles to have had 'considerable literary attainments' (G. Grove, 'A Dictionary of Music and Musicians', 1879). But Edward Taylor thought him 'not a musician by spirit' ('New Grove'). 


@@@@@


doc= 941


Lusignan, Aymer de (c.1228-1260), bishop of Winchester, was one of the younger sons of Hugues (X), count of La Marche, and his wife, Isabella of Angouleme (d. 1246), the widow of King John. 
Aymer de Lusignan was born in Poitou, probably at the family stronghold of Valence near Angouleme, and in 1242 was promised the lordship of Couhe, a small portion of his family's Poitevin estate. As a younger son he may already have been destined for a career in the church. As early as July 1242, when he can have been no more than fifteen years old, his half-brother Henry III attempted to present him to the church of Northfleet in Kent. In June 1246 he was successfully presented to the church of Tisbury in Wiltshire by the king, and in the summer of 1247 he took up residence in England together with his brothers Guy, Geoffrey, and William de Valence. Through royal favour he received a rich haul of benefices, including the churches of Wearmouth and Chester-le-Street in the diocese of Durham, Kirkham in Lancashire, Blakeney in Norfolk, Deddington in Oxfordshire, and St Helen, Abingdon, the prebends of Holme in York Minster and Oxgate in St Paul's Cathedral, London, and pensions of 10 marks a year from the abbeys of Crowland and St Albans. The chroniclers allege that the king demanded a pension for Lusignan from every abbey and priory in England. From July 1247 until at least the following September he was in residence at the schools of Oxford, supported there by the king and studying under a tutor named Master Vincent, canon and later archbishop of Tours. At much the same time the Paris grammarian Master John Garland composed a commentary, intended to instruct Lusignan in the rudiments of grammar. 
Aymer de Lusignan's residence at Oxford was marred by the murder of one of his servants, leading to the suspension of the city's privileges by the crown between November 1247 and January 1248. In 1247 the king attempted unsuccessfully to have Lusignan promoted as provost of Beverley Minster, and in 1249 the monks of Durham rejected a proposal that he be elected their bishop. During these same years he continued to spend time in Poitou. In August 1248 he was appointed one of the executors of his father, and in March 1249 he did homage to the abbot of St Maixent for his estate at Couhe. Following the death on 1 September 1250 of William of Raleigh, bishop of Winchester, in the following November the king commanded the monks of St Swithun's Priory to elect Lusignan as their bishop, and preached a lengthy sermon in Winchester Cathedral, reminding the monks of their special obligation to the crown. Although reluctant to elect a candidate who was manifestly lacking in age or experience, the monks capitulated and Lusignan was elected on 4 November. After special lobbying by the king, his election was confirmed by the pope in January 1251 and shortly afterwards he was provided with papal dispensation, allowing him to remain unconsecrated as bishop and to continue to enjoy the income from his other ecclesiastical benefices, estimated by the chronicler Matthew Paris, an inveterate critic of Lusignan, as being in excess of 1000 marks a year. He returned to England in June 1251 and on 23 July was received at Winchester with a splendid feast, being provided with a set of costly vestments and chapel furnishings by the king. 
Aymer de Lusignan's years as bishop-elect were to be marked by violent controversy. Soon after his return, in September 1251, he became involved in a dispute with the merchants of Southampton over their refusal to suspend trading during the period of the great Winchester fair, a dispute which was to be protracted until 1254. More seriously, in November 1252, following attacks by the official of the archbishop of Canterbury on the prior of St Thomas's Hospital, Southwark, Lusignan incited various of his supporters, including his brother William de Valence, to make a violent raid upon the archbishop's houses at Lambeth and Maidstone and to carry off the archbishop's official to imprisonment at Farnham Castle. The official was later released, but the archbishop, Boniface of Savoy (died 1270), issued a sentence of excommunication against Lusignan and his supporters, which was not lifted until January 1253 following interventions by the king and an appeal to the papacy. Later that same year Lusignan became embroiled in an equally fierce dispute with the monks of his cathedral convent at Winchester, inspired by his claims to supervise the appointment of the prior of St Swithun's, to nominate his own candidates to subsidiary offices within the priory, and by his insistence that the monastic obedientiaries render accounts for their offices before the episcopal exchequer at Wolvesey Palace. The monks, led by their prior, William of Taunton, appealed against Lusignan to the pope, leading to the temporary imprisonment of various members of the convent, and the exile of various of Lusignan's opponents to other English Benedictine houses. 
In June 1256 the dispute was temporarily healed, following mediation by Pope Alexander IV and the English Franciscan Adam Marsh (died 1259). However, the hostility between monks and bishops was by no means resolved. To fund their appeal the monks had been forced to borrow heavily from Italian merchants, so that in return for repaying some of these debts, Lusignan persuaded the monks to sell him the Isle of Portland with the manors of Weymouth and Wyke in Dorset. Throughout these years he continued to receive a stream of gifts, wine, venison, and timber, from Henry III. His profits from the Winchester fair were boosted by royal trading privileges, and new markets were awarded by the king to at least three of Lusignan's episcopal estates. Lusignan himself speculated in the lucrative market in Jewish debt, and obtained the king's permission to purchase land at Woolwich and Greenwich from the monks of St Jean-d'Angely in his native Poitou. Through royal favour he was able to marry his niece Alice to Gilbert de Clare (died 1295), son of the earl of Gloucester, and for several years in succession he was granted exemption from hunting offences in the king's forests. In 1255 the king lobbied unsuccessfully to have him promoted archbishop of York. 
Lusignan was not entirely subservient to the royal court. In April 1253, for example, he supported the other English bishops in their resistance to a demand for taxation, an action for which he is said to have been bitterly rebuked by the king. Perhaps as a result of this, and in the aftermath of his dispute with Archbishop Boniface, by July 1253 Lusignan's enemies had persuaded the pope to rescind the earlier licence by which he had been allowed to retain the ecclesiastical rents and benefices he held in addition to his income from Winchester. At a time of ever mounting financial crisis, the promotion of Aymer and his Lusignan brothers was widely resented in England. His dispute with Archbishop Boniface demonstrates the extent to which the Lusignans were also at odds with the king's supporters and kinsmen from Savoy, including not only Boniface himself, but also Boniface's niece, Queen Eleanor, Henry III's wife. Aymer de Lusignan and his brothers were widely criticized as Poitevin outsiders, an image enhanced by their continuing contacts with France and Poitou. Many of the clerks and knights in Lusignan's episcopal household were drawn from Poitou, and he himself spent long periods overseas -- between January and September 1257 on a visit to his homeland, in January 1257 as ambassador sent to negotiate a truce with Louis IX, and in January 1258 as an envoy to request the restoration of Henry III's lands in France. 
The outcry against Lusignan reached its climax during a parliament summoned to Oxford in June 1258. Two months earlier his men had been involved in a violent clash with the followers of John Fitzgeoffrey (died 1258), lord of Shere in Surrey, in which one of Fitzgeoffrey's men was killed. Henry III had refused to give a hearing to Fitzgeoffrey's complaints, fuelling an armed resistance to the crown headed by the English barons. In the ensuing turmoil Lusignan was appointed one of the twelve royalists sent to negotiate with the baronial opposition, but shortly afterwards, at the end of June 1258, he and his brothers fled from the Oxford parliament to Winchester. The barons pursued them there, and threatened to lay siege to Lusignan's castle at Wolvesey. He was accused of homicide, following the death of Fitzgeoffrey's servant, and dark rumours circulated of a poison plot against various of the English barons. Offered the choice between remaining in England, in baronial custody, and accepting exile overseas, Lusignan chose exile, so that he and his brothers set sail from Dover on 14 July. He was permitted to carry away with him only 3000 marks of his vast accumulated treasure; the remainder was spent by the barons over the next two years, partly in attempts to persuade the pope to remove Lusignan from his office as bishop of Winchester. 
Initially Lusignan intended to reside at the schools of Paris, but he was refused permission by the French king, Louis IX, brother-in-law of Henry III's wife, Eleanor of Provence. Instead he travelled to the papal court. There he obtained a favourable hearing, and in January 1259 the papal penitentiary Velascus was dispatched to persuade Henry III to restore Lusignan to his see. Prompted by the barons the king replied that the bishop's exile had been justified, and that Lusignan had done much to sour relations between Henry, Queen Eleanor, and their son, the Lord Edward. Meanwhile, in January 1259, the Winchester monks had been persuaded to elect Henry of Wingham (died 1262) as bishop in Lusignan's place. The Winchester estates were plundered by the barons, and Lusignan's appointees ejected from their offices in the cathedral by the monks of St Swithun's. In January 1260 Henry III wrote again to the pope, asking that Lusignan might be translated to another bishopric, outside England. Despite this, having reached the canonical age of thirty, on 29 May 1260 Lusignan was ordained priest by the pope, and on the following day was consecrated bishop of Winchester. He then set out for England, accompanied by Velascus and by his former tutor, Vincent, archbishop of Tours, who was empowered to declare a papal sentence of interdict and excommunication until the Winchester estates should be restored. However, at Paris Lusignan became ill, and died at the abbey of Ste Genevieve on 4 December 1260. On receiving news of his death King Henry ordered that special masses be said, and feasts celebrated in his honour at Winchester and Oxford. Two years later, no longer constrained by the baronial council, Henry commissioned a further series of feasts and prayers to mark the burial of Lusignan's heart at Winchester Cathedral, on 20 March 1262. 
In his lifetime Aymer de Lusignan was heavily criticized by the English chroniclers, for his foreign birth, his greed, his lack of learning, and his encouragement of violence. The dispute with St Swithun's Priory, which first erupted in 1254, was to continue to plague his successors at Winchester for many years to come, resulting in a financial crisis for both bishops and monks. However, despite this, and despite the fact that for much of his time as bishop-elect Lusignan was an absentee from Winchester, his episcopal administration appears to have operated with considerable efficiency. He or his officials issued numerous charters, ordaining vicarages, settling tithe disputes, encouraging gifts to the Winchester hospital of St Cross, and ending a dispute over jurisdiction with the archdeacon of Surrey. The Winchester account rolls demonstrate a high level of alms-giving to the poor during his years as bishop-elect. Despite his supposed lack of learning Lusignan was still able to serve as one of the judges in the literary contest between the poets Henry d'Avranches and Michael of Cornwall. Through his speculations in the land market he obtained possession of Portland in Dorset and an estate at Woolwich in Kent, originally intended to augment the revenues of the see of Winchester, but in the event seized by Lusignan's baronial opponents following his exile. Most remarkably of all, his heart tomb at Winchester, decorated with the arms of Lusignan, of Henry III, and of Henry's brother, Richard, earl of Cornwall, king of Germany (died 1272), appears to have been venerated as a shrine. Miracles are said to have occurred there in the immediate aftermath of his heart's burial in 1262, and money, presumably votive offerings, was still being collected from the tomb more than a decade later. 


@@@@@


doc= 942


Valence, Aymer de, eleventh earl of Pembroke (d. 1324), magnate, was the son of William de Valence (d. 1296), the half-brother of Henry III, and therefore closely related to both the kings of England who ruled during his lifetime; through his mother, William de Valence's wife, Joan de Munchensi (died 1307), he was descended from the Marshal earls of Pembroke. 
The date and place of birth of Aymer de Valence are both unknown. The evidence of proofs of age suggests a date somewhere between 1270 and 1275, but his father's return to England in January 1273, after crusading with the Lord Edward, implies a date towards the end of this period. Since William de Valence spent a considerable part of 1273 and 1274 on royal business in the vicinity of Limoges, and in close proximity to his own French lands, there is at least a possibility that his wife accompanied him and that Aymer was born in France. Although Aymer took his family name either from Valence, a few kilometres south-east of Lusignan and on the outskirts of Couhe south of Poitiers, or from another Valence north of Angouleme and north-east of Montignac, there is no positive evidence to support either of them as his actual birthplace. 
Aymer was his parents' third and only surviving son. His eldest brother, John, died in 1277 and was buried in Westminster Abbey, close to his sister Margaret (died 1276). Until William de Valence the younger was killed in Wales in June 1282 Aymer had been destined for an ecclesiastical career, like his uncle and namesake in the reign of Henry III: a petition to the pope in May 1282 requesting that Aymer be provided with a plurality of benefices described him as 'a youth of good ability, recommended by his study of letters and his manners and merits' (TNA: PRO, SC1/13/204; 'CClR, 1279-1288', 188). 
As the ultimate heir of both his parents, Aymer de Valence held lands in England, Wales, and Ireland, and would have occupied a leading place in English magnate society whatever the politics of the time. However he was also one of the last holders of an English earldom to be closely linked with France both by descent and by the tenure of land. He was the grandson of Hugues (X) de Lusignan, count of La Marche (died 1249) and of Isabella of Angouleme (c.1188-1246) and widow of King John of England, who belonged to two of the great families of Poitou in central France. On the death of his father in May 1296 Valence inherited Rancon (held from the bishop of Limoges); Bellac and Champagnac (held from the abbess of La Regle at Limoges), all to the north of Limoges and within the county of La Marche; and Montignac (held from the bishop of Angouleme) on the River Charente, a few kilometres to the north of Angouleme, of which county it formed part. When Guiard de Lusignan, the last count of La Marche and Angouleme, died in 1308, Valence's claims to succeed to these strategically placed territories were sufficiently strong for Philippe IV of France to buy them out in 1309 in return for 1000 livres tournois and Valence's liege homage. He visited France at least six times between 1296 and 1307, and on eleven occasions (mainly on official business) between 1307 and his death there in 1324. The magnificent Valence casket decorated with the arms of the families to whom Aymer was related, which was made for either William or Aymer and is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, shows very vividly the extent of his continental connections. 
Valence's ties with France were strengthened by his two marriages. The first was to Beatrice, daughter of Raoul de Clermont, lord of Nesle in Picardy and constable of France, and took place before 18 October 1295. A single surviving letter from Beatrice, calling herself 'la soune lyge compayne e amye' to Valence in 1296 (TNA: PRO, SC1/18/183), suggests an affectionate relationship between the two, but otherwise little is known about her. Beatrice died in September 1320, and was buried in the church of the Benedictine priory at Stratford-le-Bow in Middlesex. On 5 July 1321 in Paris, Aymer married Mary de St Pol (c.1304-1377), daughter of Gui de Chatillon, count of St Pol and butler of France. She brought to the marriage lands at Tours-en-Vimeu, Thievre, Oreville, and Freacans, in the area of the Pas-de-Calais, which she retained until 1372. 
There is no record of any children by either of Valence's marriages, but he had an illegitimate son, Henry de Valence, with an unknown partner. This relationship may be one source of the tradition, for which there is no evidence, that Valence married an unnamed daughter of the count of Bar. The fact that he was briefly held prisoner in Bar in 1317 may also have something to do with the story. Henry de Valence was a knight who served in his father's retinue between 1315 and 1319; in 1317-18 he was a hostage for Aymer in Bar; he died in 1322, leaving a widow named Margery. 
Aymer de Valence's first recorded action was to accompany his father on a diplomatic mission to Cambrai early in 1296; at Westminster on 14 July 1297 he took the oath of fealty to Prince Edward as Edward I's successor; in the same year he was knighted and in 1297-8 accompanied Edward I to Flanders. He was involved in diplomatic negotiations with France in 1297, in 1299 (the treaty for Edward I's remarriage), 1301, 1302, and 1303, and in 1304 was to have joined Prince Edward on his proposed visit to France to do homage for Aquitaine. He fought in Scotland, at Falkirk, in 1298, and again in 1299, 1300 (the siege of Caerlaverock), 1301, and 1302. In 1303 he commanded the English forces south of the Forth, and in April 1306 was appointed captain of the north after the killing of his brother-in-law John Comyn by Robert Bruce, whom he defeated at Methven in June. Although in May 1307 he was himself defeated by Bruce at Loudoun Hill, in August he was appointed by the new king, Edward II, as keeper of Scotland. 
On 26 October 1307, following his mother's death, Aymer de Valence succeeded to the title and to the lands of the earldom of Pembroke in England, Wales, and Ireland (the lordship of Wexford). In November 1307 he went to France to complete arrangements for Edward II's marriage to Isabella, daughter of Philippe IV of France, and in mid-January 1308 he conducted Edward from Dover to Boulogne, where the king was married on 25 January. Although the new earl of Pembroke had witnessed the charter creating Gaveston earl of Cornwall on 6 August 1307, it is likely that by 1308 he was becoming concerned about the arrogance of Gaveston's behaviour. However Pembroke's involvement in the 'Boulogne declaration' of 31 January 1308 was primarily caused by the need to end the financial and administrative abuses of royal government which had continued from the reign of Edward I. There is no indication of any personal hostility between Pembroke and the king. Pembroke helped to persuade Edward II to accept magnate demands for Gaveston's exile in May 1308, but in March 1309 went to Avignon on Edward's behalf in a successful attempt to persuade the pope to sanction Gaveston's return to England. Pembroke's political attitude soon changed, however, partly because of the king's failure to implement the reforms agreed at Stamford in August 1309, but also because of the behaviour of Gaveston, who bestowed one of his notorious nicknames on Pembroke, whom he allegedly described as Joseph the Jew 'because he was pale and tall' ('Historia Anglicana', 1, 115). 
In March 1310 Pembroke was elected as one of the lords ordainer who were reluctantly authorized by the king to draw up a programme of reform. Despite several appeals from Edward II, Pembroke maintained his distance from the court, and in September 1310 refused to join Edward and Gaveston in a new campaign in Scotland, although he did send a token force to observe the letter of his military obligations. Pembroke played an active part in the drafting of the ordinances, whose publication he witnessed on 27 September 1311. In March 1312 Pembroke was appointed by an assembly of prelates and magnates to pursue and capture Gaveston, who had returned to England from his latest exile in late 1311 or early 1312. On 17 May Pembroke and the earl of Surrey besieged Gaveston in Scarborough Castle; and on 19 May Gaveston surrendered to Pembroke, who guaranteed his safety until 1 August. After a meeting with the king at York, Gaveston was placed in Pembroke's personal custody and taken south. On 9 June Pembroke and Gaveston reached Deddington in Oxfordshire, where Pembroke left him and a few retainers at the rector's house while he visited his wife at his manor of Bampton about 20 miles away. On the morning of 10 June the earl of Warwick seized Gaveston, took him to Warwick and, with the approval of the earl of Lancaster and other magnates, executed him nearby on 19 June. 
This act removed any ambiguity in Pembroke's relations with the king. Pembroke probably continued to support the principles of reform as contained in the ordinances, but his support of his fellow ordainers was ended by this blow to his honour. Until the actions of the Despensers after 1318 again placed a strain upon his loyalty, Pembroke remained clearly on the king's side. 
In August 1312 Pembroke visited Paris to enlist Philippe IV's aid in negotiating with the ordainers; on 20-21 September, at great risk to his personal safety, he attempted to ensure the loyalty of the city of London to the king; and he took an active part in the negotiations which led to a peace treaty between Edward II and his opponents on 20 December 1312. In February and March 1313 he went to Paris to arrange for a personal meeting between Edward II and Philippe IV to resolve Anglo-French disputes in Aquitaine, and accompanied Edward and Isabella to Paris in June and July. He again accompanied Edward to France for a meeting with Philippe IV at Montreuil in December 1313. 
In April 1314 Pembroke was appointed as the king's lieutenant in Scotland, in advance of the campaign to relieve Stirling which culminated in the disastrous English defeat at Bannockburn on 24 June. Pembroke was close to the king, and intervened to lead him away from the battle to safety at Dunbar and thence to Berwick. 
On 2 January 1315 Pembroke attended Gaveston's reburial at Langley; in May and June he visited Paris on behalf of Edward II to obtain confirmation from the new French king, Louis X, of previous Anglo-French agreements; between July and October 1315 he organized the defence of the northern borders from Scottish attack. In February 1316 he deputized for the king at the opening of the Lincoln parliament, at which the earl of Lancaster was nominated as the king's chief councillor, and was a member of the committee appointed to consider reform of the realm and the royal household. In July he helped to end the resistance of Bristol to royal authority. 
In December 1316 Pembroke was appointed to lead an embassy to the newly elected pope, John XXII, to obtain support against the Scots, achieve financial concessions, and possibly to free Edward from his oath to uphold the ordinances. In early May 1317, as Pembroke was returning from Avignon, he was taken prisoner at Etampes and taken to an unknown destination in the county of Bar on the borders between France and the empire where he was forced to agree to a ransom of $10,400. His captor, Jean de Lamouilly, who came from Bar, had served in various Scottish garrisons between 1299 and 1312. Lamouilly's wages were apparently in arrears but it is also likely that Count Edouard of Bar used Pembroke's capture to punish Edward II for the treatment in England of his sister Joan, the estranged wife of the earl of Surrey. Pembroke was freed from captivity before the end of June 1317. The burden of paying his ransom and of redeeming the hostages he left behind in Bar left him with severe financial problems for the rest of his life. 
The Avignon embassy has also traditionally, but incorrectly, been seen as the occasion on which Pembroke began the formation of a so-called 'middle party', designed to win control over the royal government at the expense of Thomas, earl of Lancaster. Even had he wished to do so, Pembroke's financial problems would have deprived him of the necessary freedom of action. In fact his main motivation in the critical period of English politics between 1316 and 1318 was to do whatever he could to avoid the outbreak of civil war between the king's supporters and those of the earl of Lancaster. On 1 November 1317 Pembroke contracted to serve the king for life in peace and war, while on 24 November he and Bartholomew Badlesmere made a contract with one of the current royal favourites, Roger Damory, with the intention of ensuring the latter's future good behaviour. 
The possible dangers had been shown all too clearly on 1 October 1317, when Pembroke had barely succeeded in persuading the king not to attack Lancaster in his castle of Pontefract. Pembroke also played an important role, along with other magnates, the leading English clergy, and two papal envoys, in the tortuous negotiations which concluded in the treaty agreed between Edward II and Lancaster at Leake on 9 August 1318. Pembroke was a prominent member of the standing royal council of prelates and magnates which was established at the York parliament in October 1318. In March 1319 he sat at the chapter house of St Paul's Cathedral to hear the complaints of the citizens of London. In August 1319 Pembroke made his will (which is not extant) before taking part in September in the unsuccessful siege of Berwick; and in December he helped to negotiate a two-year truce with the Scots. 
In February 1320 Pembroke was appointed to be keeper of the realm during the king's proposed visit to France to do homage for Aquitaine, and was reappointed during June and July when the king made his delayed visit. However, real power was increasingly being exercised by the younger Hugh Despenser and his father. The death of Pembroke's wife in September, and his lack of a legitimate male heir, gave him a good excuse to go to France to arrange for a second marriage. Pembroke left England in late November 1320 and returned in late March 1321, shortly before the attack on the Despensers by Hereford and Mortimer. Pembroke again left England in late May to marry Mary de St Pol in Paris and returned to England in late July. He then played a crucial role in persuading Edward II to agree to the exile of the Despensers, after warning the king that even his loyalty might be in question if the king refused. 
However, Pembroke was not trusted by the opponents of the Despensers, and this fact, as well as his own natural inclination, brought him back openly to the king's side in the civil war that followed. Pembroke was present at the siege of Leeds Castle in October, and in December consented to the return of the Despensers from exile. He was active in the campaign against the contrariants, and was one of the earls who judged the earl of Lancaster guilty of treason on 21 March 1322. Pembroke's reputation was however compromised by the events of 1321-2. The king's enemies considered that he had betrayed them, while in May 1322 the king, under the influence of the Despensers, forced Pembroke to make a pledge of loyalty 'for certain reasons he was given to understand' ('CClR, 1318-1323', 563-4). 
Pembroke took part in the unsuccessful Scottish campaign in the late summer of 1322, and on 14 October was in the English army defeated by the Scots on Blackhowmoor, near Old Byland in Yorkshire. He negotiated the thirteen-year truce that was agreed with the Scots in May 1323. In June 1324 he was sent to France to settle the St Sardos dispute. He never reached Paris, dying suddenly on 23 June, probably near St Riquier in Picardy. Pembroke's body was returned to London on 31 July, and he was buried in Westminster Abbey near the high altar on 1 August. Although his death was almost certainly natural, writers hostile to him claimed that he was poisoned, and that his lack of a male heir was a divine punishment for his part in Lancaster's death, while his widow and coheirs suffered harassment in revenge for Pembroke's support of the Despensers' opponents in 1321. Long before his death Pembroke had been overtaken by events beyond his control. 
Mary de St Pol outlived Pembroke by over fifty years, devoting herself to a life of piety; she died in England in March 1377 at the Franciscan priory of Denny near Cambridge, which she herself had founded in 1339, and where she was buried. In memory of her husband she commissioned the fine stone tomb in Westminster Abbey, and a chantry -- now part of the chapel of St John the Baptist; she installed a memorial window in the new church of the Greyfriars in London; and in 1347 founded Pembroke College in Cambridge. In 1363 one of the scholars of the college, Jakob Nielsen from Denmark (James Nicholas of Dacia), wrote an ingenious if rather tortuous poem in Aymer's honour. 
While he possessed considerable talents as an administrator, diplomat, and military commander, in politics Pembroke was not a natural leader but was by birth and experience an upholder of tradition, whose usual inclination was to serve his royal cousins and the crown they represented to the best of his ability. Although he played a prominent and constructive part in the many crises of the reign of Edward II, his loyalty and integrity were severely tested by the influence exercised over Edward and his government by Piers Gaveston and by Hugh Despenser the younger. Had he lived beyond 1324 he would certainly have been forced to make a choice between serving Edward, transferring his allegiance to Isabella and Mortimer, or even in the last resort withdrawing to his French lands. Since England and France were then on the verge of open war, his death may also have saved him from another difficult choice between allegiances. 
Pembroke's leading retainers included his nephew John Hastings, lord of Abergavenny and father of Laurence Hastings, Pembroke's eventual successor as earl in 1339. Another nephew, John Comyn, was the son of John Comyn of Badenoch who was killed by Robert Bruce in 1306, and was himself killed fighting Robert at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1297 Thomas Berkeley, senior, and his son Maurice made an indenture for military service with Pembroke. They, and other members of the Berkeley family, and other associates of the Berkeleys, remained as regular retainers of Pembroke until they quarrelled with him in 1317 and moved to the service of Roger Mortimer of Wigmore. One of the many ironies of Pembroke's career is that Thomas Berkeley, junior, Thomas Gurney, and John Maltravers, the custodians of the deposed Edward II at Berkeley Castle in 1327, were all former members of Pembroke's retinue. Another prominent Pembroke retainer was John Darcy, who made an indenture for life service in 1309 and served him until 1323, when he was appointed justiciar of Ireland. Darcy was later to serve as steward of the royal household from 1337 and was present at the battle of Crecy in 1346. Pembroke evidently inspired loyalty and affection among some at least of his retainers, since in 1323 Darcy regretted having to leave his good master and lord -- 'son bon maistre e seigneur' (TNA: PRO, SC8/239/11949). 


@@@@@


doc= 943


Airmyn, Richard (c.1290-1340), administrator, came of a family that derived its name from the village of Airmyn on the River Aire in Yorkshire. Richard seems to have been a son of Adam and Matilda Airmyn and a younger brother of William Airmyn (d. 1336), bishop of Norwich, although in his episcopal register the latter does not address him as such. On the other hand, Master Adam Airmyn, rector of Gargrave, later archdeacon of Norfolk, is regularly addressed as 'carissime frater'. All three were trained as chancery clerks and both Richard and Adam owed much to the patronage of William, and in Richard's case to that of Robert Baldock (died 1327). Richard was a clerk of the privy seal from about 1315 until 1323. Eventually he received higher wages than his colleagues, suggesting that he may have become chief clerk. In October 1318, with William Airmyn, he attended the important reforming parliament at York which confirmed the articles drawn up by Lancaster's supporters at Leake the previous August. According to the Pauline annalist William and his brother, presumably Richard, were captured by the Scots at Myton in Swaledale in 1319, a heavy ransom being paid for their release. Richard succeeded William as keeper of the rolls of chancery in 1324, an office he retained for a year. When in 1323-4 the temporalities of Winchester diocese were withheld from John Stratford (died 1348), Richard Airmyn was appointed one of the administrators. During November and December 1324, owing to Chancellor Baldock's absence, he acted as a temporary keeper of the great seal. 
Following William Airmyn's acceptance of provision to Norwich in 1325, Richard became involved in diocesan administration. He was appointed vicar-general of the diocese from Paris (20 September 1325) and shortly thereafter was deputed with his brother Adam to administer oaths of canonical obedience. At the time he held the valuable Yorkshire rectory of Kirk Ella. Such duties did not detain him long, for the following year he was succeeded as vicar-general by Adam. Edward II's growing hostility to William now affected Richard's career, and in March 1326 royal writs were issued for his and Adam's pursuit and arrest. It has been suggested that they took refuge on the continent and returned with Queen Isabella. All that is known for certain is that on 14 October 1326 -- Bishop William having returned to Norwich -- Adam was reappointed vicar-general. 
The first keeper of the privy seal in the reign of Edward III, Richard Airmyn held office from 1 March 1327 until the following 18 February. In 1327 he was made keeper for life of the Domus Conversorum (house of converts) -- a domicile for converted Jews in Chancery Lane, probably already used for the storage of chancery records. He surrendered the office in 1339. But Isabella's irritation with Bishop Airmyn, on account of his alleged responsibility for the oath of homage performed to the French king by the future Edward III in 1325, may have damaged Richard's prospects, for he did not hold high office again. His administrative career nevertheless brought ecclesiastical rewards. At Edward II's request he was granted (March 1320) an annual pension of $5 from Christ Church, Canterbury. The royal grant of a Lichfield prebend in 1328 proved abortive, but an expectative grace of 23 March in that year enabled him to secure collation to the chancellorship of Salisbury Cathedral (16 July 1329), a dignity held until his death, between 3 April and 9 May 1340. He also held prebends in York (from 1316), Chichester, and Lincoln, in addition to a prebendal portion in the royal chapel of Wimborne. 


@@@@@


doc= 944


Airmyn, William (d. 1336), administrator and bishop of Norwich, was the son of Adam and Matilda Airmyn, and probably came from the hamlet of Airmyn, near Selby, in Yorkshire, one of a large group of men from that region to obtain prominence in government service. First recorded as an attorney in chancery in April 1300, he obtained royal presentation to benefices in July 1304 and October 1306, and a royal gift of timber through the agency of Walter Langton in June 1307. He was proctor for St Augustine's, Canterbury, at the Carlisle parliament of January 1307. In Edward II's reign, especially after the appointment of Walter Reynolds as chancellor in 1310, Airmyn became one of those most responsible for the routine work of chancery. A steady stream of ecclesiastical patronage followed, including canonries in six cathedrals. In 1312 he spent six months at the papal curia on royal business, and was granted a papal dispensation at the king's request in October. In 1316 he was specially deputed to draw up the parliament roll of the Lincoln parliament. Distinguished by its being a chronological record of parliamentary proceedings, this set a pattern that was taken up again in the 1330s. In August 1316 he succeeded his fellow Yorkshireman, Adam Osgodby, as keeper of the rolls of chancery and of the house of converts, and in later years was variously described as 'vice cancellaries', and as the king's special clerk and secretary of the chancery. In May 1317 he and two royal justices were charged with the partition of the Gloucester inheritance. In September 1319 he and his brother Richard Airmyn (d. 1340) were captured by the Scots at the battle of Myton; they obtained their release with a ransom of 2000 marks. In March 1321 he was one of those who negotiated a truce with the Scots. His administrative expertise led V. H. Galbraith to suggest that he is the author of the 'Modus tenendi parliamentum', which may have been written at this time. 
In February 1322 the king warmly commended Airmyn to the pope, while urging that the keeper of the privy seal, Robert Baldock, be promoted to the next available bishopric. Airmyn was one of those commissioned to negotiate a truce with Robert I in May 1323. In May 1324 he resigned his post as keeper of the rolls of chancery to his brother, Richard, and became keeper of the privy seal, an office he held until early 1325. On 7 January 1325 Airmyn was elected bishop of Carlisle, with support from both Edward II and Queen Isabella. The election was set aside by the papal provision of John Ross, but the pope promised to promote Airmyn in due course. Accordingly, on 19 July 1325, the day after hearing of the vacancy at Norwich, the pope provided Airmyn to that bishopric. The king, however, having determined upon the appointment of Baldock, now chancellor, angrily sequestered Airmyn's temporalities. Airmyn was accused of having obtained the see through the influence of Queen Isabella and her brother, the French king Charles IV. He was the more vulnerable to this charge in that he had been one of the envoys who had secured the terms of 31 May 1325 to end the War of St Sardos, terms viewed unfavourably with hindsight, although Edward had himself ratified the treaty in June 1325. Airmyn secured papal help in seeking to assuage the king's wrath. He had returned to England by December 1325 but did not respond to royal summonses in early 1326. The arrest of two of his brothers was ordered in March, and he soon fled abroad. 
Airmyn supported the queen in her invasion in September 1326, and was with her at Bristol when Prince Edward was proclaimed 'custos' of the realm. He was given charge of the great seal from 30 November until Hotham's appointment as chancellor on 28 January 1327. His temporalities were restored in early December 1326, and two months later he recovered the issues which had been confiscated between December 1325 and November 1326. From 1327 to 1335 Airmyn was prominent in diplomacy. He was one of those responsible for the settlement with France in March 1327, and for the peace with Scotland in March 1328. He played a large role in 1331 in negotiating the terms of Edward III's homage to Philippe VI and in the inconclusive process of Agen, and subsequently helped arrange the marriage of the king's sister, Eleanor, to Reginald (II), count of Gueldres, which took place in 1332. From 1 April 1331 to 29 March 1332 he held office as treasurer. His personal wealth, partly derived from property concentrated in Durham, Yorkshire, and Lincolnshire, must have been great, and he was able to advance the king $1000 for the Scottish wars in November 1334. He died at his house in Charing, London, on 27 March 1336, and was buried in Norwich Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 945


Ayres, John (d. 1704x9), writing-master, according to early accounts began life in a humble way as a footman in the house of Sir William Ashurst, to whom he owed his education. His original teacher of writing was Thomas Topham, to whom he dedicated 'The Accomplisht Clerk' of 1680. It is said that on marrying a fellow servant with $200, Ayres was able to set himself up as a teacher of handwriting and accounts in St Paul's Churchyard, where his industry and ability soon procured him so many pupils that his income from teaching alone was said to be $800 a year. Here, at the Hand and Pen near St Paul's School, he also produced a number of copybooks over the next twenty years. Samuel Pepys, who had five works by Ayres in his 'Calligraphical Collection', lists his work under the heading 'Maj.r Ayres', and contemporaries frequently referred to him as 'Major' or 'Colonel' Ayres. This title no doubt refers to his position in the City bands, and it also gives some indication of his social standing. 
The interest taken in the work of Ayres by Pepys is a strong indication of the position he held in the field of contemporary calligraphy, of which Pepys was both collector and connoisseur. In a letter to John Bagford of 16 April 1697/8 Pepys wrote of 'having a particular reason' to know of Ayres's latest 'Copy-Book, whether it be yet finished or published or no', and, if the book be available, 'procure a very fair one and send it to me' ('Letters and the Second Diary', 267). Pepys was not alone in his admiration of the work of Ayres, nor was Ayres himself unaware of his fellow penmen. In his preface to 'A Tutor to Penmanship' of 1698, Ayres wrote of the 'different state of English & Forreign Pen-man-ship, at & since the coming-in of Printing' and praised the work of Van den Velde and Materot, as well as his English predecessors such as Richard Gething and Peter Gery in particular. In this regard it is worth noting that one of his own writing books was entitled 'Materot redivivus' (1690). Towards his English contemporaries Ayres was less charitable. Most of the writing books of the period bubble with charges and counter-charges over the matter of style. The main controversy was whether 'owls, apes and monsters, and sprig'd letters' were allowable in serious works. These fanciful shapes, intended to show off the fluency of the writing-master and his command of penstrokes, were thought by some to entice unwilling pupils to better handwriting. Attacked by Charles Snell and others on this point, Ayres responded in kind with reflections on 'the malice and invincible ignorance' of his rivals. But although he did not despise the fanciful 'command of hand' exercises, it was his round hand which particularly impressed people, and which continued to influence later writing-masters, and therefore the development of English handwriting. Although Ayres himself looked back to the Italian masters, it is likely that the source of his own style was the Italian hand as transmuted through the work of northern calligraphers. While he was not against the occasional calligraphic flourish, Ayres was very scathing about the trick writing of contemporary shorthand masters, for the aim of shorthand, he said, 'is not to write much in a little room, but to write much in a little 'time'' (A. Nicholas, preface, 'Thoographia, or, A New Art of Short-Hand', 1692). 
There is considerable difficulty -- and indeed diversity -- in listing the major works of Ayres, for reasons that are common to many of the writing books of the period. They were for the most part issued with either a printed or an engraved title-page -- sometimes with both -- and usually included some pages of text in which the writing-master made clear his attitudes and aims. Popular works, such as those of Ayres, were frequently reissued. In these instances there would often be a new letterpress title-page, and possibly new text, but the original engraved plates which contained the calligraphic examples would remain unchanged. A detailed examination of several copies of a work is often required to decide on the original date and edition -- and, not surprisingly in books intended for daily practical use, they have not always survived in sufficient numbers. The five works collected by Pepys ('The ala mode secretarie', 1681; 'The Accomplisht Clerk', 1683; 'The Penmans Daily Practise', 1692; 'A Tutor to Penmanship', 1698; and 'The Accomplish'd Clerk Regraved', 1700) would make a more valuable contribution to the study of Ayres, and other penmen, if he had not preserved only the engraved plates and thrown out all printed matter -- title-page, text, and, more importantly, often the date as well. Even the engraved titles have been found to differ on occasions from the original printed version, thus making the work of the bibliographer doubly difficult. 
The date of Ayres's death is unknown, though it must have occurred between 1704 and 1709, since in 1704 he handed over his school to Robert More, and in 1709 his pupil John Rayner speaks of his master as dead. Bromley's 'Catalogue of Engraved British Portraits' gives the date of his death as 1705. This is said to have taken place from apoplexy while he was regaling friends at Vauxhall Gardens. 


@@@@@


doc= 946


Ayres, Philip (1638-1712), poet and translator, was born at Cottingham, Northamptonshire, and educated at Westminster School under Richard Busby. He is said to have been a member of St John's College, Oxford, but there is no record of his having matriculated at that university. By January 1666 he was attached to Sir Richard Fanshawe's embassy to Spain and Portugal in the capacity of steward: he is listed by Lady Fanshawe in her 'Memoirs' among those who accompanied Fanshawe on his journey from Madrid to Lisbon, but not among those who returned with her from Madrid after her husband's death in June 1666. His copy of Fanshawe's translation of Mendoza's 'Querer por solo querer' (1670), now in the National Library of Scotland, bears the Spanish inscription 'Philip Ayres majordomo to his Excellency Sir Richard Fanshawe'. 
Ayres began to learn Spanish on his travels and published, in 1670, 'The Fortunate Fool', a translation of 'El necio bien afortunado' by A. G. de Salas Barbadillo, stating in the 'Epistle Dedicatory' that it was done ''a la volee' only for my Divertisment, at spare hours, and my practice in the 'Spanish' tongue'. Ayres may have travelled to the Netherlands in the early 1670s. In the epistle to 'The Hungarian Rebellion', which he published in 1672, he claimed to be translating from a German text 'lately met with in 'Holland''. At some point in the 1670s Ayres obtained a post as tutor in the Drake family of Amersham. He was 'Dry Nurse', that is, tutor, to two Montagu Garrard Drakes, father and son, and he lived in the Drake household until his death in 1712. 
Ayres's first publication was 'A Short Account of the Life and Death of Pope Alexander the VII', published in 1667, a translation of a text by Stefano Cavalli, published at Rome earlier in the same year. The preface to this pamphlet makes Ayres's own Anglican convictions clear, and singles Alexander VII out as an exceptional pontiff, free of what Ayres regards as Roman corruption. Nevertheless, Ayres hoped to see an end to the schism within western Christianity, a view not uncommon in the 1630s but comparatively rare later in the century. He returned to the subject ten years later, in his 'Reuniting of Christianity, or, The manner how to rejoin all Christians under one sole confession of faith. Written in French by a learned protestant divine and now Englished' (1677). Despite the scepticism and hostility expressed in 'The translators animadversions on the foregoing discourses', Ayres translated, in 1680, a classic text of early modern hermeticism: Nicolas Pierre de Montfaucon de Villars's 'Le comte de Gablis'. This is the text from which Pope drew his ironic supernatural 'machinery' in 'The Rape of the Lock'. 
The two literary works for which Ayres is chiefly remembered are the 'Emblemata amatoria' (1683) and 'Lyrick Poems' (1687). The former was the last of the English emblem books to achieve a popular success. Three-quarters of the copper plates are derived from the 'Amorum emblemata' (Antwerp, 1608) of Otho Vaenius (Otto van Veen), and (in these cases) the Latin and Italian verses are from the same source. Almost all the remaining plates are from the 'Thronus cupidinis' (Amsterdam, 1618). It is to be assumed that all the English verses and some of those in French, Latin, and Italian are Ayres's own compositions. Like Ayres's 'Lyrick Poems', this work looks to the modes and achievements of the first half of the seventeenth century. Despite this, the book was clearly popular: there were five English editions over the following thirty years. 
The 'Lyrick Poems' (1687) includes translations from the ancient Greek lyric poets, Petrarch, Tasso, Camoes, Guarini, de la Vega, Quevedo, Gongora, and Marino, and most of the verses presented as original compositions are also translations. The collection also contains a Spanish poem by Ayres in which he styles himself 'Don Felipe Ayres'. The 'Preface' confirms the impression that Ayres was trying to fashion himself as a baroque poet on the continental model, referring to Fanshawe and Milton (poets closely involved with Spanish and Italian literature) as his models in English, as well as Spenser and Sidney. The volume also contains poems of friendship to John Dryden and Nahum Tate, as well as a surprisingly extravagant panegyric of James II. 
Three further works require brief mention. An original conduct-book, homiletic in tone, 'Vox clamantis, or, An essay for the honour, happiness and prosperity of the English gentry, and the whole nation' (1684), prescribes rules of elite behaviour in a context of divine-right royalism and high-church Anglicanism. In 1684 Ayres published 'The voyages and adventures of Capt. Barth. Sharp and others... journal of the same also Capt. Van Horn with his buccanieres surprizing of la Vera Cruz' (1684), a documentary work which anticipates Defoe's narratives of piracy. In 1689 he published an illustrated work, 'Mythologica ethica, or, Three Centuries of Aesopian Fables', a compendium drawn from various ancient and Renaissance sources owing at least its title to Freitag's 'Mythologica ethica' (Antwerp, 1579). In its preface he is at pains to put forward a case for his dignity and status as a compiler, editor, and annotator. 
In 1696 Ayres published 'The Revengeful Mistress', a set of interlocking prose narratives or 'novels', which set out to warn gentlemen travellers (and their guardians) of the dangers to be met with on the continent, the 'ill women' of Italy, and especially of Spain. He published no more, and died at Amersham on 1 December 1712. He was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Amersham, where a monumental inscription was erected to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 947


Ayrton, Acton Smee (1816-1886), politician, born at Kew, London, was a son of Frederick Ayrton (student at Gray's Inn from 27 January 1802, barrister from 'c'.1805, and afterwards in practice at Bombay) and Julia, only daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Nugent. Acton Ayrton was educated at Ealing School. He went to India and practised as a solicitor at Bombay, returning about 1851 with a moderate fortune. On 30 April 1853 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple, with the intention of devoting himself to a political career. 
Ayrton was Liberal MP for Tower Hamlets, 1857-74, and was always a staunch reformer, supporting the ballot and franchise reform, though being cautious about the extreme effects of free trade. His long speech, on 24 April 1860, in support of the abortive bill for reforming the corporation of the City of London ('Hansard 3', 1860, 69-85) attracted attention. Towards the end of his life he resumed his interest in that movement. He sat on the royal commissions on railway companies' charges, on the law courts, and on sanitary laws. In 1866, when addressing a meeting of working men in his constituency, he commented severely on the queen's retirement from public life owing to the death of the prince consort, and was rebuked by John Bright, who was present at the meeting. In the administration formed by Gladstone at the end of 1868 Ayrton was nevertheless appointed parliamentary secretary to the Treasury, and held the post until 11 November 1869. From that date, when he was sworn of the privy council, to August 1873 he was first commissioner of works. 
Ayrton's administration as commissioner of works was not popular; it was marked by zeal for economy in the public interest, as he saw it (described as 'scandalous parsimony' by his fellow radical, A. J. Mundella). He possessed great ability and varied knowledge, with notable independence of character, partly deriving from his membership of the commissions; but his manners were brusque, and he came into personal conflict with numerous prominent people with whom his official duties brought him into contact. He cut down the expenditure on the new Courts of Justice, and treated Alfred Stevens, the sculptor of the Wellington monument at St Paul's Cathedral, as a negligent contractor, and, but for the interposition of Robert Lowe, would have forced him to surrender his models (Martin, 2.379-80). He curtly dismissed Edward Middleton Barry as architect to the Palace of Westminster, and also had protracted differences with Sir J. D. Hooker, the director of Kew Gardens. Sir Algernon West, 'in some very complicated negotiations, made peace between them', and thought Ayrton the 'more reasonable man of the two' (West, 1.14). With two other members of the ministry (Gladstone and Lowe) Ayrton was caricatured at the Court Theatre in London in March 1873 in the burlesque 'The Happy Land', which was written by W. S. Gilbert and Gilbert a Beckett; the lord chancellor eventually required a softening of the satire. 
In August 1873 Gladstone deemed it prudent to transfer Ayrton from the office of commissioner of works to that of judge-advocate-general. Ayrton resigned with the government in March 1874, and his political career came to a somewhat inglorious end. At the general election of 1874 he contested Tower Hamlets again, but was badly beaten, and after the redistribution of seats in 1885, in a contest for the Mile End division of Tower Hamlets, gained only 420 votes. 
For the last few years of his life Ayrton was a daily frequenter of the Reform Club. He died, apparently unmarried, at the Mount Dore Hotel, Bournemouth, on 30 November 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 948


Ayrton, Edmund (1734-1808), composer and musician, was born on 21 October 1734 at Ripon, Yorkshire, the third of the four surviving children of Edward Ayrton (1698-1774), alderman and later mayor and magistrate of the borough of Ripon, and his wife, Catherine (1701?-1781), daughter of John Clough of Thirsk in the North Riding of Yorkshire. Educated at the free grammar school in Ripon, Ayrton 'was a contemporary of Beilby Porteus, afterwards Bishop of London' ('The Harmonicon', 142), though Fetis suggests that he spent only five years at this establishment (Fetis, 1.177). His son William wrote that Ayrton was 'intended for the church... but his father, finding it prudent to indulge his son's natural inclination for music, placed him under the instruction of Dr [James] Nares, then organist of the cathedral of York' ('The Harmonicon', 142), and it seems likely that this took place in 1744, Ayrton becoming a chorister and presumably also studying the organ. In 1755 he succeeded Samuel Wise as 'rector chori' of the collegiate church of Southwell in Nottinghamshire -- an establishment with an organ built by Bernard 'Father' Smith -- where his duties included the posts of organist, auditor, and 'singingman' (possibly denominating the master of the choristers). On 22 April 1756 he went to London for three further months' instruction from Nares, whose appointment to the Chapel Royal had taken place only three months earlier. During his time at Southwell, Ayrton also taught music, and it was to a pupil, the 'only moderately well educated' (BL, Add. MS 52349, fol. 97) Ann Clay (1739-1800), that he was married in Southwell on 20 September 1762. On 1 January 1764 Ayrton left Southwell on being appointed a gentleman of the chapels royal in place of John Busswell, shortly after which he was installed as vicar-choral of St Paul's Cathedral (23 December 1767). He applied unsuccessfully for the post of organist at St Alban's Church, Wood Street, in April 1766, but joined the Royal Society of Musicians in June 1765 and became a freemason in the Somerset House lodge in January 1779. On 1 February 1772 he became a lay clerk at Westminster Abbey, and in 1780 master of the choristers of the Chapel Royal replacing James Nares, who, according to John Stafford Smith, Ayrton's successor as master of the boys, 'gave up the Membership of the boys to him' (ibid., fol. 7) after hearing his anthem 'Thy rightousness' (1778). This post also seems to have included a sinecure described as 'the post of Lutinist' (Baldwin, 246, 370-71). 
By 1779 Ayrton was apparently also recruiting singers for Covent Garden; R. J. S. Stevens noted his participation in a type of choral audition at the Tilt Yard Coffee House in the presence of Antonio Sacchini, Johann Christian Bach, and Johann Christian Fischer at which Ayrton, as well as assembling the group, played the harpsichord. He was an assistant director at the first Handel commemoration in 1784, and at the commemorations in several subsequent years. On 29 April 1784 he was admitted to the degree of MusD at Trinity College, Cambridge. The anthem composed for the degree was dedicated to the honorary president and vice-presidents of the Royal Society of Musicians, and the published version contains an extensive list of subscribers. It was performed at St Paul's Cathedral on 29 July 1784 at the thanksgiving service held at the close of the War of American Independence. Ayrton is also said to have been admitted to the degree of 'Mus. Doc. Oxon, ad eundem 1788', but in the absence of any record, this ascription cannot be verified despite appearing on the title-pages of a number of his works. 
Ayrton was the father of fourteen children, all from his marriage; six survived his death, the most famous of whom was William Ayrton (1777-1858). Edmund Edward (1765-1811), the eldest son, was also a musician, noted by Doane as a tenor and organist living in Swansea in 1790. Benjamin ('b'. 1778, died after 1808) became a doctor and went to sea on a South American merchant ship, marrying in Buenos Aires, where he died shortly afterwards, while Scrope Ayrton, the youngest son (1781-1811), was second in command of the brig 'Bouncer' and died in combat at Verdun. The W. Ayrton listed by Burney and Doane was probably Ayrton's nephew William Francis Morrel (1778-1850); the Morrel Ayrton ('fl'. 1790-1794) listed by Doane, while living at the same address as Edmund Ayrton, was almost certainly a great-nephew rather than a son, and is probably also identifiable with the 'Mr Ayrton, jun.' listed by Burney. 
Ayrton's wife, Ann, died on 14 May 1800; however, he retained the post of master of children until his resignation, probably due to ill health, in 1805, despite an unpleasant episode in 1800 in which he was accused of starving the boys. Ayrton himself died on 22 May 1808, probably of tuberculosis, in the home that he had occupied at least since 1785, 24 James Street, Buckingham Gate, Westminster; it had the reputation of being haunted, allowing him to occupy it at a low rent. He was buried on 28 May 1808 in the north cloister of Westminster Abbey, near the graves of his wife and five of his children. On his death his estate was valued at $1470 before the sale of his household contents, which included an Amati violin dated 1641 and a violoncello by Duke and raised a further $215. Further instruments, including a family organ and harpsichords by Baker Harris and Tabel, were bequests to family members in his will, and a number of valuable manuscripts -- including items by Hasse, Haydn, Porpora, Scarlatti, and Stradella -- were later sold by Puttick and Simpson following the death of his son William. Portraits of Ayrton by John Hoppner and William Pether were also bequeathed. 
Ayrton was mostly well respected among his colleagues -- being, for example, a signatory to J. W. Callcott's doctoral certificate in 1800 and enthusiastically thanked by Archdeacon Robert Nares in the preface to the posthumous publication of his father's anthems in 1788 -- but Samuel Wesley described him as 'one of the most egregious blockheads under the sun' (Lightwood, 180). His extant compositions, the manuscripts of which are held by the British Library, are in the English ecclesiastical tradition following Maurice Greene, with strong Handelian influences, and include two complete morning and evening services in C and E[flat], several anthems, and a number of chants and glees of lesser significance. His sister was married to Nicholas Thomas Dall, the Danish painter, and his grandson John Ayrton Paris was president of the Royal College of Physicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 949


Ayrton, Matilda Charlotte (1846-1883), physician, was born in Honfleur, France, the daughter of John Clarke Chaplin, a solicitor. Her early studies were in drawing and painting and she used her artistic talents throughout her subsequent career. But she began what was to prove a long struggle to qualify as a doctor about 1867. She attended classes at the Medical College for Women in London, opened in 1864 to train women in midwifery, and she passed the preliminary examination for the licence of the Society of Apothecaries just before the society closed its professional examinations to candidates who had not attended regular medical schools. At the time this move appeared to preclude women's obtaining any qualification that would entitle them to have their names entered on the General Medical Council's register. However, in 1869, Sophia Jex-Blake was pressing to be admitted to medical classes at Edinburgh University. The university court refused consent for mixed classes and was not prepared to make special arrangements for Jex-Blake alone, but conceded that special classes for a group of women might be possible. Jex-Blake advertised for women to join her and Matilda Chaplin was the second to do so. In October 1869 Chaplin, together with four other women, passed the matriculation examination for Edinburgh University, the first women to be fully enrolled at a modern British university. 
These five with two others who joined them the following year were to become known as the Edinburgh seven or 'septem contra Edinam' as over the next four years they battled in private and, in the later stages, in public for access to the full range of medical instruction and the right to graduate. This culminated in a lawsuit against the university. Chaplin was 'not individually in favour of such bellicose means being employed but she loyally worked with the little band of students, of whom she was so distinguished a member' (Orme, 345). In 1870-71 Chaplin took high honours in anatomy and surgery at the extramural examinations of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Edinburgh. She also wrote several articles for the 'Medical Press and Circular' at this same time and in 1871 attended some medical classes in Paris. 
In June 1873 the seven's legal battle for the right to graduate was finally lost. But in the meantime Chaplin had married her cousin, the physicist and engineer William Edward Ayrton (1847-1908), on 21 December 1871. In 1873 her husband was appointed professor of physics and telegraphy at the new Imperial Engineering College in Tokyo and Mrs Ayrton went with him to Japan. Before leaving England she obtained a certificate in midwifery from the London Obstetrical Society and in Tokyo she started a school for Japanese midwives, lecturing there herself with the aid of an interpreter. She also continued with private medical studies and wrote and illustrated several newspaper articles about her travels. 
In 1877 Mrs Ayrton became ill and she and her young daughter Edith Chaplin Ayrton (who later married the writer Israel Zangwill) returned to London. Here Ayrton recommenced her medical training at the London School of Medicine for Women; she obtained her MD in Paris in 1879 and in 1880 became a licentiate of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland, where she, the only female candidate, headed the pass lists in medicine and midwifery. She then began practice in Sloane Street, London, while studying diseases of the eye at the Royal Free Hospital. She was a founder member of a club for women students in Paris and of the Somerville Club in London, which provided rest, recreation, and assistance for women students. Through this club Ayrton was a much valued adviser to many young women. She continued to write articles on life in Japan and other topics and, in 1879, she published a book entitled 'Child Life in Japan', illustrated by her own sketches. But by 1880 her health was breaking down and the signs of tuberculosis were manifest. She was obliged to winter abroad, first in Algiers and then in Montpellier, continuing her medical studies in both places. Ayrton died of tuberculosis on 19 July 1883, aged thirty-seven, at her home, 68 Sloane Street, Chelsea, London, and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 24 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 950


Ayrton, William (1777-1858), impresario and writer, was born in London on 24 February 1777, one of the fourteen children of Edmund Ayrton (1734-1808), composer, and his wife, Ann (1739-1800), daughter of Benjamin Clay. He was unsuccessful in winning the Gresham professorship of music in 1801; however, in 1807 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and in 1813 he became a founder member of the Philharmonic Society. In 1817 he was manager of the Italian opera at the King's Theatre, Haymarket. For this season, he went to Paris to engage some singers who were then little known, but whose reputations he helped to establish, including Camporese, Crivelli, and Pasta. With them, he introduced to England works by Paer and Cimarosa and, with particular success for twenty-three performances, Mozart's 'Don Giovanni' (in Italian). A contentious lawsuit at the end of the season with the litigious lessee of the theatre, Edmund Waters, in which Ayrton sued for $1200, was settled in his favour for $700. His second season, in 1821 (by which time Waters was bankrupt), introduced Rossini's 'La gazza ladra' to England (also in Italian). Ayrton contributed criticism to the 'Morning Chronicle' (1813-26) and 'The Examiner' (1837-51); but his most important journalistic work was as editor of 'The Harmonicon' (1823-33), an invaluable record of the times that carried full, excellent reviews and included substantial music examples. He also edited 'The Sacred Minstrelsy' (1834), a two-volume anthology of sacred music for domestic use, 'Knight's Musical Library' (8 vols., 1834-7), and 'The Madrigalian Feast' (1838). Among his songs are the popular vocal duets 'Fair and Fair' and 'Oh! Oh! Memory'. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1837. On 17 May 1803 he married Marianne, daughter of Samuel Arnold; they had at least one son. He died at his home in Bridge Street, Westminster, London, on 8 May 1858 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 951


Ayscough, Francis (1701-1763), courtier and Church of England clergyman, was born in Surrey on 19 December 1701 and baptized on 25 December in St Olave's, Southwark, the second son of Gabriel Ayscough ('bap'. 1668) and his wife, Mary. He was educated at Abingdon School, Berkshire, and matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 28 March 1717, where he graduated BA on 12 December 1720 and proceeded MA on 24 March 1723. He was ordained deacon on 18 December 1726, elected a probationer fellow of Corpus Christi on 16 January 1727, and ordained priest on 16 June 1728. In January 1730 the fellows of Corpus Christi voted eight to four against appointing him to a full fellowship but he appealed successfully to the visitor, who awarded him reinstatement, his costs and arrears to be paid by the fellows personally. He proceeded BD on 22 February 1731 and DD in 1735. 
While at Oxford, Ayscough acquired a reputation as 'a person well supported by zealous friends' ('The Proceedings of Corpus Christi College', 38); certainly he was socially adept and moved easily in aristocratic circles. One of his Oxford pupils, between 1726 and 1728, was George Lyttelton, later first Baron Lyttelton, who considered him to be 'a gentleman of great learning, candour, and judgement' (Phillimore, 2.346). In 1730 Ayscough unsuccessfully proposed marriage to Ann Pitt, sister of Lyttelton's friend William Pitt. In 1732 he was introduced to Frederick, prince of Wales, and at some time after that he was brought by Lyttelton into Frederick's circle. Meanwhile, Ayscough identified himself as a latitudinarian churchman by defending Benjamin Hoadly's views on the eucharist in 'A Proper Answer to a Late Abusive Pamphlet Entitled 'The Winchester Converts'' (1735). In 1736, preaching before the House of Commons on the anniversary of the martyrdom of Charles I, he opposed 'enthusiasm' while defending liberty of speculation: 'are not men to think at all because mad men will think madley, and weak men will think weakly?' (Ayscough, 'A Sermon', 21). In August 1736 he was appointed chaplain and clerk of the closet to Frederick, in which role he assumed control of a substantial part of the prince's political patronage. Ayscough was active in election business, especially in the west country, throughout the later 1730s and 1740s. In 1741 he was nominated by Frederick to the living of Northchurch, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. 
Ayscough was almost certainly the author of a political diary detailing the involvement of Frederick and his allies in the reconstruction of the government between January 1742 and November 1743, which is preserved in the Holland House manuscripts at the British Library. The diary, written by someone intimately involved with the prince's finances and his election patronage, is a useful source for the period immediately preceding and following the resignation of Sir Robert Walpole and for the political conduct of Frederick at this time. Ayscough acted as intermediary between Frederick and the Wilmington ministry on the one hand and his patron, Lyttelton, and Pitt on the other, during negotiations in late 1742 and early 1743 aimed at bringing Pitt and Lyttelton into the ministry. The paths of Ayscough and Lyttelton began to diverge at about this time. In 1744 Ayscough was appointed preceptor to Frederick's two eldest sons, George and Edward. On 21 January 1745 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, he fulfilled a longstanding arrangement and married Lyttelton's sister Anne (1714-1776), who brought with her an income of $6000 a year. However, his relations with Lyttelton were badly damaged by his management of the election at Okehampton in 1747, when on Frederick's behalf he unsuccessfully attempted to unseat Lyttelton, who had joined the Pelham administration, which Frederick opposed. 
Ayscough remained close to the Pitt family and was particularly concerned in Frederick's lease of the borough of Old Sarum from Thomas Pitt, Ayscough's wife's brother-in-law, who by 1749 was deeply in debt. In June of that year Ayscough arranged that Frederick would pay Thomas Pitt $3000 per annum in return for the nomination 'of every M.P. that shall be at the borough of Old Sarum... without any further expense' (BL, Add. MS 59484, fol. 67). Other clerks to the royal closet had gone on to high preferments in the church, and Ayscough must have hoped for a bishopric on Frederick's accession to the throne. His portrait, painted in 1749 by Richard Wilson, in which he is seen presiding over the two young princes, suggests an ambitious as well as a masterful and evidently capable cleric. His hopes were dashed, however, by the death of the prince of Wales on 30 March 1751, which was immediately followed by Ayscough's replacement as tutor to the princes. Horace Walpole suggests that just before this event Ayscough had been instrumental in bringing about a renewed political understanding between the Lyttelton interest and Frederick's court at Leicester House. Walpole described Ayscough as 'an insolent man, unwelcome to the clergy on suspicions of heterodoxy, and of no fair reputation for integrity' (Walpole, 1.56) and suggested that under his care Prince George had failed to learn to write English -- a slur that is contradicted by surviving letters from Prince George to his father. Politically inconvenient to the former allies of Prince Frederick, and too latitudinarian for most of the clergy, Ayscough did not receive further appointment until the veteran controversialist whom he had once defended, Benjamin Hoadly, appointed him a canon at Winchester in 1756. He had to wait for significant ecclesiastical promotion until the accession of one of his former pupils as King George III, after which he was given the deanery of Bristol in 1761. 
Ayscough died in Bristol on 16 August 1763, and was buried in Bristol Cathedral on 19 August. He left $10,000 to his wife, who died in 1776. They had one son, George Edward Ayscough, who died in 1779, after a life of debauchery. 


