@@@@@


doc= 7811


John Donkin (1802-1854), engineer, was born at Dartford, Kent, on 20 May 1802. He was a partner with his father and John Wilks, and took part in many of their inventions. He became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1824 and was also a fellow of the Geological Society. He married Caroline, daughter of Benjamin Hawes; they had seven children. He died at Roseacre, near Maidstone, on 20 April 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 7812


Donkin, Sir Rufane Shaw (1773-1841), army officer, belonged to a respectable Northumbrian family, said to be of Scottish descent, and originally named Duncan. His father, General Robert Donkin (1726/7-1821), served in Flanders, the West Indies, Ireland, and America, was reputedly a personal friend of the historian David Hume, and published two books about his military experiences. In 1772 he married Mary, daughter of the Revd Emanuel Collins. Rufane Shaw was the eldest of their three children, and the only son. 
On 21 March 1778 Rufane was appointed to an ensigncy in the 44th foot, in which his father then held the rank of major, advancing to lieutenant on 9 September 1779 through purely paper transactions. He was educated at Westminster School in London until the age of fourteen and appears afterwards to have been a diligent student. At one time when on leave from his regiment -- probably after its return from Canada in 1786 -- he studied classics and mathematics in France for a year, and when on detachment in the Isle of Man, read Greek for a year and a half with a Cambridge graduate. He obtained his company on 31 May 1793, and in September he sailed for the West Indies with the flank companies of the 44th foot to be involved in the capture of Martinique, Guadeloupe, and St Lucia, and the subsequent loss of Guadeloupe in 1794. After his return to England he was brigade major, and for several months aide-de-camp, to Major-General Thomas Musgrave, commanding at Newcastle upon Tyne, and advanced to major on 1 September 1795. He went back with the regiment to the West Indies in Lieutenant-General Sir Ralph Abercromby's expedition, which in April and May 1796 recaptured St Lucia (which had been again occupied by the French in 1795); here the 44th lost 20 officers and over 800 men, chiefly from fever. Donkin was removed to Martinique unconscious and afterwards invalided home dangerously ill. 
Having recovered, in May 1798 Donkin was detached from the regiment to command a provisional light battalion, composed of the light companies 11th foot, 23rd Royal Welch Fusiliers, and 49th foot, with Major-General Eyre Coote's expedition to Ostend, which sought to destroy the basin, gates, and sluices of the Bruges Canal, thus hampering the concentration of French troops for an invasion of England. On 20 May Donkin distinguished himself in an action near Ostend, in which he was wounded and taken prisoner but earned Coote's special praise for his conduct. He transferred to the 11th foot as lieutenant-colonel on 24 May and joined it in temporary captivity near Douai. In 1799 the 11th sailed for the West Indies, but a regimental historian, quoting an official War Office record that he was 'in London on regimental duty' during December 1799, has noted that 'no evidence' exists for his having served in the West Indies in 1799-1800, as claimed in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' (Robinson, 284). There is no doubt, however, that he did command the regiment there in 1801, when the 11th took part in the capture of numerous islands, which were returned to France after the peace of Amiens. On 29 April 1802 Donkin proposed that convicts who had opted to serve in the West Indies should not be kept there for life but be allowed to serve a normal term of engagement with a regiment, once they had proved their good conduct; this change was authorized by the War Office on 18 April 1803. His regiment remained in the West Indies but in May 1804 was declared 'unfit for service' (ibid., 292), having suffered severe loss through disease, and Donkin himself left on sick leave later that year. 
On 16 May 1805 Donkin was appointed to the permanent staff of the quartermaster-general's department, serving as an assistant quartermaster-general in Kent, and then with the Copenhagen expedition of 1807. In 1808 he issued a reprint of the French text of Comte L'Espinasse's 'Essai sur l'artillerie' (1800), which was translated into English forty years later. Meanwhile, he had been promoted colonel, on 25 April 1808, and in 1809 was appointed assistant quartermaster-general with the army in Portugal. As a colonel on the staff he commanded a brigade in the operations on the River Douro and at the battle of Talavera (for which he received a gold medal), but he soon returned home and was subsequently appointed quartermaster-general in Sicily. He served in that capacity in Sicily, and also in the operations in 1810-13 on the east coast of Spain where he was initially blamed for Lieutenant-General Sir John Murray's disaster at Tarragona in 1813. However, evidence at Murray's court martial showed that the general had disregarded Donkin's views, and he was vindicated. After a short period on half pay, Donkin, who had become major-general on 4 June 1811, was next appointed to a command in the Essex district, and in July 1815 to one at Madras, from which he was afterwards transferred to the Bengal presidency. Before leaving England he had married, on 1 May 1815, Elizabeth Markham (1789/90-1818), the eldest daughter of Dr Markham, dean of York, and granddaughter of Archbishop Markham. 
In India Donkin commanded the 2nd field division of the grand army under the marquess of Hastings in the operations against the Marathas in 1817-18, and by skilful movements cut off the line of retreat of the enemy towards the north. He was appointed KCB on 14 October 1818, though, unfortunately, his wife died at Meerut, aged twenty-eight, on 21 August 1818, leaving him with an infant son. Much shattered in health, body, and mind, he was invalided to the Cape. While there, he was requested to assume the government of the colony during the absence of Lord Charles Somerset, and did so in 1820-21, his name being meanwhile retained on the Bengal establishment. This was the period of the settlement of the colony's eastern frontier, and Donkin named a town on the shore of Algoa Bay Port Elizabeth, after his late wife. He seems to have been popular at the Cape. However, in a communication to Earl Bathurst, the colonial secretary who appointed him, which was published in London as 'A letter on the Cape of Good Hope, and Certain Events which Occurred there under Lord Charles Somerset' (1827), Donkin gave an account of his measures in Cape Colony particularly for establishing settlers there, and those pursued by Somerset 'for the total subversion of all I had done under your lordship's instructions'. Donkin had become a lieutenant-general on 19 July 1821 and was made GCH in 1824 in recognition of his services in connection with the King's German Legion ('DNB'). On 20 April 1825 he was made colonel of the 80th foot. 
The rest of Donkin's life was principally devoted to literary and parliamentary pursuits. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society, was one of the original fellows of the Royal Geographical Society, and was a fellow of other learned societies. He contributed to various periodicals, including the 'Literary Gazette'. He published 'A Dissertation on the Course and Probable Termination of the Niger' (1829), dedicated to the duke of Wellington, in which he argued, chiefly from ancient writers, that the Niger was a river or 'Nile' bearing northwards and probably losing itself in quicksands on the Mediterranean shore (in the Gulf of Sidra, according to the subsequent 'Letter to the Publisher'). This view was refuted in 1829 in the 'Quarterly Review' by Sir John Barrow, who nevertheless testified, from personal knowledge, that Donkin was 'an excellent scholar, of a clear, logical, and comprehensive mind, vigorous in argument, and forcible in language' ('QR', 81, 1829, 226). Donkin, dissatisfied and apparently not knowing who had written the review, replied with 'A Letter to the Publisher' (1829). Some of his writings appear never to have been published, including 'A parallel between Wellington and Marlborough', said to have been his last work. He was described by contemporaries as a most agreeable companion, and always had many interesting anecdotes to relate. On 5 May 1832 he married his second wife, Lady Anna Maria Elliot, daughter of the first earl of Minto. They had no children, and she survived him, dying in 1855. He was returned to parliament for Berwick in 1832 and 1835, in the whig interest, each time after a sharp contest. In 1835 he was made surveyor-general of the ordnance, and he foreshadowed developments in 1855 by suggesting that the civil business of the Board of Ordnance be transferred to the War Office, and command of the Royal Artillery to the commander-in-chief of the army at the Horse Guards. At the general election of 1837 he was defeated at Berwick upon Tweed, but in 1839 returned for Sandwich in Kent. On 15 March 1837 he became colonel of his old regiment, the 11th foot, and was promoted general on 28 June 1838. 
Donkin, whose health had for some time caused concern, committed suicide by hanging, at Southampton on 1 May 1841. He was buried in a vault in St Pancras old churchyard, London, together with an urn containing the heart of his first wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7813


Donkin, William Fishburn (1814-1869), astronomer and mathematician, the first son of Thomas Donkin, was born at Bishop Burton, Yorkshire, on 15 February 1814. He early showed a marked talent for languages, mathematics, and music. He was educated at St Peter's School, York, and in 1832 entered St Edmund Hall, Oxford. In 1834 he won a classical scholarship at University College, Oxford, where in 1836 he obtained a double first class in classics and mathematics, and a year later he carried off the mathematical and Johnson mathematical scholarships. He proceeded BA on 25 May 1836, and MA in 1839. He was elected as a fellow of University College, and he continued for about six years at St Edmund Hall as mathematical lecturer. During this period he wrote an able 'Essay on the theory of the combination of observations' for the Ashmolean Society, which was also published in French; and he also contributed some excellent papers on Greek music to Dr Smith's 'Dictionary of Antiquities'. 
In 1842 Donkin was elected Savilian professor of astronomy at Oxford, a post which he held for the remainder of his life. That year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and also of the Royal Astronomical Society. In 1844 he married Harriet, the third daughter of the Revd John Hawtrey of Guernsey. 
Between 1850 and 1860 Donkin contributed several important papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions', including 'On a class of differential equations, including those which occur in dynamical problems' ('PTRS', 144, 1854) and 'The equation of Laplace's functions' ('PTRS', 147, 1857). In these and other papers he drew upon W. R. Hamilton's theory of quaternions. He also deployed the symbolic methods of solving differential equations widely used by English mathematicians at the time; a major figure was George Boole, who published some of Donkin's results in his 'Treatise on Differential Equations' (1859). They included new ways of solving Laplace's equation, and also an important equation due to Laplace concerning potentials of a nearly spherical spheroid (such as the earth). He and Boole also exchanged ideas on methods of computation in probability theory. In 1861 he read an important paper to the Royal Astronomical Society entitled 'The secular acceleration of the moon's mean motion' (printed in the society's 'Monthly Notices' for 1861). He was also a contributor to the 'Philosophical Magazine', his last paper in which, 'Note on certain statements in elementary works concerning the specific heat of gases', appeared in 1864. 
Donkin's acquaintance with practical and theoretical music was very thorough. His work on acoustics, intended to be his 'opus magnum', was commenced in 1867, and the fragment of it which he completed was published, after his death, in 1870. Basing his mathematical treatment on Fourier series, he covered transverse and lateral vibrations of strings and rods, and free and forced oscillations. He also examined the composition of the musical scale, and had intended to present musical theory and practice in a third part. The second part would have treated elastic membranes, plates and solids, and the mathematical theory of sound. Although incomplete, his book was the principal work in English on this topic until Lord Rayleigh's 'Theory of Sound' appeared in two volumes in 1877 and 1878. Among other interests, Donkin also corresponded on geometrical problems with William Spottiswoode. 
Donkin's constitution was always delicate, and failing health compelled him to live much abroad during the latter part of his life. He died at his home in Broad Street, Oxford, on 15 November 1869. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7814


Donlevy, Andrew (1680-1746), Roman Catholic priest, was born near Balymote, in co. Sligo, into a comfortably off family. He was educated locally and it is likely that he was trained as a priest and ordained in Ireland before travelling to France about 1710. There he registered in the Paris law faculty in 1718, and took his BA in 1719 and his licence in law in 1720. In Paris he sided with a reforming party ('zelanti'), which believed that the Irish church should conform to European practices, especially with regard to the education of priests. This was contentious as the Irish seminary community, housed in the College des Lombards, was divided into two groups: already ordained priests who had travelled to Paris for theological training, and younger clerics who were following the Tridentine discipline. Longstanding financial tensions between the two groups were exacerbated by Donlevy's proposal, as prefect of the clerics since 1722, to remove ordained priests from the seminary. He was supported by Abbe Vaubrun and Cardinal de Fleury, but excited the ire of Irish bishops who feared that exclusively Paris-formed clerics would be unlikely to return to the mission. Donlevy, exercising influence with Fleury, succeeded in having a new code of discipline drawn up for the college. Pending royal ratification, the community of priests complained to Ireland and to Rome. In the college elections of 1734 the Donlevy party was ousted. Rome intervened to allow priests to remain but removed from the students their right to elect college officers; future appointments were made the responsibility of the archbishop of Paris. Donlevy continued as superior of the clerics until his death. 
Donlevy lamented the decline of the Irish language and worked to preserve its monuments. He recognized the language's importance in religious education and was anxious to modernize the increasingly scarce Franciscan catechisms in Irish of the early seventeenth century. He was helped by Philippe Joseph Perrotin, who funded a school of Irish in the college to print catechisms and works of piety for the mission. As part of this scheme Donlevy published, in 1742, the bilingual 'An teagasg Criosduidhe', to which was appended a verse abridgement of Christian doctrine, compiled by Bonaventure O'Heoghusa, and Donlevy's treatise, 'The elements of the Irish language'. Donlevy's catechism, conceived as a resource book for more advanced religious education, was written in Irish; the English version was a literal translation. It is the most complete formal text in Irish for this period and draws on the author's spoken Irish, but it was influenced too by the technical vocabulary of the early seventeenth-century Irish Louvain Franciscans. 
Donlevy died at the Irish College, Paris, on 7 December 1746 and was buried in the Irish College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 7815


Donn, Benjamin (1729-1798), mathematician and cartographer, was born in Bideford, Devon, and baptized there on 22 June 1729, the last of six children of George Donn ('b'. in or before 1680, died in or after 1750) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Ching. George Donn was from an old Bideford family and from about 1721 kept a well-regarded mathematical school there, in which his sons Abraham (1719-1743) and later Benjamin taught. In 1749 Benjamin began to contribute to the 'Mathematical Repository', 'Gentleman's Diary', and 'Gentleman's Magazine' on astronomical and mathematical subjects. On 8 October 1759 he married Mary Anne, daughter of Henry Wilcocks. 
Like other mathematicians Donn was also a surveyor, but his maps were of a quality far above the average. While still in Bideford he began his map of Devon at a scale of one inch to a mile, for which he received a premium of $100 from the Society of Arts on publication in 1765. Donn was one of the first to respond to the society's offer in 1759 of a premium for accurate, newly surveyed county maps at a scale of one inch to a mile, and he was one of the few to succeed in his application. He had apparently planned the survey independently of the society's encouragement, and, as was normal, he issued a prospectus and ultimately enlisted 528 subscribers for the map. Even with the help of assistants the fieldwork took longer than anticipated and there were further delays while Thomas Jefferys engraved the results on twelve plates. Stung by criticism from the society, Donn retorted that his map was 'not an Engraver's Job [that is an updating of a more or less out of date map], but an accurate Survey at the expense of nearly $2000... the largest work ever done of the kind at private expense' (Harley, 120). The map is an important early county map because it was newly surveyed and because Donn was an able mathematician and judge of instruments, which increased his standards of accuracy. 
In 1764 Donn moved to Bristol, where he leased rooms in the house of the city library in King Street, and from 1766 he ran an academy there to which the corporation and Society of Merchant Venturers had the right to nominate pupils. From the academy he sold his maps and instruments including his navigation scale (a Gunter's scale). In 1767 he announced his intention of publishing a map from a survey of the country 11 miles round Bristol. The city council awarded him 20 guineas on publication in 1769. The map is a valuable source of information on the then rapidly growing city. In 1768 he was elected librarian, but also continued as a mathematics teacher. 
Donn was one of a number of educational reformers in Bristol at the time who wanted to stop the rote learning of words and substitute the study of things with the aid of toys or experiments, introducing children to the principles behind each subject so that they could accept rationally what they were taught, not merely believe it slavishly. He taught a practical and vocational curriculum, presenting Newtonian experimental science as an integral part of polite learning for both adults and children. His ideas were expounded in his classes and lectures, in letters to the local press, and in his publications such as 'Mathematical Essays' (1764), 'The Accountant and Geometrician' (1765), 'The Young Shopkeeper's, Steward's and Factor's Companion' (1768), and later 'An Essay on Mathematical Geometry' (1796). 
Between 1765 and 1798 Donn gave at least seventy public lectures, many in Bristol but others over a wide area, in part as a means of establishing a scientific reputation and allowing him to teach a broader curriculum, and in part simply to make money, although since the supply of lecturers exceeded demand, he was not always successful. His audiences were mainly young men, with a few young women and 'mechanics'. The lectures were advertised as cultural activities and were illustrated by experiments in which he used instruments of his own making. 
Donn attracted an enthusiastic following, gaining civic and public support for his projects, which were thought to be a valuable addition to Bristol's commerce and culture: however, despite his supporters, an impressive range of publications, and active self-promotion through advertisements, he was unable to sustain a local career beyond that of an ordinary mathematics teacher. Such teachers were poorly paid and there was a rapid turnover of them in the city. By 1773 Donn had lost the patronage of the corporation and the Merchant Venturers and, when a new librarian was appointed on 27 March 1773, he had to move his school out of the library house. He set up an academy at The Park, near St Michael's Church, and, when this failed, left Bristol for Kingston, near Taunton, where he ran an academy. From about 1773 he added a final 'e' to his surname, apparently reverting to the practice of his grandfather, Christopher Donne. After only two years continued financial troubles took him back to Bristol where he issued a pocket map of the city about 1775. While in Bristol he was helped by another Benjamin Donne (1764-1843), often described as his son but in fact his nephew, who was also a teacher of mathematics, surveyor, and cartographer, and who issued further maps after his uncle's death. From 1796 to his death Benjamin Donne the elder was master of mechanics to George III and the list of subscribers to his 'Essay on Mathematical Geometry' (1796), which includes such figures as Erasmus Darwin, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and Josiah Wedgwood, shows the regard in which he was held by contemporaries. He is thought to have had a son, Henry, a Church of England clergyman and minor cartographer. Donne died on 27 May 1798. 


@@@@@


doc= 7816


Donn, James (1758-1813), botanist and gardener, was born in Perthshire. He began his horticultural training under William Aiton at Kew, and was appointed curator of the university botanic garden in Cambridge in 1794, in which post he remained until his death in 1813. His name is associated with a remarkable publication, 'Hortus Cantabrigiensis', the first edition of which Donn published in 1796. In the preface he explains that his book 'is not simply a catalogue of the plants actually grown in the small Walkerian garden, but contains also [plants] that are yet required to render the collection more worthy of [the botany student's] notice'. This book ran to thirteen editions, the last one dated 1845, and became, long after the original author's death, a standard reference work for both botanists and gardeners, giving compact information on the world's flora, native or exotic, as represented in British gardens. The preface to the tenth edition by John Lindley explains that Donn himself greatly enlarged the scope of his book from the fifth edition, so that it ceased to be in any way limited to what he grew in the Cambridge garden. 
Donn owed his appointment at Cambridge to Sir Joseph Banks. He greatly extended the plant collections in Cambridge, especially with gifts from Kew. There are several testaments to Donn's skill in cultivating plants. Thus the entomologist William Kirby recorded in his journal his impressions of a visit to the garden in July 1797: 'Mr Newton of Jesus accompanied us to the Botanical Garden, which, by the abilities and industry of Mr Don ['sic'], the Curator, is now in excellent order; the collection of plants is greatly augmented, and the labels are in general accurate' (Freeman, 106). Donn became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1812. He died in Cambridge on 14 June 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 7817


Dun, Sir Daniel (1544/5-1617), ecclesiastical lawyer, was the eldest of three known sons of Robert Dun of St Botolph, Aldersgate, London (died 1552/3), gentleman (in his will, though in 1576 held to have been a villein regardant to the honour of Eye in Suffolk), and his wife, Anne (died 1611x13), daughter of John Branche and Joan Wilkenson. Their father entrusted the care of Daniel and his brothers, together with their $100 portions, to his brothers-in-law John and Thomas Branche, London drapers, while allowing his widow to have their keeping if she wished. Dun was admitted a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, in 1567, BCL on 14 July 1572, and DCL on 20 July 1580, the year in which he became principal of New Inn Hall. Commissioned as an advocate in the court of arches on 3 October 1580, he was admitted to Doctors' Commons on 22 January 1582. He was a commissary during the vacancy of the see of Peterborough in 1585, official of the archdeaconry of Essex in 1585-6, and from 1598 chancellor of Rochester diocese (until 1604), the archbishop of Canterbury's 'auditor causarum', official principal of the court of arches, and dean of arches. In 1584 and 1586 he was one of the commissioners empowered to preside in convocation in Archbishop Whitgift's absence. He was one of nine civilians responsible for a treatise of 'c'.1590 defending the oaths used in the ecclesiastical courts. A member of the high commission from 1601, he was in 1603 also included in an ecclesiastical commission for the diocese of Winchester. He attended in 1604 the third session of the Hampton Court conference, at which the 'ex officio' oath was discussed, and was included in a commission for the suppression of books printed or imported without authority, which was set up pursuant to a decision taken at the conference. He became an honorary member of Gray's Inn in 1599. 
From 1598 onwards, while continuing to act as an ecclesiastical judge, Dun was very often instructed or commissioned, along with other expert civil lawyers, to inquire into delicate and complicated maritime matters, including merchants' grievances, disputes between English and foreign merchants, and cases concerning doubtful prizes, embezzlement, or piracy. He was included in two commissions appointed in 1599 to hear and determine cases brought by Danish and French subjects respectively against English pirates, and in 1601 and 1609 in two other commissions, headed by the earl of Nottingham, to inquire into the depredations committed by such pirates against the subjects of the king of France and other friendly states. In August 1602 he was sent on embassy, together with Lord Eure and Sir John Herbert, to treat at Bremen with Danish ambassadors concerning tolls on English ships going through the sound or to Muscovy and attempts to prevent English fishing in waters claimed by the Danish crown. Just before this mission he was sworn extraordinary master of requests (1 August 1602). He was knighted (23 July 1603), and by July 1609 had been appointed lieutenant principal judge and president of the high court of admiralty. In 1611, together with Henry Marten, he complained to the privy council about growing interference with admiralty jurisdiction by means of prohibitions, but with little success. 
Dun was elected MP for Taunton, probably as a nominee of the bishop of Winchester, in the parliament of 1601, where he served on a committee concerned with the penal laws and on 16 November opposed a bill against pluralities. He worked to gain representation for the universities, and in 1604 and 1614 he was elected by Oxford University; on the latter occasion the votes of the heads of houses were decisive, despite widespread support for his opponent among the electors. In 1604 he was one of the MPs appointed to consult with Scottish commissioners concerning a closer union of the two kingdoms, and (in connection with the proposed bill for abolishing hostile laws) defended in the Commons on 28 May 1607 the remanding by the king from either England or Scotland of prisoners accused of crimes in the other country. 
In 1613, when he was a justice of assize in north Wales, Dun and his colleagues were instructed to investigate a complaint by Shropshire drapers about the export of undressed Welsh cloth to France. In 1615 he was included in the commission to investigate the complicity of the earl and countess of Somerset in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury. A tract defending the annulment of the countess's first marriage, to the earl of Essex, is probably by Dun, as is also a treatise upholding the supervisory and prerogative jurisdiction of the Canterbury archiepiscopal courts. A collection of statutes concerning the court of arches bears his signature on its flyleaf and was presumably compiled under his aegis, as a set of reports of arches cases (1598-1604), may also have been. All these works survive only in manuscript. 
Dun had married by 1587 Joan (died 1640), daughter of William Aubrey, his predecessor as principal of New Inn Hall and the subject of a short account in Dun's hand. According to his epitaph they had sixteen children, seven of whom were alive in 1607. He held a messuage on Aldersgate Street, London, and the manor of Theydon Garnon, Essex, in which county he was a justice of the peace in both 1601 and 1609, and was named a member of the Virginia Company in its charter of 1609. He died on 26 September 1617 probably at Theydon Garnon, where he was buried on 28 September. His epitaph in the church there gives his age at death as seventy-two. Administration of his estate was granted to John, his son and heir, in April 1618. There is a bust of Dun by Sir Henry Cheere, executed many years after Dun's death, in the Codrington Library, All Souls College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 7818


Dunne, Gabriel (c.1490-1558), abbot of Buckfast, was one of four surviving children of Angel Donne, grocer and alderman of London (died 1506), and therefore belonged to a leading city family. His father's will of 1505 describes Gabriel as a monk and implies that he was still an adolescent, since it provides a sum of $10 to finance his education at a university. He was probably already a member of the Cistercian abbey of Stratford Langthorne, Essex, to which he belonged by 1517, and whence he proceeded to the order's college of St Bernard, Oxford. There he supplicated for the degree of BTh on 26 October 1521, on the ground of having studied logic, philosophy, and theology for twelve years, a course of instruction that may have begun at Stratford. On 28 March 1530 he matriculated at the University of Louvain, perhaps in order to earn a doctorate in theology, but it is not certain that he received such a degree, although the London writer Henry Machyn refers to him as a doctor at the time of his death. 
In May 1535, when Dunne was still living in Louvain, the English cleric Henry Phillips succeeded in decoying the 'Bible' translator, William Tyndale, from Antwerp into the hands of the authorities in the Netherlands, an event that led to Tyndale's execution. In the following month Dunne left Louvain to become abbot of the Cistercian abbey of Buckfast, Devon, thanks to the patronage of Thomas Cromwell. These events caused nineteenth-century historians to portray Dunne as Phillips's active confederate in the betrayal of Tyndale, and to interpret his abbacy as a reward for his service, but the evidence to support such conjectures is lacking. Thomas Theobald, who wrote from Antwerp on 31 July 1535 to his godfather Archbishop Cranmer, does indeed say that Phillips and Dunne lived in the same house in Louvain. He also states that Phillips told him that Dunne was his sole confidant in the plot, but that was merely Phillips's assertion. Phillips was hostile to Henry VIII and fearful of Cromwell, whereas Dunne enjoyed Cromwell's favour, making it unlikely that they took part in a joint plot, and Dunne's promotion to Buckfast is as plausibly ascribable to his learning and family connections. In 1524 his sister Elizabeth had married Sir Thomas Denys, a leading Devon magnate who was also a close associate of Thomas Cromwell. Dunne's promotion to Buckfast strengthened the influence of Cromwell and Denys in Devon, and Dunne had good relations with Cromwell in later years. There was eventually a marriage between Dunne's niece Frances Mirfin and Cromwell's nephew Richard Williams, alias Cromwell. 
Dunne and his fellow monks surrendered Buckfast Abbey to Henry VIII on 25 February 1539, and he received the generous pension of $120 a year. He subsequently settled in London and pursued a career as a secular priest, becoming a canon of St Paul's Cathedral and prebendary of Mapesbury in 1541; rector of Stepney, Middlesex, in 1544, on the presentation of Richard Williams; and rector of Langtree, Devon, in 1549, on that of his brother-in-law, Sir Thomas Denys. In the latter year Cranmer appointed him 'keeper of the spiritualities' (the acting head) of the diocese of London, following the deprivation of Edmund Bonner as bishop. His death took place on 5 December 1558, and he was buried three days later before the high altar of St Paul's Cathedral, beneath a tombstone inscribed with eight lines of Latin verse. He died as a man of some property, including the advowson of Grantham church, Lincolnshire, and gave generously to charities in his will, dated 5 February 1558. He bequeathed to his former college of St Bernard, recently refounded as St John's College, such of his books as his executors should approve; forty-five volumes were later delivered to St John's, including works of classical literature and theology. The residue of his goods was willed to provide dowries for poor maidens and support for poor scholars and students, especially those intending to become priests. One of his executors, Henry Harvey, used $120 from this source to found a scholarship at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and to hold a commemoration on St Nicholas's day in memory of Dunne's death. Dunne's will also made bequests to provide silver plate for the high altar of St Paul's Cathedral, an iron railing to fence off the laity from the sanctuary, and an altar or monument commemorating the Archangel Gabriel's salutation to the Virgin Mary. This suggests that he took a close interest in the restoration of the cathedral to Catholic worship under Mary Tudor, and that he died an adherent of the faith in which he had spent the greater part of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 7819


Donne, John (1572-1631), poet and Church of England clergyman, was born between 24 January and 19 June 1572 at his father's house in Bread Street, London, the third of six known children of John Donne ('c'.1535-1576), warden of the Ironmongers' Company, and Elizabeth Heywood ('c'.1543-1631), youngest daughter of John Heywood the epigrammatist and playwright. Donne claimed kinship through his father with the Dwn family of Kidwelly in Carmarthenshire, using its arms on his earliest portrait, painted in 1591, as well as on one of his seals and on his monument (the arms are azure, a wolf salient, with a crest of snakes bound in a sheaf), but there is no evidence extant concerning his father's family to support this claim. Donne's ancestors on his mother's side included John Rastell (his maternal great-grandfather), who was married to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John More and sister of Sir Thomas More. Through his connection with the More and the Heywood families Donne was thus associated with many men and women who had remained true to the Roman Catholic faith and had suffered as a result -- a fact that he was at pains to emphasize in his early work 'Pseudo-Martyr' (1610). Two of his uncles, Ellis and Jasper Heywood (the translator of Seneca), ended their days as Jesuits (Jasper was the head of the Jesuit mission in England from 1581 to 1583), and Donne and his siblings were brought up as Roman Catholics. In 1576, when Donne was four, his father died; by July his mother had married John Syminges, a prominent physician who had trained at Oxford and Bologna and had several times been president of the Royal College of Physicians. Some time after the marriage Donne's family moved to Syminges's house in Trinity Lane, moving again in 1583 to a house in the parish of St Bartholomew-the-Less. 
Donne was educated privately, although there is no evidence to support the popular claim that he was taught by Jesuits. On 23 October 1584, at the age of twelve, he matriculated with his brother Henry, who was a year younger than him, from Hart Hall, Oxford. It seems that the boys entered the university relatively young (and gave their ages as a year younger than they actually were) in order to avoid subscribing to the queen's religious supremacy and to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' -- a subscription demanded of all students over sixteen. Little is known of Donne's time at Oxford, though Izaak Walton claims that he was a distinguished student, and that it was there that his long friendship with Sir Henry Wotton began (Walton, 23, 106). After Donne left Oxford without taking a degree, Walton claims that he spent some time at Cambridge; there is no evidence for this in the university records, but as R. C. Bald points out, these are imperfect for this period (Walton, 24; Bald, 46). It has recently been argued that Donne left Oxford in October 1584 for a period of exile and education among fellow Catholics on the continent (Flynn, 131-46); even if Donne did attend Cambridge after Oxford, it would have to have been for less than three years, and uncertainty remains over his movements between 1589 and 1591. It seems most likely that he travelled abroad during this period, and it is quite possible that Walton's description of his travels in the late 1590s should be redated to the earlier period (Walton, 26). If Donne was travelling on the continent at this time, he probably followed the typical itinerary for a contemporary tour, visiting France, the Low Countries, and Germany 'en route' for Italy (see Bald, 52, on Donne's likely visit to Germany). During this time, Donne's stepfather John Syminges died in 1588 (he was buried in the church of St Bartholomew-the-Less on 15 July), and his mother married Richard Rainsford, probably in 1590 and certainly before 7 February 1591. In 1591 the earliest known portrait of Donne was produced: it was a miniature, possibly by Nicholas Hilliard, but now the image survives only in William Marshall's engraving of it for the frontispiece of the 1633 'Poems'. It shows him in a dark doublet, with head bared, wearing an earring in the shape of a cross and with his hand on the hilt of a sword, and bears the motto 'Antes muerto que mudado' ('Sooner dead than changed') as well as the Dwn crest described above. 
The next clear sight of Donne from the official records is on his admission to Lincoln's Inn on 6 May 1592, after at least a year's preliminary study at Thavies Inn. Edward Loftus and Christopher Brooke, who was to remain a close friend of Donne's, stood surety for him on his admission. It was at Lincoln's Inn that Donne also met Christopher Brooke's younger brother Samuel, their cousin John, and Rowland Woodward. Although Donne was never called to the bar, nor practised the law professionally, its language and modes of thought remained crucial to him throughout his life, and lend much of his writing its distinctive character. His 'Satires' and the poems later collected as 'Songs and Sonets' are not just immersed in the social world of the inns, but use the words and the distinctions of the law to conduct their business of social comment and love. Later writings, including the 'Holy Sonnets', are equally dependent upon Donne's thorough knowledge of common and canon law, and it should not be forgotten that Donne certainly used his legal knowledge in his professional life. It was in demand while he was secretary to the lord keeper, Sir Thomas Egerton; in 1603-4 he prepared a legal opinion for Sir Robert Cotton on Valdesius's 'De dignitate regum regnorumque Hispaniae'; his first major published work, 'Pseudo-Martyr', is a highly professional legal exposition and defence of the oath of allegiance, and he engages in tangled questions of civil and canon law in several other works, notably 'Ignatius his Conclave' and the 'Essays in Divinity'. It may have been during his time at Lincoln's Inn that, as Walton claims, Donne began 'seriously to survey, and consider the Body of Divinity, as it was then controverted betwixt the 'Reformed' and the 'Roman Church'' (Walton, 25-6), and to undertake a systematic reading and annotation of Cardinal Bellarmine's 'Disputationes'; certainly his later work shows that he was well acquainted with the Roman Catholic controversialist's works. 
When Donne moved from Thavies Inn to Lincoln's Inn he probably left behind him his younger brother Henry. In May 1593 a priest, William Harrington, was found in Henry Donne's chambers by the pursuivant Richard Young. Both were arrested and committed to the Clink, then moved to Newgate, where Henry died of the plague. Harrington was hanged, drawn, and quartered in February 1594. In the same year as Henry's death, Donne attained his majority, and in June 1593 he had received his inheritance from the chamber of the city of London. 
It is difficult to date Donne's poems, most of which remained in manuscript until after his death, but it seems clear that while at Lincoln's Inn he composed verse letters to friends -- such as Christopher and Samuel Brooke, Rowland and Thomas Woodward (the Westmoreland MS, one of the principal manuscripts of Donne's poems, is in Rowland's hand), Everard Guilpin, Beaupre Bell, and an unidentified Mr. I. (or J.) L. -- the first two 'Satires', nearly all of the 'Elegies', the 'Epithalamion Made at Lincoln's Inn', and some of the 'Songs and Sonets'. The verse letters especially show Donne experimenting with tone and form as he exchanges compliments in the world of humanist friendship, but the 'Elegies' and 'Satires' are remarkably assured. The speakers of the 'Elegies' are rakish young men-about-town, addressing mistresses in tones of amorous and adulterous complicity (and revealing the widespread influence of Marlowe's translations of Ovid's 'Amores'). They assume a tone of almost arrogant disregard for social mores and conventions, and yet here, as in much of his writing, Donne's voice, and his speakers, are as vulnerable as they are powerful. 'Elegy' 2 is a persuasion to his mistress to undress that deploys the languages of religion as well as exploration and conquest in its travels over her clothing and body, but its conclusion shows that it is the poet who is naked, waiting. 
The 'Satires', like the 'Elegies', are the product of, and shot through with, the social life of late sixteenth-century London; their attitudes, though, are rather different. Their speakers are urbane observers, outsiders, watching with anxious disapproval the hunt for place and promotion at court and in the courts, drawn in despite themselves (like the personae of Horace's satires, to which they are heavily indebted) to the corrupting conversation of the bore or malcontent, and finding themselves tainted by it. In the first two 'Satires' there is also found a scepticism towards both learning and public life, the contemplative and the active paths, that is characteristic of the period and that informs much of Donne's work in both verse and prose. In these early poems the immediacy of voice that is so typical of Donne's writing is fully present. 'Satires' 1 and 2 begin with a brusque imperative ('Away thou fondling motley humourist') and a weary epistolary salutation ('Sir; (though I thank God for it) I do hate / Perfectly all this town...') respectively; and this creation of a vital, speaking voice is one of the most striking features of Donne's poetic oeuvre, sustained by lengthy qualifying parentheses, interruption, colloquialism, and the careful disruption of metrical order. This last quality earned Donne the disapproval of the more formally orthodox Ben Jonson, who declared in his conversations with William Drummond that 'Donne, for not keeping of accent, deserved hanging' (I. Donaldson, ed., 'Ben Jonson', 1985, 596). 
The last mention of Donne in the Lincoln's Inn records occurs at the end of 1594. He would certainly have ended his association with the inn by early 1596, when he was among the mass of young gentlemen who offered their services to the earl of Essex for his and Lord Howard of Effingham's expedition against Spain. The fleet set sail for Cadiz on 3 June, launching its successful attack on the harbour on the 21st; returning in triumph, the leaders of the expedition soon planned another assault, and Donne also joined this expedition, which set out in July 1597. Within a week, however, the fleet had returned in disarray after the events recorded in Donne's poem 'The Storm'; embarking again a little later, the fleets were once more separated by bad weather, and Essex's squadron set off for the Azores, where they waited for Ralegh's (in which Donne was probably sailing) -- Donne describes the postponement of the rendezvous by a period of calm weather in 'The Calm'. The voyage was dogged by disorganization and ultimately achieved little: the Spanish fleet got safely into port at Angra, and only a few late ships were taken; finally, the English returned home in yet another bout of bad weather, reaching port by the end of October. 
On his return to England, Donne sought civil employment, and with help from Thomas and John Egerton, whom he may have known at Lincoln's Inn and who sailed with him on the islands expedition of 1597, he was appointed secretary to Sir Thomas Egerton, lord keeper of the great seal since 1596. On his appointment Donne would have joined Egerton's substantial household at York House in the Strand and assisted his employer in the wide range of business that occupied him, from the courts of chancery, high commission, and Star Chamber to the privy council. Egerton was determined to reform legal procedures from a state of confusion and over-complexity; Donne's 'Satire' 5 describes this morass and praises Egerton's attempts 'to know and weed out this enormous sin'. Donne would have spent time at court as well as in the courts during this time, where political discussion was dominated by the debates over the campaign in Ireland. When the earl of Essex was sent there in April 1599, two of Donne's friends accompanied him: Sir Henry Wotton, who was Essex's secretary, and Sir Thomas Egerton the younger. To the former Donne sent a verse letter asking why he had heard nothing from him ('H.W. in Hiber. belligeranti'); the latter was wounded in a skirmish and died on 23 August aged twenty-five. At the solemn funeral held in Chester Cathedral, Donne had the honour of bearing the dead man's sword before his coffin. 
As a student at Oxford and the inns, Donne was a Roman Catholic. By 1597, however, he had sailed on an expedition against Catholic Spain and was employed by Egerton, a major public figure, if one with a recusant past. By 1601 he was a member of parliament. All of these would have been extremely difficult had he still been attached to the Roman Catholic church (although Flynn suggests that he retained important links with recusant families for a considerable time). The date of Donne's 'conversion' to the Church of England has been the subject of much scholarly debate, but is impossible precisely to determine (Bald, 69, argues that he may have received some form of instruction from Anthony Rudd, dean of Gloucester, after Henry Donne's death). Indeed, it is probably unhelpful to conceive of it as an event, rather than as a long process. The best that can be said is that by 1600 or so Donne considered it possible that he could successfully seek advancement in areas that would be closed to a known Catholic, and that in 1601 he was married in a Church of England ceremony (if an unorthodox one). Seven years later he was writing anti-Catholic polemic, and using his own upbringing in the Roman Catholic church to lend greater force to his criticisms of that church. 
In the aftermath of the Essex rebellion in February 1601 Donne may have helped the lord keeper in the long business of examining witnesses and preparing for the trial; in the autumn of the same year he was returned as one of the members of parliament for Brackley, Northamptonshire, a seat in Egerton's gift. Parliament sat from 27 October to 19 December, and there is no evidence that Donne sat on any committees or took part in any debates. During the period of his employment by Egerton, Donne's friendship with Henry Wotton was sustained by correspondence in verse and prose (the verse epistle 'Sir, more then kisses, letters mingle souls' can be tentatively dated to 1597 or 1598), and among his other friends were Sir Henry Goodyer, Robert Cotton, and the essayist Sir William Cornwallis. In 1601 Donne began his Menippean epic, 'The Progress of the Soul', or 'Metempsychosis' (the preface is dated 16 August 1601). This ambitious poem aimed to trace the migration of the soul of the apple eaten by Eve 'to this time when she is he, whose life you shall find in the end of this book', but only a portion of the first canto was completed. Jonson claimed that the soul was intended to end up 'in the body of Calvin' (I. Donaldson, ed., 'Ben Jonson', 1985, 598), but Donne indicates in stanzas six and seven that the soul is now 'amongst us' in England, '
and moves that hand, and tongue, and brow, 

Which, as the Moone the sea, moves us. 

' Faced with this problem, critics have suggested Queen Elizabeth and Robert Cecil as final homes for the soul. At about this time Donne was also writing his prose 'Paradoxes'. 
During his time as Egerton's secretary, Donne met Ann More (1584-1617), the niece of Lady Egerton and the daughter of Sir George More of Loseley Park, near Guildford in Surrey. She was brought up for some time at York House (Sir George More had for his part undertaken the education of Lady Egerton's son, Francis Wolley), and while she was there she and Donne were secretly engaged. In December 1601, when Ann was about seventeen and Donne twenty-nine, they were married in a clandestine service: Donne's friends Christopher and Samuel Brooke were in attendance, Christopher giving the bride away and Samuel, now ordained, performing the ceremony. Soon Ann returned to Loseley, and it was almost two months before Donne broke the news of their marriage to her father, using Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, as the messenger for his letter of 2 February. Sir George was horrified, and immediately demanded Donne's dismissal from Egerton's service and arrest: along with the Brooke brothers he was committed to prison, and the lord keeper gave in to More's request. But soon Donne was released from the Fleet, and it was clear that the marriage would be proved valid (indeed, Donne himself initiated a suit in the court of audience of Canterbury to test its validity): Sir George released his daughter to Donne, but refused to support her financially, while Egerton refused to give his secretary his job back, even when the injured and reluctant father-in-law joined in the request. Without employment or a home (during the latter part of his employment by Egerton he had lived in lodgings in the Savoy), Donne and his wife had to depend on help from friends and sympathetic relatives. Ann's cousin Francis Wolley offered the most substantial help, giving the Donnes room in his house at Pyrford, near her former home at Loseley. It was there that their first children, Constance and John, were born, at the beginning of 1603 and in the spring of 1604 respectively. In August 1603 the new king, James I, and his court spent the first night of their progress at Pyrford. 
Early in 1605 Donne set off to travel on the continent with Sir Walter Chute, their licence being granted on 16 February. They visited Paris, and possibly Venice, where Wotton was now ambassador, before returning to England in April 1606. While Donne was abroad, his wife, who had been staying with her sister Lady Grymes at Peckham, gave birth to their third child, George; on his return the family probably spent a short time back at the Wolley house in Pyrford until they moved, before the end of the year, to a cottage in Mitcham, Surrey. While living at Pyrford, Donne had continued his studies and his writing: it was during this time that he sent his learned opinion on Valdesius to Robert Cotton, and internal evidence suggests that he wrote at least two of the 'Songs and Sonets' ('The Sunne Rising' and 'The Canonization') at about the same time. 
Donne lived with his wife in Mitcham for five years, and while they were there four more children were born: Francis in 1607, Lucy in 1608 (her godmother was Lucy Harington, countess of Bedford), Bridget in 1609, and Mary in 1611. From 1607 to 1611 Donne also kept lodgings in London, in the Strand, and he spent a large amount of his time in the city, devoting his energies to making the best of his connections and seeking out some kind of public employment for himself. These attempts to resurrect what had been a promising career failed without exception: in June 1607 he sought to fill a place that had fallen vacant in the queen's household; in November 1608 he applied for a secretaryship in Ireland, through the mediation of the king's favourite, Lord Hay; in February 1609 John Chamberlain wrote to Carleton that Donne 'seekes to be preferred to be secretarie of Virginia' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.284) -- and these were, most likely, only a fraction of the positions he applied for. 
Among the friendships that Donne established or consolidated about this time was that with Ben Jonson (for whose 'Volpone' he wrote Latin commendatory verses in 1607). From 1607 he also began his correspondence with Lady Bedford, and at about the same time he made or renewed his friendship with Mrs Magdalene Herbert (George Herbert's mother, to whom, in July 1611, he sent what was probably the sonnet sequence 'La corona'). During winter 1608-9 he was ill with chronic neuritis, and wrote 'A Litanie', which, in a letter to Sir Henry Goodyer, he referred to as 'a meditation in verse' (Donne, 'Letters', 32). Most of the 'Holy Sonnets' were probably also written at about this time. There has been much debate over how far these last form any kind of sequence, and if so in what order they should be arranged; certainly, though, the group of twelve as they appear in the Group I and II manuscripts in the 1633 edition of the 'Poems' seem to have some internal coherence, and are far from being individual utterances. The 'Holy Sonnets' are exhortatory, despairing, and demanding by turns, and they make use of virtually the full range of Donne's intellectual pursuits, the twelfth in particular ('Father, part of this double interest') skilfully pleading the legal case for inheritance of the kingdom of heaven to God figured as a divine judge. 
The period during which Donne was at Mitcham was one of the most productive for his writing and research, and Bald rightly states that at this time he was 'nearer to being a professional author than at any other time during his life' (Bald, 200). Donne had been engaged for some time, it is clear, in a course of reading in canon and civil law, and in casuistry: the works that he composed from 1607 to 1610 are steeped in this learning, determined at once to display their mastery of a vast number of authorities and to cast a sceptical eye on the very use of authoritative textual testimony. The first substantial work that Donne wrote at this time, 'Biathanatos' (composed in 1607-8, though work on it may have started at Pyrford), is a perfect example of his ambiguous relationship with humanism. It is a cousin to the more frivolous 'Paradoxes' and 'Problems' (the latter probably composed at roughly the same time) in its defence of a seeming paradox -- its subtitle is 'A declaration of that paradoxe or thesis, that self-homicide is not so naturally sinne, that it may never be otherwise' -- yet it is formidably researched, and its fashionably sceptical attitude can be more properly traced to a frame of mind inculcated by the study of cases of conscience that occupied Donne throughout his life. According to Walton, in Donne's study after his death were found 'divers... cases of Conscience that had concerned his friends, with his observations and solutions of them' (Walton, 68), and Donne refers to his book of cases of conscience in two of his surviving letters. 'Biathanatos' was -- by contrast with Donne's other prose writings from this period -- intended to be a fairly private work: it was printed in 1647, sixteen years after Donne's death, and only two manuscripts survive from Donne's lifetime. Statements made by Donne to those entrusted with a copy of the work reinforce the sense that he intended it for a restricted circle of readers: in a presentation letter to Sir Edward Herbert he suggests that the best (though he never says only) place for it is Herbert's library, and when sending a copy to Sir Robert Ker in 1619 he declared 'I forbid it only the Presse, and the Fire: publish it not, but yet burn it not; and between those, do what you will with it' (Donne, 'Letters', 22). The book was, he noted to Ker, 'upon a misinterpretable subject' (ibid., 21). 
Shortly after Donne completed 'Biathanatos', he published what was to be his most substantial prose work, 'Pseudo-Martyr' (1610; the book runs to 430 pages). 'Pseudo-Martyr' is not merely a work more public than 'Biathanatos': it is in its own right an extremely public and deliberate intervention into a current controversy, and it announces unambiguously Donne's allegiance to the religious policies of James I, to whom it is dedicated. After the Gunpowder Plot in 1605 James had approved an act of parliament that instituted a new oath of allegiance; this oath forced Roman Catholics to deny the deposing power claimed by the pope over monarchs who opposed Catholicism, or to face imprisonment and the seizure of their property. A war of words flared up over whether English Catholics were obliged to swear the oath, the king entering the fray with his 'Triplici nodo triplex cuneus, or, An Apologie for the Oath of Allegiance' (1607). The Jesuit Robert Persons soon responded to James's book in satiric vein, and William Barlow was commissioned to answer Persons. Barlow's 'Answer to a Catholike English-Man' (1609) proved to be a rather feeble contribution, and Donne spoke harshly of it in a letter to Goodyer. He had been following the controversy from its beginning, and may even have been acting as an assistant to the practised controversialist Thomas Morton, chaplain to the earl of Rutland and, from 1607, dean of Gloucester -- certainly Donne had read portions of the manuscript of Morton's 'A Catholike Appeale for Protestants' (1609) eighteen months before its publication. 'Pseudo-Martyr' is as learned a work as 'Biathanatos', and in writing it Donne turned the scepticism evinced towards human authorities in the earlier work to local ends: he was aware of the importance to the controversy of judicious and accurate quotation (Barlow's prime failing, in Donne's opinion), and went to some trouble to assert his own reliability and to expose the distortions of Catholic writers. 

'Pseudo-Martyr' is divided into two sections, which treat in turn two arguments: first, that Catholics may take the oath of allegiance with clear consciences, and second, that therefore those who do not and who suffer as a result are not entitled to be called martyrs. In the preface Donne draws attention to the fact that he is especially well placed to pronounce on martyrdom true and false, asserting that: 'as I am a Christian, I have been ever kept awake in a meditation of Martyrdome, by being derived from such a stocke and race, as, I beleeve, no family, (which is not of farre larger extent, and greater branches,) hath endured and suffered more in their persons and fortunes, for obeying the Teachers of Romane Doctrine, then it hath done. (Donne, 'Pseudo-Martyr', 1610, sig. PP)' In pursuing his thesis Donne argues that the temporal jurisdiction claimed by the pope is false, while the ecclesiastical jurisdiction claimed by various monarchs is legitimate. Arguing that those who suffer for obeying this false papal authority are not true martyrs, he distinguishes between essential points of faith and things indifferent, or adiaphora: he strikes a pose of toleration and moderation, yet in claiming the authority to make this distinction he confronts and provokes his Catholic opponents. 'Pseudo-Martyr' is a work that marshals profound learning in the service of the king's religious policy, yet it appears to have received little notice from other participants in the heated and drawn-out controversy over the oath of allegiance (J. P. Sommerville, 'Jacobean political thought and the controversy over the oath of allegiance', PhD diss., University of Cambridge, 1981). It may, however, have advertised Donne's skills as a controversial theologian to the king as well as to contemporaries in the church. Walton states that James at this point first suggested that Donne should enter the church, but this suggestion was clearly not received with great enthusiasm: Donne continued to pursue his civil ambitions. 
In April 1610 Donne was made an honorary MA of Oxford. It was probably later that year that he wrote his next controversial work, 'Conclave Ignati', or 'Ignatius his Conclave'. While 'Pseudo-Martyr' tends to conceal its confrontational position behind eirenic language, 'Ignatius' is a brief and biting satire against Roman Catholics in general, Jesuits in particular, and all kinds of innovators, couched in the form of a dream-vision, a Menippean journey to hell where Ignatius holds court. The book was published anonymously, first in Latin and then in Donne's own English translation. It makes much play with this anonymity, a preface 'from the Printer to the Reader' describing the author's supposed reluctance to publish while very deliberately setting the book as a companion-piece to 'Pseudo-Martyr'. Once again Donne displays a studied ambivalence to learning, exposing the distortions of Roman Catholic reading practices while displaying his own erudition. He mocks the procedures of controversy (side-notes support tiny points in Donne's argument by reference to enormous volumes) while at the same time demonstrating his competence in them. 
It is unclear when Donne first made the acquaintance of Sir Robert Drury and his family, but in the year following the death of their younger daughter Elizabeth in 1610, he wrote two elegies for her, 'A Funerall Elegie' and 'An Anatomy of the World', and was invited by Sir Robert to join the family on a journey to the continent. Both poems were printed, anonymously, in 1611. The party left England about November 1611, and Donne's wife and children went to stay with her younger sister Frances and her husband, John Oglander, on the Isle of Wight. Donne and the Drurys went first to Amiens, where they stayed from December until roughly the beginning of March, and where Donne wrote the next of his elegies for Elizabeth Drury, 'The Progres of the Soule'; this was published in 1612 with 'An Anatomy of the World' as the 'First' and 'Second' 'Anniversaries'. Early in 1612 the Drurys moved to Paris, where Donne fell ill. He none the less witnessed the double marriage of Louis XIII and his sister, and attempted to make contact with the Sorbonnist Edmond Richer, a critic of the pope's temporal claims; he also saw the exiled Toby Matthew. The next stage of the journey, after Easter, was to Heidelberg and Frankfurt (where the party witnessed the imperial election); from there they went on to Spa, and returned to England via the Low Countries, visiting Maastricht, Louvain, and Brussels (and possibly Antwerp). 
On his return to England, Donne moved, with his family, into a house belonging to Sir Robert Drury and near to the Drurys' own substantial house on Drury Lane. He stayed here until 1621. A number of public and personal events provided the occasions for poems during the period after his travels abroad. Donne contributed an elegy for the third edition of Joshua Sylvester's 'Lachrymae lachrymarum', a memorial volume to Prince Henry, who had died in November 1612; he also wrote an epithalamion for the marriage of Princess Elizabeth to Frederick, the elector palatine ('Hail Bishop Valentine, whose day this is') -- the latter a piece that deftly unites attention to the significance of the day upon which the marriage fell (St Valentine's day) with decorous celebration of the couple's equality and mutuality in love. A visit to his friend Sir Henry Goodyer in the spring of 1613 was commemorated in Donne's 'Goodfriday, 1613: Riding Westward'; Donne was probably on his way from Goodyer's house at Polesworth to Sir Edward Herbert at Montgomery Castle. 
Donne was still in search of an office, and sought the patronage of those who seemed most likely to be able to help; it was during 1613 that he offered his services to Robert Carr, Viscount Rochester (later earl of Somerset). Carr was engaged in the attempt to make Frances Howard (then married to the earl of Essex) his wife, and it was at this time that Donne was presented to him by another of James's Scottish favourites, James Hay. Donne later offered to write a defence of the nullity pronounced on Howard's previous marriage, and he produced an epithalamion for her wedding to Carr, which took place in December 1613. The epithalamion is a notoriously complicated response to a marriage that was regarded with some misgivings even before the bride and groom were accused of complicity in the murder of Carr's former secretary, Sir Thomas Overbury. Donne frames his poem with an eclogue, explaining that the epithalamion was written in his absence from the court and is being delivered late, and offering to burn it. Seemingly, he removes from himself responsibility for the poem or its reception while still delivering it -- an extreme example of the modesty topos, which might point to the anxieties surrounding the event being celebrated. 
Also in 1613-14 the young Lord Harington, brother of Lucy, countess of Bedford, died of smallpox, occasioning Donne's long 'Obsequies to the Lord Harrington', at the end of which he announces that his muse has 'spoke her last'. Donne himself had been ill during the winter of 1613-14, as had all of his family, and in May 1614 his daughter Mary died. As well as writing to and for his powerful friends and patrons, Donne was involved once more in the daily business of politics and public life, being returned as MP for Taunton in the short-lived Addled Parliament of April-June 1614. He served on several committees, but there is no evidence of his speaking during the session's debates. It was the search for employment that must have greatly occupied Donne during this period, as it had for some years. Before parliament assembled, he wrote to Carr (now earl of Somerset) asking him to put him forward to the ambassadorship to Venice (recently vacated by Sir Dudley Carleton), and later in the year he made more than one attempt to gain a place directly from the king. These were, however, all unsuccessful, and Donne once again was advised to enter the church, as he had been on the publication of 'Pseudo-Martyr' four years earlier. He had certainly not neglected his studies: according to Walton, at this time Donne was studying Greek and Hebrew (Walton, 46); Donne himself mentions in a letter that he was employed 'in the search of the eastern tongues' (Gosse, 2.16), and he may well have made use of the visits of the scholars Isaac Casaubon and Hugo Grotius in 1613-14. As it became increasingly clear that his path to advancement lay in divine and not secular employment, Donne chose to gather his poems for publication, finding that he needed to call in manuscripts that he had sent to friends: 'by this occasion', he wrote, 'I am made a Rhapsoder of mine own rags, and that cost me more diligence, to seek them, then it did to make them' (Donne, 'Letters', 197). However, this edition appears never to have been printed. 
It is impossible to tell exactly when Donne wrote his 'Essays in Divinity'. When the book was published posthumously in 1651, his son John Donne the younger wrote that it was 'writ when the Author was obliged in Civill business, and had no ingagement with that of the Church', and that the essays were 'the voluntary sacrifices of severall hours, when he had many debates betwixt God and himself, whether he were worthy, and competently learned to enter Holy Orders' ('Essays in Divinity', 3, 4), but this suggestion that the work should be dated to the years immediately preceding Donne's ordination has no other support, internal or external. Certainly at times the 'Essays' read like self-conscious apprentice-work -- Donne is performing a very careful kind of exegetical meditation on the beginning of 'Genesis' and on 'Exodus' -- and their tone stands at a curious mid-point between the private and the public; at one point Donne refers to them as 'sermons' with 'no Auditory' ('Essays in Divinity', 41). While it is likely that they were finished by 1615, however (there are no references to books published after this date), they may have been begun much earlier and added to over a long period. It may be significant that Donne uses the Geneva 'Bible' throughout, rather than (as might be expected were he writing after 1611) the King James Version -- but he can also be found using the Geneva and a range of other versions after his ordination in his sermons. The 'Essays', when they have received critical attention, have been praised for the prayers with which they conclude; but there is much more of interest to them than these short devotional pieces. The 'Essays' show Donne's sceptical attitude to human authorities and testimonies engaging with Reformation arguments about the relative status of tradition and authority in doctrine. 
Donne was ordained deacon and priest on 23 January 1615, in St Paul's, with John King, the bishop of London, officiating. He wrote a series of letters to friends and patrons announcing his ordination, and adopted a new seal, exchanging the sheaf of snakes for an image of Christ crucified on an anchor. Appointed soon after his ordination to a royal chaplaincy, Donne attended the king on James's visit to Cambridge in March, where he was, despite apparent reluctance on the part of the vice-chancellor, awarded an honorary doctorate of divinity. His first sermon was, according to Walton, preached at Paddington (Walton, 48); but the first to survive bears the heading 'Preached at Greenwich, Aprill 30. 1615'. Recent research supports Jessop's contention (challenged by Bald) that the sermon was preached to the court at Greenwich, not in the parish church there. For the rest of his career Donne would combine preaching in parish churches with addressing more elevated auditories, at court, at Lincoln's Inn, and at St Paul's Cathedral, among other places. 
Donne received his first benefices in the year following his ordination, being granted Keyston in Huntingdon in January 1616 and Sevenoaks in Kent in July 1616. In October 1616 he was appointed as reader in divinity at his old inn of court, Lincoln's Inn. This, along with his duties at court as chaplain-in-ordinary (he seems to have mainly preached there during Lent), was his main occupation as a preacher in the first years of his ministry. In 1617 he preached his first sermon at the outdoor pulpit at Paul's Cross, on 24 March -- the anniversary of the death of Queen Elizabeth and the accession of King James -- just after James had set off on a journey to Scotland. In July of the same year he preached at his living in Sevenoaks, with Lady Anne Clifford in the congregation. Another sermon from this year was on a more private and melancholy occasion: on 10 August Ann Donne gave birth to a stillborn child, and five days later she died. Donne preached the funeral sermon at St Clement Danes (the incumbent had himself died recently, and it was Donne's parish church) and he commissioned a monument from Nicholas Stone to commemorate his wife. Walton gives an affecting account of the sermon, and of Donne's ability to move his auditory: 'And indeed his very looks and words testified him to be truly such a man [one who had 'seen affliction']; and they, with the addition of his sighs and tears, exprest in his Sermon, did so work upon the affections of his hearers, as melted and moulded them into a companionable sadness. (Walton, 52)' 

Having sought some form of diplomatic employment during the years before his ordination, Donne was finally sent in 1619 on an embassy in the capacity of chaplain to Viscount Doncaster. James, always determined to live up to his motto 'Beati pacifici' ('Blessed are the peacemakers'), believed that he could mediate between the Holy Roman emperor and the Bohemian protestants and put a halt to the conflict that would become the Thirty Years' War. Doncaster was appointed ambassador in February, but the party did not set out until May. Donne must have been chosen at least in part because of his understanding of the continental situation -- indeed, about 1615 he had been entrusted with a cipher, and was sent another by Wotton in 1623. He was, through his controversial works and his wide reading, well placed to undertake such a mission. Donne appears to have been concerned for his safety on his journey, and before he departed he made preparations in case he should not return, sending his manuscript of 'Biathanatos' to Sir Robert Ker. He preached a farewell sermon at Lincoln's Inn, and about this time he composed the 'Hymne to Christ, at the Authors Last Going into Germany'. 
The embassy travelled from Calais to Antwerp, Brussels, and then Mariemont, where they met the archduke. After this they went on to Heidelberg to meet Frederick, the elector palatine, and Princess Elizabeth (James I's son-in-law and daughter), before whom Donne preached a sermon. Doncaster then proceeded to meetings with allies of the emperor, travelling to Ulm, Augsburg, and Munich, where he met the duke of Bavaria. In Salzburg he met Ferdinand himself, and attempted to put the case for treating with the Bohemians, but to little avail. The imperial elections took place at Frankfurt, and Doncaster and many of his party were present, though when he saw that his diplomacy was having no effect he moved on to the Spa, with Donne in attendance. Meanwhile, Frederick was chosen as king of Bohemia and Ferdinand as emperor. In the final stages of his mission, Doncaster pursued the new emperor to Graz, where he was granted an audience, and then set off on his return journey, again having failed to sway Ferdinand towards peace. The embassy travelled to The Hague, where Donne preached, and was given a medal commemorating the Synod of Dort: this gift could be seen as acknowledging his status as a moderate and sympathetic member of the European protestant movement. Finally, the party reached London on 1 January 1620: James's ambitions as peacebroker had been disappointed, and Donne and his companions had experienced the frustration of seeing their embassy exploited as a delaying tactic by the emperor while the protestant forces suffered and remained unassisted by the English. 
On his return from the continent Donne resumed his duties at Lincoln's Inn; he also celebrated the wedding of Sir Francis Nethersole to Lucy Goodyer, daughter of his friend Sir Henry. He was actively seeking promotion, however, and it is known that twice in 1620-21 his hopes were frustrated. Late in August 1621, though, the bishop of Exeter died, and was succeeded by Valentine Cary, dean of St Paul's: it was decided that Donne would take Cary's place, and he was formally elected and installed on 22 November. Donne resigned from his living at Keyston in October 1621, and also from his readership at Lincoln's Inn (though it is first recorded only in early 1622). As a parting gift to the inn he donated the six-volume edition of the 'Vulgate' with Nicholas de Lyre's commentary. Information on Donne's deanship is scarce; the act-books of the chapter for his incumbency do not survive and recent researches have failed to uncover more material. On being appointed Donne moved his residence to the deanery of St Paul's and, according to Walton, 'immediately after he came to his Deanry, he employed work-men to repair and beautify the Chapel' (Walton, 55). 
As dean, Donne's preaching duties were not onerous: he was obliged only to preach on Christmas day, Easter day, and Whit Sunday. But he certainly did more than this bare minimum, and a number of sermons on other occasions survive. Nor did he preach only in the cathedral. In February 1622 Donne was appointed to the living of Blunham in Bedfordshire, in the gift of the earl of Kent, and it seems that he spent time there each summer, as had been his custom with his other livings. Moreover, he continued to preach at court, and elsewhere. In August 1622 he preached before Doncaster, the earl of Northumberland (Doncaster's father-in-law), and the duke of Buckingham at Hanworth, and later that year he was chosen to deliver a sermon on a highly sensitive political occasion. During 1622 the protestant forces had been suffering defeats in Germany, and at the same time the negotiations for a Spanish marriage for Prince Charles were progressing; there was a degree of popular unrest, and James's policies were being criticized from the pulpits. On 4 August the king issued directions to preachers, severely restricting the subjects, political and doctrinal, that could be treated by ordinary clergy, and ordered Donne to justify the directions in a sermon at Paul's Cross on 15 September. The sermon is a consummate example of orderly preaching which also has the ability to offer implicit counsel, but it received mixed reactions when it was delivered: Chamberlain suspected that Donne was not committed to his task ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.451), but James was impressed, and ordered the sermon to be printed. It was quickly published with a dedication to Buckingham, the first of Donne's sermons to appear in print. This was the first of several important public sermons Donne delivered in autumn 1622. He preached the annual Gunpowder Plot sermon at St Paul's on 5 November, and James demanded to see it -- though this time it was not printed. Just over a week later, on 13 November, he preached to the Virginia Company (of which he had been made an honorary member on 22 May and an honorary member of the council on 3 July), at St Michael Cornhill. This sermon was printed, and was dedicated to the company. 
The next of Donne's sermons to be printed was preached and published in 1623, on the occasion of the consecration of the new chapel at Lincoln's Inn. Delivered on Ascension day, it was printed with the title 'Encaenia'. As in his defence of the directions to preachers, in this sermon Donne characteristically engages with discretion in a highly controversial subject. Not only the issue of outward displays of worship (addressed by Donne in his dedicatory epistle to the masters of the bench), but also the more specific question of what the function of consecration was in a reformed church, are discussed with a polemical force that derives precisely from Donne's choice of a moderate and moderating voice. In October 1623 Donne preached at the law serjeants' feast, although this sermon does not survive. However, the occasion is a reminder that during his time as dean Donne also had occasion to use his legal training. He served as a justice of the peace in Kent and Bedford, and he was appointed thirteen times to hear appeals from lower ecclesiastical courts and sit in the court of delegates. 
During 1623 Donne was engaged in negotiations for the marriage of his daughter Constance to the former actor and founder of Dulwich College, Edward Alleyn; the wedding took place on 3 December. During this winter, however, Donne was seriously ill with what seems to have been a combination of 'relapsing fever' with the less grave 'rewme' (Donne, 'Devotions', xiii-xvii). This illness he used as the foundation of the 'Devotions upon Emergent Occasions', printed in early 1624 (it was entered in the Stationers' register on 9 January) and dedicated to Prince Charles. The book, organized into a series of twenty-three meditations, expostulations, and prayers, follows the progress of the illness through Donne's body as he observes himself and considers himself as a type of mankind. It is striking in its dogged pursuit of the possible meanings, spiritual and physical, of the symptoms Donne observes as he works away at the questions of the relation between internal and external, the corporeal and the intellectual, the human and the divine. In March 1624 Donne was appointed to the living of St Dunstan-in-the-West, whose incumbent had recently died and which was in the gift of the earl of Dorset. The parish was in the centre of the legal district as well as being surrounded by stationers' shops, and Donne's congregation there must have contained many lawyers, judges, and printers as well as other citizens. As with his personal chapel at the deanery of St Paul's, Donne initiated renovations at St Dunstan's soon after his appointment. 
In 1625 Donne composed the only poem that can be dated with certainty from this period of his life -- and it may well have been his last. 'An Hymne to the Saints, and to Marquesse Hamylton' was written at the request of Sir Robert Ker (Hamilton died on 2 March). The same year saw the death of James I (on 27 March) and the accession of Charles I: Donne preached the first sermon before the new king, on 3 April, and a sermon before the body of James on 26 April. He was ill once more, and was forced to leave London because of the plague that swept the city from the summer; staying in Chelsea with Sir John and Lady Danvers until December, he made use of his temporary exile by writing out many of his sermons -- he refers to having completed eighty in a letter to Sir Thomas Roe of 25 November (Bald, 479). There was some familial disturbance in Donne's life, however, as he and his son-in-law Edward Alleyn quarrelled over $500 that Alleyn claimed Donne had promised to lend him and then refused to deliver. 
After the plague was over, Charles was crowned in 1626 and called his first parliament. Convocation also met, and Donne was chosen prolocutor. He preached the annual Lent sermon at court, and at Charles's suggestion it was printed, with a dedication to the king. Donne clearly retained the royal favour he had enjoyed under James. 1626 was a busy year for him in the pulpit, and he was also appointed a governor of the Charterhouse. The following year his royal favour slipped briefly, as the king -- via William Laud -- demanded to see a copy of the sermon Donne had preached at court on 1 April. It appears that they suspected him of joining with Archbishop Abbot's criticism of James Montagu and Robert Sibthorpe, who had recently preached sermons in support of Laud's ceremonial innovations. Donne would thus, by extension, be criticizing Laud himself. The sermon was scrutinized, and Donne was cleared. 
In 1627 Donne's daughter Lucy died, as well as several of his old friends: Goodyer died on 18 March; Lady Bedford on 31 May; and Lady Danvers in early June. He preached the latter's funeral sermon, and it was subsequently printed. On 19 November he preached at the wedding of Lady Mary Egerton, daughter of the earl of Bridgewater, to the son and heir of Edward, Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Little detailed information is available about Donne's activities during the final years of his life, aside from his attendance at various meetings (for instance, the vestry meetings at St Dunstan's and the meetings of the governors of the Charterhouse), his presence as judge or signatory in legal cases, and his preaching of several datable sermons at Paul's Cross, St Paul's, and the court. It is known that he continued to suffer from ill health: from August 1629 he was unwell with a quinsy, and he seems to have been frequently ill with fever during 1630 -- possibly a symptom of the stomach cancer that eventually killed him. Had he lived, Donne would almost certainly have been appointed to a bishopric: by summer 1630 he was listed as a candidate for a see whenever a vacancy should open. However, his health was failing, and when his daughter Constance remarried in June 1630 (Alleyn had died in 1626), he went to stay with her at Aldborough Hatch in Essex and remained there until early 1631. His mother, who had been living with him at the deanery, and who had accompanied him to Aldborough Hatch, died in January 1631. Donne had already made his will, on 13 December 1630, and he would only live for another three months. 
Donne returned to London, scotching rumours of his death, and on 25 February he preached his final sermon, at Whitehall. This is an extended meditation on mortality and resurrection, later printed as 'Deaths Duell' (it was entered in the Stationers' register on 30 September 1631); according to Walton many of his auditors at the time said 'that Dr. Donne 'had preach't his own Funeral Sermon'' (Walton, 75). Donne spent the time remaining to him preparing for death, practically and spiritually. He dealt with the final remaining cathedral business, he posed in his shroud for a monument (the sculpture by Nicholas Stone, funded by Donne's doctor Simeon Fox, remains in St Paul's today, and the sketch for this was also the model for the engraving by Martin Droeshout on the frontispiece of 'Deaths Duell'), and he bade farewell to his friends. He died at the deanery on 31 March, and Walton gives an affecting portrayal of his end (Walton, 81-2). He was buried, on 3 April, in St Paul's, and the Latin epitaph on his monument may well have been written by Donne himself. Among those who survived him was his son John Donne the younger, author and literary executor. 
Donne left his sermons to Henry King, and they later, by a rather murky process, went via Walton to John Donne the younger, who published those in his possession in three folio volumes ('LXXX Sermons' appeared in 1640, 'Fifty Sermons' in 1649, and 'XXVI Sermons' in 1661). One hundred and sixty of Donne's sermons survive, and they demand reading and study not just as the major productions of his maturity but also as intricate and beautiful pieces of prose. Donne's religious stance has been much debated from his lifetime on, and the sermons demonstrate that while he continued the controversial interests of his early polemical works, his concern during his ministry was most often to seek edification -- of his auditors and of the English church -- and, while criticizing those whom he regarded as sectarians, both puritan and Roman Catholic, to find some form of accommodation with elements of both. As Donne preaches to congregations ranging from the inhabitants of Blunham to the members of the courts of James I and Charles I, he can be seen to be mapping out a middle way that offers at the same time a strong vision of a church still seeking identity and a voice with which its ministers can speak both with and to authority. 
Immediately after his death Donne's greatness was celebrated by a host of poets, especially in the collection of 'Elegies upon the Author' contained in the two first editions of the posthumously published 'Poems' (1633; 1635). Writers such as John Marston, Jonson, Henry King, Richard Corbet, Thomas Carew, Lucius Carey, Jasper Mayne, Sidney Godolphin, and, of course, Izaak Walton joined in praising Donne's skill as poet, divine, and versatile intellectual. Although Carew's elegy (probably now the most famous) singled out for praise Donne's poetic inventiveness, many of the others are notable for their concentration on Donne as a preacher -- perhaps surprising in a volume of his poetry. In fact, Donne's verse was not widely known during his life. The poems were initially circulated among a small coterie of readers and, although they soon moved beyond that circle to be copied and recopied in manuscript collections, the paucity of early manuscript witnesses suggests that they travelled somewhat slowly. By the 1620s Donne's secular poetry was appearing regularly in manuscript miscellanies, but by this time he had been ordained for five years and the time of many of the poems' composition was long past. 
It was in the decades immediately following Donne's death that his fame as a poet reached its height. The publication of the 'Poems' in 1633 made them available to a wide readership, and the printer's address to the reader emphasized that already it was taken for granted by 'the best judgements' that Donne's poetry was 'the best in this kinde, that ever this Kingdome hath yet seene'. If this was a puff, it worked: there were six editions in the twenty-three years after Donne's death. Through the middle decades of the seventeenth century he was read, admired, and imitated, with further works being printed. Although several of the elegy writers of the 1633 volume had recourse to the paradoxical topos that after Donne's death it is impossible to write, his successors in fact seized the challenge enthusiastically, finding in Donne a model of a new literary style. 
However, Donne's fortunes underwent a sudden reversal in the late 1660s. In place of imitation and celebration, there is a firm rejection of his styles of thought and writing. The challenge that Carew found in Donne's prosodic inventiveness, his 'masculine expression', was considered by critics of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries to be one not worth taking up. The 'roughness' of his metre condemned him as old-fashioned, and while his conceits and his wit were praised, they were alleged to overpower the poems and the reader. Dryden criticized Donne for putting wit above feeling in his love poems, and his most critical comments were taken up with enthusiasm in the eighteenth century. This line of attack was pursued most violently by Samuel Johnson in his 'Life of Cowley' (1781), during the course of a general assault on the 'metaphysical poets'. Putting ingenuity above poetry, wrote Johnson, 'their thoughts were often new, but seldom natural; they are not obvious, but neither are they just; and the reader, far from wondering that he missed them, wonders more frequently by what perverseness of industry they were ever found' (Smith, 1.218). Donne was deemed indecorous, decadent, and an incompetent versifier (Pope had produced 'versions' of 'Satires' 2 and 4 in an attempt to regularize them); old editions of his writings became hard to find and new ones were few and very badly produced, riddled with errors. Dissenting voices were rarely heard and the force of their arguments was necessarily reduced by the difficulty of appealing to widely known texts: the feeling against Donne was often based on, at best, a half-knowledge of the works being dismissed. 
Writers of the early nineteenth century, by contrast, saw Donne as offering a mirror of some of their own most pressing concerns. Coleridge in particular stands out not only for the range and acuity of his readings of Donne but also in his treatment of the poems as arguments rather than (as Johnson did) a series of discrete and disjointed conceits. As the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries witnessed a surge of interest in the complex relationship between language, thought, and feeling, innovative writers like Coleridge and Godwin celebrated Donne for the individuality of his poetic voice, the force of his unusual images, and his exploration of the boundaries of genre. Coleridge made copious marginal notes in Charles Lamb's copy of the poems -- notes that, among other things, show just how carefully Coleridge understood Donne's metrical inventiveness; he states that 'in poems where the writer 'thinks', and expects the reader to do so, the sense must be understood in order to ascertain the metre' (Smith, 1.266). But beyond the group of writers and intellectuals who were developing an interest in Donne in the nineteenth century (a group that included Charles Lamb, Thomas De Quincey, James Henry Leigh Hunt, Elizabeth Barrett, Robert Browning, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau), his works were reaching a wider readership once more. The need for new editions was repeatedly asserted and, to some extent, met by Henry Alford's 'Works of John Donne' (1839). The first modern edition of the poems, on bibliographical principles, was produced by Grosart in 1872 for the 'Fuller's Worthies Library' -- a milestone in the study and reception of Donne, despite its thoroughly unreliable text. Donne still remained something of an acquired taste, however, and it was the work of scholars and critics at the very end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries that saw a wholesale rehabilitation. 
Edmund Gosse's magisterial 'Life and Letters of John Donne' (1899) established a context for the understanding of his works, and the editorial labours of J. R. Lowell and C. E. Norton (1895) and E. K. Chambers (1896) went some way to providing a widely available text for the poems. It was with H. J. C. Grierson's two-volume edition of the 'Poems' (1912) that modern bibliographical techniques were properly applied to Donne. Grierson's edition, along with his anthology 'Metaphysical Poetry: Donne to Butler' (1921) also initiated a new interpretive framework for Donne. T. S. Eliot's review of that anthology (1921) celebrated Donne as a precursor of the modernist poet. From the early years of the twentieth century, and with the emergence and consolidation of English literature as a university subject, Donne's place in the canon was assured. Scholars using diverse critical approaches have found Donne an engaging and rewarding subject for commentary. One of the most important aspects of many of these responses to Donne has been their increasing tendency to follow Coleridge in taking Donne's argumentation seriously -- a path followed especially brilliantly by the various essays of William Empson. An equally significant aspect of Donne's reputation in the twentieth century has been his popularity as a poet of love. Several of the 'Songs and Sonets' in particular have been celebrated as masterpieces of the genre, and as a result feature frequently in popular and scholarly anthologies. Audio recordings of the poems (most notably an intense performance by the actor Richard Burton) also focus on the erotic affect of Donne's individuality of voice. 
Both romantics and critics alike have tended to concentrate on a fairly narrow selection of Donne's works. None the less, with the appearance of the critical editions (most recently the multi-volume variorum edition of the poems), the increasing interest in manuscript studies, and the developing links between literary criticism and history, readers have the tools at hand to produce richer and more firmly grounded contributions to the ongoing debate about the meanings of Donne's life and writings. At present, his reputation is secure as one of the most significant writers of the English Renaissance. 


@@@@@


doc= 7820


Donne, John, the younger (1604-1662/3), author and literary executor, was born about May 1604, the son of John Donne (1572-1631), poet and dean of St Paul's, and his wife, Ann More. He was educated at Westminster School, and proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1622, where he took the degrees of BA and MA. It is usually assumed that he was the John Donne who married Mary Staples at Camberwell on 27 March 1627. 
Apart from being the son and literary executor of John Donne, Donne is remembered principally for an incident that took place on 31 October 1633 at St Aldates, Oxford, when he struck with his riding whip an eight-year-old boy who had startled his horse. The boy died on 22 November and Donne was put on trial for manslaughter under Laud, who was vice-chancellor at the time, but was acquitted, as two surgeons and a physician attested that they could not find any appearance of injury on the boy. Donne left for Padua after this and took the degree of doctor of laws there, and on his return was incorporated at Oxford with the same degree in 1638. He was ordained priest about this time and was presented to the living of High Roding, Essex, that year, and also concurrently to Ufford in Northamptonshire and Fulbeck in Lincolnshire in May and June respectively the following year. He resided at none of them. He was chaplain to Basil, earl of Denbigh, and during the rising of 1644 was under suspicion by the parliamentary party. In 1662, only months before his death, he published a small volume entitled 'Donnes Satyr', which revealed his fondness for witticisms and for playing the fool. 
As early as 1637 Donne had petitioned for control of his father's estate and complained to the archbishop of Canterbury about Marriot's editions of Donne's works. He finally acquired Donne's letters, which had been left to Henry King in his will, from Izaak Walton, who was consulting them in the process of writing Donne's biography. That Walton had not consented to the acquisition is suggested by a letter of King to Walton (dated 'Novem. 17 1664' and printed as a preface to the 1670 and 1675 editions of Walton's 'Life of John Donne'), in which he comments: 'How these were got out of my hands, you, who were the Messenger for them, and how lost both to me and your self, is not now seasonable to complain: but, since they did miscarry, I am glad that the general Demonstration of his Worth was so fairly preserved, and represented to the World by your Pen in the History of his Life.' Donne the younger, it seems, had acquired his father's letters despite King's desire to hold on to them. Recent scholarship has traced the course of this dispute and has suggested that, despite the acrimony, Donne and Izaak Walton worked together to some extent to assemble the volumes 'Letters to Severall Persons of Honour: Written by John Donne Sometime Deane of St Pauls London' (1651) and 'A Collection of Letters, Made by Sr Tobie Mathews Kt.' (1660). However, Donne's editorial methods in the first of these volumes are far from transparent or honest. As Bennett and Shapiro showed, apart from printing the letters out of chronological order and without their dates, Donne also gave many false addresses and substituted for the names or initials of his father's ordinary friends, including Sir Henry Goodyer, others suggestive of grander associations. 
In 1644 Donne the younger was also involved in the publication of his father's treatise on suicide, 'Biathanatos'. Caught between his father's injunction that the manuscript should be spared 'both the Presse and the Fire', Donne the younger eventually opted for publication, rather than the deliberate annihilation of the fire or the accidental damage of time and chance, remarking that the work was in equal danger of being 'utterly lost' and 'utterly found'. 
Although Anthony Wood's comment that he was an 'atheistical buffoon, a banterer, and a person of over-free thoughts' has often been used to characterize the younger Donne, it seems fairer, given the pressures of his father's fame and the complicated situations of his literary executorship, to remember him by Wood's more balanced observation, that 'there is no doubt but that he was a man of sense, and parts; which, had they been applied to a good use, he might have proved beneficial in his generation' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.503). In his will (dated 21 July 1657) Donne went some way towards setting his life in order: he returned to Izaak Walton's son some of his father's books and papers; he ordered that he wished to be buried plainly -- 'I have not lived by juggling... therefore I desire to dye and be buried without any'; and, somewhat ironically, considering his own actions, warned his executor against interpreting his Spartan wishes too freely. Donne the younger died in the winter of 1662-3 at his London house in Covent Garden and was buried on 3 February 1663 at the west end of St Paul's Church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 7821


Donne, William Bodham (1807-1882), essayist and examiner of plays, was born on 29 July 1807 at Mattishall, near East Dereham, Norfolk, the only child of Edward Charles Donne (1777-1819), physician, and his cousin Anne Vertue Donne (1781-1859). His grandfather William Donne was an eminent Norwich surgeon. The poet John Donne may have been his direct ancestor, and the poet William Cowper's mother was great-aunt to both of his parents. Donne was educated at the grammar school, Hingham, before going in 1819 to Edward VI Grammar School at Bury St Edmunds, where he became friends with schoolmates Edward FitzGerald (later translator of 'The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam') and John Mitchell Kemble, who became an Old English scholar. His lifelong friendship with the Kemble family stimulated his interest in the drama. After receiving tuition from the Revd Williams of Thornham, near Bury, in 1826 Donne entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, but his objections to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' prevented him from taking his degree. While at Cambridge, Donne became a member of the exclusive Apostles club, which also included Kemble, Alfred Tennyson, and Arthur Hallam. 
After leaving Cambridge, Donne retired to Mattishall, where, on 15 November 1830, he married his cousin Catharine (1798-1843), daughter of Charles Hewitt (1771-1847), and also a niece of Cowper's cousin and friend John Johnson. The couple had five children before Catharine's death: Charles Edward, who married J. M. Kemble's daughter Mildred; William Mowbry; Frederick Clench; Katherine Blanche; and Valentia. In 1846 Donne moved to Bury St Edmunds to educate his sons and there became friends with headmaster William Donaldson. Other friends included H. Crabb Robinson, Bernard Barton, Lamb's friend Manning, and George Borrow. A Liberal, Donne supported the repeal of the corn laws, but his scholarly nature prevented him from becoming a party man. In 1852 he declined the editorship of the 'Edinburgh Review' because he believed that 'his habits of life were too retired to keep him in the current of public opinion' (Johnson, 189). He did, however, accept the librarianship of the London Library that same year. 
In 1857 Donne resigned that post to become the examiner of plays in the lord chamberlain's office. From 1849 to 1856 he had served as acting examiner for J. M. Kemble, who was consistently abroad. As both unofficial and official examiner, Donne exercised considerable influence over Victorian drama, as reflected in periodic caricatures in the illustrated papers, in which the artists emphasized his prominent nose, bushy eyebrows, and distinctive dundrearies. Best-known for his refusal to license 'Camille' in 1853 and his efforts to continue the suppression of 'Jack Sheppard' and 'Oliver Twist' in 1859, Donne censored content that he regarded as 'indecent or profane, or politically objectionable' ('Select committee... theatres'). Genuinely interested in the state of British drama and sometimes more liberal than the general public in matters of taste, Donne nevertheless bowed to middle-class views of appropriate dramatic content and thus effectively limited the ways in which playwrights could explore serious topics. He served as examiner until 1874, when he was succeeded by E. F. S. Pigott. 
Donne contributed many essays to the 'British and Foreign', 'Edinburgh', 'Quarterly', 'Saturday', and 'Westminster' reviews, as well as to 'Fraser's Magazine', among others. He was complimented by contemporaries on his taste and delicate humour. Donne published 'Old Roads and New Roads', which drew on his knowledge of classical literature and modern history, in 1852, when he also edited 'Magic and Witchcraft'. 'Essays upon the Drama', selected from Donne's periodical writings, was published in 1858 and reissued in 1863. In 1867 Donne edited 'The Correspondence of King George the Third with Lord North' at Queen Victoria's request. Among his classical writings were the 'Euripides' (1872) and 'Tacitus' (1873) volumes of W. Lucas Collins's 'Ancient Classics for English Readers'. 
Donne died at his home in London at 25 Weymouth Street, Portland Place, on 20 June 1882 and was buried in Shooters Hill cemetery, Blackheath. 


@@@@@


doc= 7822


Donnegan, James (fl. c.1820-1841), lexicographer, was a doctor of medicine of a foreign university, who practised in London from about 1820 to 1835. His 'New Greek and English lexicon, principally on the plan of the Greek and German lexicon of Schneider' (1826) was commended by Bishop Edward Maltby as 'an important acquisition' (Maltby, 1). Subsequent editions (1831, 1837, 1842) contain many improvements and additions; an American edition, 'revised and enlarged by R. B. Patton', was published at Boston (1836), and another at Philadelphia (1843). In his preface to the fourth edition (1842), written in 1841, Donnegan revealed that since 1837 he had been in poor health, and expressed his thanks to Sir Robert Holt Leigh, a classical scholar, of Hindley Hall, near Wigan, Lancashire, with whom he was staying. 


@@@@@


doc= 7823


Donnelly, Sir Ross (c.1761-1840), naval officer, was the son of Dr Donnelly. After serving under Vice-Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot on the coast of North America, and at the capture of Charlestown, South Carolina, in May 1780, he was promoted on the Newfoundland station as lieutenant of the sloop 'Morning Star' on 27 September 1781. After the peace of Versailles (September 1783) he served as mate in the East India Company's service, but returned to the navy in 1793, and was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Montagu' (74 guns); he commanded the ship in Lord Howe's battle of 1 June 1794 in the north Atlantic after the death of her captain, James Montagu. As Howe expressed approval of his conduct and Sir Alexander Hood (Lord Bridport) wrote him a complimentary letter, Donnelly and his friends expected some more marked acknowledgement of his service than the promotion to commander's rank, which, together with the other first lieutenants of the ships engaged, he received on 6 July 1794. He had hoped (and applied) for the gold medal given to some of the flag officers and captains, but was told that it was given only to those who were post captains at the date of the battle. This rule was afterwards modified, and, after both the Nile and Trafalgar, first lieutenants who succeeded to the command by the death of their captains received the gold medal. Donnelly was, however, promoted captain on 24 June 1795, and appointed to the frigate 'Pegasus' (28 guns), in the North Sea with Admiral Duncan. From her he was moved to the 'Maidstone' off the French coast, in which, in 1801, he brought home a valuable convoy of 120 merchant ships from Porto -- a service for which the merchants of Porto presented him with a handsome piece of plate. Towards the end of the year he was moved to the 'Narcissus' (32 guns), which for the next three years he commanded in the Mediterranean, attached to the fleet under Nelson. Nelson had a high opinion of him, placing his own relative, W. B. Suckling, and several other young men in whom he was interested under Donnelly's immediate care. He wrote to one father, 'Your son cannot be anywhere so well placed as with Donnelly' ('GM'). In 1805, still in the 'Narcissus', he accompanied Sir Home Riggs Popham to the Cape of Good Hope, and afterwards to Buenos Aires, whence he returned to England with dispatches, in which his individual services were highly commended both by Popham and the general in command of the troops. He was then appointed to the 'Ardent' (64 guns), and went back to the River Plate in command of a convoy of transports. At the capture of Montevideo he commanded the naval brigade, and rendered important service both in transporting the heavy guns and in erecting batteries. In 1808 Donnelly was appointed to the 'Invincible' (74 guns), in which he joined the squadron off Cadiz, and, later on, the main fleet off Toulon under Lord Collingwood. 
In 1810 cataracts in his eyes forced Donnelly to resign his command. Two years later he had so far recovered as to apply for employment again, and he was appointed to the new 'Devonshire' (74 guns), which he fitted out. The conclusion of peace, however, prevented her going to sea, and Donnelly had no further service, though he was promoted rear-admiral on 4 June 1814, vice-admiral on 27 May 1825, and admiral on 28 June 1838; he was made a KCB on 28 February 1837. He died on 30 September 1840. He was married and had children; his eldest daughter, Anne Jane (died 1855), married, on 18 April 1816, George John, twentieth Baron Audley. 


@@@@@


doc= 7824


Donovan, Edward (1768-1837), natural historian and artist, is of obscure origin and little is known of his early life and education. His interest in natural history started with the collecting of shells and preservation of insects, probably before 1788. He was a prolific author and skilled artist who etched and engraved the plates for all his works. He became a fellow of the Linnean Society. 
Donovan's main interest was entomology and his published works included sixteen volumes of 'British Insects' (1792-1813) and three volumes on 'The Insects of China, India and New Holland', the last being dedicated to Sir Joseph Banks, and acknowledging use of his collections and library. Donovan's approach was to show species that had not been illustrated before, and many previously undescribed. Publications on other animals and plants were well received, including ten volumes of 'British Birds' (1799). Donovan's other major works included 'British Fishes' (1802-8), and the 'Botanical Review, or, The Beauties of Flora' (1789-96). His books were not of even quality and it is generally considered that he was at his best illustrating insects. In 1805 he published two volumes, 'Descriptive Excursions through South Wales', describing his travels through Monmouthshire. Donovan's plates were all engraved, hand coloured, and accompanied by a description and synonyms for each species depicted. All were published in parts; his proposal was to issue one number every two months at 7's'. 6died for each part. His early botanical plates are signed E. O. Donovan; this led to his being quoted as O'Donovan. After about 1790 he no longer used E. O. and the confusion ceased. Some contemporaries regarded the colouring of Donovan's plates as gaudy but later nineteenth- and twentieth-century opinion was, in general, much more favourable. 
Donovan was clearly endowed with a considerable fortune, spending freely to acquire specimens, including many insects from Dru Drury's collection. He bought many collections and paid high prices for some specimens (it is known he paid 7's'. 6died for a black-toed gull and 10 guineas for a great auk at the sale of the Leveren Museum). His whole natural history collection cost him several thousands of pounds and with it he established the London Museum and Institute of Natural History in Catherine Street, the Strand. The museum was opened to the public in 1807, with the general consensus that it was 'a much more valuable assortment of particular specimens than the richest Cabinets of Europe'. An entrance fee of 1's'. was charged, and 6died for the catalogue. By 1817, however, Donovan's finances began to decline. His labours of some thirty years at a cost of some $15,000 had to come to an end. A prospectus for sale of his collection was issued with the hope that funds would be raised to keep it intact, probably in the British Museum; this hope was not fulfilled and it was broken up and auctioned. 
By 1833 Donovan found himself in serious financial straits. He insisted that his publishers owed him large sums of money, but in reality he had not been a good businessman. He wanted to take his case to the court of chancery, but had not the wherewithal to do so. In that year he issued a plea 'To the patrons of science, literature and fine arts' asking for help to submit his case to the court. He described how from his first production he had verbally agreed with his publishers that they should have half the proceeds of that work and the same amount on any later publications. This would have given him a good income, since a full set of his works sold for $100; however, by withholding accounts for six years, under the existing statutes of limitation the booksellers avoided payment and Donovan was financially ruined. He was owed between $60,000 and $70,000. He had truthfully stated that there was no documentary evidence for his case, and this assured that costly legal action would not succeed. 
Once a man of great substance, when Donovan died on 1 February 1837 at his home, John Street, Kennington Road, London, he left a large family in destitution. 


@@@@@


doc= 7825


Doody, Samuel (1656-1706), botanist, was born in Staffordshire on 28 May 1656, the eldest child of the second marriage of John Doody, a local apothecary who afterwards moved to London. He assisted his father at his shop in the Strand and succeeded him in business about 1696. His interest in botany is shown in an account of an excursion he made to Gravesend in 1686, when many rare plants were found, and in his commonplace book which notes the dates of the apothecaries' herborizing expeditions for 1687 and 1688, and contains many lists of plants. Doody seems to have been a modest man, and, according to Adam Buddle (MS Sloane 2972), very slow of speech and unable to express himself adequately, but full of good argument and sound reasoning when able to exert himself. His particular interest lay in the study of mosses, fungi, and other non-flowering plants, in which little-studied field he was the acknowledged expert of his time. A possible draft for his intended publication on mosses is in the Sloane manuscripts (BL, MS Sloane 2315). His dilatoriness in passing on his observations may account for his failure to publish, although dried plant specimens sent to colleagues are found in many volumes in the Sloane herbarium. Doody was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1695. His only publication, a letter on a case of dropsy in the breast, was published in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (19, 1697, 390). 
Among Doody's close botanical acquaintances were Ray, Plukenet, Petiver -- with whom he was particularly friendly -- and Sloane, and he was a member of the Temple Coffee House Botanical Club. Ray acknowledged Doody's help in 1688 in the second volume of 'Historia plantarum', and the appendix to the second edition of his 'Synopsis' (1696) contains a long list of plant records due to Doody. Plukenet and other authors of the period also acknowledged his assistance. The new plants he saw on his herborizing expeditions around London, often in the company of Buddle and Petiver, are noted in his own copy of the 1696 edition of 'Synopsis', now in the British Library; some of these notes were later used by Dillenius in preparing the third edition. In 1692, having reported to the Society of Apothecaries the unsatisfactory management of their physic garden at Chelsea, Doody offered to maintain the garden for a year, free of charge, a decision applauded by Ray as likely to 'much promote botanics' ('Further Correspondence', 175). The following year Doody was appointed to take control for three years at a salary of $100 per annum. He continued to be involved in the running of the garden until his death. 
Doody suffered much from gout, and was notorious for an unspecified failing, apparently intemperance. He never married, and died, after some weeks' illness, at the end of November 1706. He was buried at Hampstead, Middlesex, on 3 December, his funeral sermon being preached by his old friend, Adam Buddle. He is commemorated in the genus of ferns 'Doodia'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7826


Doolittle, Thomas (1630/1633?-1707), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Kidderminster, Worcestershire. The evidence as to his date of birth and parentage is confusing, and he could be one of two Thomas Doolittles baptized in Kidderminster: he may be the son of William and Jane Doolittle, baptized on 20 October 1630 (a date which would be consistent with Daniel Williams's statement that Doolittle was seventy-seven when he died), but he could also be the son of Humphrey Doolittle and his wife, Anne, baptized on 12 September 1633. If he was baptized outside the parish, the suggestion of A. P. Gordon in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', that he was the third son of Anthony Doolittle, a Kidderminster glover, is also possible. Nathaniel Brokesby oversaw Doolittle's early education at the Kidderminster grammar school, which met in a converted chapel of St Mary's Church. As a teenager Doolittle heard Richard Baxter, who had returned to Kidderminster in 1647 from his civil war chaplaincy, preach the sermon series later published as 'The Saints Everlasting Rest' (1650). Doolittle was converted through the influence of these sermons and thereafter considered Baxter his 'father in Christ' (Doolittle, sig. C3). 
An opportunity for Doolittle to live with and assist a county lawyer ended abruptly when it became obvious that he was expected to work on Sundays. Baxter's intervention at this stage in Doolittle's life proved crucial. Seeing his academic potential, Baxter encouraged Doolittle to attend university and contributed a substantial amount of money enabling him to do so. Arrangements were made for him to attend Pembroke College in Cambridge, whose master was Baxter's friend Richard Vines. Admitted on 7 June 1649 as a sizar, Doolittle graduated BA in 1653, and MA in 1656. Surviving correspondence between Baxter and Doolittle while the latter was in Cambridge indicates Baxter's continuing close involvement in the younger man's affairs, not only with respect to financial support, but also as a mentor. 
Upon completion of his BA degree Doolittle began the search for a pastoral position and was given the opportunity to preach in London. On 14 August 1653 the St Alfege parish account book records that Doolittle was paid $1 6's'. 8died 'for preachinge fouer tymes' before the congregation of St Alfege, London Wall, a parish within London's sixth classis which was then without a minister (London Guildhall, MS 1432/4). On 13 September the St Alfege vestry chose him 'by a generall consent' to become their minister (London Guildhall, MS 1431/2, fol. 230). In the meantime, Richard Baxter had used his own connections in Worcestershire to secure for Doolittle a living as a chaplain in the house of a squire 'with an ample salary' (Doolittle, sig. C3'v'). Baxter's letter informing him of the opportunity, however, arrived after he had already committed himself to St Alfege parish. Doolittle received presbyterian ordination and began his ministry later that autumn, his signature 'Thomas Doelittle Minister' first appearing in the vestry minutes on 1 November 1653 (London Guildhall, MS 1431/2, fol. 231). 
During his years in London, Doolittle continued to look to Baxter for counsel and to interact with him on theological questions, particularly with respect to universal redemption. His early pastoral efforts met with surprising success, and on 9 May 1657 he wrote to Baxter, 'God hath given me abundant encouragement in my work, by giving mee favor in the hearts and affections of the people... & others in the city' (DWL, MS 59, i:125). Baxter himself had a high regard for Doolittle's ability as a pastor, recommending to several recently converted London correspondents that they seek him out for his preaching and counsel. 
Doolittle married Mary Gill on 13 July 1655. Her influence appears to have been felt immediately, as vestry minutes record on 5 September that 'It is this day mewtually agreed upon that new river water shalbe laid into Mr. Doelittle's house our present minester by a leaden pipe & Coxke of Brase' (Hall, 37). Thomas and Mary Doolittle had at least six children, five of whose names are known -- a son Samuel, and four daughters, Mary Sheafe, Tabitha Hearne, Martha Taylor, and Susannah Roades -- and a fifth daughter who married Anthony Dawson. 
Doolittle had a pregnant wife and three small children when he decided against accepting the terms for conforming to the Church of England set by the Restoration parliament and was ejected from his living as rector of St Alfege on 24 August 1662. He moved to nearby Moorfields, where he opened a boarding-school in his house. To accommodate a growing number of students he secured a larger house in Bunhill Fields and took on Thomas Vincent, the ejected minister of St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, as his assistant. In the summer of 1665, at the outbreak of the plague in London, he moved his family and school to Woodford Bridge, Essex, while Vincent stayed behind to minister to plague victims. After the plague abated Doolittle, however, was presented before Romford (Essex) sessions court on 26 April 1666 as one who had lately come from St Giles Cripplegate, with the intention of settling in Essex with his wife and six children; apparently fearing that the family would become dependent upon parish charity, the court ordered them to leave. 
In the chaotic aftermath of the London fire in September 1666 Doolittle and his family moved back to Bunhill Fields where in defiance of the law he opened a meeting-house and continued in public the preaching ministry he had previously undertaken privately. This site quickly proved too small and to accommodate his growing congregation he had a new meeting-house built in Monkwell Street near Cripplegate. Having thus come to the attention of the authorities he was summoned privately by the lord mayor who attempted to persuade him to desist from preaching. Doolittle refused, and the following Saturday night soldiers were sent to his home to arrest him. Doolittle escaped as they were breaking down the door. The authorities subsequently harassed the congregation and confiscated the meeting-house for use as a chapel for the lord mayor. Later, Doolittle quietly returned to his home and school, and by 1669 was reported to be preaching again at his house in Monkwell Street. 
Upon Charles II's declaration of indulgence in March 1672 Doolittle received a licence (dated 2 April 1672) to hold presbyterian services in 'a room adjoining his dwelling' in Monkwell Street ('Calamy rev.', 167), and at this time he also set up an academy at a house in Islington, Middlesex. When the king's indulgence was revoked on 3 March 1673 he was forced to move to Wimbledon, Surrey. Several of his students went as well, taking lodging in neighbours' houses and going to Doolittle's home for studies. Doolittle was able to return to Islington before 1680 but on 16 November 1682 he was convicted for having preached at Monkwell Street the previous 15 September and was fined $40. In April 1683, he was convicted of having repeated the same offence three times and fined $100, but by this time he had moved again, to Battersea, Surrey. The authorities in Battersea, however, seized and sold his possessions. Doolittle was thereby forced 'to disperse his pupils into private Families at Clapham' (Tong, 29). In 1687 Doolittle was compelled to move yet again, to St John's Court, Clerkenwell, Middlesex. 
After the 'Toleration Act' of 1689 Doolittle returned to Monkwell Street and re-established both his ministry and his academy. Despite frequent disruptions his academy was reputedly the 'leading Presbyterian academy in London', accommodating as many as twenty-eight students (McLachlan, 10). Among those who received instruction under Doolittle were the later nonconformist leaders Edmund Calamy and Matthew Henry, the Unitarian Thomas Emlyn, and nonconformist tutors John Ker and Thomas Rowe. 
Doolittle's wife, Mary, died on 16 December 1692. Afterwards he seems to have stopped taking students, but within a few years he married a woman, also named Mary, who assisted him in his ministry. The second Mary Doolittle, 'my dear and loveing wife', survived her husband by only five months, dying in November 1707 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/495, sig. 138; PROB 6/83, sig. 180'v'/213'v'). 
As a pastor, Doolittle preached twice each Sunday, lectured on the Westminster assembly catechism on Wednesdays, and pursued a vigorous catechetical ministry. Already a popular author (his 'A Treatise Concerning the Lord's Supper', 1667, reached twenty-seven English editions, twenty-two Scottish editions, and twenty-six New England editions, as well as translations into Welsh and German), he was eventually the author of twenty-three treatises, tracts, and sermons, although he was valued most by his peers for his five works on catechizing. 
Doolittle's surviving correspondence with Baxter demonstrates that he followed closely the theological debates between Anglicans and nonconformists and among nonconformists themselves. In most of his own published writings, however, he consistently chose to address pastoral and evangelistic concerns. His later reputation as one 'not eminent for compass of knowledge or depth of thought' is undeserved, as it is based on condescending comments by his student Thomas Emlyn, whose rejection of 'the narrow schemes of systematical divinity' and later drift into unitarianism did not predispose him to think favourably of his erstwhile tutor ('Works of Thomas Emlyn', vi-vii). Though Doolittle suffered chronically from stone and other ailments, his final illness was brief. The Sunday before his death 'he preach'd, and Catechized with great vigour' (Williams, 32). Late the following week he became ill. He signed his will on Friday, and died the following day, Saturday 24 May 1707, in Monkwell Street, London, the last surviving London clergyman who had been ejected for nonconformity in 1662. He was buried in Bunhill Fields cemetery on 1 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 7827


Dopping, Anthony (1643-1697), Church of Ireland bishop of Meath, was born on 28 March 1643, the son of Anthony Dopping, originally from Frampton in Gloucestershire, who had bought an estate in co. Meath in 1636. His place of birth is given as Dublin by Harris ('Whole Works of Sir James Ware', 1.394) but as Gloucester in the registers of Trinity College, Dublin (Burtchaell & Sadleir, 'Alum. Dubl.', 238), which he entered on 28 September 1655, having previously attended St Patrick's Cathedral school. He graduated BA in 1660 and MA in 1662, and was elected a fellow in 1662. In November 1669 he became vicar of St Andrew's parish, Dublin. He was appointed to the bishopric of Kildare on 16 January 1679 and consecrated in Christ Church Cathedral on 2 February. On 11 February 1682 he was translated to the bishopric of Meath, and as was normal with this senior bishopric was admitted to the privy council (5 April 1682). In the same year he was also appointed vice-chancellor of Trinity College. In these appointments he had the support both of the duke of Ormond, whose chaplain he had been while at St Andrew's, and of Archbishop Michael Boyle of Armagh. 
Dopping's sermons during 1682-8 strongly upheld the traditional doctrines of divine right and passive resistance, although reports of a sermon on 31 January 1686 denouncing Catholic doctrine reached James II, who had the lord lieutenant, the earl of Clarendon, reprimand him. On 27 March 1689 Dopping led a delegation of clergy to meet James on his arrival in Dublin and assure him of their loyalty. Over the next sixteen months he acted as the principal spokesman for Irish protestants living under the Jacobite regime, repeatedly petitioning for the protection of churches, persons, and property, as well as joining William King in administering the diocese of Dublin in the absence of Archbishop Marsh. He took his seat in the House of Lords of the Jacobite parliament of May-June 1689, where he opposed legislation on tithes, liberty of conscience, the repeal of the Restoration land settlement, and other measures. On 7 July 1690, after the battle of the Boyne and the Jacobite withdrawal from Dublin, he led a deputation of clergy to William's camp at Finglas to declare their allegiance. Thereafter his declared position, both in sermons and in private correspondence, was that James had forfeited his crown by consenting to the destruction of his protestant subjects and by abandoning his kingdom. 
Although Dopping's rapid changes of allegiance exposed him to some criticism, the new Williamite administration initially gave him a prominent role in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs. On 26 November 1691, however, preaching at a service of thanksgiving for the completion of the war, he forcefully denounced the treaty of Limerick, arguing that the long series of rebellions that had taken place since 1172 demonstrated the futility of any compromise settlement negotiated with the Irish. For this direct attack on government policy he was suspended from the privy council on 5 January 1692 and restored only in August 1695. His indiscretion, along with continuing doubts regarding his collaboration with the Jacobite regime, probably contributed to his failure to be appointed to either of the two archbishoprics, Cashel and Dublin, that became vacant in 1693-4. 
In the early 1690s Dopping was one of the group of bishops, also including William King and Nathaniel Foy, who lobbied government for the reform of the Irish church. In March 1694 he and King, executing a royal commission to inquire into the mismanagement of the diocese of Down and Connor, deprived the bishop, Thomas Hackett, and several of his senior clergy. Dopping's own visitation records and instructions to his clergy reveal a strong commitment to high pastoral standards. In 1696 he published a treatise on episcopal visitation, 'Tractatus de visitationibus episcopalibus'. William King, many years later, responded angrily to an unfavourable comparison between his own brusque treatment of his clergy and Dopping's 'mildness and gentle persuasion', insisting that he had accomplished more in five or six years in Derry than Dopping had in fifteen years in co. Meath (King, 213). 
Dopping was an intermittent supporter of proposals to evangelize the Catholic Irish through the Irish language. He solicited subscriptions for the edition of Bedell's Irish translation of the 'Old Testament' printed in 1685, and also wrote a preface, although this was mislaid and never printed. However, Narcissus Marsh complained in 1686 that Dopping subsequently 'flew off from prosecuting what he designed and promised, and has ever since been wholly unconcerned and sat neuter' (Maddison, 86). He returned to the idea of sponsoring preaching through Irish in 1693, but by 1697 had again rejected the idea. His change of heart seems to have been due in each case to fears that such efforts would retard the spread of English language and culture. Where dissenters were concerned, his anonymous pamphlet 'The Case of the Dissenters of Ireland' (1695) conceded their right to religious freedom while defending their exclusion from civic office. 
About 1669 Dopping married Jane Molyneux. He assisted his brother-in-law, William Molyneux, by obtaining a detailed description of co. Westmeath for a projected atlas in 1682, and at his request contributed to the financial support of the Gaelic antiquary Roderick O'Flaherty. He also shared Molyneux's interest in constitutional issues, and in 1692 published 'Modus tenendi parliamenta & consilia in Hibernia', from a manuscript left to him by Molyneux's father-in-law, William Domville. Dopping died in Dublin on 25 April 1697 and was buried in St Andrew's Church. His son Samuel was elected MP for Armagh in 1695, 1703, and 1714, and for Trinity College in 1715. Another son, Anthony, was bishop of Ossory from 1740 until his death in 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 7828


Doran, John (1807-1878), writer and literary editor, was born on 11 March 1807 in London, of Irish parentage. His father, John Doran, of Drogheda, co. Louth, left Ireland after the suppression of the rising in 1798, and settled in London, where he became a business contractor. In the course of his work he was captured by the French and detained in France for three years. He perfected his knowledge of the language, which he later passed on to his son, a precocious pupil who attended Matheson's academy in Margaret Street, off Cavendish Square, London. In 1819, aged twelve, the younger John Doran came first in French, geography, and elocution, winning a silver medal which was presented to him by the duke of Kent. 
Before Doran was seventeen both his parents had died, forcing the youth to find employment. His excellent French immediately secured him an appointment as tutor to the first Lord Glenlyon's eldest son, George Murray, afterwards duke of Atholl. He also began to write: on 8 April 1824 his melodrama, 'Justice, or, The Venetian Jew', was produced at the Surrey Theatre, and he contributed to the London 'Literary Chronicle'. Some of his Parisian sketches and Paris letters, written during his travels to Paris and other parts of the continent with his pupil, George Murray, appeared in 'The Athenaeum' (into which the 'Literary Chronicle' had been absorbed) in 1828, under the title 'Sketches and Reminiscences'. From 1828 to 1837 Doran was tutor to Lord Rivers, and to the sons of Lord Harewood and of Lord Portman. After 1830 he contributed lyrical translations from French, German, Latin, and Italian to the 'Bath Journal'. On 3 July 1834 he married Emma Mary Harrington, the daughter of Captain Richard Gilbert RN, at Reading, a town whose history he had been researching. His book, 'The History and Antiquities of the Town and Borough of Reading, in Berkshire', was published in both Reading and London in 1835. The Dorans lived briefly at Hay-a-Park Cottage, Knaresborough, until Doran gave up his last tutorship. He then travelled on the continent for two or three years with his 'young and pretty wife' (Frith, 2.265) and took his doctor's degree in the faculty of philosophy at the University of Marburg in Prussia, using his historical research on Reading. 
After returning to England Doran adopted literature as his profession and settled in St Peter's Square, Hammersmith. In 1841 he became literary editor of the 'Church and State Gazette', receiving $100 a year, and first came to public notice in 1852 for completing 'Filia dolorosa', a life of Marie Therese Charlotte, duchesse d'Angouleme, left unfinished by the death of its chief author, Mrs Romer. In the same year he edited a new edition of Charles Anthon's text of the ''Anabasis'' of Xenophon. In 1853 Doran prefixed a life of the poet the Revd Edward Young to a reissue of his 'Night Thoughts', and in 1854 rewrote his life for a new edition of Young's complete works. Reflecting on Young's line in 'Last Day': 'Man's is laborious happiness at best', Doran agreed. 'No doubt of it. Happiness comes by labour' (E. Young, 'Night Thoughts', 4th edn, 1864, lxiv). 
Doran was now launched as a regular contributor to 'The Athenaeum'. He became a friend of Hepworth Dixon, the editor, and during Dixon's absences acted as his substitute. Doran's first hugely successful book, 'The Court of Fools' (1858), was dedicated to Dixon, 'In Friendly Homage from the Author'. In 1854 Doran had published 'Table Traits and Something on Them', and 'Habits and Men', the latter being a history of dress and costume of men and women from the Peloponnesian War to Samuel Pepys, the son of a tailor. It must have been a labour of love, since Doran wrote: 'Under trial, next to trust in God, I do not know of any better anodyne, more potent balm, than literary occupation' (p. 290). He relished writing about royalty and high society, three books having preceded 'The Court of Fools': 'The Queens of the House of Hanover' (1855), 'Knights and their Days' (1856), and 'Monarchs Retired from Business' (1857). 'New Pictures and Old Panels', published in 1859, lacked the style and verve of 'The Court of Fools', but boasted a portrait of the author engraved by Joseph Brown from a photograph. Doran is smartly dressed, with a jewelled tie-pin in his cravat and a friendly smile on his face; his signature ends with a flourish. Also in 1859 he became a member of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and in 1876 a member of its council. In 1860 he published his most elaborate work, 'Their Majesties' Servants', a historical account of the English stage from Thomas Betterton to Edmund Kean, of which a new edition was issued in 1887. Doran never lost his critical faculty; quoting Dr Johnson's famous judgement on David Garrick, 'His death eclipsed the gaiety of nations', Doran curtly dismissed it as 'nonsense' (p. 265). 
After the retirement of William John Thoms, Doran succeeded him as editor of 'Notes and Queries'. In 1873 he published 'A Lady of the Last Century', which concerned Mrs Elizabeth Montagu, whom he admired for her intelligence and wit. His next book, 'Mann and Manners at the Court of Florence, 1740-86' (1876), based upon the letters of Sir Horace Mann to Horace Walpole, was mainly editorial, but in 1877 he published the well-researched and engrossing 'London in the Jacobite Times' (2 vols.). His conclusion was that after being a serious fact, Jacobitism became a sentiment which gradually died out (2.411). Pressed to make a book out of his articles in 'The Athenaeum' on towns which the British Association for the Advancement of Science had used for its meetings, he produced 'Memories of our Great Towns'. It was typical Doran. Describing the marital adventures of Henry Cecil, first marquess, he observed: 'Reality, after all, is as wonderful as romance' (Doran, 165). 
On 2 January 1878 Doran, apparently his customary, jovial self, took the corrected proofs of that book to the printer, but within two weeks he contracted pneumonia, and died at his home, 33 Lansdowne Road, Notting Hill, London, on 25 January 1878. He was buried on 29 January at Kensal Green cemetery. His wife survived him, as did a son, Alban Doran FRCS, and a daughter, Florence, who married Andreas Holtz. 'Notes and Queries' described Doran as an 'accomplished gentleman and warm-hearted scholar' and in April 1878 the president of the Society of Antiquaries referred to the 'kind and genial Dr. Doran, whose wonderful powers of memory made his conversations as sparkling as his writings' ('PRSA', 1879, 384). 


@@@@@


doc= 7829


Dorigny, Sir Nicholas (bap. 1658, d. 1746), painter and engraver, was baptized in Paris on 2 June 1658, the second son of Michel Dorigny (1617-1665), a painter and engraver, and his wife, who was the daughter of the painter Simon Vouet. He may have had some training in art from his father, but was said by George Vertue to have been brought up to be a lawyer. In 1687, however, he joined his brother Louis Dorigny (1654-1742) in Rome, where the latter was established as a painter. There Nicholas Dorigny took up etching, imitating the new style of Gerard Audran. At first he worked for the dominant publisher Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi, producing prints after Gianlorenzo Bernini and Carlo Maratta. Dorigny's etchings of the cupola of the church of Santa Agnese in piazza Navona, after Ciro Ferri, were published by de Rossi in 1690. His next project, 'The Marriage of Cupid and Psyche', in the entrance loggia of the Farnesina (1693), was the foundation of his reputation as an interpreter of Raphael. 
About this time Dorigny learned to engrave because 'he found for want of haveing learnt the handling & use of the Graver, he cou'd not arrive to the Perfection or harmony he aimed at' (Vertue, 'Note Books', 1.51). With the 'Planetarium' (1695), which reproduced the ceiling of the Chigi chapel in Santa Maria del Popolo, Dorigny also began to publish his own plates. He published paintings in San Pietro, Rome, after Cigoli, Domenichino, Guercino, and Lanfranco (1697-1700), and Domenichino's evangelists in Sant' Andrea (1707). He continued to work for de Rossi, engraving thirty-one statues for his 'Raccolta di statue antiche e moderne' (1704). His large engraving of Raphael's 'Transfiguration' (1705) 'got him justly the reputation of the first graver in Europe' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.187). To this he published a companion, 'The Descent from the Cross', after Daniele da Volterra, in 1710. 
In June 1711 Dorigny's pre-eminent reputation as an interpreter of Raphael secured him an invitation from Robert Harley and other virtuosi to travel to England to engrave the most important paintings in the country, Raphael's tapestry cartoons of 'The Acts of the Apostles' at Hampton Court. This was the most significant commission for engravings ever yet placed in England: for this reason Vertue left detailed notes on its progress, remarking that Dorigny was enticed both by the challenge and by the prospect of making further sales of his prints in London, having already sold many to Englishmen in Rome. His arrival in England coincided with the establishment of an academy in Great Queen Street, of which, on 18 October 1711, he was elected a director. 
Originally it had been intended that the cartoons would be engraved at the queen's expense in order to provide suitable presents for the nobility and for foreign ministers. However, Dorigny's demand for $4000 to $5000 'put a full stop to that affair' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.187), and instead the novel English method of raising a subscription was attempted. After the queen had agreed to allow Dorigny an apartment at Hampton Court 'during the time he should be doing them and fireing & a bottle of Wine daily' (ibid.), this was launched on 25 October 1711 with advertisements in 'The Spectator' and (repeatedly) in the 'Daily Courant'. A month later Richard Steele devoted an issue of 'The Spectator' to the moral value of history painting in general and of the cartoons in particular, in which he commended to his readers this initiative to engrave what the subscription described as 'the most valuable Set of portable Pictures in the World'. Tactful efforts were made to disguise the Frenchness of an artist announced as 'Signior Nicola Dorigny (lately come from Rome)'. The set was offered to subscribers for the 'modest' price of 4 guineas. This was easily the highest price ever asked in England for a set of prints. 
Dorigny began work on the cartoons at Easter 1712. The first year was employed in making accurate scaled-down drawings, and in 1713 he brought over from Paris Charles Dupuis and Claude Du Bosc to help with the engraving. In January 1714 he advertised that proofs of two of the prints might be inspected by potential subscribers. Eventually, in March 1719, the subscription was closed; the plates were printed and in April the prints were delivered to subscribers. On 1 April 1719 Dorigny presented the king with two sets of the prints and gave one set to the prince of Wales and another to the princess. In recognition of these gifts Dorigny was presented with a large gold medal from the prince and with 100 guineas from the king. He was knighted by the king in June 1720 at the instance of the duke of Devonshire. A collection of ninety heads from Dorigny's drawings of the tapestries dedicated to the princess of Wales was published in 1722. 
According to Vertue, Dorigny was 'thick of hearing inclining to deafness' (Vertue, 'Note books', 'Note Books', 1.51) and did not understand English. His drawings, which Vertue admired, were sold by auction on 21 February 1723. Selling at from 6 to 12 guineas each, with 52 guineas for the cartoons, the total price realized was $320. Dorigny gave up engraving around that time owing to the impairment of his eyesight. On 9 April 1724 he retired to Paris with the means to live without working, thanks to his savings, legacies from relations, and the income he continued to derive from his engraved plates. There he was elected an 'academicien' on 28 September 1725. In retirement he took up painting again and exhibited at the salons of 1739 and 1743. He died in Paris on 1 December 1746. According to Vertue, 'The Number of Plates gravd by Mr Dorigny big & small [came to] 153' (ibid., 1.56). His prints and drawings may be found in the Clarke collection at Worcester College, the Ashmolean Museum, and the Bodleian Library in Oxford, and also in the British Museum, London, the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, and the Nationalmuseum, Stockholm. 


@@@@@


doc= 7830


Dorin, Joseph Alexander (1802-1872), East India Company servant, born at Edmonton, Middlesex, on 15 September 1802, was the son of Joseph Dorin, merchant, and his wife, Charlotte. He was educated at Henley School, and obtained a nomination to the Bengal branch of the East India Company's service, of which his elder brother William was already a member. At East India College, Haileybury, he was first prizeman of his year, and on his arrival in India in 1821 was made assistant to the accountant-general. During the whole of his career he was attached to the financial branch. On 12 April 1823 he married Anna Patton (1806-1863) in St John's Cathedral, Calcutta; they had two sons, Henry and James. 
On his return from furlough in 1842 Dorin was entrusted by Lord Ellenborough, the governor-general, with the reorganization of Indian finance. He became the first financial secretary under the new arrangements in 1843. Praised by the authorities for his handling of the finances during the Anglo-Sikh wars, in 1851 he became one of the four members of Lord Dalhousie's council, in effect the executive of the government of India. He is credited with effecting a reduction in the rate of interest on the Indian debt, but in 1855 miscalculations of revenue and expenditures made it necessary to contract a new loan at the old rate. This occasioned a severe fall in Indian securities, and the government was harshly criticized. 
While Dorin was a member of the executive council, two momentous events took place, the annexation of the kingdom of Oudh and the great uprising in north India known as the Indian mutiny. As senior member, Dorin attracted both praise and blame for decisions taken by the government in the two events. The widely circulated 'Red pamphlet' on the uprising of 1857, by G. B. Malleson, described him as utterly deficient in knowledge of India, and claimed that nowhere but in British India would he have had anything other than the most subordinate position. He was defended by another writer who argued that, while it was true that in his thirty years in India he had never been more than 16 miles from Calcutta, he was in constant touch with other officials who did know India. In regard to Oudh, its king had signed a treaty in 1837 giving the government of India the right to intervene if it considered his rule oppressive. The treaty had never been ratified by London, but Dorin argued that the king of Oudh need not be told this, for the government had the right to do what it felt was good for the country, which in this case was annexation and ending the kingdom's existence. There is some indication that Dalhousie did not wholly accept this reasoning, but it was Dorin's views that were finally accepted by the East India Company directors. In regard to the uprising, as a member of the supreme council, Dorin, like Dalhousie, at first did not believe the reports of widespread unrest in the army and among elements in the general population. In the end, however, even before the news of the decisive army mutiny on 12 May at Meerut reached Calcutta, he proposed such harsh punishment for mutinous soldiers that all the other members of the council dissented. During this time Dorin supported the governor-general in two very unpopular measures: one was the severe press censorship known as the 'Gagging Acts', and the other a bill prohibiting Indians from owning arms. 
Dorin remained a member of the supreme council until 1858. On his return to England he was proposed for membership of the Council of India, the advisory group to the secretary of state for India, but he was not appointed. He spent the rest of his life in retirement, but under somewhat peculiar circumstances. When he returned to India in 1842 he had left his wife in Chepstow because of her ill health, but during much of the rest of his service in Calcutta, he had a companion, a widow, Margaret Christiana Twentyman, 'nee' Kelly ('b'. 1831), who returned with him to England when he retired. She lived with him in London as Mrs Dorington, with their two sons, Charles and William Dorington. After the death in 1863 of his first wife -- whom he had apparently continued to visit -- he married Margaret Christiana in 1864. He died at Place Street, St Lawrence Dene, Isle of Wight, on 22 December 1872, and was buried in the churchyard at St Rhadagund's, St Lawrence. His attempts to provide for his illegitimate sons in his will were overturned after a series of bitter lawsuits brought by the only surviving child of Dorin's elder legitimate son. The case of 'Dorin v. Dorin' and others was a leading case in civil law until the 'Legitimacy Act' of 1925. 
The judgement made of Dorin by the historian Sir John Kaye, that he held high office under successive governors-general because he agreed with them, 'which saved trouble and gained favour', is perhaps not too far from the mark, but while he was not one of the famed 'Rulers of India', he was representative of those who, possessing only average abilities and no great knowledge of India, held the fabric of the British empire in India together. 


@@@@@


doc= 7831


Dorion, Sir Antoine-Aime (1818-1891), lawyer and politician in Canada, was born on 17 January 1818 at St Anne-de-la-Perade, Lower Canada, the second of the ten children of Pierre-Antoine Dorion, a merchant descended from Pierre Dorion, who had emigrated from the Basses-Pyrenees of France in 1684, and his wife, Genevieve Bureau. Antoine-Aime was brought up in a liberal and nationalist home. His father sat in the assembly as a supporter of 'patriote' causes: Louis-Joseph Papineau was a visitor to his home. Although his father later lost his fortune, Dorion, like his male peers in the Lower-Canadian bourgeoisie, received a classical education. After attending the Seminaire de Nicolet (1830-37) he studied law under Come-Seraphin Cherrier (1838-42), and was called to the bar in 1842. On 12 August 1848 in Montreal he married Iphigenie, the daughter of Dr Jean-Baptiste Trestler, with whom he had one son and three daughters. 
While politics were Dorion's first love he did practise law in Montreal with Cherrier and headed the Montreal bar in 1861-2 and 1873-5. Active in politics by the late 1840s, he was identified as a moderate Liberal among the opponents of the dominant conservatism of Louis-Hyppolyte LaFontaine and George-Etienne Cartier. By the early 1850s he had succeeded Louis-Joseph Papineau and was leader of the 'rouge' party. Dorion was always perceived as a moderate and played a prominent role in founding the 'rouge' newspaper 'Le Pays'. He favoured universal suffrage, free, universal education, and an end to the corruption endemic in Canadian politics. A strong defender of private property and trade reciprocity with the United States, he supported economic development through the construction of canals and railways. Much of Dorion's energies were devoted to the issue of anti-clericalism in his party and the role of the Roman Catholic church in politics. A practising Catholic and a moderate on the issue of church-held seigneurial lands, he eventually distanced himself from the increasingly anti-clerical Institut Canadien, of which his brother Jean-Baptiste-Eric was a founder and president (1850-51). In 1854 he was elected for Montreal in the legislative assembly, a victory he owed in large measure to English-speaking voters. His signing of the annexation manifesto (1849) calling for annexation to the United States had brought him contact with liberal members of the Anglophone community. Indeed, his ties with English-speaking liberals led to nationalist charges that he was not strong enough in his defence of the French language. 
In August 1858 Dorion joined George Brown in a short-lived administration. After being defeated by George-Etienne Cartier in the elections of 1861 he came back into the assembly in 1862 and became provincial secretary in the administration of John Sandfield Macdonald and Louis-Victor Sicotte. He remained in the cabinet less than a year, resigning over hostility to expansion of the Grand Trunk Railway. Although he was back in the government two months later, the government lasted less than a year, being defeated in March 1864. Dorion was not then a part of the 'Great Coalition' which shepherded the union of British North America. 
Although he had earlier supported the idea of a federation of Upper and Lower Canada, Dorion opposed the 'Quebec Resolutions', which he described as 'the most illiberal constitution ever heard of in any country where constitutional government prevails' (cited in Young, 81). He was particularly concerned with provincial autonomy and the future of the French-Canadian minority in the proposed confederation of British North America. 
Dorion's brother Jean-Baptiste-Eric Dorion (1826-1866), the 'enfant terrible' of Lower Canadian politics and editor of 'L'Avenir', was an even more outspoken opponent of confederation, fearing that, in the long term, it would destroy French Canada, and was much stronger in his nationalism and his opposition to seigneurial tenure. Although another brother, Abbe Hercule Dorion, was a missionary, Jean-Baptiste-Eric was known for his passionate anti-clericalism. 
In the post-confederation years, Antoine-Aime Dorion played an important role in the transformation of the Liberal Party in Quebec into a moderate party acceptable to Catholic authorities. He also served as minister of justice of Canada for a short period (November 1873-May 1874) in the government of Alexander Mackenzie and was appointed a knight bachelor in 1877. Happy to leave politics, he accepted nomination in 1874 as chief justice of the court of queen's bench for Quebec, a position he held until, following a stroke, he died, on 31 May 1891, at his home on Sherbrooke Street, Montreal. 


@@@@@


doc= 7832


Dorislaus, Isaac (1595-1649), scholar and diplomat, was born at Alkmaar in Holland, the son of Lieven Dorislaer (1555-1652), burgher and later Calvinist minister of Hensbrock (1627), then Enkhuizen (1628). The second of three sons (tellingly named Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob), he was educated from 1610 at Leiden, where he took the degree of LLD in 1627. He taught as conrector of the Latin school while studying law. By 1622 he was married to Elisabeth Pope of Maldon, Essex; the couple lived in his father's Leiden household, together with three English students. 
In 1627 Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke, appointed Dorislaus the first incumbent of his newly founded history lectureship at Cambridge, though only after failing to secure the eminent Leiden scholar Gerhardus Vossius for the post. Dorislaus moved to England in October; lacking accommodation in Cambridge, his family settled with his father-in-law in Maldon while he himself became the houseguest of Samuel Ward, master of Sidney Sussex College. 
An admirer of Francis Bacon's 'Of the Proficience and Advancement of Learning', which he owned and annotated (CUL, MS LE 7.45), Dorislaus must have found the ordinances establishing the lectureship much to his liking. Brooke's avowed aim was that 'humane learning, the use and application thereof to the practice of life, [be] the main end and scope of this foundation' (CUL, MS Mm.1.47, fol. 146). But it was just that possibility of practical application that brought the history lecture to an early demise. Dorislaus gave just two lectures on Tacitus's 'Annals' before the master of Peterhouse, Matthew Wren, led a successful movement to silence him as a danger to monarchical government. 
Dorislaus's first lecture, on the origins of regal authority in ancient Rome, delineated two types of monarchy, both founded on the voluntary transferral of natural sovereignty from the people to the ruler. In one form, the body of people transfers its power to a monarch without retaining sovereignty to itself; in the other, which Dorislaus clearly preferred, the people reserve particular rights for themselves, bestowing strictly limited powers upon a king. A king who by force usurps the people's rights is a tyrant and liable to deposition; his case in point was Junius Brutus's expulsion of Tarquin. His second lecture recounted at greater length the ancient tyrant's abuses of law, his deposition, and the replacement of monarchy with consular government -- an act that won Brutus 'the applause of gods and men' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/86/no. 87.I, fol. 177). The lecturer identified popular consent with liberty, royal disregard of law with slavery; Matthew Wren identified the lecturer with republicanism and regicide, complaining that 'he seemed to acknowledge no right of kingdoms, but whereof the people's voluntary submission had been the constituting principle' (ibid., fol. 175). Wren found the lectures 'stored with such dangerous passages,... and so appliable to the exasperations of these villanous times', that he brought formal complaint to the vice-chancellor, Thomas Bainbridge. He was disappointed to find that the majority of the vice-chancellor's court had taken no offence at the lectures, but found that Dorislaus had spoken, as Samuel Ward reported, 'with great moderation' in 'defence of the liberties of the people' and 'with an exception of such monarchies as ours' ('Whole Works of... James Ussher', 1843, 15.403). As it happens, Dorislaus's defenders on the university court were without exception his Calvinist co-religionists, while his opponents were, like Wren, defenders of Arminian theology and the ceremonial worship associated with William Laud. The lines of division suggest that differences in political theory paralleled and may have been exacerbated by religious differences. 
When the Cambridge heads declined to condemn Dorislaus, Wren pursued his complaint through bishops Laud and Richard Neile to the king, meanwhile delaying until 1631 Dorislaus's incorporation as a doctor of Cambridge University. Ward led the defence, marshalling the majority of the vice-chancellor's court to send letters to Brooke, the duke of Buckingham, and Laud indicating their approval of the lecturer. Wren's letters seem to have carried more weight, however, and the king prohibited Dorislaus from lecturing again. Lord Brooke declined to challenge the opposition. He offered his lecturer lodging in London, then on his own estate near Doncaster, where Dorislaus continued to collect his stipend while living, he complained, 'sunk in provincial solitude' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 72.132, fol. 284). 
After Brooke's murder in September 1628, a codicil to his will was found to make Dorislaus's tenure of the lectureship lifelong and to guarantee his annuity. He took advantage of the terms of his settlement to travel extensively during the following decade, and in 1630 was resident in the Sorbonne. His scholarly interests turned for a time to military history: in 1632 he secured through Sir Kenelm Digby and the secretary of state, Coke, access to state papers to do the research for his single publication, an account of the 1600 battle of Nieuwpoort, and especially the role of Sir Francis Vere, published in 1640 as the 'Praelium Nuportanum'. His family life during this period was troubled by illness: his eldest son, John, died in 1632 aged four, and by 1634 his wife was on her deathbed. 
Dorislaus's principal occupation during the final decade of his life was legal advocacy. He had been admitted a commoner of the College of Advocates in 1629 and in 1640 served as judge advocate in the bishops' wars. In 1642 he threw in his lot with parliament, serving as advocate of the army. He attempted to prosecute under martial law two of Waller's accomplices in the 1643 plot to recover London for the king, but failed due to the Commons' concern about violation of parliamentary privilege. In 1644 his investigation of another royalist plot threatened to expose a link between the plot's sponsor, John Lovelace, Lord Lovelace, and Sir Henry Vane, commissioner of parliament to the army. Vane retaliated by charging Dorislaus with price-fixing in the sale of prize goods taken at Weymouth; Dorislaus, who had overseen the sale, cleared himself of the charge by a deposition before the Commons, who clearly held him in high regard: an ordinance of April 1648 made him one of the judges of the court of admiralty. This position led to his first diplomatic mission, with Walter Strickland, to the states general of the United Provinces concerning privileges being accorded 'revolted ships' by Dutch provinces sympathetic with the royalists. Cromwell's regard for the intelligence reports that the envoy brought back to England in December led to his intervention with the master of Trinity Hall to secure for Dorislaus and his remaining children chambers in Doctors' Commons in London, the residence of civil lawyers attached to the high court of admiralty. 
In January 1649 the commissioners for the trial of Charles I appointed Dorislaus one of the counsel for the prosecution. He helped to draw up the charge of high treason, the preamble of which echoes the language of his Cambridge lectures, arguing for lawful deposition of tyrants who deprive subjects of their freedom and privileges. Dorislaus did not speak during the trial, but he explained to a correspondent that he would have, had the king acknowledged the court and answered the charge. 
In the spring following the execution Dorislaus sought from the council of state the position of keeper of the library of St James, but agreed first to perform one last diplomatic mission as resident of parliament at The Hague. The mission proved fatal for the envoy. On 2 May 1649 a group of royalists led by Walter Whitford, son of Bishop Walter Whitford of Brechin, entered Dorislaus's inn at De Swaen and stabbed the envoy to death. The assassins were never brought to justice. Parliament had Dorislaus's body brought to Worcester House and laid in state, and issued a 'Declaration on their Just Resentment of the Horrid Murther... of Isaac Dorislaus', identifying the perpetrators as 'that party from whom all the troubles of this nation have formerly sprung' ('Acts of Parliament (1648-50)', 1.92). On 14 June, after an elaborate funeral provided by parliament at a cost of $250, Dorislaus was buried in Westminster Abbey; after the Restoration he was reinterred in St Margaret's churchyard. An act of parliament awarded $500 to each of his surviving two daughters, Elizabeth and Margaret, and an annuity of $200 to his son, Isaac ['see below'] ('JHC', 6.209). English complaint about Dutch failure to apprehend his murderers was one of the issues brought by an English delegation to the states general in 1651; among the plaintiffs was Dorislaus's son. 
The younger 


@@@@@


doc= 7833


Isaac Dorislaus (d. 1688) was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School from 1639. In 1649 he became a registrar for the probate of wills in Ely and Cambridgeshire. His linguistic skills led to employment by Thurloe as a translator and intelligence agent in the 1650s. In 1653 he was appointed solicitor to the court of admiralty; in 1660 he became one of the managers of the Post Office, a position he retained after the Restoration. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1681. He died in 1688, survived by three children, Isaac, James, and Anne, and was buried in St Bartholomew by the Exchange, Bartholomew Lane. 


@@@@@


doc= 7834


Dorman, Thomas (c.1534-c.1577), religious controversialist, was born at Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, and is of unknown parentage. His uncle, Thomas Dorman of Agmondesham in Buckinghamshire, funded his primary education under the protestant Richard Reeve. In 1547, under the auspices of Thomas Harding, he entered Winchester College. About 1550 he was made a probationer fellow of New College, Oxford, and in 1554 he was elected a full fellow of All Souls College, where he studied law, graduating BCL in July 1558. It seems probable that Dorman originally was inclined toward protestantism and only later, under the influence of Harding, embraced Catholicism. He left Oxford about 1561 and made his way to Louvain, where he pursued theological studies and received his BTh in June 1565. It was while in Louvain that he took up his pen on behalf of Harding against Bishop John Jewel. 
Dorman's historical significance lies in his role as a member of the Louvain coterie of Catholic controversialists who mounted a massive response to Jewel's famous 'challenge sermon' delivered at Paul's Cross in London on 16 November 1559. In this sermon Jewel boldly challenged his adversaries: if they could produce one authentic sentence from the fathers of the first six centuries demonstrating such practices as private masses, withdrawal of the cup from the laity, the universal authority of the bishop of Rome and transubstantiation, then he would personally subscribe to these teachings of the Catholic church. During the height of the controversy, from 1564 to 1568, the Louvain Catholics published forty-five separate volumes principally against Jewel. The vitriolic nature of the controversy derives in part from the personal animosity existing between former friends and colleagues at Oxford University who subsequently chose different sides in the Reformation debate. 
All three of Dorman's books derive from this controversy. The first and most important book, 'A Proufe of Certayne Articles in Religion, Denied by M. Juell' (1564), and dedicated to Thomas Harding, explicitly dealt with Jewel's 'challenge sermon'. Dorman defended the Catholic cause on the whole range of issues raised by Jewel, but especially on papal authority. Jewel, in his 'Defence of the Apology of the Church of England' (1562), three times mockingly cites Dorman's assertion that 'the Pope is the head and kings and princes are the feet' (Dorman, fol. 15.2). Jewel never responded directly to Dorman, but Jewel's close friend Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's, did. In an exchange of five books over three years Nowell took it upon himself to answer Dorman's first work as well as his second, 'A Disproufe of M. Nowelle's Reproufe' (1565). Dorman turned again to Jewel with his last book, 'A request to Mr. Jewel that he keep his promise made by solemn protestation in his late sermon at Paul's Cross' (1567). 
In 1569 Dorman joined William Allen at the English College in Douai. He continued to be identified as a threat as late as 1576, when Archbishop Edmund Grindal instructed the English clergy to be on watch for the writings of Thomas Dorman and the Louvain Catholics, whom he charged with denying, not only the protestant faith, but also Elizabeth's supremacy over the Church of England. In Dorman's later years he took a pastoral charge in the city of Tournai, where he died about 1577. 


@@@@@


doc= 7835


Dormer, James (1679-1741), army officer, was born on 16 March 1679, the son of Robert Dormer (1628?-1689) of Dorton, Buckinghamshire, and his second wife, Anne ['see 'Dormer, Anne], daughter of the diplomat Sir Charles Cotterell. He was appointed lieutenant and captain 1st regiment of foot guards in May 1702, in which rank he was wounded at Blenheim, and later served at Ramillies. Appointed colonel of Lord Mohun's regiment of foot in May 1708, he went to Spain, and distinguished himself at Saragossa in 1709, and was taken prisoner with General James Stanhope at Brihuega in Castile in December 1710. He was awarded $200 for his losses by pillage at Brihuega and at Bilbao on his way home on parole ('Calendar of Treasury Papers', 137.8). He was made brigadier-general in February 1711; his regiment was disbanded in 1713. In 1715 he was commissioned as colonel to raise a regiment of dragoons in the south of England, which became the 14th hussars. He commanded a brigade during the Jacobite rising in Lancashire, and was engaged with the rebels at Preston. Transferred to the colonelcy of the 6th foot in 1720, in June 1725 he was sent as envoy-extraordinary to Lisbon, where he had a dispute with Thomas Burnett, the British consul; he was appointed a major-general in 1727 and lieutenant-general in 1735, colonel 1st troop of Horse Grenadier Guards in 1737, and governor of Hull in 1740. 
Dormer was a member of the Kit-Cat Club, and, according to Nichols, the collector of a fine library. He died at Crendon, Buckinghamshire, on 24 December 1741 where he was buried on 2 January 1742. He was unmarried, and bequeathed the estates of Chearsley in Buckinghamshire and Rousham in Oxfordshire to his cousin Sir Clement Cottrell (afterwards Cottrell-Dormer), master of the ceremonies to George II. 


@@@@@


doc= 7836


Suarez de Figueroa, Jane, duchess of Feria in the Spanish nobility (1538-1612), noblewoman and courtier, was born at Eythrope, near Waddesdon in Buckinghamshire, on 6 January 1538, one of the two daughters of Sir William Dormer ['see under 'Pelham, Dorothy, Lady Pelham] and his first wife, Mary Sidney. She was brought up by her maternal grandparents after her mother's death in 1542. She then lived with her grandmother Jane, 'nee' Newdigate, Lady Dormer, until admitted into the household of Princess Mary some five years later. As a child she played frequently with Edward VI at the instigation of her grandfather Sir William Sidney, Edward's chamberlain and tutor, but it was Mary Tudor's favour that proved fundamental to her rise. She was one of the nine ladies and maids who attended the queen at her coronation in September 1553 and thereafter received a number of gifts as one of the queen's 'welbeloved women'. Her kinship with some of the most important aristocratic families made her valuable, but it was her efficiency and trustworthiness that particularly appealed to the queen, who on her deathbed charged her to take her jewels to Elizabeth. There is also good evidence of her striking looks. According to a poet, 'Dormar is a darline and of suche lively hewe that who so fedes his eyes on her may sone her bewte vue' (BL, Cotton MS Titus A xxiv, fol. 83'v'). Her portrait was one of the examples of female beauty in Philip II's main picture gallery in Spain. 

Gomez Suarez de Figueroa, count (from 1567 duke) of Feria, met Jane in 1554 when he arrived with Philip II in England for the king's marriage to Queen Mary. Feria was the king's favourite at the time, and he remained a key political figure as well as a leading household official until his death in 1571. Despite strong opposition from his own family, but with the king's full support, Feria sued for Dormer's hand in 1558, lavishing jewels and gifts on Mary's courtiers. He remained committed to the match after Mary's death, although he knew that Elizabeth I would not favour her predecessor's servants any more than her faith. The wedding took place on 29 December 1558 and was the only high-ranking union between English and Spanish courtiers to result from the brief reign of Philip II in England. 
The count of Feria left England in May 1559 and Jane followed in July, both taking a number of Catholic nobles and clergy with them. It was the beginning of a lifelong commitment to English and Irish Catholic exiles. They stayed briefly in the Low Countries, where she gave birth to their son Lorenzo on 28 September 1559. They departed in spring 1560, making a spectacular and princely progress through the Low Countries and France (where they met Mary Stewart) to Spain, where the monarchs officially welcomed them. Jane's grandmother, Lady Dormer, meanwhile established herself in Louvain, where her home became an important base for Elizabethan Catholic exiles. Once in Spain, the Feria household acted as a magnet for the English, Irish, and Scottish communities, whom they protected and aided. They devoted substantial personal resources to the endeavour, and were generous in hospitality and almsgiving. Feria put their political and military proposals at court, and promoted their suits for offices and pensions. Both spouses were ardent supporters of the Jesuits, whom Feria had tried to introduce into England in the 1550s, and were instrumental in helping to set up the Jesuit training colleges that were to change the face of English Catholicism. Owing to his long sojourn in England and the privileged information and contacts provided by his wife's kin, Feria became the most prominent adviser on English matters at the Spanish court. As a result, the activities of the Feria household were closely observed and discussed throughout Europe, especially by those eager to fathom Philip II's policy towards England. 
It was the death in 1571 of both her husband (on 7 September) and her formidable grandmother that brought Jane, now duchess of Feria, into the limelight and made her the main object of attention for the increasingly divided Elizabethan exile community. Feria left her in a position of power as tutor to their sole surviving son and in control of his extensive estates during Lorenzo's minority. Philip II's favour to the family remained unshaken, and this enhanced her value within the Spanish court, where she was trusted to provide good information on Queen Elizabeth and was recognized as a leader of the exiles. Her importance at this juncture was increased by circumstance: clashes between Elizabeth and Philip II, reinforced by immense pressure from the papacy, persuaded the king on two occasions in 1570 and 1571 of the need for an aggressive campaign against England. But he encountered strong opposition from his advisers in the Low Countries and especially from the governor, the duke of Alba, who persuaded Philip II to pull back from the brink of war. Realizing the importance of neutralizing the opposition of the Low Countries, some English exiles petitioned Philip II to send Jane there. They belonged to the group most closely associated with Rome which had wanted an aggressive policy towards England since 1559. Some hoped she might even replace Alba as governor of the Low Countries. Philip II did not approve the plan. He wanted to come to an accord with Elizabeth, and for a time in 1576 he even ejected the exiles from the Low Countries. Yet he remained sympathetic and responsive to the petitions Jane and her longtime associate Sir Francis Englefield made for money and help for the exiles, and this made her a significant player in the patronage network of the Spanish court. 
Although she had a firm character and above average intelligence, the duchess of Feria found herself at the centre of political intrigues whose complexity and international dimensions often eluded her. She remained closely associated with the 'Roman' exile contingent despite being approached by other individuals and factions, and it was they who most benefited from her regular information from England and Ireland. Throughout the 1570s Gregory XIII worked hard to secure Philip II's backing for an attack against Elizabeth as proposed by the adventurers Thomas Stucley and James fitz Maurice, and he encouraged his nuncios in Spain to make use of Jane's influence. She too approved these plans and tried to advance them by all means possible. In 1578 she even sold two statues of the Virgin, which had been rescued from St Paul's, to help them purchase arms and munitions. The papal nuncio believed, wrongly, that she had a secret understanding with her uncle Sir Henry Sidney for him to defect from his command of Elizabeth's troops in Ireland and help fitz Maurice's invasion in 1579. A year later the remnants of the invasion force were trapped at Smerwick, surrounded by loyal and implacable Elizabethan troops. Jane forwarded their request for help to Philip II. This close association with papal policy towards England and the additional pressure she brought to bear on the king did not always endear her to the Spanish court, nor was her support of the various plots linked to Mary Stewart always approved of. While she remained a respected figure, she exerted no real influence over the king's policy. Nevertheless, to Elizabeth and her council she always appeared dangerous. 
Significantly, we hear little of Jane in connection with the Armada campaign (1585-8). Her political role had been reduced since 1579, when Sir Francis Englefield settled in Spain and took over the business relating to patronage and pensions for the exiles. Shortly afterwards William Allen established strong, if not unchallenged, leadership over the exiles. Once Philip II decided to act against Elizabeth after 1585, the exiles had a direct line to the king and council without need for her intervention. But as soon as they realized that Philip II was wavering from his commitment to fight Elizabeth in 1590, the exiles once again turned their attention to the duchess of Feria, particularly because Lorenzo had no desire to play the Englishman in Philip's court or take up his parents' role in this respect. In the 1590s, her prominence reasserted, she became involved with such shady characters as Francis Dacre, whose dubious activities at the Spanish court discredited her for a time. Her sister Anne, Lady Hungerford, who had taken refuge in the Low Countries in 1571, also came under the baneful influence of one of the many factions among the exiles, and notably of the adventurer Thomas Morgan. In 1593, and at their instigation, Anne took up the campaign to persuade Philip II to send Jane to the Low Countries so that she might lead the exile community and threaten Elizabeth. Jane was enthusiastic, failing to appreciate that this scheme was primarily intended to reduce the influence of her friends and collaborators Englefield and Allen, and to agitate for an aggressive policy towards England which would not meet with approval at the Spanish court. The duke of Feria successfully countered these proposals. Although by 1593 he too was under the influence of an English exile, Thomas Fitzherbert, Feria was a senior official of Philip II whose primary aim was not to risk the honour or finances of his house or threaten its future by undermining his own career. He believed the plan would be disastrous for his mother, who would become the butt of vicious attacks by dissident exile factions, as Allen and Englefield had been. He doubted whether it would have a significant impact on Elizabeth and was aware that the office would be a serious drain on the family's resources. He dismissed as shady intriguers those who had advanced the proposal, not sparing his aunt Lady Hungerford. The king and council of state agreed with him. Lady Hungerford nevertheless continued for over two years to argue for Jane's appointment, and the duchess remained eager to take it up. Her son opposed it with even greater force, and as a result their relations were tense and sour for years. 
This disappointment did not deter Jane from making further attempts to influence Philip II's English policy, and she continued to act on behalf of the exiles. In 1596 she presented the king with a document which Persons, Englefield, and the Jesuit Joseph Creswell also signed, requesting that Philip II should make a public declaration to the effect that his eldest daughter, Isabel, was the rightful claimant to the throne of England. In a separate document that year, largely drawn up by Persons, the king was also urged to set up a special mixed council for English affairs in the Low Countries; but significantly there was no suggestion that Jane should be there. Unwilling to exacerbate relations with England while his forces were stretched by the wars against the Dutch and French, Philip II rejected both requests. Thereafter Jane continued with her pious benefactions and good works towards the exiles, but was either less active or more circumspect in political matters. Even after the death of Allen and Englefield, it was evident that she would not be able to take their place at the helm of the exile community. Evidence remains of further, fitful activity: in 1600, for example, she wrote to James VI urging him to embrace Catholicism. It was James's accession to the English throne in 1603 that once again focused attention on her, but now as the shining symbol of the Anglo-Spanish amity that both courts were eager to re-establish. The papacy, as ever, missed no chances. In 1603-4 vague plans were hatched in Rome to send her as a lady-in-waiting to Queen Anne, and the question was raised by Lord Howard of Effingham on behalf of the queen when he visited Spain in May 1605. The duke of Feria vetoed the plan, believing that it would put his mother in an invidious position, since her presence at the English court would nurture the wildest expectations from the Catholics, and he did not believe that Philip III would help them. Although she outlived her son by five years, her failing health and the new alliance with England combined to keep her out of major international politics in the years before her death on 13 January 1612. She was buried on 26 January at the monastery of Santa Clara at Zafra. 


@@@@@


doc= 7837


Huddleston, John (1636-1700), Jesuit, was born on 27 December 1636 in the village of Clavering, Essex, the son of Sir Robert Huddleston. He was brought up in London until the age of twelve. In 1649 he was sent to the English College, St Omer, where he remained until he entered the English College, Rome, on 9 September 1655 under the alias Shirley. He left Rome to join the noviciate at Bonn in 1656, was probably ordained in 1669 and was at the English College in Liege in 1670-72. He left for the English mission in 1673 and lived in the College of St Thomas (1673-4), the College of St Ignatius (1674-5), and the College of St Hugh (1676-8). In 1678 he was serving on the mission at Blyborough in Lincolnshire. He published 'A New Plot' (1679) defending the martyrs of the Popish Plot, and wrote 'A Brief Instruction Touching the Oath of Allegiance' directed against the oath. He appears in Paris in 1681-2 and at Liege in 1683. He returned to England, to the College of St Hugh, in 1684. James II had a great regard for him and appointed him one of the royal preachers at the court of St James. Several of his sermons between 1686 and 1688 were published, including a call to repentance in 'A Sermon of Judgement' (1688) and 'Rebellion Arraign'd' (1688), preached on the anniversary of the execution of Charles I and condemning the use of religion as a justification for rebellion. On the outbreak of the revolution in 1688 he escaped to the continent and was chosen rector of the college at Liege on 4 November 1689. His government of the college was criticized and he left Liege on 23 April 1691 and returned to England, living mostly in the College of St Ignatius, covering the London district. His 'Usury Explain'd, or, Conscience Quieted in the Case of Putting out Mony at Interest' (1695-6), published under the name Philopenes, may have been written against Bishop James Smith's treatise on the subject and was condemned by the Holy Office in 1703. He died in London on 16 January 1700. 


@@@@@


doc= 7838


Dormer, John (1730-1796), army officer in the Austrian service, was born on 18 February 1730 at Grove Park, Warwickshire, the second son of John, seventh Baron Dormer (1691-1785), of Grove Park, and Mary (died 1739), daughter of Sir Cecil Bishopp of Parkham, Sussex. The Dormers were an Anglo-Catholic family with large estates in Warwickshire and Buckinghamshire, but the career prospects in England for a younger son of the Catholic aristocracy before emancipation were poor. Consequently John Dormer left England on 24 July 1752, and studied at the military academy in Vienna between September 1752 and August 1753. According to family papers (Warks. CRO, CR895/107) he joined General Count Luquesy's regiment of cuirassiers as a cornet in May 1754 and saw action against the Prussians in the Seven Years' War. After the battle of Prague (6 May 1757) he was promoted to captain and was present at Breslau (22 November 1757) and Leuthen (5 December 1757). After the battle of Stochkerch (18 September 1757) he was given command of the 4th squadron of carabiniers. At Maxen (18 November 1759) Dormer's squadron, together with General O'Donnell's carabiniers, relieved and saved a battalion of Croats, which had been surrounded by seven squadrons of Prussian dragoons. Dormer's squadron played an equally prominent role at Torgau (2 November 1760), taking five pairs of colours. In 1762 he became 2nd captain of the regiment, now the Kleinhold cuirassier regiment, and 1st captain in 1763. When his regiment was disbanded in 1768 he was transferred to Count Serbelloni's cuirassier regiment. On 29 January 1767 he was appointed chamberlain to Empress Maria Theresa. 
On 22 May 1775 Dormer married Elizabeth (1753-1824), second daughter of General Count Gabriel Buttler of Erdo-Teleck, near Eslau in Hungary. In 1777 he established his family at Gran in Hungary, where he resided until his death. Following his retirement from the service, in January 1782, he was granted the brevet rank of major. 
A small group of letters from Dormer to his family in England during the 1790s has survived; these letters record his opinions on events in revolutionary France and the legal and civil condition of Catholics in England. On 4 December 1792 he wrote to his brother Charles, eighth Baron Dormer, 'I hope our countrymen will not suffer themselves to be outdone by the French in the generous strife to extend freedom and promote the happiness of mankind. Why should Protestants view us poor Roman Catholics with scornful and suspicious eyes... if they had seen us in private life, upright, quiet and faithful in our engagements and just in our dealings, why have we been deprived so long of the Rights of Man and why are so many younger brothers... obliged to exile themselves and search precarious fortunes in foreign climates, to avoid a dependent life.' He added that 'every spirited Briton would return to his native soil if the advantages of constitutional rights were granted him' (Warks. CRO, CR895/68). 
Dormer did not return to England but lived out his life in frustrated exile. He died on 19 November 1796 aged sixty-six, and was buried on 21 November in the church of St Peter and Paul, Gran. His wife, Countess Elizabeth, died on 6 April 1824. He was survived by two children (three died young): Antonia Dormer (1782-1805), who married Baron O'Brien, a general in the Austrian service; and Joseph Thaddeus Dormer (1790-1871), who, in 1826, succeeded his cousin as eleventh Baron Dormer and also inherited the family's Warwickshire estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 7839


Dormer, Robert, first earl of Carnarvon (1610?-1643), royalist army officer, was the only son of Sir William Dormer, baronet (died 1616), and Alice, daughter of Sir Richard Molyneux of Sefton, Lancashire. The Dormer family had risen to power and influence under the Tudors, gained court connections (Jane Suarez de Figueroa, nee Dormer, was a close friend of Mary Tudor), and were allied by marriage to such prominent midland and northern Catholic families as Catesby, Dacre, and Huddlestone. Robert Dormer's mother was a recusant and his sister married the later earl of Glamorgan. They acquired large holdings in Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire. His grandfather, Sir Robert Dormer, prospered as a flockmaster, supplying wool and meat for the London market. He owned twenty-four manors in Buckinghamshire alone, and had an income of about $6000 p.a. (L. Stone, 'The Crisis of the Aristocracy, 1558-1641', 1965, 761). He acquired the title of Baron Dormer of Wing, Buckinghamshire, on 30 June 1615. It was said that he paid $10,000 for it in the first of the substantial sales of peerages at the Jacobean court. He was also appointed to the hereditary post of chief avenor or keeper of the king's hawks. Sir William Dormer predeceased his father, who died on 8 November 1616, leaving his grandson, a minor, heir to a great fortune. The king sold this lucrative wardship to one of his favourites, Philip Herbert, earl of Montgomery (later also earl of Pembroke) for $4000. 
Dormer was educated at Eton College between 1621 and 1624, and in April of the latter year matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford. He proceeded MA on 25 May 1627. Pembroke consolidated an expensive purchase by marrying the ward to his eldest daughter, Anne Sophia Herbert ('c'.1610-1643), on 27 February 1625, when Dormer was probably fifteen. Before the wedding Dr Prideaux, vice-chancellor of Oxford, instructed the couple in religion, presumably to counteract the Catholic influence of the Dormer family. He may have had success with the bride, who refused later to take part in a court masque on a Sunday, but not with her husband. As office-holders the Dormers no doubt conformed, while retaining their old beliefs. 
Shortly after the wedding Dormer set out on the grand tour. Unusually, after visiting Spain, France, and Italy, he journeyed to Turkey and the Middle East: he was a more observant traveller than most, according to Clarendon, whose eulogy on his death, in the 'History of the Rebellion', is the best source. Now a wealthy man in his own right, and well connected to the court (Pembroke was lord chamberlain of Charles I's household), he was further advanced in the peerage as Viscount Ascott and earl of Carnarvon in 1628. He was the very picture of a sumptuously attired Caroline courtier in the well-known Van Dyck portrait of the Herbert family at Wilton, painted about 1635. He too held an office in the household, and was the owner of a great house, Ascott, near Wing. He had Inigo Jones prepare plans for its enlargement, which the onset of war halted. The house fell into ruin later and is now lost. He also had a house in London, where a son, Charles (who was to succeed to the earldom), was born in 1632. 
Appropriately to his position at court, Carnarvon was a keen follower of country sports. Later royalist apologists felt bound to admit that he was 'extreamly wild in his youth' (Lloyd, 372), and devoted to the 'looser exercises of pleasure, hunting, hawking, and the like' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.178), if only to point the contrast with his later seriousness as a soldier. He loved gaming, and spent heavily. 'His Recreations were rather expensive than bruitish' (Lloyd, 369). He briefly served at sea, for in 1637 he was reported aboard the man-of-war 'Triumph' in the Downs, presumably as a gentleman volunteer, enjoying shipboard life. After an excellent supper on a fine night, and with a good bed ready, he swore that 'by God's blood he would have three whores' (Conway to Gerrard, 10 July 1637, 'Portland MSS', 3.44). 
When the bishops' wars loomed Carnarvon was appointed second in command to Pembroke of the regiment of horse raised by the royal household, and took part in the first campaign of 1639. In the second bishops' war he commanded a regiment of cavalry in 1640. A leading figure in Buckinghamshire, and acceptable to parliament, he was appointed lord lieutenant of the county in June 1641. 
But early in 1642 Carnarvon detached himself from the Pembroke connection, and local opinion, by declaring for the king. He sided with his wife's brothers in deploring their father's support for the popular party, and was furious that Pembroke had used his proxy vote in the Lords against the king. In response to his father-in-law's bullying he is supposed to have said, 'leave me to my Honor and Allegiance' (Lloyd, 371). He was active in promoting the royal commission of array in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, unpromising territory for the king. He joined the royal court in the north, was knighted at York in April 1642, and was one of the peers who pledged financial support for the cause in June. By August he had raised one of the first regiments of 500 horse, a complex and expensive operation, speedily accomplished. All this activity earned him an early place in the list of those to be excepted from pardon by parliament. His regiment fought with distinction in Wilmot's left wing at Edgehill in October 1642. For his good service at the battle he was awarded, with 400 others, an honorary degree at Oxford in November. His house was plundered, and a convoy of plate and jewels, destined for the king at Oxford, seized. 
Carnarvon took part in Rupert's successful assault on Cirencester in February 1643, and was commended for his mercy in capturing rather than killing the many runaways. In June he was lieutenant-general, under the marquess of Hertford, of the Oxford cavalry force sent to join Hopton's Cornish army advancing from the west. In several actions against Waller's army he showed himself a resourceful and daring cavalryman, who, 'with incomparable gallantry... always charged home' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.86). He was wounded in the leg at the battle of Lansdown on 3 July 1643, however, and was temporarily replaced. With the foot under Hopton bottled up in Devizes by Waller's superior forces, Carnarvon and Hertford with the horse made their way with difficulty back to Oxford. He returned to take part as a volunteer in the battle of Roundway down, on 13 July. According to Clarendon it was his good knowledge of Waller's tactics and prompt advice to Lord Wilmot which helped to clinch the victory (ibid., 3.85-7, 98-9). 
After the fall of Bristol Carnarvon was sufficiently recovered to continue as general of the western army and lead an expedition (of about 2000 horse and dragoons) into Dorset, intended to follow up these successes in a 'malignant' area. The cavaliers' reputation for invincibility was inflated by the stories told by former soldiers of Waller's army and defenders of Bristol returning to their homes. Carnarvon's horse must have been reassuringly well disciplined as well as victorious, and himself seen as someone who could be trusted to keep his word, for Dorchester and Weymouth, both famous for godliness, quickly surrendered to him, on generous terms, without a fight, on 2 and 5 August 1643. But when the rest of the army, mainly infantry, under Prince Maurice, arrived shortly after, they plundered the inhabitants anyway. Carnarvon, 'who was full of honour and justice upon all contracts', was so disgusted that he immediately resigned his command and rejoined the main army with the king at the siege of Gloucester (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.158). 
It is not certain which unit Carnarvon rode with to the first battle of Newbury, but he was one of several notables who perished that day, 20 September 1643. He had been fully engaged, charging Essex's lifeguard, as usual with success. But while he was rejoining his men a stray trooper, recognizing him, ran him through. His body was carried to Oxford and buried in Jesus College chapel. It was removed to Wing church in 1653. His wife had died in Oxford, of smallpox, in June 1643, and her body had been buried at Wing immediately after. The church contains many monuments to the family. 
Carnarvon was a prominent landlord and courtier, whose family had strong Catholic leanings. He abandoned a life of pleasure in peacetime to devote himself, against the wishes of several powerful interests, including that of his father-in-law, to the royalist cause. He showed unexpected qualities of courage and organization in building and commanding part of the king's mounted arm, and was a successful colonel and (briefly) general in the field, before losing his life in battle. As a playboy turned gallant soldier, and exemplary man of honour, he was the subject of later cavalier eulogies. 


@@@@@


doc= 7840


Dormer, Robert (bap. 1650, d. 1726), judge and politician, was baptized on 30 May 1650, the second son of John Dormer ('bap'. 1612, died 1679), of Lee Grange, Quainton, Buckinghamshire, barrister and MP, and his wife, Katharine ('bap'. 1622, died 1691), daughter of Thomas Woodward of Saxons Lode, Ripple, Worcestershire. Dormer matriculated on 30 April 1667 at Christ Church, Oxford, and then on 20 May 1669 entered Lincoln's Inn. He was called to the bar on 27 January 1676 and soon afterwards became attorney-general to Bishop Crew of Durham. As early as 1680 Dormer acted as junior counsel for the crown in the prosecution of Sir Thomas Gascoigne for treason and Elizabeth Cellier for libel. By 1690 he was appearing as counsel before the House of Lords. At some point before 1693 Dormer married Mary (died 1729), daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Blake of London. They had two sons and five daughters, but only three daughters survived them. In March 1693 Dormer petitioned (as heir) the crown for a grant of the estate of his nephew, Sir William Dormer, second baronet (the son of his elder brother, John), who had inherited the family estates in 1675, in order to pay off the encumbrances on the estate, with William, a lunatic, being left in the care of Sir Fleetwood Dormer of Arle Court, Gloucestershire. In November 1693 Dormer was appointed chancellor of the diocese of Durham, a post which he held until 1696. 
In September 1696 Dormer succeeded to his uncle's estate at Arle Court, and, if he had not already done so, gained control of his nephew's estates. In February 1698 Dormer acted as counsel for the parliamentary bill of pains and penalties against Charles Duncombe. Dormer stood for Aylesbury at the 1698 general election, but was defeated. When the election was declared void he won the subsequent by-election in February 1699. During this parliament Dormer appears to have switched sides from tory to whig and come under the influence of the leading Buckinghamshire whig Thomas, fourth Baron Wharton. He certainly proved able to defend several whig ministers, including the duke of Shrewsbury and Lord Chancellor Somers, who were under attack in December 1699 over the patent issued to Captain Kidd, who had by then turned pirate, arguing 'very strongly for the legality of the grant' (James, 2.380). By December 1700 he was being described as 'wholly Lord Wharton's' (Verney MS 636/51, Lord Cheyne to Sir John Verney, 14 Dec 1700). He stood for the county of Buckinghamshire at the January 1701 election, but lost, winning the seat at the general election held the following December. A man of 'soaring temper' (Verney, 'Letters', 1.159-60), his ambition may well have been to become lord keeper, but the king's death prevented his advancement and he then lost his seat in 1702, taking refuge at Northallerton at a by-election held in November. No doubt his local knowledge assisted the whig side in the celebrated 'Ashby v. White' case concerning the election at Aylesbury when he argued on 21 January 1704 that voters deprived of the franchise should have recourse to the law courts and thus against the exclusive jurisdiction of the House of Commons over elections. He was returned for Buckinghamshire in 1705, vacating his seat upon becoming a judge on 11 February 1706. 
Lady Gardiner had noted that Dormer's 'generous humour has made him many friends' (Verney MS 636/52, 30 July 1702) and in celebration of his elevation to the court of common pleas 'most of the Lord (Spiritual and Temporal) were invited to dine with the new judge, Mr Justice Dormer, whose Serjeant's motto, given by the Bishop of Sarum, is 'Imperium Oceano, Faman Astris'' ('London Diaries of William Nicolson', 375). Dormer's admittance to the order of serjeants-at-law was sponsored by the two leading ministers, the duke of Marlborough and Lord Treasurer Godolphin. 
Dormer was reappointed to common pleas following the accession of George I and continued to grace the bench until his death. In March 1726 Dormer had succeeded his nephew to the family properties at Lee and also Purston, Northamptonshire. Dormer made his will on 15 July 1726, three days after the burial of his only surviving son, Fleetwood. Dormer died at his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields on 18 September 1726 and was buried at Quainton, where a full-sized effigy of him was set up. 


@@@@@


doc= 7841


Dornford, Joseph (1794-1868), Church of England clergyman, was born on 9 January 1794 in Deptford, Kent, the son of Josiah Dornford and the half-brother of Josiah Dornford, miscellaneous writer. He was brought up in an atmosphere of evangelical piety. His mother, Esther, formerly Mrs Thomason, was by her first marriage the mother of Thomas Truebody Thomason (1774-1829), curate to Charles Simeon, the evangelical leader at Cambridge. She was described (Mozley, chap. 78) as Simeon's chief lady friend, and as pouring out the tea for his weekly gatherings. 
Dornford entered young at Trinity College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1811, but he suddenly left to serve as a volunteer in the Peninsular War. Mozley explained: 'He would rather fly to the ends of the earth and seek the company of cannibals or wild beasts than be bound to a life of tea and twaddle' (Mozley, 2.56). He saw some service, and on his return home entered Wadham College, Oxford, where he gained a first in the classical school and a second in the mathematical, proceeding BA in 1816. In 1817 he was elected to a Michel fellowship at Queen's, and in 1819 to a fellowship at Oriel, where he graduated MA in 1820. In August of that year he joined Dr Joseph von Hamel on the well-known ascent of Mont Blanc in which three guides were killed, of which he subsequently wrote an account in the 'New Monthly Magazine'. Ordained in 1821, he was appointed a tutor of Oriel in 1823 in succession to John Keble, a disappointment to Keble's pupils, though he proved a good lecturer. His martial exploits earned him the sobriquet the 'University Corporal' when he served as a proctor in 1830. 
In 1832 Dornford was presented by his college to the rectory of Plymtree, Devon, and in 1847 he was collated by Bishop Phillpotts prebendary of Exeter Cathedral. He published nothing save a few sermons. One of these, 'The Christian sacraments', is contained in a volume edited by the Revd Alexander Watson, 'Sermons for Sundays, festivals, and fasts, and other liturgical occasions, contributed by bishops and other clergy of the church' (1845). In his bearing Dornford was more of a soldier than a priest, and his talk ran much on war. He was a man of strong will, generous impulses, and pugnacious temper. Sympathetic to the Tractarians, his high-church innovations aroused opposition in his parish; further strife was caused by Dornford's gallantry towards the female members of his flock. Remaining a bachelor until late in life, despite a string of courtships, he eventually made what Mozley described as a 'quiet, domestic marriage', marrying on 31 May 1855 Emma Louisa, daughter of Lieutenant Josiah Dornford RN, a distant relative. Dornford died at Plymtree on 18 January 1868, survived by his wife and at least one son, Arthur Clifford Dornford ('b'. 1862), later a medical practitioner. 


@@@@@


doc= 7842


Dornford, Josiah (1762/3-1797), translator and writer, was the son of Josiah Dornford of Deptford, Kent, a member of the court of common council of the City of London, and the author of several pamphlets on the corporation's affairs and the reform of debtors' prisons. His half-brother was Joseph Dornford, Church of England clergyman. He matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 23 May 1781, aged eighteen, and graduated BA in 1785 and MA in 1792. He later moved to the University of Gottingen, where he took the degree of LLD. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn. In 1790 he published in three volumes 'An Historical Development of the Present Political Constitution of the Germanic Empire', translated from the German of J. S. Putter; the work was probably undertaken at Gottingen, where Putter was professor of laws. Dornford also published in Latin a small volume of academic exercises by another Gottingen professor, the philologist Christian Gottlob Heyne, who, in a preface to this publication, speaks of Dornford as a 'learned youth' who had 'gained the highest honours in jurisprudence in our academy'. Dornford's only other known work is 'The Motives and Consequences of the Present War Impartially Considered' (1793), a pamphlet written in defence of William Pitt's administration. In 1795 he was named inspector-general of the army accounts in the Leeward Islands, and the record of this appointment shows that he had served as one of the commissaries to Lord Moira's army. He died at Martinique on 1 July 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 7843


Dorrington, Theophilus (1654-1715), Church of England clergyman, was born in Bow, London, on 11 November 1654 and was baptized at St Mary-le-Bow on 23 November. His father was the London clothier Theophilus Dorrington. The son of a nonconformist father, Dorrington seems to have been taught first by two ejected ministers: Mr Beard at Berden, Essex (possibly Thomas Beard), and Mr Horrax at Newington (probably Thomas Horrockes at Newington Butts, Surrey). Dorrington attended Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1667. He was admitted on 19 December 1670 to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, which he left without graduating, to preach among the presbyterians. 
In 1678, with Thomas Goodwin, John Shower, and James Lambert, Dorrington conducted an evening lecture at a coffee house in Exchange Alley, London, which many wealthy merchants attended. Apparently unsettled about continuing in presbyterian ministry, he enrolled on 13 June 1680 at the University of Leiden to study medicine. Dorrington spent two years in Antwerp, but when is uncertain. Encouraged by John Williams, later bishop of Chichester, he took Anglican orders as early as 1682. Probably after serving as chaplain to the mother of Elizabeth Howland, future duchess of Bedford, he entered Magdalen College, Oxford, on 16 June 1686, then became rector of Castle Hopton, Shropshire, the following year. In the summer of 1698 he toured northern Europe, collecting data for a book on Roman Catholicism. In November Archbishop Tillotson presented him with the valuable rectory of Wittersham, Kent, where he ministered for the remainder of his life. Dorrington projected an image of cultured refinement and piety -- a cosmopolitan, learned divine polished in Latin and French, who cultivated patronage in high society and wrote tirelessly on establishmentarian values. Finally, on 9 March 1711, the Oxford convocation rewarded his efforts with an MA degree. 
Remembered for his acerbic polemics against dissent, Dorrington was concerned ultimately to remedy the three broader but related problems of immorality, schism, and sedition. He linked immorality to declining manners and piety. Ever conscious of rank and status, he urged ladies to emulate Du Bosc's 'The Excellent Woman' (1682), which he had translated from the French. In 'The Right Use of an Estate' (1683) he exhorted gentlemen to exemplify discipline, duty, and religious devotion. For common folk, he published a collection of meditations resembling a Catholic breviary: his popular 'Reform'd Devotions' (1696) made nine editions by 1727. He then focused on the home: 'Family Devotions' was a series of discourses (1693-5) for domestic teaching on Sunday afternoons. 
In 'A Familiar Guide' (1695), Dorrington addressed the problem of schism by describing communion as renewal of a covenant with God that could not be observed properly outside the established church. The assassination attempt against William III (1696) prompted his 'The Honor due to the Civil Magistrate', a polemic which vindicated high-church passive obedience and linked sedition to immorality and religious schism. Hinting that dissenters were responsible for most of this, momentarily he turned his attention to an easier target. After touring the continent, he wrote 'Observations Concerning... the Romish Church' (1698) to warn against harbouring its superstitious practices, to guard against divisive Jesuit influences, and to encourage protestants abroad. Next he turned to Baptists, who had 'miserably overrun' the county of Kent with error. 'A Vindication of the Christian Church' (1701) was more than an apologetic for infant baptism. He claimed that the 'Toleration Act' (1689), by removing measures of accountability, had promoted schism and the rise of heresy. Baptists were only one stage in the slide from presbyterianism to Quakerism. Disintegration of the established church had to be stopped with 'wise and moderate laws' that would protect it from such 'sects'. In the midst of this polemical barrage he published 'The Divine Feudal Law' (1703), his translation (from Latin) of a work by Pufendorf, hoping, like its author, to unite protestants. Whatever goodwill created by this was quickly lost. 
That year, Dorrington's 'The Dissenting Ministry in Religion Censur'd' attacked the 'greatest Evil' and cause of all religious corruption: the usurping of ministry by those not qualified for that office. In a postscript to 'A Defence of Moderate Nonconformity' (part 1, 1703) Edmund Calamy described Dorrington's argument as 'weak, as it is bitter and virulent' and full of 'Furious Invective' (Calamy, 'Defence', 239-40): he had misrepresented dissenters and had abandoned them because he misunderstood their principles and sought preferment in the established church. 
Dorrington's shallow arguments and sharp tone had marginalized him. He returned to publishing devotional guides, but usually with commentary on the key role of lawful ministers and how nonconformity was a chief cause of impiety. 'The Plain Man's Gift of Prayer' (1703) opposed the extemporaneous praying of 'sects'. 'A Discourse of Singing' (1704) criticized some dissenters' plain style of worship, and 'Devotions for Several Occasions' (1707) complained of others' 'instrumental verse'. 'Family Instruction' (1705) labelled dissenting academies 'nurseries of errour and schism'; 'The Worship of God' (1712) reinforced this attack and rebuked dissenters for abandoning sacramental worship. 
In 1710 Dorrington renewed his frontal assault. In 'The Dissenters Represented and Condemn'd' he opposed occasional conformity and used the presbyterian Daniel Williams's censure of a member's unlawful separation as a basis to argue against sectarian schism. To the end he maintained that true morality, unity, and loyalty could be maintained only within the established church. After the Hanoverian accession, in 'The True Foundation of Obedience and Submission' (1714) he railed against dissenters as 'Republicans' whose call for personal liberty and opposition to passive obedience were just as inimical to the interests of hereditary protestant succession as were the Jacobites. 
Dorrington died at Wittersham on 30 April 1715, and was buried in the church there. He was survived by his wife, Elizabeth (the daughter of Joseph Waldo of Hoxton), who lived until 1739; a daughter, Sarah; and a son, Theophilus, who became treasurer of the East India Company and died on 5 November 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 7844


D'Orsay, Gedeon Gaspard Alfred de Grimaud, styled Count D'Orsay (1801-1852), artist and dandy, was born in Paris on 4 September 1801, second son of Albert, Count D'Orsay, a general in Napoleon's 'grand armee', and Eleanore de Franquemont, an illegitimate daughter of the duke of Wurtemburg and an Italian adventuress, Anne Franchi. His elder brother died in infancy. As befitted the son of a general, but against his staunchly imperial sympathies, Alfred D'Orsay joined the army of the restored Bourbon monarchy in 1821 with a commission in the 'garde du corps', shortly before embarking for England to attend the coronation of George IV. In England, he quickly gained a reputation as a dandy, as his biographer W. Teignmouth Shore observed: 'It was... no small feather in D'Orsay's cap that he came to London an unknown man, was seen, and by his very rivals at once acknowledged as a conqueror. His youth, his handsome face, his debonairness, his wit, were irresistible' (Shore, 36). 
D'Orsay returned to France the following year and was quartered with his regiment at Valence on the Rhone, where, on 15 November 1822, he first became acquainted with Marguerite Gardiner, countess of Blessington, and her husband, the first earl. He accepted their invitation to travel with them and resigned his commission. On 31 March 1823 they arrived at Genoa where they met Byron, who sat to D'Orsay for his last portrait. Byron found him 'clever, original, unpretending... he affected to be nothing that he was not' (Shore, 51). Also at Genoa, on 31 August 1823, Lord Blessington made his will, leaving all his Irish property to the daughter of his first marriage, provided she married D'Orsay. The fifteen-year-old Lady Harriet Anne Jane Frances Gardiner (1812-1869) was married to D'Orsay at Naples on 1 December 1827. The couple put up no false front of happiness: they were cold, distant, and barely civil to each other. D'Orsay's interest in his new wife was merely financial; his romantic interest was in Lady Blessington. Their affair had begun some time before the marriage, and, although the earl could hardly have remained in ignorance of it, he took no action. Indeed, the possible relationships between the members of this 'menage a trois' have produced speculations that it was Blessington who was D'Orsay's admirer, and that D'Orsay himself was impotent (Sadleir, 44-8). 
From Italy, the entourage moved on to Paris, where Lord Blessington died on 23 May 1829. The following year the family returned to London. Although Lady Harriet left D'Orsay and returned to her relatives in Ireland in 1831, her husband seems to have been undisturbed by either their estrangement or the scandal it caused. He busied himself by acting as host of Lady Blessington's fashionable, though bohemian, salon, first at Seamore Place, Mayfair, and then at Gore House, Piccadilly. Together they wielded a kind of influence over the artistic world of London, and gathered around them many of the social and literary celebrities of their time. Despite their precautions (D'Orsay officially lived not at Gore House, but next door) their affair was common knowledge, and had the effect of keeping away from the salon anybody with pretensions to moral respectability. 
In London, D'Orsay was both a sculptor and a painter, specializing in portraiture. In 1845 he painted the portrait of Wellington, who is said to have exclaimed, 'At last I have been painted like a gentleman!', adding immediately, 'I'll never sit to any one else!' (Shore, 232). His statuettes of Napoleon and Wellington were very popular, as were engravings of many of his portraits, including those of Queen Victoria, Dwarkanath Tagore, and Lord Lyndhurst. More than 125 profile sketches of his contemporaries were published by Mitchell of Bond Street, including among them nearly all the artistic, literary, and fashionable celebrities of the time. Some sixty-one of his pencil and chalk portraits are in the National Portrait Gallery, as are the 1845 portrait of Wellington and a self-portrait in marble. 
D'Orsay was chronically irresponsible about money: 'he never denied himself that which he could obtain for love or by owing money' (Shore, 131-2). Handsome, perhaps beautiful, he early developed a taste for elegant living, but had no family money to support his tastes; highly vain and profoundly selfish, he assumed he had an entitlement to live as he wished. Sadleir comments that D'Orsay decided to 'capitalise his only assets, sell his looks and fascination to the best possible advantage' (Sadleir, 47). The number of his creditors suggests he did this to some effect. He used some of the money he borrowed for philanthropic purposes, and was one of the founders of the London Societe de Bienfaisance, but far more went on the gaming tables, the racetrack, his clothes, horses, and carriages. In 1838, in exchange for a legal separation and his relinquishing of all claims to the Blessington estate, Lady Harriet paid over $100,000 to his creditors -- and yet still unpaid debts remained. 
More important in D'Orsay's estimation than paying the debts he had incurred, was the frequenting of Gore House by the exiled Louis Napoleon (later Napoleon III). An intimate friendship grew up between the two Frenchmen, or so D'Orsay, the loyal Bonapartist, thought. Other regulars at Gore House by 1840 included Disraeli, Bulwer, Ainsworth, Dickens, Thackeray, and Marryat, drawn in part at least by D'Orsay's charm. Considered the 'prince of dandies', and widely regarded as the handsomest man in England (although French), his dandyism served no ulterior motive; unlike his admirer Disraeli, whose 'amateur' dandyism was always a means to a political end. Indeed, Disraeli included a favourable portrait of D'Orsay (as Count Mirabel) in his 1837 novel, 'Henrietta Temple'. Even Tennyson was charmed: 'Count D'Orsay is a friend of mine, co-godfather to Dickens's child with me' (Shore, 266); the child rejoiced in the name Alfred D'Orsay Tennyson Dickens. 
And still the debts mounted. By 1849, D'Orsay could no longer avoid his creditors, and, like the previous 'prince of dandies', Beau Brummell, he fled to France. Lady Blessington admitted defeat, sold almost all of her possessions, and joined him in Paris, where she died shortly after her arrival. Her death was a blow from which D'Orsay never fully recovered. Louis Napoleon had also returned to France from exile, and had been elected president of the new republic in 1848. D'Orsay hoped for an appointment from him, as the reward of loyalty and friendship, but Louis Napoleon was reluctant to entrust to him any affairs of state. The president finally offered him the position of director of the Beaux-Arts. Within a few months of the appointment, however, D'Orsay contracted a spinal infection, which was to prove fatal. He died on 4 August 1852 in the house of his sister Ida, duchesse de Gramont. His erstwhile friend, now Napoleon III, was conspicuous among the mourners at his funeral. D'Orsay was buried next to Lady Blessington in the grey stone pyramid which he had designed and built for her at Chambourcy, near St Germain-en-Laye. 


@@@@@


doc= 7845


Dorset, Catherine Ann (bap. 1753, d. in or after 1816), children's writer, was the younger daughter of Nicholas Turner of Stoke, near Guildford, Surrey, and Bignor Park, Sussex, and his wife, Anna ('c'.1727- 'c'.1752), daughter of William Towers. Catherine was baptized at Stoke on 15 January 1753; her mother probably died in childbirth with Catherine, and her care consequently fell to an aunt. In 1764 her father remarried; his new wife was a Miss Meriton. Little is known of Catherine's childhood with her sister, Charlotte ['see 'Smith, Charlotte (1749-1806)]. On 2 June 1779, in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Catherine married Michael Dorset (died 'c'.1805), a captain in the army and probably the son of Michael Dorset MA, incumbent successively of Rustington and Walberton, in Sussex. They had two children, Lucy Smith Dorset ('bap'. 1780) and Charles Ferguson Dorset ('bap'. 1782). 
In 1804 some poems by Catherine Ann Dorset appeared anonymously in her sister's 'Conversations Introducing Poetry', a temporarily popular compilation for children. Charlotte Smith, better known for her adult fiction, produced various works for children in the 1790s and early 1800s and this may have encouraged her sister to write. About 1805 Catherine Ann Dorset was widowed and in 1806 she sold the interest in Bignor Park bequeathed to her by her father. In 1807 her poem for children 'The Peacock 'at Home'' was published as 'by a lady' for the second number of John Harris's 'Cabinet' series, illustrated by William Mulready. The initial two publications in the series were to cause something of a stir; the first had been 'The Butterfly's Ball' by William Roscoe, and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' printed some correspondence debating the relative merits of these two numbers. Some readers asserted the superiority of Dorset's 'exquisite little Poem', and suggested that it might be a 'satire upon the manners of the times', while others attributed the poem's success merely to the gender of its author and complained also that its ornithological detail would deter young readers. Nevertheless, 'The Peacock 'at Home'' was a great success, selling 40,000 copies within a year, and reaching a twenty-eighth edition by 1819. On the back of this success, Harris published eleven further numbers in this series of tiny (5 inch x 4 inch) volumes for children. These included another work by Catherine Ann Dorset, 'Think before you Speak, or, The Three Wishes' (1809), a translation of a French folk story as related by Mme de Beaumont. It is also possible that another title in the series, 'The Lion's Masquerade' (1807), was one of Catherine Ann Dorset's publications. Revised and unillustrated versions of 'The Peacock 'at Home' and other Poems' appeared in 1809 under Dorset's married name. 'The Peacock' was reprinted in 1849, illuminated by her grandniece W. Warde, and a careful facsimile of the original edition appeared in 1883. 
Catherine Ann Dorset also wrote an important memoir of Charlotte Smith, published in Walter Scott's 'Miscellaneous Prose Works' (6 vols., 1827), with Scott's critical remarks appended. Little information on Catherine Ann Dorset herself emerges from the memoir, save her disapproval of the French Revolution. Catherine Ann Dorset was still alive in 1816, but nothing is known of her after this time. Her son went on to become an officer in the army and he also wrote some poetry and military works. 


@@@@@


doc= 7846


Doubleday, Edward (1810-1849), entomologist, was born on 9 October 1810 at 62 High Street, Epping, Essex, the second son of Benjamin Doubleday (1771-1848), grocer and provision merchant, and his wife, Mary (1779-1846). He and his brother Henry Doubleday (1808-1875), also a celebrated entomologist, were birthright Quakers who attended the local Friends' school, Isaac Payne's, and shared an enthusiasm for natural history. Doubleday received a good classical education, and possessing a romantic temperament dreamed of studying nature in the New World. 
Doubleday contributed many articles and notes to scientific journals, notably the 'Entomological Magazine', some under the pseudonym greekLetterDelta (Delta). His plans to travel widely in North America were fulfilled in 1837 when, in the company of fellow Quaker and entomologist Robert Foster, he arrived in New York. During his trip he amassed a large collection of insects, mainly Lepidoptera and Coleoptera, but also some birds and animals, which he shipped back at intervals for the Entomological Club cabinet, the British Museum, and other institutions. He met many American naturalists and his letters to Edward Newman, nearly twenty of which were printed in the 'Entomological Magazine', gave fascinating accounts of his extensive travels. On his return the following year he was dissuaded from joining the ill-fated Niger expedition. 
A genial companion and a brilliant scientific lepidopterist with a worldwide correspondence, Doubleday was appointed in 1841 assistant in the zoological department of the British Museum, where he built up a magnificent lepidopteran collection. He published about thirty scientific papers of entomological importance after his return from America (among the most notable being 'Remarks on Lepidoptera of North America', 'Magazine of Natural History', 1840, and 'Description of new or imperfectly described diurnal Lepidoptera', 'Annals of Natural History', 1845-8). He enjoyed membership of many British and foreign scientific societies, including the Linnean (1843-9), and the Entomological, of which he was a founder member (1833) and secretary for the last two years of his life. He was a vice-president of the Botanical Society. Appointed curator of the collections of the Entomological Club in 1843, he was noted for his extreme liberality to fellow entomologists, to the detriment, Newman commented ruefully, of the cabinets. 
Doubleday's early death at the age of thirty-nine terminated the publication of his 'List of Lepidopterous Insects in the British Museum' of which three parts only, covering the butterflies, were issued (1844, 1847, and appendix 1848). Also left uncompleted was his most ambitious work, the superb two-volume serial publication 'The Genera of Diurnal Lepidoptera', illustrated with coloured plates by W. C. Hewitson. Started in 1846 but interrupted by his ill health in 1848 and later by Hewitson's illness, the 'Genera' was only half completed at the time of his death. Doubleday, who never married, died of spinal disease at his home in Harrington Square, Westminster, London, on 14 December 1849, a great loss to entomological science. He was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Epping on 19 December. The 'Genera' was finally completed by J. O. Westwood in 1852, and reissued in parts in 1857-61. 


@@@@@


doc= 7847


Doubleday, Henry (1808-1875), naturalist, was born on 1 July 1808 at 62 High Street, Epping, Essex, the elder of the two children of Benjamin Doubleday (1771-1848), grocer and provision merchant, and his wife, Mary (1779-1846). His brother, Edward Doubleday (1810-1849), became a distinguished entomologist. A Quaker by birth, Doubleday attended the local Friends' school conducted by Isaac Payne. With congenial schoolfellows he studied the wildlife in the adjacent Epping Forest and the surrounding countryside, thereby laying the foundations of his life's work. 
After leaving school Doubleday assisted in the family shop, and following his father's death its management devolved solely on him. This new responsibility restricted his hitherto frequent collecting trips; however, his correspondence with English and foreign naturalists continued throughout his life to be extensive, and he also contributed observations on birds, plants, and insects to scientific journals, notably 'The Entomologist' and 'The Zoologist', both edited by his close friend Edward Newman. Doubleday was an original and lifelong member of the Entomological Society of London. In local affairs he succeeded his father as treasurer of the Epping and Ongar Highway Trust and Epping Poor-Law Union. An excellent shot and taxidermist, he assisted many authors of standard natural history works, including William Yarrell, for whom he provided specimens and notes for his 'History of British Birds' (1837-43), and Newman, who acknowledged his invaluable help in checking and correcting every column and sheet of his 'Natural History of British Moths' (1869). 
Shy and retiring, Doubleday was reluctant to appear in print and published little himself. Probably his earliest scientific note was on the hawfinch in 1837, which was written after several years' study and published study in 'Jardine's Magazine of Zoology'. His study of birds, particularly in his earlier years, encouraged him to publish 'Nomenclature of British Birds' (1836), a catalogue which passed through four editions. However, his arrangement of species attracted criticism. Among his other contributions to natural history were his recognition of the oxlip as a species distinct from the two other members of the same family, the primrose and the cowslip; this was later confirmed by Darwin. The attraction of sallow blossom in springtime for many moth species was noted by his first published entomological observation, and he also introduced a method of attracting moths by painting tree trunks with a treacle mixture. This method, known as 'sugaring', was based on an idea suggested by P. J. Selby of Twizzell, Northumberland, but had never before been practised. In 1843 Doubleday made a two-week visit to Paris in order to compare nomenclature with European lepidopterists. As a result on his return he devoted several years to the preparation of his 'Synonymic List of British Lepidoptera' (1850). A second edition, adding the Tineidae, appeared in 1859, and later supplements identified over 2000 species; for a time it became a standard authority in Britain. Of his numerous foreign correspondents it was undoubtedly Achille Guenee, the eminent French lepidopterist of Chateaudun, with whom Doubleday most closely co-operated. 
Doubleday's neglect of business, for which he was unsuited, and a heavy financial loss from a bank failure in 1866, led eventually to the prospect of financial ruin and a breakdown in his health from which he never completely recovered. In December 1870 he was admitted to the Retreat, the Quaker mental institution at York, 'with his body and mind shattered', as the medical superintendent reported. After four months he returned home, where his distant cousin, Ann Main, continued to look after him. In his absence friends had contributed to a trust to provide for his maintenance and for his research, and he was thus enabled to pursue his studies at home. Doubleday died of a heart condition at his home, 62 High Street, Epping, on 29 June 1875. He was buried on 4 July in the Quaker burial-ground at Epping. Always commanding great respect for his opinions, he accumulated much practical knowledge of which little written evidence remained. He left behind a remarkably comprehensive but unlabelled British and European Lepidoptera collection for which a catalogue was published in 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 7848


Doubleday, Thomas (1790-1870), politician and author, born in Newcastle upon Tyne in February 1790, was the son of George Doubleday, a manufacturer of soap, tallow, and sulphuric acid, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Fawcett. His political activities during the 1830s are his greatest claim to fame: although a poor orator, he was a competent organizer of political agitation, with a considerable gift for propaganda. 
Under the early influence of William Cobbett, Doubleday became a leading figure in the Northern Political Union throughout the struggle for parliamentary reform in the early 1830s. After the enactment of parliamentary reform in 1832, he believed that the whigs betrayed the people. He thought the 1834 'Poor Law Amendment Act' to be 'a scheme, the most atrocious, probably, ever entertained by any legislators calling themselves civilised' ('A Financial, Monetary and Statistical History of England from the Revolution of 1688 to the Present Time', 1847, 313). After the 'Municipal Reform Act' of 1835 he entered the reformed Newcastle council, but opposed the creation of an 'Austrian-like' borough police (Newcastle watch committee minutes, 5 May 1836) in a town 'remarkable for its good behaviour' (ibid., 4 March 1837). (Newcastle police had recorded 1327 cases of 'disorderly conduct' in 1835.) 
Doubleday was an enthusiastic Chartist in the early Victorian years, taking a leading part in the 'Northern Liberator' during that sprightly Chartist newspaper's short life. As an elected councillor from 1835 to 1840, he defended Chartists from criticism in the reformed Newcastle town council. Although by 1856 he claimed to have lost 'the feelings of a partisan of any line of policy' (T. Doubleday, 'The Political Life of Sir Robert Peel', 1.iii), his hostility to the whigs persisted. In 1864 he appealed to fellow radicals to vote Conservative, noting that 'If ruled by Tories, we should at all events be ruled by gentlemen' ('Crimes of the Whigs, or, A Radical's Reasons for Supporting the Tory Party at the Next General Election'). He supported the Northern Reform Union and the Reform League, but like Cobbett, his liberalism had its limits; in 1847 he denounced 'the Jew or moneyed interest' ('A Financial, Monetary and Statistical History of England', 305), and when 'The Times' supported whig foreign policy in 1861 he castigated it in a pamphlet as 'that Jew-organ' ('The French Alliance: its Origins and Authors'). 
Doubleday's political activities were complemented by varied intellectual interests. His first published work (1818) comprised sixty-five sonnets, and was followed by the undistinguished verse dramas 'The Italian Wife' (1823), 'Babington' (1825), 'Diocletian' (1829), and 'Caius Marius' (1836). Such lines as 'How poor a stay has she who leans upon thy bosom for support' (from 'The Italian Wife') might well fail to achieve the desired effect on contemporary audiences. Like the sculptor John Graham Lough, Doubleday's creative talents aroused an enthusiasm in his own region that was not shared by a wider public, although his novel 'The Eve of St Mark: a Romance of Venice' (1857) shows some merit. A keen angler, he co-operated with his friend Robert Roxby in writing, collecting, and publishing fishing songs (for example, 'The Coquetdale Fishing Songs', 1852). He wrote widely on political economy and similar subjects, and published a philosophical treatise 'On Mundane and Moral Government' (1852). He was also much concerned with the nature and proper administration of the money supply, notably in 'A Financial, Monetary and Statistical History of England from the Revolution of 1688 to the Present Time' (1847). His 'Political Life of Sir Robert Peel' (2 vols., 1856) is a substantial work in which W. L. Burn rightly discerned in 1956 'considerable judgment and discernment' (Burn, 7n.). He wrote extensively on diverse topics for both local and national newspapers and reviews. 
The collapse of the family business in the early 1840s was largely caused by Doubleday's absorption in political and literary activities. Other factors included a disastrous fire in 1841, speculation in lead-mining shares, and extravagant expenditure by his business partner Anthony Easterby. Doubleday's personal popularity was never in doubt, and after this catastrophe even political enemies helped to ensure that he retained enough income to live in modest comfort. He was given the post of registrar of births, marriages, and deaths for St Andrew's parish, Newcastle, and subsequently served as salaried secretary of the Tyneside coalowners' organization. In late 1870 his health failed, and he died at his home, Gosforth Villas, Bulman village, Gosforth, on 18 December. Although the evidence is incomplete, it appears probable that Doubleday had married twice; his second wife, Mary, survived him for only a few months, dying on 4 March 1871. He had three sons, all probably from his first marriage, and probably three daughters by his second marriage. He was buried at Gosforth parish churchyard. His funeral attracted much public attention and there were laudatory obituaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 7849


Douce, Francis (1757-1834), antiquary and collector, was born on 13 July 1757 in London, the fourth and last child of Francis Douce (died 1799), attorney, of the six clerks' office, and his wife, Ellen Tapley (died 1799). His relationship with his father was not affectionate: 'my grandfather was a domestic despot, and tyrannized over my father, who thought proper to retaliate upon me' ('GM', 212); that with his mother was very sympathetic. From his earliest years she fostered his curiosity about books and antiquities and his love of music, interests which were to predominate in his adult life. 
Douce was first sent to a school at Richmond but he was suddenly removed (apparently lest he should outshine his elder brother Thomas) to 'a French academy, kept by a pompous and ignorant Life-guardsman, with a view to his learning merchants' accounts, which were his aversion, and he made no other acquirement there than a little French; the second master, a Scotchman, knowing less Latin than himself, and no Greek. ('GM', 213)' He wanted to go to university but was prevented, he believed, by the machinations of the same brother. He worked for a while under his father and on 13 January 1779 entered Gray's Inn and was admitted an attorney of the king's bench. In that same year he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and in 1781 became a reader at the British Museum. 
On 2 November 1791 Douce married Isabella Maria Price, 'nee' Corry (1754/5-1830), widow of the Revd Henry Price of Bellevue, Ireland; they moved to 13 Upper Gower Street. His marriage, which was childless, 'did not increase his happiness, though on his part it was a match of affection; some peculiarities of disposition in the partner of his choice occasionally embittered his life, and there were circumstances connected with his union which had a baneful influence upon his peace even to the close of his life. ('GM', 213)' Isabella died at the end of July 1830, aged seventy-five; at her burial in St Pancras churchyard no one supplied the clerk with her Christian name. 
In 1799 Douce's parents died. The disparity between his brother Thomas's legacy from their father's estate and his own he ascribed to 'the misrepresentations of my brother, who used to say that it was of no use to leave me money, for I should waste it in books' ('GM', 213). In fact, Douce's inheritance was sufficient to enable him to amass extraordinary collections of books and manuscripts, coins, medals, prints and drawings, and miscellaneous antiquities. His second attempt at a professional life began in 1807, when he joined the department of manuscripts at the British Museum; he succeeded Robert Nares as keeper later that same year, and moved into a museum residence. He worked on the catalogues of the Lansdowne and Harleian collections, using his extensive knowledge to good effect, and learning much in turn. However, he was too old and independent to cope with the institutional regime, and submitted his resignation in April 1811 on the grounds of ill health. His own notes on the business record fourteen reasons for his decision, ranging from his damp apartments to the 'fiddle faddle requisition of incessant reports' by the officers of the museum (Munby, 39). Great efforts were made to change his mind, but he was adamant, and returned to the life of a private collector and scholar, pursuing his antiquarian researches amid a wide circle of friends and correspondents, both at home and on the continent. 
The motive behind Douce's various collections was to illustrate the manners, customs, and beliefs (especially those of the common people) of all ages. It is this illustrative imperative, the desire to assemble material which pictured the activities of humanity down the centuries, preferably as contemporaneously as possible, which informs his collections and provides the matter for his two major publications. 'Illustrations of Shakespeare, and of Ancient Manners' was published in two volumes in 1807; in it Douce endeavours to see the dramatist in his social, cultural, and historical setting, and by so doing to throw new light on the plays in particular and on Elizabethan and Jacobean customs and literature in general. Its critical reception was mostly favourable, but a vituperative review by Jeffrey in the 'Edinburgh Review' (prompted by a feud against the book's publisher, Longman) hurt Douce deeply and put him off publishing for many years. It was not until 1833 that his other major work, 'The dance of death exhibited in elegant engravings on wood, with a dissertation on the several representations of that subject', appeared. He had first published on the dance of death in 1794, anonymously; during the four intervening decades he had amassed materials on, and devoted much research to, the subject, all of which was distilled in this illustrated study. In addition to several contributions to 'Archaeologia' and an anonymous pamphlet attacking government economic policy, Douce collaborated with George Spencer on 'Nymphaea lotus' (1804), helped Walter Scott with his edition of 'Sir Tristrem' (1804), anonymously edited and augmented Joseph Ritson's 'Gammer Gurton's Garland' (1810), wrote the introduction to John Thomas Smith's 'Vagabondiana' (1817), and provided much material for Richard Price's edition of Thomas Warton's 'The History of English Poetry' (1824). 
Douce was a difficult man but, once won over, extremely generous with his knowledge, books, and affection. He was 'a perfect gentleman of the old school; a little reserved on first acquaintance; but when this was passed, easy, affable, and kind', observed the obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' ('GM', 215), adding 'his temperament was constitutionally irritable' (ibid., 216). One of Barry's portraits of 1803 shows a striking, rather severe-looking man. The obituarist in 'The Athenaeum' describes him in old age 'wearing a little flaxen wig, an old-fashioned, square-cut coat... he was short and stout, somewhat near-sighted' ('The Athenaeum', 257), much as in the pencil portrait of him aged seventy-three, by S. C. Smith. 
After leaving the British Museum Douce moved to 36 Charlotte Street; in 1820 he moved to 20 Berners Street, and the following year to 34 Kensington Square. A dramatic change in his fortunes took place in 1823, when his friend Joseph Nollekens, the sculptor, died. His will became the subject of much legal wrangling and it was not until 1827 that Douce, a residuary legatee, received about $50,000, enabling him thenceforth to augment his collections on a lavish scale. His last move had been in 1825, when he returned to Upper Gower Street, to no. 15. 
In July 1830 Douce and his old friend Isaac D'Israeli visited Oxford. Frederic Madden of the British Museum had given them a letter of introduction to Bodley's librarian, Bulkeley Bandinel, who enthusiastically took them round and had them to dine with him. Douce was much taken by the library's tradition of preserving the identity of its named collections. 'At this moment', records D'Israeli, 'Douce must have decided on the locality where his precious collection was to find a perpetual abode' (D'Israeli, 3.264). Douce died 'after an illness of but two or three weeks' ('The Athenaeum', 257) on 30 March 1834 at his home, 15 Upper Gower Street, and was buried in St Pancras churchyard on 7 April. The Bodleian received his books (18,000), manuscripts (420), prints (27,000 fine, 17,000 other), drawings (1500), coins, and medals. The drawings and most of the prints were transferred to the Ashmolean in 1863, the non-fine prints being returned in 1915; the coins and medals were transferred to the same museum in 1920. Douce bequeathed his antiquities to Sir Samuel Meyrick, whose collection was dispersed in the 1870s, and his private papers to the British Museum, not to be looked at until 1900 (they were given to the Bodleian in 1930). His residuary legatees, S. W. Singer and the Revd Edward Goddard, shared an estimated $50,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 7850


Doudney, David Alfred (1811-1893), Church of England clergyman and educationist, was born on 8 March 1811 at 386 Mile End Terrace, Portsea, son of John Doudney (died 1834), tallow chandler, and his wife, Sarah (died 1838). Details of his education are unknown, but it was probably minimal. At the age of thirteen he was apprenticed to a printer at Southampton, and subsequently joined the staff of the 'Hampshire Advertiser'. In 1832 he moved to London and was engaged by Messrs Jowett and Mills, printers, of Bolt Court, Fleet Street. He set up a printing business of his own in 1835, first at Holloway, and then in Long Lane, Aldersgate Street. 
In 1840 Doudney purchased and became editor of the sternly Calvinist 'Gospel Magazine', which he edited for many years. He married, first, in 1834, a Miss Draper. They had three children, of whom only the eldest son, D. A. Doudney, survived. In 1842 he married Eliza (died 'c'.1873), daughter of William Durkin, at St Mary's, Portsea. Of their eight children, five died young. In 1846 he retired from the printing trade, and in November of that year he went to Ireland to distribute funds raised by his readers for the relief of the Irish famine. At this time he felt called to full-time Christian ministry, and underwent some training in Ireland. He was ordained in 1847 by the bishop of Cashel as a licentiate clergyman. From 1847 to 1854 Doudney was curate of Monksland, co. Waterford. Moved by the poverty and lack of facilities he found Doudney established industrial and agricultural schools at nearby Bunmahon. Here he set up a printing press, which produced his new periodical, 'Old Jonathan'. An abridgement of John Gill's exposition of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, which appeared in six volumes between 1852 and 1854, was also printed. The latter venture gained Doudney recognition. The lord lieutenant, the earl of Carlisle, presented him to the sinecure living of Kilcash, near Clonmel, in 1854, enabling Doudney to continue his active and highly individual work. 
Doudney left Ireland in 1859 to become perpetual curate of St Luke's, Bedminster, Bristol, where again he established industrial schools. He continued to edit the 'Gospel Magazine' and 'Old Jonathan', and published a large number of tracts and other devotional works. Doudney also took an active part in many charitable institutions, particularly the Printers' Corporation. He retired from St Luke's in 1890, moving to Southville, Granada Road, Southsea, where he died on 21 April 1893. He was buried at Highland Road cemetery, East Southsea, on 25 April. He married a third time in old age and had two children, who predeceased him. He left four sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 7851


Dougall, John (1760-1822), writer, was born in Kirkcaldy, where his father was master of the grammar school. He studied at Edinburgh University with a view to entering the Church of Scotland, but later abandoned this intention. For some time he was private secretary to General Robert Melville, but he ultimately settled in London and devoted himself to literary work. His writings on education were 'The Modern Preceptor' (1810) and 'The Cabinet of Arts' (1821). He also wrote 'Military Adventures' (n.d.), and translated 'Espana maritima, or, Spanish Coasting Pilot' (1813). 
Dougall had been preparing a translation of Caesar's 'Commentaries' under the patronage of the duke of York when he became seriously ill, and was unable to complete it. He had long been in financial straits, and died on 14 September 1822, at Robert Street, Little James Street, Bedford Row, London, leaving his widow destitute. 


@@@@@


doc= 7852


Dougall, Neil (1776-1862), poet and hymn writer, was born on 9 December 1776 at Greenock, the son of Neil Dougald and his wife, Jean Moir. His father was a joiner and sailor, who was pressed into the naval service and died in Ceylon when his son was four years old. His mother remarried, and Neil remained at school until he was fifteen, when he was apprenticed as a sailor in the mercantile marine service. On 14 June 1794, during celebrations of a naval victory against the French, he lost his eyesight and right arm as a result of the accidental discharge of a gun. 
On recovering from his injuries, Dougall began to develop a musical talent, and became a popular teacher of singing. He married Margaret Donaldson on 28 July 1806, and through teaching, together with a business as keeper of a tavern and later of a boarding-house in Greenock, he managed to raise a family of four sons and six daughters. His daughter Lilly achieved some success as a contralto singer. 
Dougall composed about a hundred psalm and hymn tunes, of which 'Kilmarnock' gained immediate popularity and became a standard melody in the Presbyterian church service. In 1854 he published a small volume, 'Poems and Songs', which contained twelve 'miscellaneous pieces', eleven songs, and thirteen 'sacred pieces', several of which he set to music. Among the miscellaneous poems are various imitations of conventional eighteenth-century pastorals and a tribute to Burns, written a few days after the poet's death. The most notable of the songs is 'My Braw John Highlandman'. Dougall died at 7 Manse Lane, Greenock, on 1 October 1862, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7853


Dougharty, John (1677-1755), mathematician, was born in Dublin, the son of John O'Dougherty and a descendant of the O'Doughertys of Inishowen, co. Donegal. By 1698 he was in England, marrying Priscilla Fereder (died 1741) at Chaddesley Corbett, Worcestershire, on 5 November. They settled in Kidderminster, where their eldest child, Joseph Dougharty (1699-1737) ['see under 'Doharty, John], was born, then moved to Bewdley, where further children followed from 1702. There Dougharty kept a school, teaching writing, arithmetic, bookkeeping, gauging, navigation, and astronomy, and he probably surveyed land also. In 1707 he published 'The General Gauger', dedicated to the named commissioners of excise. Its sixth and last edition was in 1750. By 1711 he had moved to teach in Worcester, first in High Street, and from 1720 in Edgar Tower. The school was patronized by local gentry, some of whose estates he surveyed in partnership with his sons Joseph and John (Doharty) the younger. Their masterpiece was the estate atlas of Hanbury Hall (1731-3), drawn by the father from the sons' surveys. In 1716 he had been appointed lay clerk and inspector of works to Worcester Cathedral, and became choirmaster. The two daughters who had survived to maturity, Elizabeth and Joyce, married and left home, and his wife, Priscilla, was buried on 8 August 1741, leaving only Dougharty and son John in the Tower. His only other book, 'Mathematical Digests' [1749], encapsulating his teaching, was issued in parts from the end of 1748, the complete work having 450 pages. It was dedicated to George, Lord Viscount Deerhurst. 
Dougharty died on 11 January 1755 and was buried in the cathedral cloister at Worcester. An encomium, probably by son John Doharty, describes him as dignified, sincere, generous, cheerful, and 'ever communicative'. The combination of his amiability with talent and hard work undoubtedly led to his successful career as a mathematician, teacher, and land surveyor. 


@@@@@


doc= 7854


Doughtie, John (1598?-1672), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born at Martley, near Worcester, perhaps in 1598 as asserted by Anthony Wood and indicated by his supposed age at death, but his ordination suggests an earlier date. Educated at Worcester grammar school, on 30 April 1613 he matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford. He graduated BA on 4 November 1616, having been ordained the previous February and acquired the living of Wood Norton, Norfolk, in April. Elected to a fellowship at Merton College in 1619 he proceeded MA in 1623. 
Doughtie's early writings reveal criticism of harder line Calvinism but fear of disruption of the church by Arminian innovation. In two sermons of 1628 he generally sided with Calvinists concerning doctrine and popery but, fearing schism, called for silence from dissenters. Opposed to innovation in doctrine or rite he blamed Arminius for the current doctrinal challenge, which he thought might mask popery, still the real danger. However, he may have given comfort to English anti-Calvinists by situating England's orthodox religion 'betwixt papistry and semi-Pelagianism' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 584), by doubting the possibility of certainty in religion (specifically concerning reprobation) and by arguing (like James I had done) that it was better to avoid public discussion of central points of faith if it meant disturbance in the church. He also emphasized reform of the individual's will and life rather than minute examination of the first decree as a better guide to assurance. His 'A Discourse Concerning the Abstruseness of Divine Mysteries' (1629), dedicated to Sir Nathaniel Brent, warden of Merton, was the last work containing Calvinist statements to be published in Oxford until the 1640s. 
In 1631 Doughtie served as proctor, but in August he was made to resign by royal order after hearing an appeal from the decision of the vice-chancellor. From that year he may have been rector of Rushock, Worcestershire; Wood suggests that he was chaplain to the earl of Northumberland about this time. He was presented to the Warwickshire livings of Lapworth and Beaudesert in 1634 and 1636 respectively. In 1640 some Lapworth parishioners petitioned the House of Lords against Doughtie's alleged neglect and his supposed favouring of popery and approval of the new canons. By 1646 he had been sequestrated from both livings. That September the committee for plundered ministers ordered the payment of fifths for Lapworth to his wife, Katherine, of whom nothing else is known. John Walker claimed that Doughtie went to Oxford, then to Salisbury, where he became lecturer at St Edmund's through the patronage of Brian Duppa, and finally to London, to the home of Sir Nathaniel Brent. 
Doughtie's later publications, such as 'The King's Cause Rationally, Briefly and Plainly Debated' (1644), illustrate his increasing dedication to divine right or absolutist monarchy and to an ecclesiology defined by an Erastian episcopacy. A monarch, having received authority directly from God, could acknowledge no superior force on earth. Representative assemblies received their authority from subjects and were therefore inherently of inferior status. Employing Ptolemaic imagery Doughtie set the king above the three estates of the realm. Disobedience to a lawful prince led to civil wars as providential punishment. While Charles had 'somewhat swerved from the known Dictates of the Law', he had not attempted either tyranny or idolatry. Doughtie insisted that Charles had protected both religion and property. His earlier anti-popery changed here to a denunciation of the 'Popish Legend' and of the sedition it occasioned. Here and in later works, 'Velitationes polemicae' (1651) and 'Analecta sacra' (1658), Doughtie condemned both presbyterianism and Independency and defended the structures and practices of the Church of England and of an absolutist political authority. Monarchs properly possessed the right of coercive discipline in matters of public belief and church organization. Thus prelacy, while not scripturally mandated, had to be accepted because established by law. Monarchs should obey the law but were not accountable to it. Even illegitimate authority in a state commanded a 'submissive manner of conversation' save on matters of conscience. 
In 1660 Doughtie's petition to secure the profits of his Warwickshire livings was not granted. Installed as prebendary in Westminster Abbey in July he proceeded DD on 19 October. In 1662 he was instituted to Cheam. Wood ascribes mental unsoundness to his later years. He died on 25 December 1672, said to be aged seventy-five, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 7855


Doughty, William (1757-1781/2), portrait painter and engraver, born in York on 1 August 1757, was baptized on 14 August 1757 at St Michael le Belfrey, the son of John Doughty, the keeper of a fishing-tackle shop, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Kirby. At the age of fourteen he produced two etchings which have survived: portraits of Thomas Beckwith after T. Barow and of Bacon Morritt after Vaslet; an earlier etched portrait of the Revd Mr Elgin has not survived. Doughty was recommended to Sir Joshua Reynolds by the Revd William Mason and, on being accepted, lived in Reynolds's house in Leicester Fields, Westminster, having enrolled as his pupil on 8 April 1775. He exhibited a portrait at the Royal Academy's exhibition in 1776. During his three years' residence with Reynolds, Doughty etched a portrait after a drawing by Mason of the poet Thomas Gray (1716-1771). On 9 August 1777, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, he married Margaret Joy, probably also from York and one of Reynolds's servants. 
On leaving Reynolds in 1778 Doughty visited York and then went to Ireland, intending to reside there for a few months. In a letter to Hely-Hutchinson, Reynolds expressed a high opinion of Doughty's abilities and prospects, and Ellis Waterhouse considered him to have been 'potentially the ablest of Reynolds's students' (Waterhouse, 112). Doughty returned from Ireland at the end of 1778 and settled in Little Titchfield Street. He then produced a series of excellent mezzotints after Reynolds, who was particularly impressed with Doughty's interpretation of his portrait of Samuel Johnson. Reynolds advised Doughty to make a career as a mezzotint engraver, but Doughty was ambitious for recognition as a painter, and as his wife had friends in Bengal they decided to seek their fortune there. They embarked in 1780, but their ship was captured and Doughty was taken to Lisbon, where he died within a short time. His wife eventually reached India, but died of cholera in Calcutta, where she was buried on 10 December 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 7856


Douglas, Sir Alexander, seventh baronet (1738-1812), physician, was born in 1738, the only son of Sir Robert Douglas of Glenbervie (1694-1770), genealogist and author of 'The Peerage of Scotland', and Margaret, eldest daughter of Sir James Macdonald of Macdonald. Douglas studied medicine at Leiden University in 1759, and was admitted MD of St Andrews on 11 July 1760. In April 1770 he succeeded his father, becoming seventh baronet, of Glenbervie. In May 1796 he became a fellow of the Edinburgh College of Physicians, and in September 1796, a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London. 
In June 1798 Douglas served as physician to the forces in the north of Britain, going on half pay in June 1802. It is not known whether he practised medicine subsequently, although he is described in Anderson's 'Scottish Nation' as 'a physician of eminence' (Anderson, 2.59). 
In 1775 Douglas married Barbara (died 1815), daughter of James Carnegie of Finavon. Their only son, Robert, died in 1780 and with the death of Douglas in Dundee on 28 November 1812 the baronetcy became dormant. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7857


Hamilton, Alexander Douglas-, tenth duke of Hamilton and seventh duke of Brandon (1767-1852), aristocrat, was born on 3 October 1767 in St James's Square, London, the elder son of Archibald (1740-1819), the ninth duke, and Lady Harriet Stewart (died 1788), fifth daughter of Alexander, sixth earl of Galloway. The marquess of Douglas (as he was known until 1819) was educated at Harrow School and Christ Church, Oxford. His earlier years were spent in Italy, where he acquired a taste for the fine arts. In 1801 he returned home, and in the following year was appointed colonel of the Lanarkshire militia and lord lieutenant of the county. He was whig MP for Lancaster, 1802-6, and made his maiden speech on 22 March 1804 against an alteration in the 'Militia Bill' proposed by Pitt. In 1806 he was sent as ambassador to the court of St Petersburg, and was sworn of the privy council. In the same year he was summoned to the House of Lords by writ, in his father's barony of Dutton. Recalled on the change of ministry in 1807, he remained in the interior of Russia and Poland until October 1808 on account of his infatuation with an 'old battered beauty', the Polish Countess Potocka (GEC, 'Peerage'). He married, on 26 April 1810, his cousin-german, Susan Euphemia Beckford (1786-1859), second daughter of William Beckford, and Lady Margaret Gordon, daughter of Charles, fourth earl of Aboyne. They had two children, William Alexander Anthony Archibald Douglas-Hamilton, and Lady Susan Harriet Catherine Opdebeck, married first in 1832 to Lord Lincoln, afterwards duke of Newcastle, from whom she was divorced in 1850. 
Douglas succeeded his father on 16 February 1819, as tenth duke of Hamilton in the peerage of Scotland. He was also duke of Brandon in the peerage of Great Britain and duke of Chatelherault in the peerage of France, and was appointed a knight of the Garter in 1836. He was hereditary keeper of Holyroodhouse. He took no prominent part in the debates of the House of Lords. He was lord high steward at the coronations of William IV and Queen Victoria. He was a trustee of the British Museum, vice-president of the Royal Institution for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Scotland, FRS, and FSA. He died at his house, 12 Portman Square, London, on 18 August 1852. 
The chief characteristic of the duke -- at least in his later days -- was his intense family pride. He firmly believed that as the descendant of the regent Arran he was the true heir to the throne of Scotland. For the same reason he was buried with 'oriental' pomp (and a Presbyterian service), after the body had been embalmed, in an Egyptian sarcophagus, which was deposited in a colossal mausoleum erected near Hamilton Palace, in Lanarkshire. He showed intelligence in the improvement of his estates, and taste in the large collection of pictures and objects of virtu with which he adorned Hamilton Palace. This collection, which included the famous 'Laughing Boy' of Leonardo da Vinci and other gems of art, together with a valuable collection of old books and manuscripts, part of which was made by Beckford, was auctioned by Sothebys in July 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 7858


Douglas, Andrew (d. 1725), naval officer, was born in Glasgow but became domiciled in Ulster, probably in Coleraine. In 1689 he was master of the merchant ship 'Phoenix', which was laden with provisions and stores for the relief of Londonderry, besieged by the forces of James II. 
For some weeks a squadron of English ships had lain in Lough Foyle, unable or unwilling to attempt to force the boom with which the river was blocked. Positive orders to make the attempt were sent to Colonel Percy Kirke, who commanded the relieving force; and two masters of merchant ships, Browning in the 'Mountjoy' of Londonderry and Douglas in the 'Phoenix', volunteered for the service. With them also went Captain John Leake in the frigate 'Dartmouth'. As the three ships approached the boom the wind died away; they were becalmed under the enemy's batteries, and were swept up by the tide alone. Their position was thus one of great danger; but while the 'Dartmouth' engaged and silenced the batteries, the 'Mountjoy' first, and after her the 'Phoenix', crashed through the boom. The 'Mountjoy' ran aground and for the moment seemed to be lost. She was exposed to a heavy fire, which killed Browning; but the concussion of her own guns shook her off the bank, and on a rising tide she floated up to the city. With better fortune the 'Phoenix' had passed up without further hindrance, and brought relief to Londonderry's starving inhabitants, by whom Douglas was hailed as a saviour. A certificate signed by the town's governor, George Walker, and others recommended him to the king, and in February 1690 he was accordingly appointed to the command of the sloop 'Lark'. 
On 30 August 1691 Douglas was promoted captain of the frigate 'Sweepstakes' in which, and afterwards in the 'Dover', 'Lion', and 'Harwich', he served continuously during the Nine Years' War, employed, it would appear, on the Irish and Scottish coasts, but without any opportunity for distinction. The 'Harwich' was paid off in November 1697, and for the next three years Douglas was unemployed, during which time, with no alternative profession, he wrote repeated letters to the Admiralty, asking for his case to be taken into consideration. At last, in February 1701, he was appointed to the 'Norwich' (60 guns) which he commanded for eighteen months in the channel, and in July 1702 he sailed for the West Indies with a considerable convoy. He arrived at Port Royal, Jamaica, in September, where for the next eighteen months he remained senior officer; and in July 1704 he sailed for England with a large convoy. With him he brought a slave, Scipio Kennedy whom Douglas appears to have treated well and who later entered the household of John and Jean Kennedy of Culzean, Ayrshire. Douglas arrived in the Thames at the end of September 1704, and while preparing to pay off wrote on 4 October of his desire to be moved with his crew to the soon-to-be-launched 'Plymouth'. Douglas's request is curious, for at the time of his writing many of his officers and men were combining to try him by court martial on charges of sutling, trading, hiring out the men to merchant ships for his private advantage, and punishing them 'exorbitantly'. He was tried on these charges at Deptford on 16 November 1704, and the court, holding them to be fully proved, 'in consideration of the meanness of his proceedings', sentenced him to be cashiered. Despite his reputation for brutality, Douglas appears to have treated Scipio Kennedy well, as the young man later testified (NA Scot., GD 25/9/72). In 1705 Douglas gave Scipio to his daughter Jean (died 1767) on her marriage to John Kennedy of Culzean, Ayrshire. 
Douglas was reinstated in his rank on 24 September 1709 (with effect from 25 January 1710) by the earl of Pembroke, then lord high admiral, on the consideration of fresh evidence. In March 1711 he was appointed to command the 'Arundel', in which he was employed in the North Sea, and as far as Goteborg with convoy. While in her, on 15 December 1712, he was again tried by court martial, on this occasion for using indecent language to his officers and confining some of them to their cabins undeservedly, and for these offences he was fined three months' pay. He seems indeed to have been guilty, but under great provocation, especially from the lieutenant, who was at the same time fined six months' pay. In the following March the 'Arundel' was paid off, and in February 1715 Douglas was appointed to the 'Flamborough', also on the home station. She was employed, mostly in the channel, in the operations concerned with the Jacobite rising of that year. The ship was paid off in October, and he had no further service. After several years on half pay as a captain he died on 26 June 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 7859


Douglas, Andrew (1735/6-1806), physician and man-midwife, was born in Teviotdale, Roxburghshire, and educated at the University of Edinburgh. He began work as a surgeon in the navy in 1756, and later practised at Deal before returning to Edinburgh in 1775 where he graduated MD. He settled in London with the intention of practising midwifery, and was for several years physician to the Charity for Delivering Poor Married Women at their Own Houses. Douglas was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1776. He published 'De variolae insitione' (his MD thesis) in 1775; 'Observations on an Extraordinary Case of Ruptured Uterus' in 1785; and 'Observations on the Rupture of the Gravid Uterus' in 1789. Douglas grew rich by marriage, gave up practice, and travelled abroad. From 1792 to 1796 he was detained as a prisoner in France. In 1800 he left London for Scotland and settled at Ednam House, near Kelso. He died at Buxton, Derbyshire, on 10 June 1806, aged seventy. 


@@@@@


doc= 7860


Douglas, Sir Archibald, lord of Liddesdale (1294?-1333), magnate, was the youngest son of Sir William Douglas (d. 1298), lord of Douglas ['see under 'Douglas family], and his second wife, Eleanor de Ferrers (died after 1305). He was possibly born in 1294, as a two-year-old son of William Douglas, either Archibald or his elder brother Hugh, is recorded at William's manor of Stebbing, Essex, in 1296. By the time Archibald reached adulthood, his half-brother, Sir James Douglas, had emerged as a key adherent of Robert I and Archibald benefited from the connection. During the 1320s he received estates at Morebattle in Roxburghshire and Kirkandrews in Dumfriesshire, and was granted Crimond and Rattray in Aberdeenshire; in 1327 he participated in the invasion of England. 
Archibald Douglas's importance grew in the aftermath of the death of Sir James Douglas in 1330, when he became tutor to the latter's son. He himself married Beatrice (died after 1337), daughter of Alexander Lindsay of Crawford, and their infant daughter Eleanor married Alexander Bruce, earl of Carrick, extending Archibald's connections. The losses among the Bruce party at Dupplin Moor on 11 August 1332 increased Archibald's significance and he engineered Edward Balliol's defeat at Annan at the end of the year. This military role and the Douglas reputation made him a natural choice for guardian of Scotland after the capture of Sir Andrew Murray in April 1333. He used his authority to personal advantage, illegally occupying Liddesdale and other southern lands. When Edward III laid siege to Berwick in May, Archibald raised an army and devastated northern England. This tactic failed to force Edward's withdrawal and Douglas marched to relieve Berwick. On 19 July at Halidon Hill he was defeated and killed in the attempt. His sons, John and William Douglas, fled into exile, and Archibald was remembered as the Tyneman or loser for this defeat, but his career shows he recognized the link between war and lordship which would allow William to become first earl of Douglas. 


@@@@@


doc= 7861


Douglas, Archibald, lord of Galloway and third earl of Douglas (c.1320-1400), magnate, was the illegitimate son of Sir James Douglas, lord of Douglas (died 1330). He took his third nickname from his and his father's dark complexions. As lord of Galloway and earl of Douglas Archibald was the effective founder of the Black Douglas dynasty which dominated southern Scotland between 1388 and 1455: he had two legitimate sons, Archibald Douglas, fourth earl of Douglas, and James Douglas, seventh earl of Douglas and first earl of Avondale, and one illegitimate son, William Douglas, lord of Nithsdale. 
Despite his later success, information on Archibald's origins and early life is extremely limited. He was probably born about 1320 and, to escape capture by the English, he may have been sent to France along with his cousin William Douglas, future first earl of Douglas, and David II. Although after the death of his half-brother, William Douglas, in 1333, Archibald was the only surviving son of the famous James Douglas, as a bastard he was initially excluded from any rights to the extensive lands of his father. This changed in 1342, when Archibald appears for the first time in contemporary records, being named as a possible heir to the Douglas estates. His inclusion was almost certainly the work of his distant cousin Sir William Douglas of Lothian, in whose interests the entail of 1342 was drawn up. While the document did not achieve its intended purpose in 1342, namely the diversion of the family lands to Sir William, forty-six years later Archibald used it to claim the principal Douglas estates. 
In the decade from 1342 Archibald Douglas followed Sir William, witnessing one of his charters (in which he is named as a kinsman) and visiting England as his agent and servant. The death of his master at the hands of William, first earl of Douglas, in 1353 led Archibald to enter the latter's following. It was with the earl that Archibald fought for the French at Poitiers in 1356, when he escaped capture only through the efforts of a fellow knight, William Ramsay. However, the next year Archibald was taken prisoner, again as an accidental consequence of the actions of Earl William. The earl seized Hermitage Castle in Liddesdale while Archibald was visiting England, and in revenge he was detained by the English. His release was probably connected to the liberation of David II from captivity in late 1357. If so, it formed the basis of a lasting alliance between the king and Archibald. Although he continued to appear in Earl William's entourage during the late 1350s, from 1360 Archibald was moving into royal service, acting as the king's sheriff of Edinburgh and keeper of Edinburgh Castle. Adherence to the king earned Archibald his first significant estates. David II's influence was behind Archibald's marriage to Joanna Murray (died after 1401) in 1362, which then brought Douglas not just Joanna's own estates, but also the lands of her first husband and cousin, Thomas Murray. By 1371 these included the baronies of Duffus, Petty, Balvenie, and Aberdour in north-east Scotland and the lordships of Bothwell and Drumsargard and a number of other baronies in Lower Clydesdale, providing Archibald with the status and resources of a major magnate. Bothwell became Archibald's favourite residence. 
Royal patronage also made rivals for Archibald, among them Robert Stewart and William, earl of Douglas. When these two led a rebellion against David II in 1363, Archibald's interests lay firmly with the king, whom he accompanied throughout the crisis. His reward took the form of new opportunities. From 1364 Archibald was warden of the west march with England, and his responsibilities there included the final subjection of the province of Galloway, where strong regional identity combined with vestigial loyalty to the Balliol family to cause repeated problems for the Bruce dynasty and its allies. By 1369 Archibald had completed his task, forcing the chief local kindreds to recognize his authority. In return the king granted him the lordship of Galloway between the rivers Nith and Cree, and Douglas built a massive tower house at Threave to act as his chief stronghold. Associated with this venture was Archibald's chief ally, James Douglas of Dalkeith, the nephew of Sir William Douglas, and during the 1360s David II patronized both men as potential rivals to William, earl of Douglas. 
The death of David II in early 1371 seemed to pose a major threat to Archibald Douglas's prospects. The new king, Robert II, had no compelling reason to favour Archibald and quickly reached an understanding with William, earl of Douglas, who had at first opposed his accession. Although he was sent on an embassy to France in 1371, during the 1370s Archibald's position in the south-west was still at risk from the earl of Douglas and his allies, but the new lord of Galloway possessed the local backing to forestall any major challenge to his influence in the region. Indeed Archibald was able to extend that influence. In 1372 he bought the earldom of Wigtown, which neighboured his lordship of Galloway, from its lord, Thomas Fleming. Unlike Archibald, Fleming lacked the ability to control the leading kindreds of the area and, though Robert II may have had his own plans for the earldom, he accepted the purchase, recognizing the difficulties involved in supplanting Archibald. 
These difficulties were increased by the gradual escalation of war with England, which had begun in the late 1360s with raids by Archibald and another protege of David II, George Dunbar, earl of March, on English-held lands in the west and middle marches. By the early 1370s the earl of Douglas too was leading attacks against England. While the Stewart royal house was slow to participate, the conflict secured Archibald's place in the marches and the kingdom. This was in part because, despite his prosecution of the war, Archibald was also active in the border negotiations which attempted, without success, to maintain the truce which was being breached by both Scots and English. These negotiations show that Archibald retained his influence in the borders, since from the 1360s to the 1380s he was consistently named as the sole warden and commissioner for the Scots in the west march. His role in war and diplomacy was the basis for his integration into the new Stewart-dominated polity in Scotland. By the early 1380s the source of royal lordship in the south was John Stewart, earl of Carrick, the king's eldest son and lieutenant in the marches. Between 1381 and 1388 Archibald was drawn into Carrick's following, which also included the earls of Douglas and March, by a number of significant acts of patronage. Thus Archibald's bastard son, William, was made lord of Nithsdale, assigned a pension, and given the king's daughter, Egidia, as his wife. And a second marriage alliance linked Archibald and Carrick when, about 1387, Douglas's elder son from his marriage to Joanna Murray, Archibald, the future fourth earl of Douglas, married Carrick's daughter Margaret. 
These marks of favour were indications of Archibald's importance as a military leader in the marches, as war with England grew in scale and intensity with the end of the truce in February 1384. To coincide with this Archibald, with Douglas and March, at once besieged and captured Lochmaben in Annandale in revenge for attacks by the garrison on his men in Galloway. His success deprived the English of their last stronghold in south-west Scotland. Archibald's value in war was recognized beyond Scotland. In 1385 the French distributed a war subsidy to the Scots king and nobility. Archibald's share of this was 5500 livres tournois, a sum equal to that of Carrick and second only to the new earl of Douglas, James Douglas. When the French sent an expedition to Scotland in 1385, Archibald showed his worth, meeting the French force in the west march and leading it in a raid on Carlisle. Much of the devastation suffered by the west march in the 1370s and 1380s was inflicted by Archibald. It was during a large-scale invasion of the English west march, by a substantial Scottish army led by Archibald and the earl of Fife, that Archibald received the news of the death of James, second earl of Douglas, at Otterburn in August 1388, leaving the Douglas estates without an undisputed heir. 
During late 1388 and early 1389 Archibald the Grim or the Terrible as he was nicknamed, secured a share of this Douglas inheritance, which included the earldom and principal border lordships of the family. He did so despite the initial opposition of a number of leading figures, mostly relatives and followers of Earl James, who supported the claims of Malcolm Drummond, husband of Isabella, the previous earl's sister and, by normal legal standards, heir. Archibald's case rested on the 46-year-old entail of Douglas lands which limited succession to the male line and named him as ultimate heir. While Drummond sought recognition of his rights at the royal court, Archibald pressed his claim in the borders. In alliance once again with James Douglas of Dalkeith, who had his own claims to certain Douglas estates, and also with the backing of the king's second son, Robert Stewart, earl of Fife, Archibald extended his influence into Eskdale, Liddesdale, and Ettrick Forest during the autumn and winter. This success in winning over local men arguably depended less on the entail than on Archibald's pedigree as a war leader and his possession of the Douglas name, major considerations to communities in the front line of Anglo-Scottish warfare. As Archibald triumphed, Drummond's support at court crumbled. The latter's brother-in-law, Carrick, was succeeded as lieutenant by the earl of Fife, who had been on good terms with Archibald and whose interests centred on the north. Fife quickly identified Archibald as the man in possession and in April 1389 recognized him as earl of Douglas and lord of Eskdale, Lauderdale, Ettrick Forest, and the other entailed estates of the family. 
Archibald Douglas spent the rest of his life defending these gains against a number of rivals. In 1389 Malcolm Drummond had in vain sought English help against Douglas, but on his return to Scotland he won support from the men round Carrick, who became king as Robert III in 1390. The focus of this faction was the king's son and heir, David Stewart, the new earl of Carrick. With this backing Drummond obtained rights to the unentailed portion of the Douglas estate, while David Stewart and his guardians began to interfere with Archibald's position in the marches. In the early 1390s Stewart himself claimed Nithsdale, following the death on crusade of Archibald's son William, who had held it by royal grant; he also took a leading role in border negotiations, squeezing out Archibald as march warden, and attracted a number of borderers to his own paid retinue. In addition to this pressure, Archibald found his position challenged by a new rival, George Douglas, earl of Angus, bastard son of William, first earl of Douglas, and his mistress Margaret Stewart, countess of Angus. From 1397 George put forward claims to the lands held by his father, and was assisted by Robert III, whose daughter Mary he married. Such claims threatened both Archibald and James Douglas of Dalkeith and were backed by force. In response Archibald seems to have transferred possession of his border lordships to his elder son, Archibald, master of Douglas, thereby ending any uncertainty over his advancing age and handing power to an active and aggressive lord who immediately renewed war with England. Royal politics confirmed Archibald's security. In late 1398 David Stewart, now duke of Rothesay, sought Archibald's support in his efforts to become lieutenant of the realm. The alliance was confirmed by Rothesay's marriage to Douglas's daughter Mary, and Archibald was left to settle the dispute between Douglas of Dalkeith and Angus, using the opportunity to build closer links with the latter. Archibald died at Bothwell Castle on Christmas eve 1400 and was buried at Bothwell collegiate church. He had secured his family's hold on the earldom of Douglas, while his son had already begun the search for still greater land and lordship. 
Archibald Douglas's fame extended beyond Scotland. Like many of the Douglas family, he maintained close contact with France. He fought at Poitiers in 1356 and in 1369 and 1371 was sent as an ambassador to Charles V of France by successive Scottish kings. The scale of their payment to Archibald in 1385 suggests the French were impressed. Archibald was seen as an exceptional figure by other contemporaries. Jean Froissart wrote of him as a giant warrior, while the Scottish chronicler Walter Bower claimed that Archibald 'surpassed almost all other Scots... in worldly wisdom, resolution and daring [and] in the additions to his inheritance and wealth' (Bower, 8.35). Bower added praise for Archibald's judgements, the size of his retinue, and his generosity to the church, recording Douglas's foundation of collegiate churches at Bothwell and at Lincluden, near Dumfries. The expulsion of the existing community of nuns from Lincluden brought a characteristic element of force into his act of piety. The great rectangular tower house which he built at Threave helped to set a fashion for such residences among the Scottish landowning class, at every level, which would last into the sixteenth century. In view of his longevity and his mastery of the skills of war and politics in fourteenth-century Scotland Archibald Douglas ranks with Robert II and Robert Stewart, duke of Albany, for his impact on Scottish political society. 


@@@@@


doc= 7862


Douglas, Archibald, fourth earl of Douglas, and duke of Touraine in the French nobility (c.1369-1424), magnate and soldier, was the elder son and heir of Archibald Douglas, the Grim, third earl of Douglas and lord of Galloway (d. 1400), and Joanna Murray (died after 1408), heir of Bothwell and Drumsagart (now Cambuslang) in Lanarkshire. The second Archibald has occasionally been called the Tyneman, or loser, on account of the defeats he suffered on the battlefields of Homildon Hill, Shrewsbury, and Verneuil. However, it is likely that in the later middle ages this nickname belonged rather to Archibald's great-uncle and namesake who was killed at Halidon Hill in 1333. Its application to the fourth earl of Douglas is an unfair epitaph for the greatest magnate of the Douglas dynasty. 
Although his father had a son, William ['see 'Douglas, Sir William, lord of Nithsdale], from an earlier relationship, who was married to a daughter of Robert II, it was the younger Archibald Douglas who was identified as heir to both his father's lordship of Galloway and his mother's extensive inheritance in Clydesdale and in the north. The latter's status was underlined by his marriage to Princess Margaret (died 1450/51) ['see 'Douglas, Margaret, countess of Douglas, and duchess of Touraine in the French nobility], the eldest daughter of John Stewart, earl of Carrick, heir to the throne and lieutenant of the kingdom, about 1387. The match was designed to bind Archibald the Grim to Carrick, but instead linked the politics of the royal family to the Black Douglas dynasty in a way disastrous for Carrick's own line. This was first demonstrated in the following year when, after the death of James, second earl of Douglas, in battle in 1388, Archibald the Grim secured the earldom of Douglas and aided in Carrick's fall from power by allying with the lieutenant's younger brother Robert Stewart, earl of Fife (later duke of Albany). The events of 1388-9 made the younger Archibald heir to massive estates in southern Scotland, but his father faced problems holding the Douglas following together in the face of pressure from his Red Douglas rivals and Carrick, now King Robert III. It was as master of Douglas that Archibald the son made his first appearance in active politics in this struggle. It was perhaps in 1398 that the lands of the earldom of Douglas, including the lordships of Ettrick and Lauderdale, were assigned to the younger Archibald by his father, in an effort to ensure the former's succession to these disputed estates. The same year the master entered into war with England, breaking the truce by attacking English-held Roxburgh. 
During the rest of his career Douglas combined warfare with wide political ambitions in Scotland and beyond. In 1399 he continued to lead his father's followers in attacks on England, attacks which were partly responsible for provoking the new English king, Henry IV, into launching an invasion of southern Scotland in the following year. Douglas's actions had political implications within Scotland. His father had forged an alliance with David, duke of Rothesay, elder son of Robert III and newly appointed lieutenant for his father. As part of this, Rothesay married the old earl's daughter Mary, an act which alienated the Douglases' chief southern rival, George Dunbar, earl of March. March turned to the English king to put pressure on Rothesay, but in his absence the master of Douglas seized his main stronghold at Dunbar and secured the support of many of March's chief tenants. The master clearly saw war with England and the Dunbars as the means to recover his family's influence in Lothian. By the time Henry IV led his army north in the summer of 1400, Douglas had been appointed keeper of Edinburgh Castle for life, a base for his local influence for over two decades. When his elderly father died at Christmas 1400, Douglas had already secured his place as the leader of the war in south-east Scotland. In early 1401 he routed a force led by March and Henry Percy (Hotspur), in eastern Lothian, and later in the year he established control of March's lordship of Annandale. 
In these circumstances Douglas hardly wanted a cessation of Anglo-Scottish hostilities. By March 1401 the Stewart dukes, Rothesay and Albany, were anxious to secure a general truce but, when they sought to negotiate with the English, Douglas prevented them from entering his lands and continued the war. As in previous years, Stewart rivalries worked to the advantage of the Douglas earl. Amid growing political tension between them, in October 1401 Albany arrested his nephew, Rothesay. Albany's next act was to meet with Douglas at Culross in Perthshire. He needed to secure the support of Rothesay's main ally and was prepared to make considerable concessions to Douglas. The latter agreed to the death of Rothesay and in return Albany accepted an escalated war with England. Douglas, calling himself the lord of Dunbar, immediately rode to break up border negotiations and during early 1402 a series of Scottish attacks were launched across the border. In September Douglas himself took the field at the head of a massive force which included a force from Albany's retinue and a number of other magnates. However, after raiding to the Tyne the Scots were crushingly defeated on the 14th by an English army led by Hotspur and March at Homildon Hill near Wooler in Northumberland. Douglas was blinded in one eye by an arrow and taken prisoner. 
Initially Douglas's defeat seemed to have exposed southern Scotland to renewed English occupation. The Percys were granted many of the earl's estates by Henry IV and in early 1403 began the campaign to make good their title. In these circumstances, Douglas was saved by conflict between his enemies. In summer 1403 the Percys rebelled against Henry IV. One of their grievances was the king's demand that they surrender those captured at Homildon Hill. Douglas in turn hoped to secure his release by providing support for Hotspur when the latter led his army south. When the Percys clashed with the royal army at Shrewsbury on 21 July 1403, Douglas, a huge and impressive fighting man, led a Scots contingent and the rebel vanguard. He wreaked considerable slaughter among Henry IV's own household, but when Hotspur was killed the rebel army fled. Douglas, who this time lost a testicle in the fight, was captured once more. Now a royal prisoner, Douglas spent much of the next six years in London. His imprisonment was not too confined: by the time of his final return to Scotland, Douglas had his own establishment in London; he shared his captivity with many other Scots, fellow prisoners like the son of Albany, Murdoch (or Murdac) Stewart, and the young king of Scots, James I, and his own household servants; and after 1405 received at least three lengthy periods of parole in Scotland. 
These paroles reflected Henry IV's desire to use his prisoner to his own advantage but they also allowed Douglas to maintain his lands and lordship during his captivity. Douglas's first return in 1405 was to seek his own release in exchange for Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, an exile in Scotland. The failure of this scheme condemned Douglas to further captivity. His second parole in 1407 was connected to the negotiations between Albany, now governor of Scotland, and Douglas's enemies, the Dunbars, who were still in exile. In return for his release, Douglas sealed an indenture with Henry IV, becoming the king's man. Douglas's renewed presence in Scotland caused problems for Albany and the evidence suggests that friction between the two magnates and their followings ensued. When Albany allowed the Dunbars to return to Scotland in early 1408, Douglas left captivity for a third and final time, effectively absconding from his parole, even though he had left hostages for his return. A settlement between Albany and Douglas was only reached in an indenture between the two magnates in June 1409. They promised mutual friendship and agreed to settle disputes arising between them and their followers, but no mention was made of Albany's authority as governor. In return for relinquishing Dunbar to its previous lords, Douglas obtained the lordship of Annandale. The relationship between Douglas and Albany was sealed by the marriage of Douglas's daughter, Elizabeth, to Albany's second son, John Stewart, earl of Buchan, in 1410. 
The maintenance of Douglas's fortunes from captivity depended on the loyalty of his family and following in Scotland. The earl recognized the need to reward support. His brother James had defended family interests on the governor's council and in battle, and Douglas granted him a share of their mother's inheritance. Douglas similarly rewarded the service of other key supporters like William Crawford, his deputy in Edinburgh Castle, and James Douglas of Dalkeith, a long-standing ally of the Black Douglases. Crucially, between 1400 and 1409 Douglas was able to win the adherence of the most important local lords in the south. His influence in the old Dunbar lands was guaranteed by Douglas's good relations with Alexander and David Hume of Berwickshire, while his hold on Annandale was secured with the help of Robert Maxwell of Caerlaverock. A second Annandale man, Michael Ramsay, was also associated with Douglas. Ramsay's service rested on the dubious privilege of being husband of the earl's mistress, Christian, possibly the mother of the earl's bastard son John. Douglas gave these lords lands, money, and positions as his local deputies. Within the Douglas kindred, the support which the earl gave to William and Archibald, the bastard sons of the second earl of Douglas, weakened the power of the rival Red Douglas branch of the family. 
The power of the fourth earl of Douglas rested on his leadership of a massive connection drawn from across the south. It also rested on his unparalleled accumulation of offices in the region. By 1410 Douglas was justiciar south of Forth and warden of all three marches towards England, this latter role elevated into 'Great Guardian' in the earl's own documents. As elsewhere in Scotland, the powers of government rested with the greatest private magnate of the region. The earl seems to have regarded the royal revenues of the south as a perquisite of his post. The profits of his justiciary courts and at least $500 a year from the customs of Edinburgh were siphoned into Douglas's coffers. Albany may have attempted to limit these depredations, but he had little success, and Douglas was regarded with some justice by one English writer as the real ruler of southern Scotland. 
The influence of Douglas extended to the Scottish church. He was recognized by the abbeys of Dryburgh, Sweetheart, Holyrood, and Melrose, and by Coldingham Priory, as a valuable patron and protector. The earl's standing with the church, in Scotland and beyond, was raised to new levels by the ending of the great schism. By 1418 Scotland was virtually alone in continuing to support Pope Benedict XIII at Avignon when the other major kingdoms of the west were adhering to his Roman rival, Martin V. Albany remained firmly attached to Benedict, but Douglas was identified as a source of secular support for Martin, and as early as 1414 he had received letters from the king of France and elsewhere asking for his help in reuniting the church; by 1418 he had worked successfully with St Andrews University to secure Scottish recognition for Martin. The earl benefited in terms of prestige and influence from his involvement in the schism. The papacy addressed Douglas in respectful terms and churchmen and religious houses sought his sponsorship at the curia. 
Douglas's role in ecclesiastical politics also added to his reputation outside Scotland. Respected by European rulers long before 1418, Douglas was keen to play a part in international politics. He placed most weight on his family's well-established French connection. The Douglas name was already famous in France and when the earl invaded England in 1402 he had a company of French knights in his army. After Homildon Hill the French sought to ransom not just their own knights but Douglas too as a friend of their kingdom, and in 1404 there was talk of a marriage alliance between the French royal house and Douglas. The earl was eager to exploit this fame. In 1412 he travelled to France and negotiated an agreement with John, duke of Burgundy, effective regent for Charles VI. Facing a civil war and English invasion, Burgundy sought military aid and Douglas promised to lead 4000 men to the continent to fight for pay. Burgundy promised reciprocal support to Douglas, and though the plan came to nothing, it clearly established Scotland, and Douglas in particular, as a source of soldiers for wars in France. In 1419 the Dauphin Charles, facing Henry V of England's attempts to conquer France, also looked to Scotland for military assistance. He made a direct appeal to the governor and estates, having prepared the way by writing directly to Albany, Douglas, and other Scottish magnates. The expedition which the Scots sent was dominated by the retinues of Albany and Douglas. Its leaders were Douglas's elder son, Archibald Douglas, earl of Wigtown, and his son-in-law John Stewart, earl of Buchan. Among the 6000 men the earls took to France were many who had served the earl of Douglas in war and politics. Although Douglas himself avoided going to France at this point, he clearly committed extensive resources to the continental war and placed considerable hopes on its success. 
The importance of the expeditions to France may be related to difficulties in Douglas's position in Scotland which began to show after 1410. Despite his political successes there were limits to the earl's ability to dominate the south. Most spectacularly, in 1416 Douglas was forced to besiege a hostile force in his own castle of Edinburgh, perhaps indicating a dispute with his deputy governor. This reflected wider problems, especially in Lothian. A number of feuds between baronial families in the early 1420s suggest difficulties perhaps connected to the re-emergence of the Red Douglases and Dunbars as rivals for predominance in south-east Scotland. During the same period the war leadership which was the basis of Douglas's influence across the south declined in importance. The restoration of the Dunbars in 1408 ended major Anglo-Scottish conflict. From 1415 English attention focused on France and, though Douglas led raids into northern England in that year, 1419, and 1420, and besieged Roxburgh Castle in 1417, these attacks achieved little except to provoke English retaliation. 
Opportunities for greater importance and rewards lay on the continent. At Easter 1421 the Scottish army under Buchan and Wigtown defeated an English force at Bauge. The victory immediately heightened the importance of the Scots in Anglo-French conflict. While the Scots in France were showered with rewards by the dauphin, Douglas exploited the victory to seek a deal with Henry V. As he had done with other rulers, Douglas offered military service in return for significant rewards. In May 1421 he agreed to become Henry's man for life, serving him with 400 soldiers and receiving an annuity of $200 sterling. The arrangement was supported by James I who was to be temporarily released in exchange for hostages. Although James never went to Scotland and Douglas never served Henry V against his own family, and an English pension was far less than the rewards being offered by the French, the indenture had diplomatic value for Douglas. It forged links with the English and put pressure on the dauphin to bid for further Scottish help. It also allowed Douglas to move closer to his brother-in-law, James I. The two men had worked together in efforts to bring Scotland into papal allegiance between 1415 and 1418. After 1421 Douglas remained in regular contact with James and by 1423, after Henry V's death, the earl was working for the return of the king to Scotland. By the end of the year James's release was agreed. 
Douglas may have believed that James I would follow his return to Scotland with an attack on Duke Murdoch of Albany, who had succeeded his father as governor. In such Stewart rivalry the Black Douglases would hold the balance of power as they had done in 1402, and neither the king nor Albany would interfere with Douglas interests. The earl sought security in Scotland which would allow him to go to France in person. In October 1423 Douglas had promised to support the dauphin (now Charles VII) with a full-scale army and handed over his Scottish lands to the safe keeping of his wife and elder son. In February 1424 he and Buchan left for France with an army. On 7 March Douglas landed at La Rochelle and on 24 April the Scottish army of 6500 men was reviewed by Charles VII at Bourges. Douglas was well paid for his support. He was granted the duchy of Touraine and was named lieutenant-general of the king for the war against England. A non-royal foreigner, Douglas had been given rank and powers without precedent in medieval France. He moved quickly to take possession of his new lands. On 7 May the citizens of Tours reluctantly welcomed their new duke, who was made a canon of the cathedral and also took custody of the castles at Loches and Tours. 
During the next three months Douglas and his army lived off the land in Touraine, running up debts and arousing local hostility. Then in August he led an army of Scots, French, and Italians northwards to enter the war against the English in Normandy. Although his attempt to relieve the town of Ivry (Eure) failed, on 16 August Douglas captured Verneuil-sur-Avre (Eure). This provoked the advance of the English under John, duke of Bedford. Against the advice of many French nobles, Douglas offered battle next day outside Verneuil. The fight was the fiercest of the war. The Scots threatened to break the English opposite them but, led by the Italians, the rest of the army fled. Douglas, who was in the thick of the fight, was killed along with his younger son James, Buchan, and almost the entire Scottish contingent. He was buried with his son and son-in-law in St Gatien's Cathedral at Tours. The fourth earl of Douglas had used the resources built up by magnates of his family to carve out a role for himself in Scotland and in European politics. His ambitions were enormous and rested on his military following. Douglas may have hoped to found a Franco-Scottish princely house but his death and the destruction of his army left the way clear for the revival of royal power in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 7863


Douglas, Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas, and duke of Touraine in the French nobility (c.1391-1439), magnate and soldier, was the elder son of Archibald Douglas, fourth earl of Douglas and duke of Touraine (c.1369-1424), and Margaret Douglas, nee Stewart (b. before 1373?, d. 1450/51), daughter of Robert III. His early career was dictated by the ambitions of his father in Scotland, England, and France. During the fourth earl's English captivity his heir acted as a hostage for his good behaviour on temporary release from custody and, while in London, the younger Archibald witnessed two of his father's charters. Similarly, in Scotland Archibald and his younger brother, James, were associated with an indenture designed to regulate possibly uneasy relations between their father and the governor, Robert Stewart, duke of Albany, in 1409. The assumption by Archibald of the title earl of Wigtown (the lands of which earldom had been held by the Black Douglases since 1372) may have been part of his father's attempt to raise the status of his house in Scotland and beyond. More particularly, occurring as it did between 1417 and September 1419, Archibald's elevation was probably connected with his co-leadership of an army in France. 
In the autumn of 1419 Archibald, earl of Wigtown, was one of the principal commanders of a Scottish force of up to 6000 men sent to France. He and the other main leader, John Stewart, earl of Buchan, second son of the duke of Albany and husband of Archibald's sister, Elizabeth, had been sent to support the dauphin, Charles (the future Charles VII), in his war against Henry V. Although he returned to Scotland on recruiting missions in early 1420 and late 1422, between 1419 and 1423 Wigtown's career was as a French commander. The high point of his efforts was the victory won by the Scots and their French allies at Bauge in Anjou on Good Friday 1421 in which Henry V's brother Thomas, duke of Clarence, was killed. Wigtown was rewarded for this success with the lands of Dun-le-roi in Berri and the title of count of Longueville (then in English hands). His role at Bauge and his prizes indicate that in the leadership of Scots troops on the continent he played a junior part to Buchan, who was made constable of France after the battle. Wigtown probably represented his father both at the French court and in the Scottish army -- the latter contained considerable numbers of kinsmen, tenants, and adherents of the Black Douglases. 
The return of Wigtown to Scotland in 1423 was once more in response to the ambitions of his father. The fourth earl was preparing for his own entry into the French war, encouraged by the offer of the duchy of Touraine from Charles VII, the imminent return of James I from English captivity, and the death of Henry V, whom the earl had promised to serve in France. Wigtown was again to stand in for his father, this time in Scotland. Since 1419 Wigtown had been confirming grants made by Archibald the elder. Such confirmations by an heir of alienations by his father are commonplace, but these may also reflect the fourth earl's long-standing intention to serve in France. Between late 1423 and the departure of the fourth earl to France in March 1424 Wigtown was given power to run the Douglas lands in his place, with the exception of Galloway, where his mother, Margaret, was left in authority. Although he had helped secure the king's release, the fourth earl was apparently not prepared to experience James's rule. Wigtown's marriage, around 1423, to Euphemia Graham (died 1468), sister of Malise Graham, earl of Strathearn, and great-niece of Walter Stewart, earl of Atholl (died 1437), forged connections with other magnates which could be valuable in the uncertain circumstances of the king's return. 
In the event Wigtown found his uncle James I anxious to maintain Black Douglas support. Though he relinquished part of his father's dominance in the marches, Wigtown successfully forged a working relationship with the king; James knighted him in May 1424, which seemed to secure his family's power. This position was weakened in August by the death of the fourth earl and the destruction of the Scottish army at Verneuil. The French lands received by both Douglases were quickly repossessed by Charles VII and given to new owners, despite continued complaints from the family. More damagingly, the removal of the earl and so many of his adherents meant that his son had to concede influence in Lothian and Berwickshire to the king. Archibald, now fifth earl of Douglas, backed the king's attack on Murdoch Stewart, duke of Albany, in March 1425 not because he was the mainstay of royal power envisaged by the fourth earl, but in hope of reward. The support of the Black Douglas connection was none the less crucial to the assize which condemned Albany, and Douglas had his title to the lordship of Bothwell confirmed in return. Further recompense was not forthcoming. Instead in 1426 the king confirmed his sister, Douglas's mother, in her hold on Galloway and displayed his ability to intervene in the family's border power base. 
The fifth earl was clearly dissatisfied with the limitations on the regional powers established by his father. He continued to concern himself in Galloway after 1426, and in 1429 sought to exert influence in Carrick in a dispute between members of the Kennedy kindred. James I distrusted such activities and, although Douglas was given the rank and role of a trusted councillor at court and served on James's 1429 highland campaign, the king blocked his local ambitions. Tension increased with the king's move towards a war in the highlands and with England, which Douglas saw as potentially disastrous. The earl was removed as a march warden and in 1431 was arrested, once again perhaps in connection with the feuding Kennedys. He was quickly restored to lands and offices, but his local role remained curtailed. While he did not go to France, as David Hume of Godscroft later claimed, his activities were confined to the heartlands of the family, Bothwell, Annandale, and Selkirk Forest, and his support drawn largely from those regions. 
Throughout James's reign Douglas benefited from the rise of family servants. Men such as his uncle James Douglas of Balvenie, John Cameron, and William Crichton maintained contact between king and earl and prevented wider conflict. They were also vital in the earl's promotion following the assassination of James in February 1437. Douglas had no part in a plot which sought power for his rival, Walter, earl of Atholl. To many, though, he was the most acceptable lieutenant for the young James II, no doubt in part because of his descent from Robert III. In June he received the office from a general council, forcing Queen Joan to relinquish power. All the same, it is arguable that his rise owed less to legitimacy than to the support of Balvenie and Crichton. Both profited from his brief period of power, in which Douglas showed himself aware of the need to forge agreements with the other major Scottish magnates, the earl of Crawford and the lord of the Isles, and widened his own basis of support in Ayrshire and Lothian. However, the earl's own death on 26 June 1439 at Restalrig, Edinburghshire, was to prove the dangers of reliance on such powerful servants as Balvenie and Crichton, who orchestrated the murder of Douglas's sons, David and William Douglas, the following year. The earl was buried in an impressive tomb in the church of Douglas, St Bride's, on which were recorded his full titles -- earl of Douglas and Wigtown and lord of Galloway, Bothwell, Selkirk and Ettrick Forest, Eskdale, Lauderdale, and Annandale in Scotland, and duke of Touraine, count of Longueville, and lord of Dun-le-roi in France. 


@@@@@


doc= 7864


Douglas, Archibald, fifth earl of Angus (c.1449-1513), magnate and rebel, was the elder of the two sons of George Douglas, fourth earl of Angus (c.1417-1463), and his wife, Isabel, daughter of Sir John Sibbald of Balgonie in Fife. The steady advance of this comital family to a position of great power, especially on the borders, was based on unswerving loyalty to the crown over two generations. Earl Archibald's career displays no such consistency; indeed, he may be regarded as the great political maverick of the reigns of James III and James IV, an earl who rose to be chancellor, yet whose last years were spent trying to preserve his family's inheritance from the encroachments of a predatory crown. 
On 4 March 1468 Earl Archibald, who had succeeded his father in 1463 at the age of about fourteen, married Elizabeth (died 1498), eldest daughter of Robert, Lord Boyd (died 1482), the chamberlain, whose power rested on his seizure of the adolescent James III in July 1466. Boyd earned the king's undying hatred by marrying his son Thomas to James's elder sister Mary in 1467; so the Angus-Boyd alliance of 1468, although doubtless made with a view to advancing the fortunes of both families, soon misfired badly. In November 1469 the king took control of government, and the Boyds, forfeited, finished up in exile or on the block. The young Earl Archibald, having backed the wrong side, hastened to make amends to the king by sitting on the parliamentary assize of November 1469 which condemned his Boyd kinsmen. 
Thereafter, during most of the 1470s, Angus was rarely at court, and was only occasionally in parliament. His territorial interests lay mainly, though not exclusively, in the south and west, where he had inherited lordships stretching from Haddingtonshire to Kirkcudbright; and by the early 1480s, if not before, he was justiciar south of Forth. Together with his near neighbour Alexander Stewart, earl of March and duke of Albany, the king's brother, Angus appears to have disliked James III's obsessive concern for peace and alliance with England. Albany's opposition to the king's Anglophile stance led to a royal attack on his castle of Dunbar in the spring of 1479. The duke fled to France (moving to England in the late spring of 1482), and James III's unconvincing indictment of Albany failed to secure a parliamentary sentence of forfeiture in October 1479. In the following spring the king's foreign policy collapsed, and Angus was first off his mark in the war with England which ensued, raiding Northumberland and burning Bamburgh Castle. 
Angus played an important, if rather obscure, role in the Lauder crisis of July 1482, when James III, mustering the host to resist the invasion of a huge English army commanded by Richard, duke of Gloucester, and the exiled Albany, was seized by his own magnates and incarcerated in Edinburgh Castle. Angus was certainly present at Lauder -- he had probably no further to come than from Tantallon Castle in Haddingtonshire and, according to the chronicler Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie, writing in the 1570s, he played a major part in arresting and hanging Cochrane and other offensive royal familiars -- but his motives are difficult to ascertain. He can hardly have been the prime mover in the Lauder 'coup', for he played no obvious part in the governmental regime which followed it; control of the king fell to James III's half-uncles, the earls of Atholl and Buchan, and Andrew Stewart, bishop-elect of Moray. Angus may, indeed, have been a committed Albany man throughout, looking to the duke as 'Alexander IV', a suitable replacement for James III; he may have taken part in an embassy to the exiled duke in France in the spring of 1482, and therefore been in collusion with Albany before the Lauder crisis; and later, when Albany had acquired a new backer in Edward IV of England, Angus may have been one of those twenty-six Scottish magnates who gave a written commitment to the English king to support the duke in his efforts to displace James III. What is clear beyond doubt is that, early in 1483, Angus was acting as one of Albany's commissioners to Edward IV, travelling south to Westminster to negotiate a treasonable treaty with the English king. According to this agreement (11 February 1483), Albany and his supporters, including Angus, would become liegemen of the English king, and Edward IV promised to assist Albany in his efforts to acquire the Scottish crown. 
Thus Angus's role in the crisis of 1482-3 was overtly treasonable, a far cry from the later portrayal of the patriotic earl acting out of concern for his king, misled as he was by evil counsellors who had to be removed for the good of the kingdom. This latter view of the earl has persisted, however, thanks to the efforts of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century chroniclers to portray Angus in a flattering light. Among these, David Hume of Godscroft, in his 'History of the Houses of Douglas and Angus' (1644), was the first writer to apply the epithet Bell-the-Cat to the fifth earl. According to Godscroft, when the nobles were holding their conference in Lauder kirk to decide what could be done to remove the royal favourites, Lord Gray told the old story of the mice who resolved to hang a bell about the cat's neck, to give warning of its approach, but lacked the courage to do so, whereupon Earl Archibald volunteered to bell the cat. In spite of the fact that no earlier chronicler -- not even Pitscottie, the 'locus classicus' for this event -- mentions the story, the tag has stuck as an inappropriate nickname for the fifth earl. 
The recovery of power by James III and the death of Edward IV in April 1483 doomed Albany's schemes, and left Angus and the rest to make what terms they could. Given his recent treasons, the fifth earl was treated remarkably leniently, losing his justiciarship and keepership of Threave, but acquiring, astonishingly, the wardenship of the middle marches. However, uncertainty as to his standing with James III made Angus a rebel in the crisis of 1488 when Prince James (the future James IV) took arms against his father at the head of a huge and diverse body of disaffected magnates. 
As in 1482, Angus's initial role in this crisis is obscure. James III may have tried to buy his support, for the earl remained at court until early March 1488, more than a month after the start of the rebellion, and he was at best a lukewarm rebel. When the end came for James III at Sauchieburn (11 June), no contemporary record, no later chronicler even, mentions Angus's prowess at the battle, and he may not have been there at all. Perhaps significantly, many of the earl's relatives and tenants -- Lindsay of Auchtermonzie, lords Forbes and Glamis, David Scott of Buccleuch, and William Douglas of Cavers -- did not join him in rebellion. 
The advent of the fifteen-year-old James IV produced a temporary improvement in the fifth earl's fortunes; he was the king's friend, who gave James presents and who on occasions played cards and dice with him. More to the point, Angus acquired the wardenships of all three marches at the start of the reign. But there was no room for him in the new government, dominated as it was by Patrick Hepburn, recently created earl of Bothwell, and his Hume allies. Fearing Angus's power on the borders and facing a serious rebellion against their authority in 1489, the leaders of the new regime gradually stripped the earl of his lands and offices: all his march wardenships, the sheriffdom of Lanark, the Berwickshire lands of Earlston, and the lands and castle of Broughty in Angus. The earl also disappeared from the royal council and from parliament for three years (1489-92). 
Under severe threat in the borders, Angus renewed his treasonable links with England, this time with Henry VII, promising by an agreement of November 1491 to hand over Hermitage Castle in Liddesdale to the English king in return for lands of equal value in England, if he could not move the Scottish government towards peace with England. About this time he also sought to have himself recognized as heir-at-law to the last earls of Douglas, a chilling prospect for his Hepburn and Hume rivals in southern Scotland. In October 1491 the king laid siege to Angus's castle of Tantallon; the outcome is unknown, but in spite of a reconciliation between King James and Angus at Christmas, the Bothwell-dominated royal council was taking no chances with Angus's future loyalty. On 29 December 1491 the earl was forced to exchange his border lordship of Liddesdale and castle of Hermitage (which went to Bothwell in regality) for the lordship of Kilmarnock in Ayrshire. 
Angus-Bothwell rivalry continued for much of the rest of the reign, with Earl Archibald generally on the losing side. In January 1493 he made a spectacular political comeback by acquiring the chancellorship, an office which fell to him partly through the growing importance of his Ayrshire relatives, for his niece, Marion Boyd, was James IV's first mistress. But advancement acquired in this way was difficult to sustain. Within a few years the king was an adult, Marion Boyd was discarded, and the Anglo-Scottish war of 1496-7 made Angus, with his earlier English affiliations, a highly unsuitable chancellor. He was dismissed to make way for the earl of Huntly in the autumn of 1497 and thereafter Angus's career was visibly in decline. In 1498 he made the tactical mistake of granting the baronies of Braidwood and Crawford-Lindsay in Lanarkshire to his mistress Janet Kennedy, only to see Janet transfer her affections to the king, who was quite happy to confirm the earl's Lanarkshire grants to the woman who was to become the most durable of his mistresses. 
Angus suffered some losses in the royal revocation of 1498; and Hepburn rivalry may account for Earl Archibald's being warded in Dumbarton Castle in 1501 and, much more seriously, on the island of Bute for the remarkable period of seven years (1502-9). Perhaps significantly, he was not freed until after the death of Patrick Hepburn, earl of Bothwell, in 1508, and then only to be savagely pursued by the crown on the legal technicality of non-entry -- forty-five years of it -- to his lands of Kirriemuir in Angus and his border lordship of Eskdale, and presented with an appalling bill of $45,000 Scots for Kirriemuir alone. Angus, endeavouring to preserve some of his inheritance in the face of relentless and cynical royal demands, settled for a composition of 5,000 merks, not all of which had been paid when he died. 
In his last years, though a chastened old man, Angus re-emerged at court. According to Buchanan, he opposed the Anglo-Scottish war of 1513; yet his two eldest sons, George, master of Angus, and Sir William Douglas of Glenbervie, were both killed in James IV's army at Flodden (9 September 1513). Angus's survival left him one of Scotland's senior earls, but towards the end of October 1513 he died at Whithorn, Wigtownshire, aged about sixty-four. He was succeeded by his grandson Archibald Douglas (died 1557), another political high-flyer who came to grief even more spectacularly than his grandfather. 
The fifth earl of Angus was twice married. He and his first wife, Elizabeth Boyd, had four sons and three daughters: George, master of Angus, and Sir William Douglas (both killed at Flodden), Gavin Douglas, the poet and bishop of Dunkeld, Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie (d. before 1540), Marion, Elizabeth, and Janet. Angus's second marriage, to Katherine Stirling, daughter of Sir William Stirling of Keir, in the summer of 1500, produced no children and had ended in divorce or separation by 1512. 


@@@@@


doc= 7865


Douglas, Sir Archibald, of Kilspindie (b. c.1490, d. before 1540), administrator, was the fourth son of Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus (c.1449-1513), and his first wife, Elizabeth Boyd (died 1498). Old enough to witness charters in 1509, he was probably born about 1490. His principal seat was Kilspindie Castle and estate in Perthshire, but he was not a major landowner, and his advancement resulted mainly from political influence and from his having property in Edinburgh, some of which he acquired through his marriage to Isobel Janet Hoppringle, widow of John Murray, which had taken place before 27 May 1519. Kilspindie owed his political career to his nephew Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, who in the confusion of James V's minority won control of Edinburgh in 1519. Angus failed to secure the castle, where the young king was in the keeping of Lord Ruthven, but his grip on the town was strengthened by the election of his uncle Douglas of Kilspindie to the office of provost. However, this proved unacceptable to Angus's rival, James Hamilton, first earl of Arran, who demanded that Kilspindie relinquish the office. In 1520 the regent, John Stewart, duke of Albany, attempted to solve the tension by barring either a Douglas or a Hamilton from holding the provostship, and Kilspindie duly ceded office to a neutral burgess, Robert Logan of Coitfield. The arrival of Albany in Scotland in 1521 led to several years in the political wilderness for the Angus faction, including Kilspindie. 
The trust placed in Kilspindie by his nephew is demonstrated by the positions of influence afforded to him on the restoration in 1525 of Angus, following Albany's departure for France the previous year. Douglas dominance was based on control, principally within that family, of offices of state and patronage, and Kilspindie was at the heart of this strategy. On 21 June 1526 he was one of the lords appointed to be a member of the royal council and he had acquired the office of treasurer by 15 October. By November he had regained the provostship of Edinburgh and held the important office of keeper of the privy seal. He appears to have formed a close relationship with the young king, in the light of the legend (first related by Hume of Godscroft in 1644) that James V called him Greysteil. The nickname derives from an epic poem, known to have been popular at court no later than 1498, whose hero, Sir Greysteil, is a powerful, almost invincible, swordsman, and points to James's youthful admiration for the man who was at the centre of court administration. Kilspindie sat continuously upon the session of lords of council; that the government was under severe financial strain is suggested by the substantial debt of $3654 8's'. 1died which appeared in the account which he submitted as treasurer for the period October 1526 to August 1527. 
Political ascendancy could be personally lucrative, however; Kilspindie received 1000 merks from Archbishop Beaton and shared in the profits from the forfeiture of Patrick, Lord Lindsay of the Byres. But dissatisfaction with the Douglases -- with Angus's former wife, Queen Margaret, prominent among the malcontents -- was never far beneath the surface of political life, and the escape of James V from Angus-controlled Edinburgh to Stirling in early June 1528 caught the Douglases off guard. According to John Law's contemporary account, the king's flight occurred while Angus was absent from court and Kilspindie was visiting his mistress in Dundee. The Observantine friar Adam Abell adds the opinion that the overbearing pride of Kilspindie's wife, Isobel, referred to scathingly as 'my lady thesaurer' (NL Scot., Add. MS 1746, fol. 116'v'), had also alienated support from the Douglases. 
With the effective commencement of James V's personal rule in 1528 Kilspindie lost the keepership of the privy seal to George Crichton, bishop of Dunkeld, and as Kilspindie's accounts for the Edinburgh customs were being audited in July, Lyon king, unable to find Kilspindie in person, proclaimed a summons against him from Haddington market cross. On 19 July Robert Cairncross, provost of the collegiate church of Corstorphine, was appointed treasurer in place of Kilspindie, who had ignored instructions to enter into ward at Edinburgh Castle, and in August Robert, fifth Lord Maxwell, was appointed provost of Edinburgh. Roger Lascelles, the English captain of Norham Castle, describes Maxwell arriving in Edinburgh and proceeding to surround the provost's house where Kilspindie was hosting dinner for his nephews George and William, suggesting that the king's control of Edinburgh was still not secure. The Douglases retreated to Tantallon (according to Lascelles, accommodation at Norham had been offered to the Douglases, including Kilspindie and his wife). On 5 September 1528 sentence of forfeiture of life, lands, and goods was passed against Kilspindie, his possessions being divided between Hugh Montgomery, first earl of Eglinton, and Robert Cairncross. His stepson, Andrew Murray of Blackbarony, Peeblesshire, bailie of Ballencrieff, had to seek remission for association with his stepfather after the latter's forfeiture, although he was sufficiently in favour to have secured the office of sheriff of Edinburgh by 1536. 
A period of exile in England followed. In February 1529 Kilspindie was involved in tentative negotiations with Sir James Hamilton of Finnart at Cockburnspath, possibly aimed at seeking political rehabilitation. Nothing came of these discussions, and in 1540 charges were brought against Hamilton which included the accusation that in 1529 he had plotted with Kilspindie and others to kill the king at Holyrood. Kilspindie joined Northumberland's raid on Haddingtonshire and the Merse on 11 December 1532, but he appears to have approached Thomas Erskine, secretary to James V, while Erskine was on business at the English court, with a view to sounding him out on the possibility of returning to Scotland. An undated letter to Erskine from the king warns him against association with the Douglases, probably in response to these encounters, yet Kilspindie, encouraged by the peace treaty between Scotland and England, risked returning to seek clemency in August 1534. While he had a cold reception from the king, he did not suffer imprisonment. Instead James V commanded that he should be conveyed overseas, probably to France, which amounted to effective banishment, as Kilspindie seems to have died abroad before 1540. His son, also Archibald, succeeded to Kilspindie in 1543, upon the lifting of the sentence of forfeiture. 


@@@@@


doc= 7866


Douglas, Archibald, sixth earl of Angus (c.1489-1557), magnate and lord chancellor of Scotland, was the eldest son of George Douglas, master of Angus ('c'.1469-1513), and his wife, Elizabeth, widow of Sir David Fleming of Monycabo and daughter of John Drummond, first Lord Drummond. 
Douglas's first involvement in dynastic politics may have been his marriage in 1509 (contract 26 June) to Margaret, daughter of Patrick Hepburn, first earl of Bothwell, a rival of his grandfather Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus, nicknamed 'Bell-the-Cat'. She died childless in 1514. His father was killed at Flodden on 9 September 1513, and in November Douglas succeeded to the earldom of Angus on the death of his grandfather. His inheritance was scattered over a wide area: Crawford Douglas in Lanarkshire, Tantallon in Haddingtonshire, the regalities of Jedburgh Forest and Selkirk, and the advowson of Abernethy collegiate church in Perthshire, to mention only a few. He maintained a persistent claim to Coldingham Priory, Berwickshire, important both for its potential wealth and for its position near the border, though here he faced competition from the Humes. He was also well connected: the Cunningham earls of Glencairn, the Graham earls of Montrose, the Hays of Yester, and the Lyons of Glamis were all close relatives. His considerable power and worth to the monarchy lay in his extensive kin and in the large number of armed retainers he could call upon for support. 
In 1514 Angus began to attend the council regularly. In August 1514 (probably, though not certainly, on the 6th) he made a secret marriage at Kinnoull in Perthshire to James IV's widow, Margaret Tudor ['see 'Margaret (1489-1541)]. The priest who performed the ceremony was Angus's kinsman John Drummond, and it is likely that the groom's maternal grandfather helped to arrange the match. This was barely eleven months after the king had been killed at Flodden and only four months after the birth of James's last child, Alexander. At that time Margaret was not only queen dowager, the mother and protector of the royal children, but also regent of the kingdom of Scotland. She also was a major landowner, holding not only her dower of Stirling Castle, but estates as widely scattered as Dunbar, Methven, and Crawford. In one bound, the youthful Angus leapt close to real power. 
Angus's ambition was so blatant that Margaret was removed from the regency in September. The lords of the council then invited John Stewart, second duke of Albany, eldest son of James III's brother and the heir to the throne should the infant sons of James IV both die, to come from France and assume the governorship. Albany arrived in May 1515, a development which displeased Margaret's brother Henry VIII, who had counted on her to create and maintain good Anglo-Scottish relations and to keep him informed of Scottish affairs. Albany, by contrast, was seen as essentially an agent of France. So unpopular was her new union that Margaret fled to England, where in October she gave birth at Harbottle, Northumberland, to a daughter, Margaret Douglas. Angus and his wife had no more children; Angus lost interest in Margaret during her absence and took a mistress, Lady Jane Stewart of Traquair (to whom he had earlier been briefly betrothed). The queen responded by beginning divorce proceedings shortly afterwards, a goal which she attained only early in 1527. Yet despite their acrimony she begged James V to be 'good and gracious' to her former husband as she died at Methven, Perthshire, the home of her third husband, Henry Stewart, Lord Methven, in October 1541. 
Angus's influence in Scotland was restricted while Albany was in Scotland, but soon after the duke returned to France in June 1517 his arrangements for the government of Scotland began to break down. There was fierce competition for power between Angus and James Hamilton, earl of Arran, with control of Edinburgh in particular a bone of contention. Their rivalry culminated in the skirmish known as Cleanse the Causeway at the end of April 1520, in which the Hamiltons were driven from the town. But Albany returned late in 1521 and used his authority to restore order; thereupon Angus retired to France, where he stayed until 1524. It was Albany's leaving Scotland for France at the end of May in that year which enabled Angus to make the same crossing but in the opposite direction. He did not go directly, however, but made the journey via England -- he arrived in London on 28 June. He had been maintained by an English pension of 1000 marks since 1521, and in 1525 this was raised to $1000. This reflected his importance in Scottish government by that date. In July 1524 Queen Margaret and her supporters had declared James V of age in order to ensure against Albany's return; as James was still only twelve they intended to govern in his name. Margaret was very anxious to prevent her estranged husband's return, but by October Angus had secured English agreement to his going home. He was perceived as popular in Scotland, and as a valuable counterbalance to the influence there of France. About the beginning of November he crossed the border. 
For several months Angus and Margaret competed for power. Margaret's coup of the previous July had led to the dismissal of Chancellor James Beaton, who now made common cause with the earl. Hence the proclamation issued in the king's name in January 1525 against consorting with Beaton, who had 'kept up private councils and trysts' with Angus 'and other broken men' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/1, no. 1030). But Angus soon held the initiative, and by mid-February had enough noble support to be able to force the queen to surrender control of the realm to a council, in which he rapidly became predominant. As the queen dowager's husband, Angus held a 'special position' within the realm. He was never formally designated regent to James V, whose person was instead entrusted on 17 July 1525 to a rota of four groups of lords, each of which was to be attendant on the boy as administrators of his realm for three months at a time. Angus was a member of the first group to have custody of James, but when the time came for the king to be passed to the second, at the beginning of November, he refused to surrender his charge. 
Between 1525 and 1528 Angus had almost complete control over the person of the king, reinforcing his own position when he took the post of chancellor in August 1527. He also advanced the interests of his relations. His uncle Gavin Douglas was nominated to the see of Dunkeld; another uncle, Sir Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie, became treasurer; his brother George Douglas of Pittendreich was master of the royal household; yet another brother, William, was given the revenues of Holyrood Abbey and Coldingham. His kinsman James Douglas of Drumlanrig had watch over the royal wine cellar. Some historians have seen Angus's administration as marking the low point of sixteenth-century Scottish political morality, but such a condemnation is anachronistic as well as exaggerated; it was expected that a nobleman would use power to further the interest of his kin. Moreover, Angus performed his duties in government, both those attached to his various offices and the broader responsibilities involved in trying to punish wrongdoing and disorder. These often overlapped with his efforts to keep peace with England. Between 1525 and 1528 he made no fewer than six judicial raids into the borders, more than any of his predecessors had done, and though their effects were usually transient, some observers (for instance the English ambassador Thomas Magnus) still felt able to declare that the region had never been better ruled. Angus's work here provided a model for later policy: thus James V's hounding of the Armstrongs in the early 1530s was a direct continuation of Angus's attempts to tame them in 1527-8, when he was warden of the east and middle marches. Both in September 1525 and in January 1526 Angus was also a commissioner in negotiations for a lasting peace with England, and his efforts here, too, enjoyed at least a temporary success, with a treaty being concluded at Berwick on 15 January 1526. 
Despite his achievements Angus faced growing opposition. The queen was unreconciled to her loss of power, and Angus also had to face the continuing hostility of the Hamiltons and of the Humes (over whom Angus exercised a technical overlordship), who resented his activities in border areas they regarded as their own preserve. In January 1526 Margaret and Arran led an attempted coup, but this was quickly suppressed. Then in August 1527, while Angus was engaged in a judicial raid into the borders with the king, Sir Walter Scott of Buccleuch attempted to ambush them at Melrose in order to take control of the monarch; this attempt also failed. Appreciating the developing threat to his position, Angus manoeuvred to maintain a coalition of supporters, but John Stewart, twelfth earl of Lennox, a key figure in any grouping, had become irremediably alienated, partly by Angus's refusal to share the custody of the king and partly by the extent to which government patronage was now monopolized by the Douglases, and on 4 September 1526 he made his own bid to secure the person of James V. The 'Lennox affair' which took place at Manuel near Linlithgow perhaps deserves to be called only a skirmish, but it resulted in Lennox's being killed, leaving Angus still very much in control of Scottish government. 
From 1526 the problem of Angus's relations with his fellow Scottish nobles was increasingly overshadowed by those with his young king. His hold on power depended entirely on his hold on James, who was therefore effectively kept a prisoner, with his every move being closely watched, and as far as possible distracted from thoughts of power by being encouraged into debauchery. These dubious pleasures notwithstanding, James came to loathe the Douglases in general, and Angus in particular, with a fine and near hysterical fervour. Finally, at the end of May 1528, he escaped from Edinburgh and fled to Stirling, where in the following month he raised the country against Angus, who was replaced as chancellor by Gavin Dunbar, archbishop of Glasgow, while Lord Hume became warden of the east march. On 23 June James announced that a convention would be held in Edinburgh on 10 July, with the purpose of investigating charges of maladministration against Angus. He wrote to Henry VIII giving details of his former chancellor's deficiencies, and on 13 July had Angus summoned on a charge of treason. The summons was served on the earl at Dalkeith five days later, and he was finally forfeited on 5 September. Angus and his brother George withdrew to the great Douglas castle of Tantallon, where they were able to resist the Royal Artillery, mocking the ineffectiveness of both the king and his guns. But efforts to secure English support came to nothing, and when Magnus tried to intercede for Angus with King James he was rebuffed. Fighting continued throughout the winter, but the pressure which the king was able to exert on the Douglases began to tell, and on 23 March 1529 Angus agreed to surrender Tantallon and his other castles and retreat to England. The only concession he was able to extract was that his earldom would retain its integrity. Thus began a thirteen-year exile, during which James conducted a relentless hounding of members of the Douglas family, justified by his conviction that Angus and his brother wanted to return to Scotland and see the king dead. 
Although he travelled intermittently to the English court, Angus resided mostly at Berwick upon Tweed, which served as a base for numerous raids into Scotland and where he gathered information for forwarding to Henry VIII. He was now totally dependent upon the English king's goodwill and on 25 August 1532 signed a contract (deemed a treaty in English records) recognizing Henry as supreme lord of Scotland, to whom he rendered homage. His knowledge of the borders exceeded that of many English march wardens, and his attacks upon Scotland were often bloodily effective. When James went to France in 1536 it was suggested that the French king be asked to try to reconcile him to Angus, but nothing came of this, and James's campaign of violence against the Douglases continued, culminating in the burning at the stake of Angus's sister Janet Douglas, Lady Glamis, in 1537. She had been charged with treason, for having both conspired to poison the king and communicated with her exiled brothers. Even this failed to satisfy the king's hostility and vindictiveness, for in December 1540 the Scottish parliament declared all Angus's estates forfeited and he was again branded a traitor. The earl's lands were now comprehensively redistributed by James. 
During his thirteen years of exile Angus became a skilled and experienced soldier, as he showed again when war between England and Scotland erupted once more in the summer of 1542, leading a number of highly destructive raids over the border; John Dudley, Lord Lisle, praised his diligence. He was a member of the English army which the Scots roundly defeated at Haddon Rig on 24 August and was almost captured. It was rumoured after the Scottish defeat at the battle of Solway Moss on 24 November 1542 that James V was considering calling Angus home so that he could bring order to the Scottish armies and lead them effectively. The earl was one of the first to hear of James's death on 14 December, so efficient was his information-gathering network (as Lord Lisle observed). 
After the death of James V, James Hamilton, second earl of Arran, emerged as governor and immediately set about reversing almost all James's policies. The central plank of his programme was to return the Scottish aristocracy to the centre of politics, and he invited Angus to return home, which he did with his brother early in 1543. Before leaving England he signed a set of articles in which he promised to secure the person of the infant Queen Mary for Henry VIII, not to mention a string of powerful castles. On 16 January 1543 Arran issued a proclamation restoring Angus's estates, and in the March parliament his forfeiture was voided. 
Angus was so attached to Henry that he became the effective head of an English party in Scotland, advocating protestantism and the marriage of Queen Mary to Prince Edward. It was to Angus that the English ambassador, Sir Ralph Sadler, repeatedly turned for information and advice, and when Sadler was hounded out of Edinburgh in September 1543, it was to Coldingham and Tantallon that he retired. During Arran's short-lived protestant phase (January to August 1543) Angus wielded considerable influence. On 9 April 1543 he married his third wife, Margaret (died 1594), daughter of Robert Maxwell, fifth Lord Maxwell. It might have been a useful political alliance had not Maxwell spent the years between January 1544 and his death in 1546 almost entirely in gaol, in Blackness Tower in Scotland and in the Tower of London. None of the children of Angus's marriage to Margaret survived to maturity. 
When Arran returned to the Catholic faith in September and rejected the English marriage, Angus opposed him, increasingly by armed force. At this time Angus remained loyal to Henry as did others of his party, men like William Cunningham, third earl of Glencairn. In January 1544 Angus and his allies formed a small army and issued defiance to the governor at Leith, but Arran was too quick and too strong for him, and at Greenside Chapel Angus was forced to submit and give pledges: Maxwell was gaoled, as was George Douglas. Angus escaped to his estates and lay low, but in April 1544 was warded in Blackness. He was freed in May when Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, sacked Edinburgh. 
Gradually Angus transferred his allegiance from Henry VIII to Arran's regime, and late in 1544 showed himself a true Scotsman. Arran had mustered a small army, strengthened by artillery from Edinburgh Castle, proposing to retake Coldingham Priory, which the English had fortified. But when he heard that an English army intended to attack him, he fled and his army almost disintegrated. Angus, however, kept his nerve. Though an adroit practitioner of mounted warfare characteristic of the border regions, he also appreciated the potentially decisive role that artillery could now play on the battlefield. At this juncture he made sure that the Scottish guns were not abandoned, storing them at Dunbar. This was the act of a man who knew (as Arran then did not) how to fight wars and who had a firm grip on military imperatives. Others appreciated his qualities, to the extent that in December 1544 he was appointed lieutenant-general of the south, given money to hire soldiers, and encouraged to attack England's Scottish allies -- his own former associates -- in Teviotdale and the Merse. 
Angus's martial qualities were still more strikingly displayed at his famous triumph at Ancrum Moor, fought on 27 February 1545. A massive English raiding party, over 5000 strong, under the command of Sir Ralph Evers and Brian Layton, had invaded the borders, setting fire to numerous tower houses and desecrating Melrose Abbey, where many Douglas tombs lay. At the time it was widely reported that Angus turned on his erstwhile allies in revenge for this sacrilege, but he had already abandoned his English alliance. Using his own and Arran's troops, Angus lured the English into a trap. Just before the battle at Ancrum Moor commenced, a heron flew over him, prompting him to remark: 'Would that I had my goose hawk [goshawk] with me now: I could thus have two good meals in one day.' 
The massive defeat which Angus inflicted on the English was in no small measure due to the revolt of the contingent of 'assured Scots' in English service, something Angus may have engineered in advance. Over 1000 English were made prisoners and both their commanders were killed. Moved to tears, Arran embraced Angus, and trumpeted how the earl was now 'ane true Scottisman' again. In the words of a seventeenth-century poet, 'the honour of the victory was wholly given to him' (Hume, ed. Reid, 2.121). Francois I of France was overjoyed at the victory, and a printed report ('La deffaicte des anglois par les ecossois faicte le jour de jeudi sainct dernier') was published in Rouen and widely circulated. Francois then sent an expeditionary army to help the Scots during the summer of 1545. Its commander brought with him Angus's admission to the order of St Michel, an honour Angus deeply cherished. This was rehabilitation indeed, and yet more rewards followed, in particular the revenues of Arbroath Abbey, one of Scotland's richest monasteries. When a massive English army attacked Scotland in 1547, Angus again showed his military skills. At the battle of Pinkie, fought on 10 September, he commanded the Scottish right wing, and when the main battle under Arran and the left wing under George Gordon, fourth earl of Huntly, began to disintegrate under the impact of sophisticated English firepower, Angus kept his head and suffered the fewest casualties. He also extricated himself (by hiding in a ditch), as Huntly did not. 
Angus's skills as a soldier did not lie only in steadfastness; he also had a grasp of strategy which he displayed tellingly in the aftermath of Pinkie, which seemed to lay Scotland at the feet of the invader. In February 1548 a force under Thomas Wharton, first Baron Wharton, and Matthew Stewart, thirteenth earl of Lennox, invaded the west marches. Their intention was to attack James Douglas of Drumlanrig, one of the few Scots in the west not to have assured. Again, Angus laid a trap. One of the key elements in Wharton's force was some 1000 assured Scots under the command of John Maxwell, master of Maxwell, who had submitted to the English with great reluctance at the end of 1547. Maxwell clearly kept Arran informed of this attack and promised that he would 'revolt' if the governor would only allow him to marry the crown's richest ward, Agnes Herries, Lady Herries, of Terregles. Arran agreed, whereupon Angus assembled a small army and despite the wintry conditions took it over the Lammermuir Hills and fell upon Wharton's force, defeating it piecemeal. Angus's triumph on this occasion was even more timely than his victory at Ancrum Moor, for England's 'pale' in the south-west utterly collapsed. Utterly routed, Wharton withdrew via Dumfries to Carlisle, while his report to the English commander at Haddington (carried by his son, in a state of near hysteria) so alarmed the latter that he abandoned the town and removed the English garrisons at Yester and Hailes to Berwick. Angus's reputation soared. 
With these victories under his belt Angus became unabashedly hostile to Edward Seymour, formerly earl of Hertford (and as such Angus's rescuer in 1544) but now duke of Somerset and lord protector, and to all his works. This loathing was fully reciprocated: the English made at least two determined attempts to capture Angus. The earl, increasingly assiduous in attending council and parliament meetings, now worked vigorously with Arran to have Queen Mary sent to France, for marriage to the dauphin. He played a conspicuous part in the parliament held at Haddington Abbey in July 1548, when he presented the Scottish regalia to the French commander, and commanded half of the Scottish force besieging the town near by. In September he was rewarded with another order of St Michel and a pension to enable him to finance a company of cavalry, while in November he helped to raise a force to push the English out of Dundee; December found him attacking their garrison at Broughty. The English garrisons stood increasingly on the defensive, and were unable to attack the Scots as Somerset had intended. The cost to the English exchequer became insupportable, and in September 1549 Haddington had to be abandoned; by the end of March 1550 Scotland was utterly lost to England. All this had stemmed largely from Angus's victory at Drumlanrig. 
Once the wars were over Angus set about trying to restore his estates and regalities. He had been regranted most of his forfeited lands by the lords of council in July 1546 and July 1547. Then at the parliament of February 1552 both he and his brother George were declared exempt from any claims brought against them as a result of their devastations in the borders around Berwick between 1529 and 1542. The rest of his life was spent not on the battlefield but in the law courts, as he set about recovering his former properties which James V had given away. As a result he largely left the central stage of high politics, attending only a few meetings of the privy council in June and August 1553, signing a bond in favour of Arran in February 1554, and standing caution the next year for Huntly. By the end of his life he had virtually reconstituted the inheritance he received in 1514. A further factor in his withdrawal from politics was the mutual dislike between him and Mary of Guise, who became regent of Scotland in April 1554. Attempts were made to tame him, to make him behave in a respectful and obedient manner. They all failed. Mary of Guise once rebuked him for turning up to a meeting in armour. Angus rejoined: 'It is only my old dad Lord Drummond's coat, a very kindly coat to me. I cannot part with it.' 
To the end of his life Angus retained a strong sense of family loyalty. When walking across the courtyard at Douglas one day in 1550, he encountered a messenger sent from his daughter Margaret, countess of Lennox, then in England. He paused to ask after the family's health and general well-being. And he gossiped that the French were coming to take over the kingdom, 'and frenche lawes and thei be sharpe'. How was it with his grandson, Lord Darnley ('that young boy there'), whose residence so far away in England 'brekes my hart?' Patience was a virtue he had clearly cultivated in his many years of exile. 'The worlde ys very strange and I have sene mony changes' (BL, MS Cotton Calig., fol. 423). The tales many recorded about him may well be apocryphal in their details, but they often accord with firsthand accounts of his deeds and sayings, as well as with his contemporary reputation. 
Angus died at Tantallon shortly before 22 January 1557. As he lay dying, a retainer commented that it was ironic that such a formidable warrior should expire in his bedclothes and not have been killed in battle, underneath his heart standard. 'Lo,' Angus barked, grasping a crucifix, 'Here is the standard under which I shall die' (Merriman, 353). He was buried in the collegiate church of Abernethy, Perthshire, of which he was patron. 
Despite many frustrations, especially in the years of his exile, Angus showed some accomplishment in the exercise of power, both in the mid-1520s and later. Moreover he was a soldier of notable skill in an age which knew many such. But he failed in a dynast's most important duty, leaving no male heir to succeed to his inheritance. His daughter Margaret, countess of Lennox, had put pressure on him to deed the honour and lands of Angus to her and her heirs, but instead he created an entail which laid down that all should go only to heirs male. The earldom thus passed to Angus's nephew, David Douglas, who lived only until June 1557, after which his great-nephew Archibald Douglas (c.1555-1588) succeeded as eighth earl of Angus. 


@@@@@


doc= 7867


Douglas, Archibald (c.1540-c.1602), conspirator and Church of Scotland minister, was the second son of William Douglas of Whittingham and Janet Matheson; he had an elder brother, also William (died 'c'.1572). Educated for the priesthood in France, Archibald graduated MA and by June 1562, probably in his early twenties, was parson of Douglas. An early convert to protestantism, in February 1566 he was appointed subdean of Orkney in recognition of his work as a royal clerk. Three months earlier, probably through his knowledge of canon law, he had been appointed an extraordinary lord of session in place of Adam Bothwell, bishop of Orkney. Douglas held his new positions only for a short time. In March 1566, with his brother William and his kinsman James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, he was involved in the conspiracy to murder David Rizzio, secretary to Mary, queen of Scots. Charged for his part in the crime, Douglas fled to France, where he found favour with Charles IX. After his return to Scotland he successfully negotiated the pardons of the other conspirators and attached himself to the company of James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell. In February 1567, with Bothwell, Douglas was implicated in the plot to murder Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, the queen's husband. Despite widespread belief in his guilt, however, no immediate proceedings were taken against him. 
Following Queen Mary's deposition in June 1567, Douglas helped secure the casket letters for Regent Moray (it has been suggested that he was responsible for forging them). On 2 June 1568 Douglas was appointed an ordinary lord of session in place of John Leslie, bishop of Ross, and in 1570 he was presented to the parsonage of Glasgow through Morton's intercession. However he was refused letters testimonial by the commissioner and this decision was confirmed by the general assembly in March 1570. At length he was allowed possession, on 23 January 1572, but an account of his examination for the benefice stated: 'when he had gottin the psalme buike, after luking, and casting ower the leives thereof a space, he desyrit sum minister to mak prayer for him; 'for', said he, 'I am not used to pray'' (Pitcairn, 'Memoriales', 312). Indeed Douglas was more of a politician than a cleric: in September 1570 he acted as ambassador to the earl of Sussex, and in April 1572, having been detected sending money and supplies to the queen's party besieged within Edinburgh Castle, he was imprisoned in Stirling Castle (when it was alleged he plotted to kill his kinsman Morton, now regent). The rift did not last long, and for the remainder of the 1570s Douglas remained prominent, mainly owing to his close alliance with the regent. He was restored to his place on the bench in November 1578. 
A year earlier Douglas had married Janet Hepburn (died 'c'.1586), Bothwell's only sister and widow successively of John Stewart, Lord Darnley (an illegitimate son of James V) and of John Sinclair, master of Caithness. They appear to have had at least one son, John. The marriage was not successful, however, and by 1581 Janet Hepburn was seeking a divorce. Meanwhile, on 31 December 1580 Douglas had been accused (along with Morton) by Captain James Stewart (afterwards earl of Arran) of 'heigh treason and foreknawlege of the king's murthour' (Thomson, 'James the Sext', 180-81). Hearing of Morton's imprisonment -- and aware of orders issued for his own arrest -- Douglas fled from Morham Castle to England and then France. His wife did not accompany him. He was degraded from the bench in April 1581, and a decree of forfeiture was pronounced against him on 28 November 1581. 
In France and England, Douglas remained heavily involved in Scottish affairs and was primarily responsible for the forged letters which implicated Esme Stewart, duke of Lennox, in popish plots. Although Elizabeth refused James VI's requests to return Douglas for trial in Scotland, she did temporarily imprison him in the Tower of London. After six months Douglas gained his release by disclosing his private transactions with the imprisoned Queen Mary; he then remained at the English court as an unofficial agent to various Scots who sought his aid (including the king). From mid-1583 he was also a paid agent for the English secretary, Sir Francis Walsingham, acting as a spy in the household of Michel de Castelnau, the French ambassador to England. In spring 1586 he was permitted to return to Scotland, and on 1 May an act of rehabilitation was passed under the Scottish great seal restoring him, but at the same time providing that if he should be found guilty of King Henry's murder then the act should have no effect. On 21 May Douglas received a pardon for all his crimes except the murder, and five days later he was put on trial for it. The indictment declared that Douglas had been present at the blowing up of Henry's lodgings in Kirk o' Field, and claimed that while perpetrating the crime Douglas 'tint his mulis [lost his dancing slippers]', which, being found upon the spot the next day, were acknowledged to be his (Pitcairn, 'Criminal Trials', 1.146). The rigged jury unanimously acquitted him. 
The continuing association between Douglas and the Scottish administration fluctuated depending on who was in favour at court. He had a close relationship with his stepson Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell, but was greatly disliked by the more powerful Chancellor Maitland. Although known to be an agent of Elizabeth, Douglas returned to England as the official Scottish ambassador. Highly sensitive to political realities, he was well aware of the ambiguities of King James's position with regard to his mother, Mary, queen of Scots -- her execution would damage the Scottish king's honour while at the same time greatly strengthening his claim to be Elizabeth's heir. Faced with the task of securing the promise of the English succession for his king while also attempting to preserve Mary's life, Douglas treacherously revealed royal letters to Walsingham and Elizabeth, and informed the earl of Leicester that, even if Mary was executed, it was unlikely that James would break amity with England. In spite of such acts of disloyalty, Douglas remained a well-used conduit for official and secretive cross-border communication. Following Mary's death James employed him to try to secure his English heritage, and he continued to use his services until at least 1596. 
Douglas was also active on his own behalf. He attempted to co-ordinate English support for his stepson Bothwell after the murder of the second earl of Moray in February 1592; he was approached by the rebel Roman Catholic earls in an attempt to secure English support in 1594; and he involved himself in the various continental (largely Spanish) plots to invade England and Ireland. He was deposed from his parsonage for non-residence and neglect of duty on 13 March 1593, though it was not until July 1597 that he ceased to use his ecclesiastical style. The date of his death is unknown, but it appears that he was alive until at least the summer of 1602 (resident in Lime Street, London) when he was 'unfit for ony service', of 'poor estate', and desiring to return to Scotland ('Salisbury MSS', 12.252). 


@@@@@


doc= 7868


Douglas, Archibald, eighth earl of Angus and fifth earl of Morton (c.1555-1588), magnate, was the only son of David Douglas, seventh earl of Angus ('c'.1515-1557), and Margaret Hamilton, daughter of John Hamilton of Samuelston, a natural son of James Hamilton, first earl of Arran. He was only about two years old when his father died, and in his early years his uncle James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, supervised Angus's affairs. Since he was an infant this would in any circumstance have been necessary, but the support of a powerful figure like Morton was doubly important because of the bitter legal wrangle which developed over his inheritance with Margaret, countess of Lennox, the daughter of his great-uncle Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus. This prolonged dispute was resolved only in May 1565 when the countess, eager to obtain Morton's support for the wedding of her son Lord Darnley to Mary, queen of Scots, renounced all her claims. A mutual contract between the two parties confirmed Angus in his possession of Tantallon Castle, one of the most formidable strongholds in the lowlands, the regality of Bothwell, in Lanarkshire, and 'the Landis, lordschipps and baroneys of Abernethy, Jedburgh Forest, Bonkle, Preston, Dryburgh and Selkirk' (Fraser, 2.261). He had established himself as a territorial magnate in central and south-east Scotland. 
Morton's influence is also evident in Angus's education, which took place at St Andrews University under the tutelage of the provost of New College, John Douglas, a kinsman and protege of his uncle, who subsequently became the first protestant archbishop of St Andrews. While the future primate was no radical, it is quite possible that Angus was influenced by Douglas's tutoring, since he undoubtedly became a devout Calvinist, indeed, he was unusual among the Scottish nobility of this period in the earnestness of his religious observance. As head of one of the principal families in Scotland, Angus played a leading role in a number of ceremonial occasions; in spite of his youth he carried the crown at the state opening of parliament in 1567 and again in 1571. But his career took off when Morton became regent in November 1572. One of Angus's main responsibilities during Morton's regency was to assist his uncle with the administration of the borders, an area of Scotland with a long tradition of disorder and unrest, where between 1573 and 1580 Angus held a number of appointments. In 1573, for instance, he was appointed sheriff of Berwickshire, one of the key administrative posts in the crown's possession while from July 1575 to February 1576 he was warden of Liddesdale, subsequently holding a similar position on the west march between May 1577 and March 1578. But his most important office, one placing him in overall control of the whole region, was as lieutenant from July 1574 to March 1578. In that capacity he took part in several judicial and military operations, notably Morton's expedition to Lauder and Jedburgh in November 1576; on that occasion Angus was personally in charge of the campaign against local lawbreakers. Morton's deposition as regent in March 1578 spurred Angus, who had been recently rewarded with the hereditary stewardship of Fife and the captaincy of Falkland Palace, into considerable activity on his uncle's behalf. Throughout the crisis he acted as the latter's spokesman and also kept him in touch with developments at Stirling, where James VI's parliament was bringing the regency to an end. 
In summer 1578, with Morton effecting a political comeback, his nephew also returned to play a significant role in the new administration. In August 1578 Angus was put in command of the forces which Morton had assembled against the league raised against him by the disaffected earls of Argyll and Atholl. The rival armies faced each other near Falkirk but Angus's military capabilities were not on this occasion put to the test, since the parties accepted a truce and signed a joint agreement ending hostilities. Angus was also prominently involved in the vendetta pursued by Morton's government against the Hamilton family in 1579, being one of the commissioners appointed to enforce the measures prescribed against the outlawed family. 
Although Angus reputedly had some kind of disagreement with Morton during 1580, he made strenuous efforts in support of his uncle following the ex-regent's arrest on 31 December 1580, an event at which Angus was present. Having abandoned plans to rescue Morton on his way to incarceration in Dumbarton Castle prior to his trial, Angus concentrated his energies into rallying noblemen sympathetic to his cause and making appeals for assistance to Thomas Randolph, the English ambassador, and Lord Hunsdon, the governor of Berwick. In the end nothing significant came of these endeavours, but his activities did result in March 1581 in the new administration of Lennox and Arran ordering him into exile beyond the River Spey. Initially he ignored this decree, but when it became obvious that his support was dwindling -- a large number of border lairds withdrew their allegiance by renouncing their bonds of manrent in March -- Angus reconsidered his position. Consequently, on 8 July 1581, six days after his uncle's execution, Angus and his followers arrived at Carlisle, to be taken under the protection of Henry, Lord Scrope, governor of that city and warden of the English west march, and as such an official with whom he had been on amicable terms since his own years as a border administrator. 
Morton's downfall signalled the start of a bewildering series of fluctuations in Angus's fortunes, the outcome of the complex religious struggle within Scotland in these years. The immediate consequence was a period of exile in England. By summer 1581 Angus had moved to London, where he relayed his version of events to Elizabeth and her ministers. He also, apparently, became sufficiently friendly with Sir Philip Sidney for the latter to show him a manuscript copy of his 'Arcadia'. Then in August 1582 the ultra-protestant faction to which Angus was aligned, headed by William Ruthven, earl of Gowrie, seized James VI and ousted the Lennox-Arran administration. Although the Ruthven raiders survived in power for less than a year, during their short ascendancy Angus received a royal pardon and was reconciled with the young king. He also persuaded James to order the removal of Morton's head from the Edinburgh tolbooth so that it be 'layed in a fyne cloath, convayed honorabilie and layed in the kist where his bodie was buried' (Calderwood, 3.692). 
By summer 1583, following James VI's escape from the control of the Ruthven faction and a comeback by Arran and his supporters, Angus found himself in an awkward position. Once again ordered to take himself beyond the Spey he spent the winter of 1583-4 in Elgin. However, his involvement in an unsuccessful coup by the Ruthven party in April 1584 forced him to leave the country altogether and return to England. There followed a year of frantic intrigue by Angus and other Scottish exiles against Arran's regime. They were aided and abetted in their plotting by Elizabeth's minister Sir Francis Walsingham and by her Scottish ambassador, Sir Edward Wotton, both of whom had doubts of Arran's political reliability in England's conflict with Spain. The eventual upshot was that in October 1585 Elizabeth agreed to allow Angus and his associates to return to Scotland to assist in the overthrow of Arran. Their capture early in November of the town and castle of Stirling signified that Arran had been ousted, just as the return of their estates shortly afterwards to Angus, Mar, and the Hamiltons confirmed that Arran's opponents were back in royal favour. 
These events heralded another upturn in Angus's career, and for the rest of his life (apart from an interval early in 1587 when Arran made a brief recovery) he once again played a significant role in the government of Scotland. Thus he was prominent at traditional ceremonial events such as the opening of parliament in July 1587 when he carried the royal sceptre. He was also restored to his old position in the borders, being appointed lieutenant and justiciar for the whole region on 2 November 1586. Moreover, he became warden of the west march from around March 1587. 
While he was lieutenant, Angus took part in four judicial raids on the borders, during which he held courts and dispensed justice over the length and breadth of the region. In January 1587, for example, he held a court of justice at Jedburgh at which he had sixteen offenders hanged and took pledges for good behaviour from a number of others. In his last expedition, which took place in May-June 1588 and was directed against the rebellious Maxwell family, he accompanied James VI and the chancellor, John Maitland, into south-west Scotland. Lord Maxwell himself was arrested and several of his strongholds were captured. 
Angus died on 4 August 1588 at Smeaton, near Dalkeith. The latter had been one of the principal residences of his uncle, whose lands and title Angus had inherited in July 1587, following ratification in parliament. His body was buried at Abernethy (Perthshire), a Douglas burgh of barony since 1459, although his heart was apparently interred separately at Douglas (Lanarkshire), another family possession. In all likelihood he died of tuberculosis, although Angus's biographer and younger contemporary, David Hume of Godscroft, made some curious references to sorcery and to the activities of a certain Agnes Sampson, who would feature in the witchcraft trials conducted by James VI in 1591. Angus married three times. His first wife was Mary Erskine, daughter of the seventeenth earl of Mar, whom he married at Stirling on 13 June 1573. She died less than two years later, on 3 May 1575, and Angus married, on 25 December following, Margaret Leslie, daughter of the fourth earl of Rothes; he was divorced from her in 1587 because of her liaison with John Graham, third earl of Montrose. Neither of these marriages produced children. Immediately afterwards, on 29 July 1587, Angus took as his third wife Jean (died 1608x10), widow of Robert Douglas and daughter of John Lyon, eighth Lord Glamis. Their daughter, Margaret, who died aged fifteen, was born after her father's death. For want of a male heir Angus's title was inherited by the nearest claimant, Sir William Douglas of Glenbervie, great-grandson of the fifth earl. 
Angus was held in high regard by contemporary churchmen, especially those who shared his ultra-protestant inclinations. Thus the presbyterian historian David Calderwood was to declare that Angus was 'more religious nor anie of his predecessors, yea, nor anie of all the erlis in the countrie much beloved of the godlie' (Calderwood, 3.498). Archbishop John Spottiswoode, who obviously did not share Calderwood's views on church polity, nevertheless described Angus in glowing terms as 'a nobleman in place and rank, so in worth and virtue, above other subjects; of a comly personage, affable, and full of grace a lover of justice, peaceable sober and given to all goodness and which crowned all his virtues, truly pious. ('History of the Church', 2.371)' The diarist James Melville, too, was greatly impressed by Angus when he met him in England in 1584. 'This nobleman was felon weill myndit, godlie, devot, wyse and grave, and by and besyde their comoun was given to reiding and privat prayer and meditation and ordinarlie efter dinner and super haid an houres and sum tyme mair nor twa houres, conference with me about all maters; namely concerning our Kirk and comoun-weill, what war the abusses thairof and whow they might be amendit. ('Autobiography and Diary', 185)' But all these eulogies notwithstanding, Angus's impact on the affairs of the kirk was marginal, and it is as a border administrator that he principally deserves recognition. In a letter written in August 1577 Lord Scrope, the English warden and Angus's border colleague, wrote, 'I am well assured of your lordschippis honourable meaning and intention to reformacion of such disorders' (Fraser, 4.232). His words underline the high regard in which Angus was held, and show that his contribution to the difficult task of taming the borders was a substantial one. 


@@@@@


doc= 7869


Douglas, Archibald, styled earl of Angus and Ormond (c.1609-1655), nobleman, was the eldest son of William Douglas, eleventh earl of Angus and first marquess of Douglas (1589-1660), and his first wife, Margaret (1584/5-1623), daughter of Claude Hamilton, first Lord Paisley. In his early years he was known by the titles Lord Douglas and master of Angus, but after his father was promoted to the rank of marquess in 1633 he became known as earl of Angus. By contracts dated November 1629 and May 1630 he married Lady Anne ('bap'. 1614, died 1646), daughter of Esme Stuart, third duke of Lennox. In 1630 he received permission to travel abroad for two years, and on 4 May 1636 he was admitted as a member of the Scottish privy council. 
When conflict broke out between Charles I and his Scottish subjects Angus acted indecisively, his inclination to support the king's opponents being countered by his father being a royalist and a Roman Catholic. He was present in the privy council in December 1636 when it approved the new Scottish prayer book, the introduction of which provoked the emergence of open opposition to the king, but he was one of those whom Robert Baillie hoped in September 1637 would 'speik plaine Scottish' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.14) to the king's cousin, the fourth duke of Lennox, when he visited Scotland, indicating that Angus was considered to have sympathy for the opposition. In February 1638 he was one of the councillors who signed a royal proclamation demanding the submission of the Scots, but he then declared repentance for his rashness in doing so. In September 1638 he signed the king's covenant, the abortive rival of the national covenant, and in February 1639 the king appointed him one of the noble extraordinary lords of the court of session, no doubt hoping this would strengthen his loyalty. But in April 1639 he made clear his wish to avoid involvement in the approaching first bishops' war by seeking permission to leave Scotland. 
In May 1639 the bishop of Bath and Wells investigated reports of two mysterious strangers whose speech was incomprehensible who had appeared in Wells. One of them -- 'a tall man, black haired, having a little beard, with a visible blemish in one of his eyes' ('CSP dom.', '1639', 200) -- proved to be Angus. He explained with embarrassment that he had visited the royal court at York, gone to London, and was now sightseeing incognito. The inconclusive result of the bishops' war of 1639, leaving the king's covenanter enemies in control of Scotland, persuaded Angus that he now had to commit himself. It was clear that his father's support for the king would provoke the covenanters into occupying the family estates. After seeing the king again, Angus returned to Scotland and swore the national covenant. He presented what he had done as a necessity, writing to his father on 28 February, 'I have now done that which I told you I should be necessitated to do' ('CSP dom.', '1639-40', 495) and 'I have done nothing else than what before my parting from Court I told his Majesty I would be necessitated to do.' 'What is done cannot be undone' ('CSP dom.', '1640-41', 376). Taking over his father's lands, he raised men and led them in defence of the border against the threat of invasion by the king's army. His father bitterly denounced 'the unnatural courses of my eldest son to denude me of my whole estate and people' ('CSP dom.', '1640', 199), but received assurance from Charles that 'I will not lay the follies of your son to your charge' (Fotheringham, 2.602). 
When the king reached a settlement with the covenanters in November 1641 Angus was reappointed a member of the privy council of Scotland. As intervention by the covenanters in the English civil war to assist parliament against the king approached he again gave his support. In August he sat as an elder in the general assembly which agreed the solemn league and covenant as the basis for alliance with the English parliament, and from 1643 to 1651 he was annually appointed a member of the commission of the general assembly. This, and the fact that he did not support the engagement whereby moderate covenanters and royalists allied to try to help Charles I in 1647-8, indicates real commitment to the covenanting cause, though he was not prominent in state affairs, perhaps being distrusted because of his father's continuing royalism. Relations between father and son remained bitter, as is indicated by a report by a French agent in August 1647: Douglas 'named to me while in tears the Earl of Angus as the principal author of the hardships that he has been made to endure' (Fotheringham, 2.226). 
In 1647, on the death of his brother James, Angus was appointed colonel of the Scottish regiment the former had commanded in the French service, but although he retained the post until 1653 his only contributions to it were efforts in 1646-7 and 1650 to send recruits to France, some of them royalist prisoners of war. He supported the bringing of Charles II to Scotland in 1650, and at the coronation at Scone on 1 January 1651 he acted as 'chamberlane appoynted by the King for that day' (Nicoll, 42). On 3 April the king ordered that Angus be created earl of Ormond, so he would be an earl in substance as well as style during his father's lifetime but, with the administration collapsing in the face of the Cromwellian conquest, the grant never passed the great seal and was therefore never regarded as valid. Angus sat in the general assembly of July 1651, but the English advance forced the assembly to flee from St Andrews to Dundee, and thereafter he accepted English rule. His first wife having died in 1646, he had married on 2 January 1649 Lady Jean (died 1715), daughter of David Wemyss, second earl of Wemyss ['see under 'Wemyss, David], who was to outlive him for sixty years; their eldest son was Archibald Douglas, first earl of Forfar. He was probably ill in his final years: in February 1651 he referred to himself as 'a creple man' (Fraser, 4.258). Under the Cromwellian 'Act of Grace and Pardon' of 1654 he was fined $1000 sterling, and his efforts to have this cancelled, by persuading the English authorities that he was a staunch protestant who had lived quietly in the Canongate for years, were thwarted by his death, which occurred in Edinburgh on 16 January 1655. He was buried at Douglas, Lanarkshire. In 1654 Robert Baillie, mourning the decline of the Scottish nobility, had remarked that 'Dowglas and his sonne Angus are quyet men, of no respect' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.249). 


@@@@@


doc= 7870


Douglas, Archibald (d. 1667), army officer, whose origins are obscure although he was probably Scottish by birth, was commissioned captain on 5 July 1666 in Colonel Lord George Douglas's regiment of foot (the Royal Scots). In 1667 the regiment was brought back from four years' garrison duty in France to confront the Dutch threat during the Second Anglo-Dutch War. As the Dutch fleet under De Ruyter advanced on the Medway estuary, Colonel Douglas's regiment was reinforced and assigned to the defence of Chatham. Captain Douglas was sent with a detachment of soldiers to defend HMS 'Royal Oak'. 
On 12 June the Dutch got their fireships over the chain across the mouth of the Medway and entered the river. They missed the 'Royal Oak' on the first attempt but on the following day John Clapham reported to Pepys that he saw the 'Royal Oak' and other vessels 'fired and aflame' ('CSP dom.', '1667', 185). Douglas defended the vessel with great courage and when advised to retire, refused, allegedly saying, 'it shall never be told that a Douglas quitted his post without orders' (Lediard, 589). Douglas perished in the flames on 13 June; it is not known whether his body was recovered for burial but on 18 October of the same year his widow, whose name is not stated, was given the sum of $100 by royal warrant. 


@@@@@


doc= 7871


Douglas, Archibald, first earl of Forfar (1653-1712), nobleman, was born in Lanarkshire on 3 May 1653, the eldest son of the second marriage of Archibald Douglas, earl of Angus (c.1609-1655), to Lady Jean Wemyss (died 1715), eldest daughter of David Wemyss, second earl of Wemyss. On his father's death, in January 1655, Douglas ought to have succeeded to the title of second earl of Ormond, which his father obtained from Charles II in April 1651 for himself and the heirs-male of his second marriage. However, owing to Charles's defeat at Worcester and the establishment of the Commonwealth, the patent never passed the great seal, and the title of earl of Ormond was never borne by either father or son. Nevertheless, after the Restoration, by patent dated 2 October 1661, the king created Douglas earl of Forfar, Lord Wandell and Hartside, with precedency dating from the original grant of 1651. 
Forfar sat in parliament in 1670, but there appears to be little record of the earl's public life until the revolution of 1688. This is probably due to his apparent dissatisfaction with aspects of the Scottish policy of both Charles II and James VII and II. Like his father, he seems to have held covenanting sympathies. In 1685 a complaint was brought before the privy council that Forfar, along with various others, had since August 1679 'attended house and field conventicles in the shires of Lanerk... or elsewhere, and heard divers rebels and vagrant preachers, 'these trumpets of sedition and rebellion'', and had 'proposed to levy money for rebels, prisoners or banished persons' ('Reg. PCS', 10.121). 
After the revolution Forfar was sworn of the privy council, and regularly attended parliament and council. He was appointed one of the commissioners for executing the office of keeper of the privy seal, and in March 1689 subscribed both the act declaring the convention to be a lawful meeting of the estates, and the letter of congratulation to King William. Throughout the period from 1689 to 1702 he was actively employed on a number of committees dealing with a variety of subjects, receiving the praise of the duke of Hamilton for having carried himself very well in parliament. 
Following the accession of Queen Anne, Forfar remained active in public affairs. He was a member of the privy council, and one of the lords of the Treasury -- an office he held until the dissolution of that court, in consequence of the treaty of Union. Queen Anne promised him an equivalent post, and until it was obtained gave him in compensation a yearly pension of $300, although, ultimately, no similar position was forthcoming. During the debates concerning parliamentary Union, Forfar appears to have steadily voted with the government. 
Forfar married Robina (1661/2-1749), daughter of Sir William Lockhart of Lee and a close friend of Queen Mary. He possessed the baronies of Bothwell and Wandell in Lanarkshire, but resided chiefly at Bothwell Castle. He died at Bothwell on 23 December 1712 and was buried in Bothwell church, where his countess erected a monument to his memory. He was succeeded as earl by their only son, Archibald Douglas (1692-1715). 


@@@@@


doc= 7872


Douglas, Archibald, second earl of Forfar (1692-1715), army officer, son of Archibald Douglas, first earl of Forfar (1653-1712), soldier and politician, and his second wife, Robina Lockhart (died 1741), was born on 25 May 1692. In his early years he bore the courtesy title of Lord Wandell, and Queen Anne about 1704 granted him a yearly pension of $200 to assist his education. In 1712, on the death of his father, he succeeded as second earl. In the following year, though only twenty years of age, he was appointed colonel of the 3rd, or Buff, regiment of infantry. In 1714 he petitioned Anne for payment of arrears, both of his father's pension and his own, amounting together to $1400; he pointed out at the same time that in her majesty's service he had incurred a debt of about $3000. He was appointed envoy-extraordinary to Prussia in 1715 (credentials dated 14 July) but never took up his post. 
In 1715 Forfar served as a brigadier-general in the army raised by the duke of Argyll for quelling the Jacobite rising in Scotland, and was present on 13 November at the indecisive combat at Sheriffmuir, where he fought bravely, but sustained wounds that were to prove fatal. He was taken prisoner to Stirling, and died there on 8 December. He was buried in Bothwell church, where a monument was erected to his memory. As he died unmarried the title of earl of Forfar became extinct, and his estates passed to Archibald, first duke of Douglas. 


@@@@@


doc= 7873


Douglas, Archibald, duke of Douglas (bap. 1694, d. 1761), landowner, the son of James Douglas, second marquess of Douglas (c.1646-1700), and his second wife, Mary Kerr 
(Ker; 'bap'. 1674, died 1736)
, daughter of Robert Kerr, first marquess of Lothian, was baptized on 13 October 1694. He succeeded his father as marquess of Douglas in February 1700. He was created duke of Douglas by Queen Anne in 1703 at the behest of his kinsman James Douglas, second duke of Queensberry, ostensibly in recognition of the loyalty and deeds of his forebears, but more immediately to balance the elevation of the rival marquess of Atholl to a dukedom. 
As he was head of the senior line of one of Scotland's most illustrious families and heir to a great fortune, much was expected of Douglas as a young man. Such hopes, however, went unfulfilled. His public career was brief and spotty. In 1712 he joined nineteen other Scottish peers in a remonstrance to the queen against the decision of the House of Lords that those who had held Scottish peerages at the time of the Union could not subsequently sit in the house by virtue of British peerages. During the Jacobite rising of 1715 he was commissioned lord lieutenant of Forfarshire, and raised 500 men for the government; he also fought as a volunteer at the battle of Sheriffmuir. 
It became apparent, however, that Douglas was not cut out for political or social leadership. He was, for one thing, barely literate. Late in life he confessed to the earl of Shelburne (who characterized him as 'the last of the feudal lords') that 'he could neither read nor write without great difficulty' (Fitzmaurice, 1.6-7). Proud, irascible, and reclusive by nature, his eccentric conduct raised doubts about his mental stability. Such concerns were intensified in 1725 when, at Douglas Castle, his chief seat, he killed John Kerr, the illegitimate son of his brother-in-law, Lord Mark Kerr, and a suitor for the hand of his sister, Lady Jane Douglas. Douglas fled to the Netherlands for a time, but eventually returned to Scotland and was never prosecuted. The affair, Horace Walpole suggested, 'had been winked at on supposition of his insanity' (Walpole, 3.201n.). No certificate of lunacy was ever issued, but the duke 'retired from the world', in the words of the duke of Queensberry, and 'lived like a prisoner' ('Laing MSS', 2.455), surrounded by retainers sympathetic to the duke of Hamilton, next heir after his sister. Douglas never participated in peers' elections, and he allowed the family's parliamentary interests in Lanarkshire, Forfarshire, and elsewhere to languish. Events occasionally intruded on his isolation. During the Jacobite rising of 1745 he denied Lord George Murray admittance to Douglas Castle on the Jacobite army's return from England. However, he was later obliged to open his door to the Young Pretender himself (Charles Edward Stuart), whose troops did much damage. In 1758 Douglas Castle burnt down, forcing the duke to divide his time between Holyrood Palace, where he had apartments, and Bothwell Castle. He began the reconstruction of Douglas Castle (unfinished in his lifetime) to plans from John Adam, with the intention, it was said, of building a house 10 feet wider and 10 feet higher than the duke of Argyll's new seat at Inveraray. 
The last decades of Douglas's life were dominated by speculation over the eventual disposition of his considerable estate, which included property in eight Scottish counties and was said to be worth more than $12,000 a year. His relationship with his only sibling, Lady Jane Douglas, was strained after Kerr's death. In 1746 she married -- without his knowledge -- Colonel John Stewart of Grandtully (from 1759, third baronet), a former Jacobite sympathizer, mercenary, and sometime bankrupt, and fled to the continent. In 1748 she reported her marriage from Paris and then informed the duke of the birth (in her fifty-first year) of twins. Douglas cut off Lady Jane's support and refused either to see her before her death in 1753 or to accept her offspring as genuine. He instead entailed his estates on the Hamiltons. 
Douglas, who had often stated that he would never marry, surprised many when on 1 March 1758 he wed Margaret (died 1774) ['see 'Douglas, Margaret], the daughter of James Douglas of Mains. (When Alexander Carlyle first met her in 1745, he noted that she had even then 'Sworn to be Dutchess of Douglas, or never mount a Marriage Bed' (Carlyle, 56). An eccentric in her own right, she took a sympathetic view of the claim of Lady Jane's only surviving son, Archibald ['see 'Douglas, Archibald James Edward, first Baron Douglas], and eventually persuaded the duke to reconsider the case and recognize him as heir. This set the stage for the famous Douglas cause that would, nearly eight years after the duke's death, confirm young Archibald, now called Douglas, in possession of the Douglas estates. 
The duke died on 21 July 1761 at Queensberry House, Edinburgh, and was buried on 4 August with his ancestors in the parish church at Douglas, Lanarkshire, contrary to his wish to be buried in the bowling green. The marquessate and other titles he had inherited passed to the seventh duke of Hamilton; the dukedom and other titles conferred on him in 1703 became extinct. Once the object of high hopes, Douglas led an eccentric and reclusive life, posthumously overshadowed by the titanic legal battle to become his heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 7874


Douglas, Archibald James Edward, first Baron Douglas (1748-1827), litigant and politician, the son of Sir John Stewart of Grandtully, third baronet (1687-1764), and his wife, Lady Jane Douglas (1698-1753), was born on 10 July 1748 at faubourg St Germain, Paris. His early life was dominated by the efforts of his parents and supporters to establish his identity as nephew and heir of Archibald Douglas, duke of Douglas (bap. 1694, d. 1761). His mother, the duke's only sister, had in 1746 married without her brother's knowledge Colonel John Stewart, a former Jacobite sympathizer and veteran of the Swedish army, and fled to the continent. Two years later she informed the duke of the marriage and notified him that she was (at the age of fifty) pregnant. Subsequently she reported the birth on 10 July 1748 of twin boys, named Archibald and Sholto. The irascible and eccentric duke disapproved of the marriage, cut off his sister's allowance, and -- encouraged by the duke of Hamilton's family, who stood next in line to the sister as heir -- refused to recognize the twins as hers. In 1751 the family returned to Britain, where they lived a hand-to-mouth existence as Colonel Stewart was soon imprisoned for debt. Sholto and Lady Jane both died in 1753. Archibald's upbringing was taken over by Lady Schaw of Greenock, and, after her death in 1757, by the duke and duchess of Queensberry, who saw to his education, first at Rugby School (1759-61) and then at Westminster School (1761-5). The reclusive duke of Douglas surprisingly married in March 1758, and the new duchess, Margaret Douglas of Mains, became an aggressive advocate of Archibald's claim to the Douglas estates, which were said to be worth in excess of $12,000 a year. Before the duke died, she convinced him to reinvestigate the case and to name Archibald as his heir. Following the duke's death in July 1761, Archibald Stewart was duly served heir and took the surname Douglas. 
This set the stage for one of the eighteenth century's most famous legal battles, the Douglas cause. Archibald's inheritance was challenged by the Hamiltons, who argued that he and his brother were supposititious. The Hamilton lawyers put together a plausible circumstantial argument that Archibald was actually Jacques Louis Mignon, the son of a Parisian glassworker, who had disappeared in July 1748. The case was litigated at great length and expense (the two sides spent $54,000 between them). It attracted tremendous interest, especially in Scotland. Not only was a large estate at stake, but many felt that requiring Archibald Douglas to in effect prove his identity raised a question that could endanger the security of inheritance in general. In Scotland the Douglas side enjoyed broad popular support, with James Boswell an especially eager partisan, though many of the literati favoured the Hamilton side. In 1767 the court of session decided by the casting vote of the lord president against Douglas. Douglas appealed to the House of Lords which, following the opinions of law lords Mansfield and Camden, reversed the decision without a division. 
Douglas settled easily into the life of a landed magnate. He was an improving landlord who continued the rebuilding of Douglas Castle begun by his uncle, though investment in the Ayr bank of Douglas, Heron & Co., which failed in 1772, complicated his finances during the 1770s. He also achieved a degree of political prominence as he worked to resurrect the Douglas interest in Lanarkshire, Berwickshire, Forfarshire, and elsewhere. He was elected member for Forfarshire in 1782, and was made lord lieutenant of the county in 1794. During the following year he raised a regiment of fencibles. In parliament he was a loyal, if silent, follower of Henry Dundas and William Pitt, a status that facilitated his successful pursuit of a peerage. Although he would have preferred an earldom, he was created Baron Douglas of Douglas in 1790. 
Douglas married twice into ducal families: first, on 13 June 1771, Lady Lucie Graham (1751-1780), daughter of the second duke of Montrose, and second, on 13 May 1783, Lady Frances Scott (1750-1817) ['see 'Douglas, Frances, Lady Douglas], sister of the third duke of Buccleuch; among the children born of this second marriage was Caroline Lucy Scott, novelist. Horace Walpole commented that 'it is proof of 'his' sense, that he can forgive her person in favour of her merit' (to Lady Ossory, 17 April 1783, Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.399). Douglas died on 26 December 1827 at Bothwell Castle, Lanarkshire. He was buried in Douglas parish church in the same county. Forever identified with the Douglas cause, as an adult he proved a rather unexceptional aristocrat. 


@@@@@


doc= 7875


Archibald Ramsey Douglas (1807-1886), miniature painter, born on 23 April 1807 in Edinburgh. She learned the art of miniature painting from her father. She exhibited four works at the Royal Academy between 1834 and 1841 and nine works at the Royal Scottish Academy between 1835 and 1847, practising from 13 Hart Street, Edinburgh. She died in Edinburgh on 25 December 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 7876


Douglas, Catherine, duchess of Queensberry and Dover (1701-1777), literary patron, was the second daughter of Henry Hyde, second earl of Rochester, later fourth earl of Clarendon (1672-1754), son of Laurence Hyde, first earl, and his wife, Jane Hyde (c.1672-1725), daughter of Sir William Leveson-Gower, though Lady Mary Wortley Montagu always said that Kitty's real father was Henry Boyle, first Baron Carleton. Henry Hyde, Baron Hyde, was her brother. Her mother was a great beauty and Catherine, usually known as Kitty, was brought up in a household frequented by literary celebrities such as Alexander Pope and Matthew Prior. They made much of her, and when she was about sixteen Prior composed his well-known poem 'The Female Phaeton: upon Lady Kitty Hyde's First Appearing in Publick'. 
On 10 March 1720 Kitty married her second cousin Charles Douglas, third duke of Queensberry and second duke of Dover (1698-1778), at a magnificent ceremony in her father's house in Whitehall, London. Both were tall and slim, Kitty with large brown eyes, fair hair, and a famously graceful figure. They were a devoted couple. The duke, who had inherited great wealth when he was only twelve, was a quiet, patient man, a good listener, and a natural diplomat. This was fortunate, for Kitty had strong opinions and no hesitation in voicing them. Perhaps as a reaction to the flattery heaped upon her in her mother's house, she hated artifice. She could dress magnificently when she chose, but she rarely wore jewellery, as her portraits show, and she often startled her friends by appearing at court in the simplest of garments. She avoided alcohol, loved walking, and was an enthusiastic planter of trees on her husband's estates. Convinced that she knew best, she was all too ready to tell other people how they should live their lives, but in spite of her blunt manner she had a kind heart and her friends valued her common-sense advice. She and the duke had two sons, Henry, Lord Drumlanrig, born in 1723, and Charles, born in 1726. A daughter, Catherine, died in infancy. 
The duke was lord of the bedchamber to George II, and at their London residence, Queensberry House, their regular guests included Handel, Pope, Prior, William Kent the architect, Charles Jervas the painter, and John Gay the playwright. When, in 1729, Gay was refused a licence for 'Polly', a sequel to his immensely successful 'Beggar's Opera', Kitty took up his cause, quarrelled with the lord chamberlain, offended the king, and was ordered to withdraw from court. London society was horrified at her temerity, but the duke stood by her and resigned his appointment as vice-admiral of Scotland, despite the king's kindly urgings that he should stay on. When Gay fell ill, Kitty took him in and nursed him tenderly. The duke and duchess, he told Swift, could not have treated him more kindly had he been their nearest relative. On his death in 1732 they arranged his magnificent funeral in Westminster Abbey and put up a monument by Rysbrack, describing him as 'the warmest friend, the gentlest companion, the most benevolent man'. 
For the next fifteen years the duke and duchess divided their time between Amesbury, their Wiltshire and Oxfordshire estates, and Drumlanrig Castle, the duke's ancestral home in Dumfriesshire. Kitty was finally received back at court in 1747. By then her sons were grown up, but her happy family life was shattered when the recently married Lord Drumlanrig apparently committed suicide in 1754 while suffering from depression, and his younger brother died of tuberculosis the following year. After that, Kitty and the duke preferred to live quietly at Amesbury. Even in her seventies she was as tall, upright, and energetic as ever. She died at Queensberry House in London on 17 July 1777, after a brief illness caused, according to Horace Walpole, by a surfeit of cherries. Her servants said that she had been suffering from a chest complaint. She was buried in the duke's family vault at Durisdeer, near Drumlanrig, Dumfriesshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 7877


Douglas, Charles, third duke of Queensberry and second duke of Dover (1698-1778), courtier and politician, the son of James Douglas, second duke of Queensberry and first duke of Dover (1662-1711), and his wife, Mary Boyle (1670/71-1709), daughter of Charles, Lord Clifford, was born at Edinburgh on 24 November 1698. Having been created earl of Solway in the Scottish peerage in 1706 in recognition of the services of his father and grandfather, in 1711 he succeeded his father as third duke of Queensberry (in the Scottish peerage) and second duke of Dover (British). 
After returning from the grand tour, in 1719 Queensberry unsuccessfully sought his seat in the House of Lords as duke of Dover, the house applying its 1712 decision that no peer of Scotland at the time of the Union could sit by virtue of a British peerage. On 10 March 1720 he married his second cousin Lady Catherine Hyde (1701-1777), the second daughter of Henry, second earl of Rochester and later fourth earl of Clarendon, and Jane, daughter of Sir William Leveson-Gower ['see 'Douglas, Catherine, duchess of Queensberry and Dover]. Catherine was a major figure in her own right as a literary patron and socialite. Queensberry was a successful courtier under George I: lord of the bedchamber (1721), vice-admiral of Scotland (1722), and privy councillor (1726). In 1729 his wife's outrage at the lord chamberlain's refusal to license the performance of John Gay's 'Polly' (which satirized Sir Robert Walpole) led George II to bar her from court and Queensberry to resign his offices. Thereafter they joined the opposition, the duke serving as a gentleman of the bedchamber to Frederick, prince of Wales, from 1733. In 1734 Queensberry took an active part in an unsuccessful attempt to elect a slate of opposition Scottish representative peers, standing as a candidate and voting in a peers' election for the only time in his life. After the accession of George III, Queensberry regained his place on the privy council and became keeper of the great seal of Scotland (1761-3) and lord justice-general (1763-78). Often solicited by Scots seeking patronage, the duke was not always able to oblige, as James Boswell found. 
The Queensberrys lived mostly in England, where they were prominent in the social life of the capital. The duke periodically returned to Scotland and remained involved in affairs there, exercising over his long life the predominant parliamentary interest in Dumfriesshire and Dumfries burghs. An improving landlord, he sought to promote Scottish economic development. He was the chairman of the Firth and Clyde Canal Company and a major backer of the Ayr Bank (whose failure in 1772 put a dent in the duke's considerable fortune). 
Queensberry's political influence was probably less than his contemporaries thought, and was likely limited by his exclusion from parliament. He was regarded as an amiable and benevolent aristocrat, Boswell characterizing him as 'a man of the greatest humanity and gentleness of manners' and 'good plain sense' ('Boswell's London Journal', 63). Many sympathized with the duke and duchess for their fortitude in the face of sorrow when their adult sons, Henry, Lord Drumlanrig, and Charles, died within two years of each other in the mid-1750s. Queensberry died on 22 October 1778 from 'mortification of the leg after an accident alighting from a carriage' (GEC, 'Peerage', 10.699), and was buried at Durisdeer, Dumfriesshire. He was succeeded in his title and estates (said to be worth $18,000 p.a.) by the earl of March and Ruglen, the son of his first cousin. 


@@@@@


doc= 7878


Douglas, Sir Charles, of Carr, first baronet (d. 1789), naval officer, was descended from a younger son of William Douglas of Lochleven, sixth earl of Morton. The record only begins with his passing his examination for lieutenant in the British navy in February 1747, having attracted the attention of Admiral Francis Holburne who in 1757 described him as a 'good clever sensible man' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/481, fol. 467). From 1749 to 1752 he served as a lieutenant in the Dutch navy (admiralty of Amsterdam). He was promoted to that rank in the Royal Navy on 4 December 1753 and on 24 February 1759 he was made commander. He served through that summer in command of the armed ship 'Boscawen' attached to the fleet under Sir Charles Saunders during the capture of Quebec. 
In 1761 Douglas had command of the 'Unicorn' (28 guns) attached to the squadron employed in blockading Brest, and in 1762 he was in charge of the 'Syren' (20 guns) on the coast of Newfoundland, where he commanded the naval force which covered Lieutenant-Colonel William Amherst's landing at Torbay on 13 September. He was still in the 'Syren' at the peace, and when transferred to the 'Tweed' (32 guns) was able to ensure that James Cook could complete his survey of St Pierre and Miquelon before those islands passed to the French. In 1764 and 1765 he served as a flag officer in the Russian navy. From 1767 to 1770 he commanded the 'Emerald' (32 guns), and from 1770 to 1773 the 'St Albans' (64 guns), both on the home station. In 1775 he was appointed to the 'Isis' (50 guns), and was sent with reinforcements and stores for Quebec, then threatened by American rebel forces commanded by Benedict Arnold. He did not reach the coast of America until too late in the season; the St Lawrence was closed by ice, and he was obliged to return without having effected the object of his voyage. He was again sent out early in the next year, and, pushing through the ice with great difficulty, arrived off Quebec on 6 May. The town, which had been closely blockaded during the winter, was relieved, and the governor, assuming the offensive, drove the enemy from their entrenchments in headlong flight. Douglas then proceeded to construct a squadron of small vessels on Lake Champlain, with which he defeated Arnold's flotilla in the battle of Valcour Island (11-13 October 1776). On his return to England, Douglas was rewarded with a baronetcy on 23 January 1777. A few months later he was appointed to the 'Stirling Castle' (64 guns); in her he took part in the action off Ushant on 27 July 1778. In the subsequent courts martial his testimony was distinctly to the advantage of Admiral Augustus Keppel. 
Douglas was afterwards appointed to the 'Duke' (98 guns), and commanded her in the Channel Fleet for the next three years; during this time he experimented with moving standards from the gun decks, in order to open greater arcs of fire, thereby enabling several ships to engage a single target at a quarter mile range, or a single ship to engage several. He also introduced improvements in gun tackles and equipment which significantly increased rates of fire. 
Douglas was selected by Sir George Rodney towards the end of 1781 as his first captain or captain of the fleet, accompanied him to the West Indies on board the 'Formidable', and was with him in the battle of the Saints on 12 April 1782. The claim, recounted years later by Admiral Sir Charles Dashwood, who had been a midshipman on the 'Formidable', that Douglas persuaded Rodney to make the decisive tactical movement to cut the enemy battle line, is doubtful, and Brian Tunstall largely accepts Samuel Hood's criticism of Douglas's failure as Rodney's staff officer to ensure that the older man's weakness of memory was overcome. In particular Hood criticized Douglas's failure to support Hood's efforts to persuade Rodney, who was exhausted after four sleepless nights, to order 'general chase' in the pursuit of De Grasse following the battle (Tunstall, 113-20). Captain Thomas White, who dismissed the claim for Douglas, also reported that when the 'Formidable' was passing the 'Glorieux', and pouring in her a tremendous broadside at very close range, Douglas exclaimed: 'Behold, Sir George, the Greeks and Trojans contending for the body of Patroclus'; to which Rodney replied, 'Damn the Greeks, and damn the Trojans; I have other things to think of'. Later, the story goes, he returned to Douglas and said, smiling, 'Now, my dear friend, I am at the service of the Greeks and Trojans, and the whole of Homer's 'Iliad'; for the enemy is in confusion and our victory is secure'. White said that the remark attributed to Douglas was 'in perfect accordance with his usual style of expression', and 'the answer to it is agreeable to that of Sir George Rodney' ('Naval Researches', 112). To set against the tittle-tattle is Douglas's real and very important contribution to the victory provided by his gunnery innovations, which had been approved by the Admiralty in the early months of 1781, and at Rodney's instructions had been introduced into some at least of the ships under his command. 
When Rodney was recalled Douglas remained with Admiral Hugh Pigot as captain of the fleet, before returning to England at the peace in 1783. In October he was appointed commodore and commander-in-chief on the Halifax station, but in 1786 he asked for his recall when the Admiralty would not support him in a dispute with the dockyard commissioner, Henry Duncan. On 24 September 1787 he was promoted rear-admiral, and in January 1789 he was again appointed to the command in North America. 
Douglas was married three times. His first wife was Lydia Schimmelpinck; the couple produced two sons and a daughter, the eldest son, William Henry, inheriting as second baronet. His second marriage was to Sarah (died 1779), daughter of James Wood, who gave birth to a daughter and a son, Howard Douglas, who subsequently inherited the title as third baronet, and became inspector of artillery. Major-General Sir Howard Douglas was the chief advocate for his father's claims at the battle of the Saints, and served a term as governor of New Brunswick. His third marriage was to Jane Baillie. Douglas died suddenly of apoplexy in early February 1789 as he was about to take up his command in North America. 


@@@@@


doc= 7879


Douglas, David (1799-1834), plant collector and traveller, was born on 25 June 1799 at Scone, Perthshire, one of six children of John Douglas, a stonemason, and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Drummond. Quick to learn but often truant from school owing to his passion for natural history, he was apprenticed at the age of ten in the gardens of the earl of Mansfield at Scone. In 1818 he became under-gardener to Sir Robert Preston at Valleyfield, near Culross in Perthshire, whence, about 1820, he moved to the botanical garden at Glasgow. There he attended the botanical lectures of W. J. Hooker, whom he accompanied on several excursions to the highlands. According to Hooker, Douglas's 'great activity, undaunted courage, singular abstemiousness, and energetic zeal, at once pointed him out as an individual eminently calculated to do himself credit as a scientific traveller' (Hooker, 87). These qualities led Hooker to recommend Douglas as a plant collector to Joseph Sabine, secretary to the Horticultural Society of London. 
In 1823 the society sent Douglas to America, where he spent four months collecting in the eastern parts of the United States and Canada. Soon after his return to London Douglas was commissioned again by the society, this time for a more ambitious journey to the Columbia River in America's Pacific north-west. After arriving at Fort Vancouver in April 1825 he spent two years combing the mountainous regions of the north-west in pursuit of new species of plants, birds, and mammals. He endured continual hardship from exposure, fatigue, lack of food, and native hostility. In March 1827 he left for England by an overland route, bearing a profusion of live plants unknown in the gardens of Europe. The botanical world was astonished by the wealth of Douglas's collection, and received him with great enthusiasm. This pleased him at first, but at length the lionization caused revulsion and irritability, 'so that his best friends could not but wish, as he himself did, that he were again occupied in the honourable task of exploring North-west America' (Hooker, 142). John Murray offered to publish his travel journals, but they did not finally appear in print until 1914. 
In 1829 Douglas embarked once again for north-west America, this time travelling via Cape Horn and the Sandwich Islands. He reached the mouth of the Columbia River in June 1830, and spent the summer and autumn making journeys into the interior. In December he took ship for Monterey in California where he stayed nineteen months collecting along the Spanish mission trail before returning to the Columbia. In October 1833 he sailed to the Sandwich Islands where, in Laupahoehoe Forest near Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii on 12 July 1834, he met his death when he fell into a pit trap and was gored by a wild bull. He was buried at Kawaiahao church cemetery, Honolulu, on 4 August. 
Douglas's introductions to the horticultural world number over 200, including the famous Douglas fir ('Pseudotsuga taxifolia') and the sugar pine ('Pinus lambertiana'). The Royal Society's catalogue credits him with fourteen papers. He was described by his fellow traveller, F. McDonald, as 'a sturdy little Scot, handsome rather, with a head and face of a fine Grecian mould; of winning address, and withal the most pious of men' (Coats, 310). His death at the age of only thirty-five cut short what was certain to have been a great career in plant collecting. 


@@@@@


doc= 7880


Douglas, Francis (bap. 1719, d. c.1790), writer, was baptized on 6 February 1719 in the parish of Logie Coldstone, near Aberdeen, the third son of Robert Douglas of Blackmiln. He was apprenticed to a baker in Aberdeen and after the completion of his training in the late 1730s he went to London to practise his trade. During this time he wrote 'Rural Love, a Tale in the Scotish Dialect' that he printed in Aberdeen in 1759. From 1743 he was back in Aberdeen and became a baker in the Netherkirkgate. From 1744 to 1747 he was a juror for the fixing of the fiars' prices. He married Elizabeth Ochterloney of Pitforthey on 22 April 1745 in the church of St Nicholas in Aberdeen. They had seven children: Robert ('b'. 1746), Mary ('b'. 1747), Elizabeth ('b'. 1748), Mary ('b'. 1750), Ann ('b'. 1754), Bathia ('b'. 1756), and Margaret ('b'. 1759). The family became Episcopalian in the late 1740s and joined St Paul's in Aberdeen. 
In 1748 Douglas started book selling and advertised that 'catalogues... may be had at his house in the Nether Kirkgate' ('Aberdeen Journal', 31 May 1748). Two years later he had now 'taken himself entirely to the trade' (ibid., 8 May 1750). He was importing new and second-hand books from London as well as selling maps, prints, and stationery. With William Murray, a druggist, he set up a printing house and published books and a weekly Jacobite newspaper called the 'Aberdeen Intelligencer', in opposition to the 'Aberdeen Journal'. The 'Intelligencer' existed from 1752 to 1757. In 1755 Douglas published the first of his own works, 'The History of the Rebellion in 1745 and 1746', extracted from the 'Scots Magazine'. Murray would appear to have withdrawn from an unprofitable partnership in 1757. Douglas continued until at least 1768, and published more of his own works, 'A Pastoral Elegy to the Memory of Miss Mary Urquhart' (1758) and 'Life of James Crichton of Clunie, Commonly Called the Admirable Crichton' (1760). 
In the early 1760s Douglas moved to a farm near Drumoak belonging to Mr Irvine of Drum. Here he was moderately successful and in 1763 won a $10 prize for planting the most trees ('Aberdeen Journal', 1 Aug 1763), although Chalmers writes that his mutton was of such poor quality and so badly butchered that it never sold ('N&Q', 1861, 222-3). When the Douglas peerage case came before the House of Lords, he advocated in the 'Scots Magazine' the claim of the successful litigant, Archibald, son of Lady Jane Douglas. A pamphlet by him entitled 'Observations on the Douglas Cause' (1768) was printed by James Chalmers and published by Dilly, neither of whom was aware that they had committed a breach of privilege. The House of Lords ordered them to be carried to London, but Dilly induced Lord Lyttelton and some other peers to interfere, and the printer and publisher were excused on account of ignorance. When Archibald Douglas succeeded to the estate of his uncle the duke, Francis Douglas was gifted with the life-rent of Abbotsinch, a farm near Paisley, for his services. He continued to write and publish such works as 'Reflections on Celibacy and Marriage' (1771), 'Familiar letters, on a variety of important and interesting subjects, from Lady Harriet Morley and others' (1773), 'The Birthday; with a Few Strictures on the Times; a Poem in Three Cantos' (1782), and his most reprinted book, 'A General Description of the East Coast of Scotland from Edinburgh to Cullen' (1782). 
Douglas died at Abbotsinch about 1790 and was buried in the churchyard of Paisley Abbey. He was survived by two married daughters living in the Paisley area. 


@@@@@


doc= 7881


Frederick Sylvester North Douglas (1791-1819), politician and classical scholar, was born in Bedford Square, London, on 8 February 1791 and christened at home by the rector of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Bloomsbury. Delicate and precocious, he was educated at Sunbury School, proceeding to Westminster School in 1801 and Christ Church, Oxford, in 1806. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1807, he was not called to the bar. Taking a first in classics and a top second in maths at Oxford in 1809 (MA, 1813), he went to Edinburgh to pursue his studies, but was taken ill. Physically he resembled his mother's family. In 1810 he embarked on a two-year tour of Greece and the Near East, under the aegis of his philhellenic uncle Frederick North, fifth earl of Guilford (1766-1827), colonial governor in Ceylon. His 'Essay on Certain Points of Resemblance between the Ancient and the Modern Greeks' went into a second edition in June 1813, in which year he acted as Germaine de Stael's guide to Oxford and deputy secretary of the politically ambivalent Grillion's Club. He had entered parliament in 1812 for Banbury, the North family borough, of which his father was recorder. His political independence soon alarmed his father. His maiden speech was lukewarm in support of the Christianization of India and he consistently voted for Catholic relief and abolition of the slave trade. More conventionally he was shy of parliamentary reform, apart from sponsorship of a bill (lost on 16 May 1814) to stop payment of non-resident electors' expenses. He opposed the peacetime reduction of the militia in 1815; he had been a major in the Surrey militia since 1813, and was a captain in the Oxfordshire yeomanry in 1817. During the recess in 1814 he interviewed Bonaparte, who liked him best of his English visitors on Elba. From February 1816, when he consulted the speaker about his debating style, which was disliked by reporters, he acted increasingly under the whig opposition, joining Brooks's Club on 7 May. He voted against the address and tried to exempt Scotland from measures against sedition in the 1817 session, to the chagrin of his father, whom he joined on a continental tour in the autumn. In spite of defending his father and uncle in debate in 1818, he also delivered a speech on 15 May against the 'Aliens Bill' which went unanswered by the administration. In 1819 he conceded the need for piecemeal parliamentary reform, and in his last speeches in June, he spoke in favour of South American independence and educational reform. On 19 July 1819 he married a whig bride, Harriet Wrightson (died 1864), eldest daughter of William Wrightson of Cusworth, Yorkshire. He died on 21 October 1819, after a bout of jaundice, in Brook Street, Westminster. According to one obituary, he had 'enlivened every society by his presence' ('GM', 1st ser., 89/2 1819, 468). His widow married in 1825 Colonel Henry Hely Hutchinson and died on 16 July 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 7882


Douglas, Gavin (c.1476-1522), poet and bishop of Dunkeld, was the third son of Archibald Douglas (Bell-the-Cat), fifth earl of Angus (c.1449-1513), and Elizabeth (died 1498), daughter of Robert Boyd, Lord Boyd ['see under 'Boyd family]. The earliest surviving reference to Douglas, in a supplication to the papal curia dated 13 February 1489, stated that he was in his thirteenth year, and he himself, in July 1515, claimed to be a 'man of forty yeris or tharby [thereabouts]' (Bawcutt, 'New light', 95-6). It is likely that Douglas was born in Tantallon Castle, Haddingtonshire, one of the chief seats of the fifteenth-century earls of Angus. 
Douglas was educated at the University of St Andrews: having matriculated in 1490 he became a licentiate, or master of arts, in 1494. There is no firm evidence that he later studied at the University of Paris -- though John Mair (Major) stated in 1516 that he had enjoyed Douglas's friendship both at home and in Paris -- or that he had higher degrees in theology or law. None the less Douglas was a learned man and well read, both in vernacular poetry and in classical and humanistic authors. His writings reveal an intensely bookish man, who was acquainted with recently printed editions of Ovid and Virgil, and who read Mair's 'Historia majoris Britanniae' ('History of greater Britain', 1521) almost as soon as it was published. In later life he travelled to England, France, and Italy. 
Douglas was designed, from an early age, for the church. During the late middle ages the church in Scotland, as elsewhere in Europe, was characterized by nepotism, pluralism, and frequent struggles for wealthy benefices. Douglas was highly ambitious, and was aided in the search for ecclesiastical preferment by his intelligence, noble birth, and the favour of James IV. In the competitive and litigious climate of the age, however, he did not retain permanently all the benefices with which his name was associated in the 1490s. According to an entry in the chancery register of Pope Alexander VI, Douglas was granted the deanery of Dunkeld in 1496, but his right to that office was vigorously contested by George Hepburn; though Douglas had royal support, Hepburn's persistence in litigation seems to have been ultimately successful. On 6 May 1498 Douglas was 'presented' with the parsonage of Glenholm, when it should become vacant, but there is some doubt as to whether it ever came into his possession, since the presentation was provisional. There is more certainty as to the parsonage of Linton, a small village in Haddingtonshire, not far from Tantallon, which had been appropriated to the collegiate church of Dunbar in the fourteenth century. Douglas probably became parson of Linton and canon of Dunbar about 1504, though the precise date is not known. 
Douglas's first important benefice was the provostry of St Giles, Edinburgh, a rich and well-endowed collegiate church, whose patron was the king. Douglas was in possession by 11 March 1503. During his time as provost St Giles was substantially enlarged, and several side chapels were added. There are only a few sparse testimonies to Douglas's activities at St Giles: on 30 July 1510, for instance, he supplicated the pope that he should be granted a special faculty to dispense those within the fourth degree of consanguinity who wished to marry, 'for the making of peace and avoidance of bloodshed', and on 27 February 1511 he and the other prebendaries bound themselves to celebrate the mass of the holy blood regularly throughout the year. There is no reason to doubt Douglas's genuine piety, which is evident in his poetry. Between 1503 and 1513, however, there is far more evidence for Douglas's involvement in secular affairs. He was present at meetings of the lords of council in February and March 1505, and again in 1509. He was one of those appointed to counsel the rector of St Andrews University in 1512 and 1513 ('Acta rectorum', vol. 1, fols. 59 and 61). He frequently witnessed charters for his father and other members of the Douglas family. He also served as their legal representative: on 11 October 1503 he acted as procurator for his brother George in a dispute concerning lands in Jedworth Forest, and on 26 November 1512, in another dispute concerning property, he was one of the procurators for his sister-in-law, Elizabeth Auchinleck. 
Douglas's friendship with John Mair played some part in the offer to Mair, in December 1509, of the treasurership of the Chapel Royal, Stirling. Mair draws an interesting portrait of Douglas, clearly based on life, in the 'Dialogus inter duos famatos viros magistrum Gawinum Douglaiseum et magistrum Davidem Crenstonem', which is prefixed to his commentary on Peter Lombard's 'Sentences' (29 April 1510). In the 'Dialogus' Douglas aligns himself with the opponents of scholastic theology, and advocates a return to the biblical and patristic sources of Christianity. 
All Douglas's surviving poetry belongs to the early years of his life, during the reign of James IV. In the brief 'Mensioun of hys pryncipall warkis' ('Virgil's Aeneid', 4.139), Douglas refers to a mysterious juvenile translation 'Of Lundeys lufe the remeid'; this is no longer extant, but was possibly a translation of Ovid's 'Remedium amoris'. His second work, completed 'c'.1501 and dedicated to the king, was 'The Palice of Honour'. This long and complex poem employs an ancient but still very popular form, the allegorical dream, to explore the nature of honour. The varied processions, led by Minerva, Diana, Venus, and the Muses, that pass before the dreamer represent some of the different paths by which men and women have sought to attain honour, such as learning, asceticism, love, or poetry. From the fourteenth to the sixteenth century this was a topic that fascinated poets, who frequently placed a deified Honour in temples and palaces. Douglas's dreamer is taught, at the end, that true honour must be distinguished from worldly glory, and that pre-eminence should be given to heroic honour won by martial virtue. Yet the central section of 'The Palice of Honour' is dominated by the Muses, and voices Douglas's tribute to the power of imaginative literature. This is the poet-dreamer's preferred route to honour. The poem shows evidence of Douglas's wide reading: it abounds in allusions to Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', and the humorous self-mocking characterization of the dreamer owes much to Chaucer. Yet, despite the highly literary framework, there are interesting links with Douglas's own career. One is the trial scene, which makes comic use of the terms and procedures of the Scottish law courts. There must have been much piquancy for contemporary readers in finding the poet who had recently litigated with George Hepburn now bandying legal precedents with Venus. Two other poems are attributed to Douglas in the Maitland folio, a literary miscellany compiled in the 1580s. The longer of these, usually known as 'King Hart', is an impressive homiletic allegory; Douglas's authorship of this poem, however, has been vigorously contested on stylistic and linguistic grounds. The attribution to him of 'Conscience', a witty, punning poem on corruption in the church, is more convincing. 
Douglas's greatest claim to fame rests upon the 'Eneados', a translation of Virgil's 'Aeneid'. In the early 1500s no major classical work had been translated into English, and Douglas's 'Eneados' was a pioneering work; what is more, it was not a free paraphrase nor a mere sample of one or two books, but a careful translation of the whole of Virgil's great poem. Douglas was aware of the novelty of his undertaking. He proudly asserted his own fidelity to Virgil's text, and voiced pungent criticisms of William Caxton's recent version of the 'Aeneid', which was no more like Virgil 'than the devill and Sanct Austyne' (prologue 1, 143). It might well seem inconsistent that Douglas also translated the so-called thirteenth book, written by the Italian humanist Maffeo Vegio, but it should be recalled that most editions of Virgil included this supplement to the 'Aeneid' until the seventeenth century. The 'Eneados' was affectionately dedicated to Henry, Lord Sinclair, whom Douglas characterized as a keen bibliophile and 'fader of bukis' (prologue 1, 85). He did not design his translation, however, solely for aristocratic readers, but envisaged a wider audience, including 'masteris of grammar sculys', teaching on their 'benkis and stulys' ('Virgil's Aeneid', 4.189). Douglas shared the values of the humanists: an antipathy to scholasticism, respect for classical authors, and a zeal for education. He wished to communicate to his countrymen a knowledge of the 'Aeneid', and also to enrich his native 'Scottis' tongue with something of the 'fouth', or copiousness, of Latin. 
Douglas attempted to acquaint his readers with the Virgilian scholarship of his age. Much in his translation that might seem extraneous is closely related to the contents and apparatus of contemporary editions of Virgil. He is thought to have used an edition published in Paris by Jodocus Badius Ascensius (1501), and often incorporates into his translation the explanatory glosses of Badius and Servius. He is occasionally diffuse and over-explicit, but this springs from a desire to convey the full implications of Virgil's 'sentence', or inner meaning. Douglas, like many translators, is better at rendering some aspects of the 'Aeneid' than others. He seems to have found particularly intractable those passages which are densely packed with historical or mythological allusion. He is more successful with narrative, portraiture, and battle scenes, where a debt to the vernacular tradition of alliterative poetry is evident. Douglas excels at rendering the more timeless parts of the 'Aeneid' -- the similes, and descriptions of nature or of the underworld. At his best he is a responsive and sensitive translator: 'he makes the world of the 'Aeneid' seem almost contemporary; Virgil's characters might be just around the corner' (R. G. Austin, 'Some English Translations of Virgil', 1956, 16-17). 
Knowledge of Douglas's critical ideas on a wealth of topics, including Virgil and Chaucer, and the problems of translation, derives largely from the prologues which he furnished for each book of the 'Eneados', and the series of epilogues, in which he took a leisurely farewell of Virgil, his patron, his readers, and even his critics. The prologues vary greatly in tone, length, and metrical form -- this includes rhyme royal, the decasyllabic couplet (used also for the translation), and the archaic 13-line alliterative stanza of prologue 8. Critics have debated the relevance of some of them to the 'Aeneid', and whether they might better be regarded as independent poems. There is no doubt, however, that they contain much of Douglas's finest and most original writing. Several offer glimpses of the poet in the process of composition; prologue 7 contains a brilliant vignette, in which the poet rises from bed on a wintry morning and shudders at the cold, before he turns to resume work at his lectern. Douglas's tone is often highly colloquial: sometimes he chats familiarly with his readers, sometimes he exhorts them to read poetry attentively -- 'Considdir it warly, reid oftar than anys [once]' (prologue 1, 107). Prologues 7, 12, and 13, commonly entitled the 'nature prologues', are outstanding for their perceptive description of the natural world in winter and summer, moving from tiny and vivid details to grand panoramic vistas. 
Douglas completed the 'Eneados' on 22 July 1513; on 9 September 1513 occurred the disastrous battle of Flodden, at which James IV died, to be succeeded by James V, a child of eighteen months. Flodden marked a watershed in Douglas's life. Poetry seems to have been abandoned, and his attention diverted to the power struggles within Scotland, and the advancement of himself and his family. On 30 September 1513 Douglas was made a free burgess of Edinburgh: this, though possibly a tribute to his poetry, is more likely to be a sign of the high status of the Douglases in the city. In August 1514 his nephew Archibald Douglas, now the sixth earl of Angus, married James IV's widow, Margaret Tudor. Henceforward Douglas's fortunes were closely linked with those of his nephew. The queen was held to have forfeited the regency by her marriage to a powerful nobleman, and the duke of Albany, who had lived in France for most of his life, was summoned to be the governor. The queen's supporters, led by Angus and Gavin Douglas, were opposed by many of the lords of council, including James Beaton, the chancellor. Beaton was temporarily deprived of the great seal, and its keys were handed over to Douglas, who himself for a short time had pretensions to the high office of chancellor. 
Many important churchmen died at Flodden, and at a time when several rich benefices were vacant Douglas's family connection with the queen was at first advantageous to him. During 1514 Margaret wrote several letters, in the name of the infant James V, to Pope Leo X, urging Douglas's appointment to the abbey of Arbroath. She also supported his claim to the archbishopric of St Andrews, and on 23 November 1514 persuaded Henry VIII to write on his behalf to Rome. Henry praised Douglas lavishly -- though hardly from firsthand acquaintance -- for his extraordinary learning, probity, and great zeal for the public good. Douglas was so confident that he occupied St Andrews Castle with his servants, but was forced to surrender it. There were more powerful contestants for both benefices: Leo X granted Arbroath 'in commendam' to James Stewart, earl of Moray, and Andrew Forman, bishop of Moray, was appointed archbishop of St Andrews. 
Douglas was thus doubly disappointed. In January 1515, however, another benefice fell vacant, on the death of George Brown, bishop of Dunkeld. A letter written by Douglas on 18 January to Adam Williamson, one of his agents, leaves no doubt concerning his resentment towards Forman: 'yon evyll myndyt Byschop of Murray trublys all our promociones, and has sped Sanct Andris to himself'. No less evident is his ambitious desire for Dunkeld, 'a rycht gud Byschopry of rent and the thryd Seyt of the realm' ('Poetical Works', 1.xxxvi). The queen, with the consent of some lords of council, presented him to the bishopric on 20 January 1515. Leo X consented to the appointment, but in May 1515 the governor, Albany, gave his support to another contestant, Andrew Stewart, brother of the powerful earl of Atholl. In July Albany and those lords of council hostile to Douglas charged him with breaking the laws concerning the purchase of benefices at Rome. He was imprisoned for nearly a year, but was released some time before 30 July 1516, and was officially appointed to the see of Dunkeld on 16 September 1516. Even when Douglas arrived in Dunkeld, after his consecration, he still met with armed resistance from Andrew Stewart. One of the canons, Alexander Myln, who was probably an eyewitness, gives a vivid account of the incident, describing how 'shooting began from the steeple and the episcopal palace, and the nobles who were with the bishop disposed themselves for his defence' (Myln, 333). 
According to Myln, Douglas now devoted himself to good works, one of which was to complete the building of a bridge over the River Tay, begun by his predecessor. But his life as bishop was by no means calm and uneventful. Dunkeld, which is in the highlands, was notorious as the haunt of criminals and outlaws: Queen Margaret, in urging Douglas's preferment, had written that it required 'a strong man to curb an unruly people' ('Letters of James V', 17). Douglas's hostility to Andrew Forman continued: as late as 1518 he refused to render obedience to Forman as archbishop of St Andrews, and when Forman sent messengers to Dunkeld, Douglas's servants repelled them forcibly, threatening to throw them in the Tay. Douglas seems to have yielded at last, possibly because of papal pressure. He was often absent from Dunkeld, travelling to Edinburgh for consultations with Albany, or attending meetings of the lords of council. In the spring of 1517 Douglas was sent on a diplomatic mission to France, together with Patrick Panter, the royal secretary, and Robert Cockburn, bishop of Ross. The chief object of the embassy was to renew the alliance between France and Scotland, and to arrange for a marriage between James V and a daughter of Francis I. Douglas returned to Scotland in the autumn, shortly after the treaty of Rouen was confirmed on 26 August 1517. 
After Albany's departure to France in June 1517, Scotland grew more anarchic and faction-ridden. There was a long-running dispute between the Hamiltons and the Douglases, which had as its focus the office of provost of Edinburgh. When this dispute turned to pitched battle on the streets of Edinburgh (30 April 1520), Gavin Douglas took no part in the fighting, but acted as a mediator between the two sides. Lindsay of Pitscottie, a vivid but unreliable historian, describes a picturesque conversation between Douglas and James Beaton, bishop of Glasgow, on this occasion, and states that Douglas later intervened to save Beaton's life. 
After 1517 the marriage of Margaret Tudor and the earl of Angus grew increasingly troubled. Margaret accused her husband of wrongfully appropriating to his own use the revenues of her properties. In this quarrel Douglas supported Angus, and acted as his advocate when the legal dispute was heard before the lords of council on 28 February 1519. It is not surprising that he lost the friendship of Margaret, who considered him partly responsible for Angus's harshness towards her. When Albany returned to Scotland in November 1521, Douglas again supported his nephew, who had fled to the borders and was openly rebellious. In December of that year Douglas travelled to London, and attempted to secure English support for Angus. His last surviving letters, written to Cardinal Wolsey between December 1521 and January 1522, vividly illustrate Douglas's hatred of Albany, whom he called a 'dedelie inimye to me and all my hous' ('Poetical Works', 1.xcix), and exasperation with his nephew, that 'young wytless fuyll' (ibid., 1.civ). 
Douglas's spirit was by no means crushed. About this time he formed a new friendship, with the Italian historian Polydore Vergil, resident in London since 1502. Vergil reports that they discussed Scottish history, and that Douglas, ever a controversialist, 'vehementlie' criticized John Mair for his scepticism concerning Gathelus and Scota, the mythical founders of Scotland. Despite his absence from Scotland, Douglas sought to obtain the archbishopric of St Andrews, vacant upon the death of Andrew Forman. He seems to have enlisted the support of Wolsey, who wrote on his behalf to the pope. On 21 February 1522, however, James V ratified a decreet issued by Albany, proclaiming Douglas guilty of treason and stating that letters were to be sent to the pope to prevent his promotion. (The Scottish parliament later declared this charge of treason unfounded.) On 8 April James Beaton, Albany's nominee to St Andrews, sought the aid of the king of Denmark to 'impede the ambitious schemes of a proscribed exile' ('Letters of James V', 90). 
Whatever Douglas's schemes, they were frustrated by his death, in London, apparently from the plague, in September 1522. In his will, dated 10 September 1522 and made while he was staying in the house of his friend Lord Dacre, he requested that his body should be buried in the hospital church of the Savoy. A brass tablet, reading 'Gavanus Dowglas, natione Scotus, Dunkellensis praesul, patria sua exul', formerly marked his grave. 
Douglas attained high office in the Scottish church, and he briefly played an important political role in the turbulent years of James V's minority. He cannot be regarded as a great bishop or statesman, comparable in stature to James Kennedy, bishop of St Andrews, or William Elphinstone, bishop of Aberdeen. But his career is more richly documented than those of other early Scottish churchmen and poets, and vividly illuminates many aspects of contemporary Scotland, such as the strong attachment to kin and 'house', and the intense rivalries and power struggles within the church. More positively, Douglas throws valuable light on the education and literary culture of Scotland in the early sixteenth century, through his friendships (and occasional quarrels) with scholars such as John Mair and Polydore Vergil, through the impressive width of his reading, and, above all, through his own writings. Douglas's lasting importance lies in his poetry, which was highly esteemed, in England as well as Scotland, throughout the sixteenth century. The 'Eneados' circulated in several manuscript copies (five of which survive) and in an edition printed at London (1553). No manuscript survives of 'The Palice of Honour', but it was printed at least three times, in Edinburgh ('c'.1540 and 1579) and in London ('c'.1553). It was the 'Eneados', however, that was most famous and influential: it was imitated by Tudor poets, notably Henry Howard, earl of Surrey. In later centuries Douglas's reputation remained high, assisted in part by the association of his name with that of Virgil, and also by the interest of his language to antiquarians and scholars, such as Francis Junius. More recently critics have debated whether Douglas should be regarded as a medieval or Renaissance figure, and to what extent he had a political purpose in translating the 'Aeneid'. The 'Eneados', however, has an importance that is more than merely historical. In Ezra Pound's opinion 'Douglas gets more poetry out of Virgil than any other translator' ('Literary Essays', 1954, 245). In all Douglas's writings, including his letters, a distinctive voice may be heard, trenchant, acerbic, and often witty. 


@@@@@


doc= 7883


Douglas, George, first earl of Angus (1378x80?-1403?), magnate, was the illegitimate son of William Douglas, first earl of Douglas (c.1330-1384), and Earl William's sister-in-law, Margaret Stewart ('b'. 1353x62, died in or before 1418), eldest daughter and heir of Thomas Stewart, earl of Angus, and wife of Thomas, earl of Mar, whose sister, also Margaret, was Douglas's wife. The liaison between George's parents presumably began after the death of Thomas, earl of Mar, early in 1377. Thomas died childless, and his estates and titles passed to his sister's husband, George's father, who was made earl of Mar in July 1377. Margaret Stewart became Earl William's mistress and by January 1379 was residing in Douglas's fortress of Tantallon in Haddingtonshire. The relationship produced a son, George. Despite George's illegitimacy, Margaret Stewart was determined to arrange his succession to the estates and title of his maternal grandfather, the earl of Angus. In 1388-9 she was able to exploit a political struggle for control of the kingdom between two of Robert II's sons, John, earl of Carrick, and Robert, earl of Fife, to obtain royal ratification of George's right to inherit his grandfather's earldom and lordships. On 10 April 1389 Robert II confirmed Countess Margaret's resignation of the earldom of Angus and the lordships of Abernethy and Bunkle in favour of her son, who became first earl of Angus of a new creation in 1397. 
Between 24 May and 9 November 1397 Angus married Mary Stewart, a daughter of Robert III. As part of the marriage settlement the earl's lands in Forfar and his lordships of Abernethy and Bunkle were elevated to the status of a regality. Under the terms of the marriage contract Robert III was obliged to confirm all resignations of land made in George's favour by his half-sister Isabella Douglas, countess of Mar, and his cousin Sir James Sandilands of Calder. This arrangement gave Angus claims to many of the lordships which had been the property of his father. After the latter's death his estates and title had passed to his legitimate son, James, who, however, was killed at the battle of Otterburn in August 1388. The title of earl of Douglas and possession of many of Earl William's estates had passed, by means of an entail drawn up in 1342, to Earl James's illegitimate kinsman Archibald Douglas, lord of Galloway, who became third earl of Douglas in April 1389. Robert III seems to have encouraged George Douglas's claims to the wider Douglas inheritance in 1397 in order to undermine Earl Archibald and his allies, who were associated with the king's brother and political rival, Robert, earl of Fife. The arrangement made in 1397 essentially gave Angus rights to all the lordships not covered by the 1342 entail, including Liddesdale, Cavers, and Jedworth; his attempts to recover control of Liddesdale led to a serious feud with an alternative Douglas claimant, Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith. 
Angus was briefly active in Anglo-Scottish diplomacy, but on 14 September 1402 he was among the Scottish noblemen captured by English forces at the battle of Hamildon Hill. He is said to have died in England shortly after his capture during an outbreak of plague. When his son, William Douglas, was served as heir to his father in Liddesdale on 27 March 1409, it was noted that the lordship had been in the crown's hands for six years, suggesting that George died early in 1403. His widow, Mary, had certainly married Sir James Kennedy of Dunure before 25 January 1406. Angus and his wife had two children, William, who succeeded as earl of Angus and was the first of the so-called Red Douglases, and Elizabeth, who married Sir Alexander Forbes before 4 November 1423 and, surviving him, Sir David Hay of Yester. Mary Stewart was to remarry three times in all. After Kennedy's death in 1408 she became the spouse of Sir William Graham of Montrose, who died in 1424. Finally, widowed yet again, she married Sir William Edmonstone of Duntreath in 1425. She seems to have died some time after 1458, and is said to have been buried in the parish church of Strathblane. All her marriages produced children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7884


Douglas, George, fourth earl of Angus (c.1417-1463), courtier and soldier, was the second son of William Douglas, second earl of Angus (c.1398-1437), and his wife, Margaret ('fl'. 1410-1484), daughter of Sir William Hay of Yester. He succeeded to the earldom on the death of his childless elder brother, James Douglas, in 1446. William Douglas, who had been a prominent crown servant in the reign of James I, died shortly after the king, and his eldest son failed to make his mark at court. Earl George, however, seems to have established himself quickly there after his succession, but managed to avoid entanglement with the notorious Livingston faction, whose fall in late 1449 had widespread ramifications. Furthermore, although he continued to witness crown charters thereafter, he was not caught up in the collapse of the Black Douglases either, and indeed it was the final defeat of the earls of Douglas in May 1455 which brought him further prestige. 
Angus was by this time seldom at court, yet James II granted him the lordship of Douglas, Lanarkshire, which had been forfeited by James, ninth earl of Douglas. Earl George already possessed major estates (most of them held in regality) in Forfarshire (Angus), Fife, Perthshire, Haddingtonshire, Dumfriesshire, Selkirkshire, Berwickshire, and Roxburghshire. His becoming lord of Douglas represented a significant accretion of honour, marking that he was now the senior member of the house of Douglas. He had succeeded his brother as warden of the east marches (against England), and after the defeat of the Black Douglases he obtained the wardenship of the middle marches as well. He shared the military preoccupations of his father. He and others invaded England to counter raids from the south and burnt Alnwick, probably in 1448. He may have had a role in the rout of the Douglases in 1455; and some accounts suggest that he was standing beside James II at the siege of Roxburgh in August 1460 when the king received the fatal blow from a Scottish gun which shattered when fired, and was himself injured. 
Although the family historian, David Hume of Godscroft (died 'c'.1630), relates that at the coronation of the eight-year-old James III on 10 August 1460 Angus seized the crown and put it on the head of the new king, challenging anyone else to remove it, he seems to have played little part in political life during the opening years of the minority administration. It is certain, however, that the earl sought to profit from the civil war in England. When Henry VI fled with his family to Scotland, in 1461, he contracted with Angus to enlist his support against the Yorkists, in return for which Angus would be created an English duke and would obtain a castle and territory to the value of 2000 marks, on the north side of the rivers Trent and Humber. Angus supplied material help in January 1463 by relieving Edward IV's forces' siege of Alnwick, where French troops raised by Henry VI's spouse, Margaret of Anjou, had taken refuge. But before Angus could capitalize on this he died, on 12 March 1463; he was apparently buried beside his ancestors in the collegiate church of St Bride, Abernethy, Perthshire. 
Hume of Godscroft regards Angus as the earl who securely founded the family's fortunes, and gives him the sobriquet 'the Great Earl'. After the fall of the Black Douglases, Earl George was careful to build up his following, particularly when he had assumed the lordship of Douglas. Most notably, he persuaded some greater and lesser barons to effect bonds of manrent to him. Recent scholarship has suggested that these bonds, which first appear in the 1440s, indicate efforts by a new nobility within Scotland to establish their status. Forfeitures in the reigns of James I and James II fell hard on many old noble families. The new nobility sought to assure themselves of support among the lairds by securing written, personal promises of loyalty, often for life, in return for maintenance of the subscribers' interests. Angus received bonds from barons whose estates lay in Roxburghshire, Lanarkshire, and Forfarshire, including two lords of parliament: James Hamilton, first Lord Hamilton of Cadzow (died 1479), and John Somerville, second Lord Somerville (died 1491). Hamilton, formerly a leading adherent of the Black Douglases, had changed sides in 1455 and been given forfeited Douglas estates. His giving a bond to Angus represents a striking demonstration of regional supremacy on the latter's part. Earl George is also said to have taken a wider perspective of his family estates, moving their centre from Perthshire and Forfarshire to his border strongholds, notably Jedburgh and Hermitage in Liddesdale; but he is often found in Edinburgh, presumably with the king's court, and in 1455 he received the king's permission to construct and fortify a castle at Broughty, Forfarshire. 
Earl George married, apparently before his elder brother's death, Isabel, daughter of Sir John Sibbald of Balgonie, master of the king's household in the 1440s. They had two sons, one of whom was Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus, and six daughters. Shortly before Earl George died Archibald was contracted to marry a daughter of Alexander Seton, first earl of Huntly, but the marriage is not known to have occurred. After her husband's death Isabel married John Carmichael of Balmedie (by 1477) and then Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven (by 1489). She had died by February 1503. 


@@@@@


doc= 7885


Douglas, Sir George, of Pittendriech (1490?-1552), nobleman, was the second son of George Douglas, master of Angus ('c'.1469-1513), who was killed at Flodden, and his wife, Elizabeth Drummond. Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, was his elder brother. George's early years are obscure, but he emerged as a force to be reckoned with in the confusion which followed the killing in 1517 of Antoine de la Bastie, the principal agent of the duke of Albany. Although Douglas's involvement in the crime could not be proven, he was bustled off to France after incarcerations in Blackness and Inchgarvy. Throughout his life he collaborated with his elder brother, in a partnership in which Angus (while clearly not stupid) provided the brawn, George the brains. And there is no doubting the latter's intelligence and wide-ranging adventurousness. Behind his inveterate evasiveness a lively mind can always be seen at work. Few of his ingenious schemes saw fruition, but they all required considered replies from the English privy council, the council of the north, and even the king. 
George Douglas aimed to secure independence in life and eventually achieved a fair measure of success. He had become a laird by about 1516 through his marriage to Elizabeth, heir to David Douglas of Pittendriech, whose lands lay near Elgin; they had two sons, David, who became seventh earl of Angus, and James Douglas, later earl of Morton and regent of Scotland in the 1570s. Pittendriech also had an illegitimate son, George of Parkhead, and four illegitimate daughters. Marriage to an heiress brought wealth, and he transformed Dalkeith Castle into something of a palace (in March 1543 Cardinal David Beaton was imprisoned there). Because Angus had no male children, George Douglas was styled master of Angus as his brother's heir presumptive. He was indeed very much Angus's man, acting for him on numerous occasions; rarely did their ambitions clash, and much of Pittendriech's story is the biography of Angus as well. He had been knighted by 3 October 1524, when he was described as 'a man of more knowledge and experience than the Earl' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 4, pt 1, no. 701). Master of the royal household from 1526, he shared power with Angus during the latter's ascendancy (1525-8), and when James V took control went into exile with the earl in England, where he remained from 1529 to 1543. Having been forfeited in 1528, Sir George was several times involved in efforts to recover his family's lost position. In 1532 and again in 1542 he took part in English raids into Scotland, and he seems to have maintained spies in Scotland throughout his years in exile. 
Following the death of James V on 14 December 1542 -- for which his dispatch is a vivid if uncertainly reliable source -- Douglas returned to Scotland with Angus early in 1543; not everyone was pleased to see them, but eventually the two men recovered their estates and positions. Douglas was quick to profit from his return, by marrying his son James to the youngest daughter of the third earl of Morton in 1543, with a settlement securing the earldom of Morton for them. The exiled Douglases came back with English encouragement and ostensibly at least they were committed to the furtherance of Henry VIII's plans for Anglo-Scottish union. Sir George also seems to have become a committed protestant. Thereafter he was seldom out of the records and featured in the English ones almost as frequently as his apparently much more powerful brother. 
Pittendriech owed his prominence to qualities peculiarly suited to the confused political position prevailing in Scotland in the early 1540s -- abounding energy, a wide-ranging intelligence, and an almost pathological deviousness. He had an uncanny memory for faces and for gossip; he knew everyone that mattered and most of their secrets. He was also unusually sensitive to geographical factors; thus his outlined schemes for invasion routes for English armies were infinitely detailed and quite accurate. Moreover he had great personal charm and was a negotiator of high skill. This took a number of forms, not least his manipulation of the rather guileless English ambassador Sir Ralph Sadler and a mastery of the art of telling people what they wanted to hear. In spring 1543 Scottish ambassadors were dispatched to London to conclude what became the treaties of Greenwich: the betrothal of Queen Mary and Prince Edward. When the envoys needed stiffening, it was Pittendriech (along with the earl of Glencairn) who was sent early in May, in part because he had become familiar with Henry VIII, in part because he was avowedly in favour of the marriage, but also because of his reputation as a canny and forceful diplomat. In this he was largely successful: the resulting treaty secured much of what the Scots wanted. 
At this time Pittendriech and his brother appeared to be staunch 'Englishmen'. Early in January 1544 they were captured by the governor, the second earl of Arran, and Cardinal Beaton, and were reported to be in danger of execution. When he was released from Blackness in May by the earl of Hertford, then leading an army of invasion, Douglas told him that 'bothe his brother and he shuld have loste their heddes, and the daye prefixed for the same' (Bain, 2.372). But although he maintained an overtly Anglophile stance, at least to the extent of being free with his advice, doubts soon arose as to his trustworthiness. By December 1544 Henry VIII's agents were complaining how 'thErle of Anguishe and George Douglas have nowe opened their untrew, false and disloyall hartes' (ibid., 2.525-6), and soon after Henry himself ordered that the two men be captured and offered 1000 marks to whoever should bring Douglas in. So complete was his rapprochement with Beaton that on 18 March 1545 it was reported that 'the Cardinall and George Dowglas rulith the realme of Scotland this tyme as they thynk good' (ibid., 2.583). Pittendriech and Angus had recently both fought in the victorious Scottish army at Ancrum Moor on 27 February, while by the beginning of 1546 each was receiving a French pension. Sir George's position survived the murder of Beaton on 29 May 1546 and he continued to be the target for English detestation and distrust, only just escaping when Dalkeith Castle was captured on 3 June 1548. A member of the Scottish council at that time, he took part in Mary of Guise's visit to France in October 1550. In 1552 he accompanied Arran (now duke of Chatelherault) to the north of Scotland and during this expedition he died at Elgin, some time before 10 May, worth $3582 Scots. His widow lived until at least 1560. 
Douglas is one of the more fascinating figures of his time, not least because so much of his correspondence survives and because so much was written about him by contemporaries. Bishop John Lesley spoke for many when he described him as 'sa well knawin' in Scotland, England, and France for his 'inventionis' and for his 'politique and wechtie effertis' (Lesley, 244). His 'falsehood' enraged Englishmen, then and later, and has led to his coming to be perceived as treacherous and unpatriotic, ready to sell out his country for gain. However, the circumstances of sixteenth-century Scottish political life were such as to make a certain slipperiness essential for survival, and in any case there were limits to Pittendriech's unreliability. The one man he never played false was his brother, and he was ever loyal to his kinsfolk; when Dalkeith was taken in 1548, the house was full of them. Like Angus, he lived and died in the faith of the Douglases. 


@@@@@


doc= 7886


Douglas, George, first earl of Dumbarton (c.1636-1692), army officer, was the second son of the second marriage of William Douglas, first marquess of Douglas (1589-1660), to Lady Mary Gordon (1610/11-1674), daughter of George Gordon, first marquess of Huntly. In 1647 he received permission from Charles I to go to France for five years. He took military service under Louis XIV, receiving by 1656 the colonelcy of the regiment formerly commanded by his elder half-brothers, Lord James Douglas and Archibald Douglas, styled earl of Angus and Ormond. The regiment was recalled in 1666 during the Second Anglo-Dutch War, upon which its arrears, and his pension, were withheld. Charles II returned part of the regiment 'as a present' in 1667, whence it was used as a diplomatic tool by Louis XIV in order to endanger British trade with the Ottoman Porte by making it part of the invasion force of Candia (Crete) in 1668/9. Though a great favourite of Louis XIV, he was said to be very much 'in their black book' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/122/122) after deserting the service in 1669, and Arlington had to forward him 242 livres so that he could afford to leave France. He soon returned to French service and was a 'marechal de camp' at the time when his regiment fought alongside the duke of Monmouth's regiment royal anglais in the French army during the Third Anglo-Dutch War. On 9 March 1675 Charles II granted him the titles of earl of Dumbarton and Lord Ettrick, though he owned no land anywhere in Scotland. He was appointed a lieutenant-general in the French army in 1676/7 after considerable manoeuvring at the French court. His brother the duke of Hamilton was told that the appointment would gain him nothing save a further debt of the 20,000 livres he was forced to spend on his equipage for the French encampment at Cambray. In the same year the regiment of his younger brother Lord James was collapsed into his own. His regiment was formally disbanded from the French army in June 1678, but was re-formed on the English establishment as the 1st Royal regiment of foot, or the Royal Scots. He again recruited Scots for French service in 1679. From 1680 onwards his regiment served in Ireland, with 200 of his men also being sent to Tangier. 
Dumbarton was a great royal favourite; in 1684 Charles II granted him $1500 to cover fines imposed on him for ecclesiastical irregularities resulting from his Catholicism. Following James VII and II's accession to the throne he assisted in the suppression of Argyll's rebellion and was appointed commander-in-chief of the army in Scotland. He was an integral member of James's Catholic court party, supporting the policies in Scotland of his brother-in-law James Drummond, earl of Perth, chancellor of Scotland, and Perth's brother John, earl of Melfort, secretary of state for Scotland. In 1687 he became one of the founding knights of the 'restored' Order of the Thistle, and was appointed a gentleman of James's bedchamber. He received the estate of the attainted Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun in the same year, upon which he wrote to his brother-in-law the duke of Queensberry, saying of his sister that 'now I am a Scots Laird I may hop[e] to see herr' (NL Scot., Salt. MS 17498, fol. 57). The king also helped pay off his many debts. He was one of the courtiers who advised James to flee in 1688. He followed James to Rochester, being one of the three courtiers, including his nephew the earl of Arran, who accompanied him there. He died at St Germain-en-Laye on 20 March 1692 and was buried, possibly the same day, at St Germain-des-Pres. He married, in or about 1686, Anne, daughter of Robert Wheatley, of Bracknell, Berkshire. She was supposedly a sister of the duchess of Northumberland, but Dumbarton's brother the duke of Hamilton would never consent to meet her. She died at St Germain-en-Laye on 25 April 1691. He and Anne had a son, George, second earl of Dumbarton, born in April 1687. He wanted to be a monk, but was dissuaded by Mary of Modena in 1704. He returned to Britain, having been pardoned of high treason as a Jacobite in 1710, and attained high rank in the British army and the diplomatic service, being appointed ambassador to Russia in 1716. He died without issue and the title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 7887


Douglas, George, fourth Lord Mordington (d. 1741), political writer, was the only son of James Douglas, third Lord Mordington (1651-1706?), and his wife, Jean Seton ('b'. 1651), eldest daughter of Alexander Seton, first Viscount Kingston. On 16 November 1704 he married Mary Dillon (died in or after 1745). He was imprisoned for debt at Newgate on 22 April 1706, and abandoned his wife soon after. On 1 April 1715, while his wife still lived, he went through a form of marriage with Catherine (died 1741), daughter of Robert Lauder, rector of Shenty, Hertfordshire. She styled herself Lady Mordington; they had one son, Charles, and two daughters, Mary and Campbellina. 
Mordington's principal political study was 'The Great Blessing of a Monarchical Government' (1724), a rambling work of patriotic and anti-Catholic sentiment which he dedicated to George I. In the preface he wrote of his not being 'insensible that what I sent into the world at two different times about three years since, occasioned by a weekly paper called ''the Independent Whig'', created me some enemies', referring to two tracts: 'Aminadab, or, The Quaker vision: a satirical tract in defence of Dr Sacheverell's sermon before the lord mayor', which was answered anonymously in 'The Tory Quaker'; and 'A Letter from Lord Mordington to the Lord Archbishop of York' (1721). 
Mordington died in Covent Garden, London, on 13 May 1741 and was buried at Paddington, Middlesex. He was survived by both Catherine Lauder, who died on 3 June of the same year, and his estranged wife. His son, Charles, did not assume the title in 1741, having no landed property. He was imprisoned in December 1745, first at Preston and later at Carlisle, for his supposed Jacobite sympathies. He then pleaded his peerage, and the trial was postponed. However, he was still in Carlisle gaol in 1750 and may have remained there until his death in 1755. His sister Mary, who was married to William Weaver, an officer of the Horse Guards, then assumed the title of Mordington; but she died childless, and it finally lapsed in July 1791. 


@@@@@


doc= 7888


Douglas, Sir Howard, third baronet (1776-1861), army officer and colonial official, the third son of Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Douglas, first baronet (d. 1789), and his second wife, Sarah (died 16 Aug 1779), the daughter of James Wood, was born at Gosport, Hampshire, on 23 January 1776. His mother died when he was three and, his father being away at sea, he was brought up by his aunt Helena, the wife of James Baillie of Olive Bank, Musselburgh, near Edinburgh. 
He was educated by a governess, then by a tutor, and finally at Musselburgh grammar school, but his early boyhood was spent largely with fishermen, from whom he gained knowledge of boats and the sea. He was intended for the navy, but his father died suddenly in early 1789 and his guardians -- without consulting him and to his bitter disappointment -- obtained for him a nomination to the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. Douglas initially failed the simple entrance examination in reading, writing, and arithmetic, but passed a few weeks later and entered as a cadet on 29 June 1790. He soon showed mathematical ability and became a favourite with Dr Charles Hutton. He appears to have been a daring boy: he spent his spare time on the river, and improved his seamanship by working his passage to and from the north on Leith and Berwick smacks. 
Douglas passed out as second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 1 January 1794, and was promoted first lieutenant on 30 May 1794. Reportedly he served under the duke of York on the continent, but this appears doubtful. He commanded the artillery of the northern district during the spring 1795 invasion alarms, and in August of that year he embarked for Quebec as senior officer of a detachment of troops on board the transport 'Phillis', which was wrecked off Little Bay Head, Cape Ray, Newfoundland. Douglas suppressed an attempted mutiny among the soldiers, and the survivors were rescued by a trader and taken to Great Jervais, a fishing port on Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, where they passed the winter. They were then taken to Halifax, Nova Scotia, where Douglas served three months, and then to Quebec, where he remained for a year. In summer 1796 he commanded a schooner scouting for the French fleet said to be making for Quebec, and in 1797 and 1798 he served at Kingston, Upper Canada, where he hunted and fished among the native people and was sent on a Canadian government mission to the Cherokees. He once skated from Montreal to Quebec to attend a ball, a feat which cost the life of a brother officer who accompanied him. He also had an affair with a young Quebec woman, and they had a daughter. Douglas returned home in 1798, and his seamanship saved the timber-laden brig in which he travelled. 
In July 1799 Douglas married Anne ('c'.1781-1854), the eldest daughter of Captain James Dundas of Edinburgh, who was in the East India Company's marine service; they had six sons and three daughters. 
Douglas became a captain lieutenant in the Royal Artillery on 2 October 1799 and served at Plymouth, with one of the new horse artillery troops at Canterbury and Woolwich, and for ten months with Congreve's mortar brigade (1803-4). This last, organized by General Congreve (father of the rocket pioneer Sir William Congreve), comprised twenty 8 inch mortars and a battery of field guns. The intention, if the enemy landed, was to bombard them at night with continuous shell fire, preparatory to a dawn attack. Douglas became captain in 1804, but as he was required at the Royal Military College he was placed on half pay, retired from the artillery, and appointed major in the 1st battalion of the army of reserve on 12 October 1804 and the following day placed on half pay of the York rangers. He continued on the retired list of that corps until promoted major-general. 
The Royal Military College (later at Sandhurst) was formally established in 1801 with its senior department, to train staff officers, at High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. From 1804 to 1808 Douglas was superintendent of the senior department, and also held until 1820 the post of inspector-general of instructions. He improved and extended the training and improved discipline. Among his students were Philip Bainbrigge, Henry Hardinge, and other well-known officers of the Peninsular period. However, opinions on him differed. Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Napier, who graduated from the senior department in 1817, alleged: 'Sir Howard Douglas is perfectly ignorant of military affairs and anything but 'able' and could not 'teach' what he did not 'know'... Sir Howard is 'quite ignorant' of fortification' (Bond, 53-4). He became brevet lieutenant-colonel on 31 December 1806. 
In 1808 Douglas was appointed assistant quartermaster-general in Spain. He joined Sir John Moore's retreating army in December at Benevente, and was present at the battle of Corunna on 18 January 1809. In July 1809 he accompanied the disastrous Walcheren expedition as assistant quartermaster-general and took part in the artillery attack on Flushing; he wrote the journal of the expedition appended to the report of the parliamentary commissioners. Douglas succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his unmarried elder half-brother, Vice-Admiral Sir William Henry Douglas, second baronet, on 23 May 1809. He then resumed his college duties. Concerned with naval warfare, he studied navigation and developed his 'improved reflecting circle and semicircle for land and marine surveying' (patented in July 1811), for which he was elected FRS in January 1816. In 1811 Lord Liverpool sent him to the north of Spain to report on the state of the Spanish armies in Galicia and Asturias and on Spanish military resources, including the guerrillas, and how they could be assisted. After conferring with Wellington he went on his mission, and was present at the operations on the Orbigo and Esta, in the combined naval and military operations of the Spaniards and Sir Hope Popham's naval squadron on the north coast in the early part of 1812, in the capture of Lequertio, in the siege of Astorga, in operations on the Douro, in the siege of Zamorra, and at the attack on the Douro ports. At the end of August 1812 he joined the army on the advance to Burgos. The British government, expressing satisfaction with his work, then recalled him to the Royal Military College. He became brevet colonel on 4 June 1814, major-general on 19 July 1821, and lieutenant-general on 10 January 1837. 
At the end of the Napoleonic wars Douglas had been appalled to witness the low standard of gunnery and gun drill aboard some British warships. Inspired by the brilliant training regime of Captain Philip B. V. Broke and the capture of the USS 'Chesapeake' in 1813, he realized that naval officers required a basic knowledge of gunnery as part of their basic training, and that seaman gunners should be encouraged to remain in the service. In 1818 he presented his findings to the Admiralty, without success. He then began to correspond with Broke. Among the naval lords between 1815 and 1830 only Henry Hotham, who had served on the North American station and seen HMS 'Shannon', favoured modern gunnery methods. His interest may well have been reflected in the initial impetus for the gunnery training ship HMS 'Excellent', set up in 1830. Douglas's 'Treatise on Naval Gunnery', which went through five editions between 1820 and 1861, remained the basis of study until the late 1840s, when Douglas fell out with the captain of the ship, Henry Chads RN, over the significance of the new shell-firing guns. Unlike members of the 'liberal' school, Douglas considered shells unreliable and inaccurate. War experience would prove him largely correct. Douglas's book was more than a mere artillery training manual; it encompassed key elements of national strategy, notably the development of new weapons and tactics for the bombardment of foreign naval bases -- initially Cherbourg in France. He considered that mortars, and later Armstrong breech-loading cannon, enabled naval forces to lay off at long range and destroy naval bases. In the Crimean War his ideas were applied at Sveaborg in August 1855 with devastating results. 
In 1816 Douglas published his 'Essay on the Principle and Construction of Military Bridges', initially compiled in 1808 as a manuscript textbook for the Royal Military College, which reportedly gave Telford the idea of the suspension principle in bridge construction. In 1808 he had also submitted to the authorities a plan for a corps of pontooners. In 1819 he published 'Observations on the Motives, Errors, and Tendency of M. Carnot's System of Defence'. His criticism of Carnot drew a reply from a French engineer, M. Augoyat. Copies of the latter work were forwarded by Douglas, then residing in Paris, to Wellington, who was officially interested in the Prussian Rhine frontier fortresses then under construction, and led to artillery experiments at Woolwich, in accordance with Douglas's suggestions, in 1822. 
From 1823 to 1831 Douglas was lieutenant-governor of New Brunswick, where he arrived in August 1824. He was dynamic, effective, and popular. He identified with the province and encouraged its development, reorganizing local government and the militia. In 1825 fires destroyed Government House, forests, and much of the capital, Fredericton; Douglas directed the firefighting, relief, and reconstruction. He favoured British immigration but opposed the British government's pauper emigration, and he wanted adequate reserves for native North Americans. He improved communications and promoted rural schools, agricultural societies, and fairs. He saw the North American colonies as a source of strength to Britain and urged the British government to continue financial support to New Brunswick, opposing Treasury policy on the payment of customs officials. He was a founder and first chancellor of King's College, Fredericton (later the University of New Brunswick), which received its royal charter in 1829 and where he endowed an annual prize. He resisted American encroachments. The boundary dispute with the United States was referred to arbitration by the king of the Netherlands, and in March 1829 Douglas was ordered to England to advise the British delegation. While there he was awarded an honorary DCL degree by Oxford University (1 July 1829) for his work in New Brunswick, especially with King's College, and was enthusiastically cheered by the undergraduates. His presence at The Hague when the Belgians rebelled in 1830 led to his being sent on a secret observation mission on the Dutch frontier. In February 1831 he resigned as lieutenant-governor in order to campaign publicly for continued British protective tariffs for British North American timber, against the ascendant free-traders. He published a pamphlet, 'Considerations on the Value and Importance of the British North American Provinces' (1831). When the House of Commons rejected a whig government bill to reduce duties on Baltic timber, Douglas was acclaimed for saving the North American timber trade, and in New Brunswick a public subscription was raised to send him a service of silver plate. However, he was not favoured by the whig government, who disliked his firmness on the boundary question and also his opposition to the 'Reform Bill' and to emancipation. 
In 1832 Douglas published 'Naval Evolutions on the Battle of the Saints', defending his father's claim as originator of the manoeuvre of 'breaking the line'. This work was suggested by a conversation with his old friend and school companion Sir Walter Scott. Douglas unsuccessfully contested Liverpool as a Conservative in 1832 and again in 1835. From March 1835 to December 1840 he was lord high commissioner of the Ionian Islands. The post was a difficult one, but despite criticism at home he governed firmly, if sometimes high-handedly. He foiled conspiracy, domestic and foreign, and countered Russian intrigue, promoted education and public works, and improved the revenue. He introduced a new code of laws based on the Greek model, known as the Douglas code, and founded a prize medal (the Douglas medal) at the Ionian College. At his departure the Ionian states erected a column at Corfu commemorating the achievements of his government. In 1837 he became lieutenant-general and in 1841 colonel of the 99th foot, and in 1851 was transferred to the 15th foot. In November 1851 he was promoted general. Douglas was elected a Conservative MP for Liverpool in 1842. A frequent and moderate speaker on service questions, he warned against the French naval threat, advocated a naval reserve, and attempted to gain better treatment of army surgeons. In 1846 he voted against the repeal of the corn laws, and at the 1847 dissolution withdrew from parliamentary life. 
For the rest of his life Douglas took an active interest in professional subjects. He was consulted by politicians on service matters, as by Sir Robert Peel in 1848 on the introduction of iron ships into the navy, which Douglas opposed; by Lord Aberdeen in 1854 on the descent on the Crimea, which Douglas opposed on the grounds that the season was too far advanced and the army insufficiently provided; by Lord Panmure in 1855 on army education -- Douglas having called attention to the decline of military education; and by Sir John Pakington on ship armour, which Douglas strongly and controversially opposed, maintaining that ordnance would in the end always prove superior to any armour that could be carried. He told the 1855 select committee on the Royal Military College of the potential value of a revived staff school. He also developed an improved screw propellor. In 1859 he was invited to be chairman of the royal commission on the defences of the United Kingdom, but declined because of his age. He was 'a steady assertor of the doctrine that ships could not stand against forts' ('GM', 3rd ser., 14, 1863, 91), and he recommended that the government substantially implement the recommendations of the commission's 1860 report, which resulted in the 'Palmerston's follies' fortifications. Though in some respects a reformer, in others Douglas was conservative: for example, in the early 1850s he opposed replacement of muskets by rifles. 
Douglas's later output included the significant study 'Naval Warfare under Steam' (1857) and 'Modern Systems of Fortification' (1859). Lord Palmerston, prime minister from 1855 to 1858, and again from 1859 to 1865, held Douglas in the highest regard as an adviser on defence. Douglas's work on steam tactics was overly geometric, but it inspired more practical work, at Palmerston's direction, in Admiral Sir William Fanshawe Martin's Mediterranean Fleet (1860-63). His publications showed the wide scope of his scientific and technical attainments, and it has been claimed that the value of his labours lay in his peculiar capacity for grafting new discoveries on old experience and hitting the wants of the generation which had sprung up since his own youth. 
Douglas's last service to his country was to raise doubts about the value of ironclad warships in a heated debate with John Scott Russell and the Institution of Naval Architects. Although he was wrong, Douglas had forced the exponents of the new system to think through their ideas and express their arguments with greater clarity than had hitherto been the case. 
Although a theoretical, and conservative, contributor to the development of naval gunnery, Douglas provided a critical professional element to supplement the work of Broke and other reformers. 
Douglas was one of the first fellows of the Royal Geographical Society and was elected an associate of the Institution of Naval Architects (1861). He was made CB in February 1817, GCMG in March 1835, KCB in July 1840, and GCB, civil division, in August 1841. Shortly before his death Palmerston offered him the military GCB, but he declined, saying he was 'too old for such vanities' (Fullom, 423). He had the grand cordon of Charles III of Spain and the Peninsular medal with clasp for Corunna. He was a commissioner of the Royal Military College, a patron of the Royal United Service Institution and of Wellington College, in which he took a lively interest, president of the Royal Cambridge Asylum, and supported other charities. He was colonel of the 99th regiment from 1841 to 1851 and of the 15th from 1851 until his death. For many years he was a gentleman of the bedchamber to the duke of Gloucester. 
On 22 September 1859 Douglas's unmarried daughter, Christina Helena Emma, his companion since his wife's death, died, and the shock apparently contributed to the deterioration of his health. He died at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 9 November 1861, and was buried beside his wife at Boldre, near Lymington, Hampshire. His three elder sons had died in the service of their country, and he was succeeded in the baronetcy by his fourth son, Robert Percy (1805-1891), army officer and lieutenant-governor of the Cape of Good Hope (1863-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 7889


Douglas, Sir James (d. 1330), soldier, was the son of Sir William Douglas ['see under 'Douglas family] and of Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander, the steward of Scotland; she had died by 1289. William Douglas's arrest (1297) and imprisonment and death (1298) allowed Edward I to grant his lands of Douglas to Sir Robert Clifford, leaving James to find his own way in the world. 
About 1301-4 Douglas went to Paris (where he sowed his wild oats), possibly as valet to William Lamberton, bishop of St Andrews, because after the latter's return to Scotland Douglas served him as his carver. Lamberton interceded with Edward I, asking that Douglas have his lands restored to him, but merely angered the king. When Robert I made his bid for the throne in 1306, Douglas soon joined him. He is said to have been present at the battle of Methven on 19 June 1306 and to have shared Robert's subsequent hardships in the highlands, though it is unlikely that he went to Kintyre, Rathlin, and the Isles with the king between September and December 1306. 
In 1307 Douglas began his long campaign to recover his heritage. He took Douglas Castle about 1 May 1307, but ingratiatingly sent the garrison back to Clifford (who repaired the castle); he was at Loudoun on 10 May, seeking to negotiate terms with the advancing force of Aymer de Valence, before joining King Robert in halting them. In the following months he harassed the English and, while he was hounded near Paisley in September 1307, defeated the pursuers at 'Edirford' near Fenwick, Ayrshire. He remained in Ettrick Forest when Robert went north in September 1307 and on Palm Sunday (7 April) 1308 caught the garrison of Douglas Castle in Douglas kirk, took the undefended castle, and beheaded the prisoners in a cellar, mingling their blood and limbs with emptied sacks of provisions and tuns of wine from the castle stores; the well was polluted with salt and dead horse. The name Douglas Lardner needs no further explanation. Later in the year he joined the king to defeat the men of John of Argyll, whom they sandwiched between their forces on the slopes of Ben Cruachan, and after his return to Ettrick captured a small body of Anglo-Scots including the king's nephew, Thomas Randolph. 
Between Douglas's appearance as a baron, though not a knight, at the St Andrews parliament of March 1309 and Bannockburn in 1314, little is heard of him, partly because the war was relatively quiet in 1309-11, and partly because King Robert himself led the incursions into enemy territory thereafter. Douglas is not named at the attacks on Dundee, Berwick, or Perth in 1312-13, but early in 1314, when Randolph, now earl of Moray, was besieging Edinburgh, he again had a signal success from his Ettrick base by taking Roxburgh Castle at night on 27 February 1314, his men creeping close to the walls under cloaks and securing a rope ladder to the wall-head. Later in the year he and his young cousin Walter Stewart were knighted on the eve of Bannockburn -- he must have been at least twenty-six years old -- and, according to Barbour's 'Bruce', he was in command of one of four Scottish divisions there. But all other sources are agreed on three divisions, and it is likely that he served under Edward Bruce. When the English broke and Edward II fled, King Robert allowed Douglas to pursue him, but the Scots dared not send a large enough cavalry force lest the English rally (or so Barbour claims); despite being followed by Douglas all the way, Edward and his men rode by Winchburgh to Dunbar and safety. 
The victory of Bannockburn, though not complete, established Robert I's rule firmly, and led to an intensification of attacks on northern England, attacks in which the king rarely participated, the leaders being Moray, when not in Ireland, and Douglas. In the summer of 1315 when the Scots invaded co. Durham, the king sent Douglas to Hartlepool, formerly a Bruce possession; Douglas despoiled the town, took men and women prisoner, and rejoined the king to return home. Later in the year, in Cumberland, Douglas ravaged in Copeland, robbing the priory of St Bees of its vestments, before joining the king at the siege of Carlisle. In the final assault, on 30 July, his men seem to have reached the wall-head, but were driven off, and Douglas himself is said to have been wounded; the army withdrew. On 13 January 1316, in an unsuccessful surprise attack on Berwick, Douglas barely escaped with his life in a small boat; according to one source, he was jointly responsible for the taking of the town in April 1318, having bribed a defender to allow Scots to climb the wall: 'At dawn, with the gates opened, they had James Douglas, who was waiting outside, come in. This James entered the town with such lightness and joy in his heart that he claimed he had come into the city more cheerfully and happily than even paradise. For they despoiled all that they found and killed those who resisted them, throwing the rest into prison. (Stevenson, 5)' Barbour gives the credit elsewhere. 
Meanwhile, in the first half of 1317 the king and Moray diverted their energies to Ireland and Douglas was left in Scotland, according to Barbour, as 'Warden' and 'Warden of the March'. The former, which implies a regency, is unlikely; the latter is independently attested. Seeking advantage from the king's absence, the English warden, the earl of Arundel, invaded Roxburghshire with a large force in March 1317, and aimed: 'at Lintalee, where James Douglas was staying in a certain fortified place with 200 men. Hearing of their coming, Douglas took to flight, leaving the place empty, which a noble freebooter called Elias the clerk, with 30 companions entered, eating up the many victuals he found there. But James, having ascertained the sloth of the English, who made little effort to approach the place, recovered his boldness, entered the place, cut off the head of Elias and stuck its face inhumanely in the anus, killing the rest by the sword. Then he violently attacked the army of the English, which conducted itself very carelessly, and killed Sir Thomas Richmond. (Stevenson, 3-4)' Barbour has another version, omitting Douglas's initial flight and the fate of Elias's face, but describing how Douglas knocked Richmond to the ground, dismounted, turned him over, and dispatched him with a dagger -- no time for taking prisoners in the heat of combat. 
When the succession was regulated in 1315, it was laid down that in the event of a child succeeding Robert I, Moray was to be guardian; three years later, in revised provisions after the death of Edward Bruce, Moray was again to serve or, if he had died, Douglas. Although he was not an earl nor any kin of the king and the extent of his comradeship with Robert may well have been overdrawn by Barbour, Douglas's military capacities had nevertheless won him recognition as the outstanding man in the kingdom, and a series of brushes with the enemy in these years confirmed his abilities as a brilliant tactician and ruthless field commander, to whom winning was all. The women of the English borders silenced their children with the threat that mewling would bring the Black Douglas upon them. The name is not derived from his coat of arms, so presumably refers to the colour of his hair. 
Douglas with Moray led the force which penetrated to near York in 1319, defeated a local force mustered by the archbishop at the 'Chapter of Myton' (because so many clerics were killed), and pulled Edward II away from the siege of Berwick. There was a truce in 1320-21, and in 1322 Douglas was deep in the negotiations between an invalid King Robert and the traitor Thomas, earl of Lancaster. Later in that year, as Edward II withdrew from his vain march to Edinburgh, Douglas caught and destroyed a scouting party at Melrose, then joined his king and Moray in a swift and secret invasion of England which sent the queen fleeing for refuge from York, defeated Edward's force in a brilliant uphill assault near Byland, and almost caught him as he fled from Rievaulx Abbey, abandoning his plate and equipment to the Scots; again Barbour presents Douglas as commander, but it is likely that he served under Moray and the king. 
After the truce of 1323-7 Douglas was a leader either with or, more probably, under Moray of the 1327 campaign in Northumberland which drew Edward III in pursuit. It is brilliantly described by Jean le Bel (who was with Edward) and by Barbour, and if the latter prettifies the planning of the Scots, there can be no doubt that the English stumbled about in a strategic and tactical fog. Barbour ascribes two brilliant moves to Douglas: in Weardale he led a night force round the English and attacked their camp on the far side, cutting tent-ropes to confuse and immobilize them and almost reaching King Edward's tent; and on 6-7 August 1327, silently by night, the Scots evacuated Stanhope Park with no loss other than of horses and equipment -- in large amounts, says le Bel. The former enterprise was certainly his. 
The English made peace in 1328, and Douglas and Moray were at Berwick for the rumbustious marriage of the young David, earl of Carrick, to Joan of the Tower; the kirkyard wall was knocked down by the revellers. Douglas had been well rewarded by his king with grants of the lands, castle, and forest of Jedworth, of Ettrick Forest, Lauderdale, and Bedrule in the east and the baronies of Staplegordon and Westerkirk in Eskdale in the west, as well as a more generous definition of his lordship of Douglas in Lanarkshire. After the peace the family's English lands (at Fawdon in Northumberland) were restored to him, despite the king's wish not to revive such double loyalties. At Byland he had taken three French knights prisoner; in return for 4400 merks he was persuaded to release these men to his king, who wished to send them home to win over Charles IV of France. As payment of this sum the king, by putting an emerald ring on Douglas's finger, gave him the revenues of criminal justice from all his lands and baronies and freed them from any services due; it was a unique mark of favour, and at the same time a taste of the gravy which dripped from the roast of chivalric warfare. 
In 1329, as Robert I lay dying, Douglas undertook for his lord, troubled by the murder of Comyn in a church in 1306, the responsibility of carrying the king's heart to the Holy Land 'to the help of Christians against Saracens' ('CDS', vol. 3, nos. 990, 991) and returning it for burial at Melrose Abbey. On 1 February 1330, the day of Douglas's patron, St Brigit, he made a gift to Newbattle Abbey, then set out for the Mediterranean by sea with an English safe conduct. In Spain he joined Alfonso XI of Castile in his war against the Moors of Granada, and was involved in a battle at Turon near the siege of Teba, Malaga province. He seems to have been rash, as he became isolated and was cut down and killed on 25 August 1330. His body was boiled, the flesh buried in Spain and the bones brought back for burial at Douglas, where decades later his illegitimate son, Archibald, provided the tombstone in that kirk. The political consequences of sending Douglas away were catastrophic, for Moray died as guardian a week before the war was renewed in 1332, leaving the Scots without the one leader who might have discouraged Edward III. 
Barbour's 'Bruce' describes Douglas memorably: 'his face was somewhat grey and he had black hair, as I heard say; but his limbs were well made, with big bones and broad shoulders. His body was well-made and lean, as those who saw him said to me. When he was cheerful he was attractive, meek and sweet in company, but if you saw him in battle, he had another face altogether. He lisped in his speech a little, but that suited him very well. (Barbour, 64)' When he was in Spain, an English knight was astonished that so fierce and famous a veteran had no scars on his face. He has left only one known charter as grantor, and most of our knowledge of him comes from 'The Bruce', behind which surely lies a life, perhaps by Douglas herald, written not long after his death; such a source is suggested by Barbour's knightly league-table entry: 'he was beaten thirteen times, and won victory fifty-seven' (Barbour, 312). 
The name of Douglas's wife is unknown, but they had a son, William, who was killed, childless, at Halidon Hill on 19 July 1333. James also had an illegitimate son, Archibald Douglas, who, through an entail of 1342, succeeded to the lands and (by then) earldom of Douglas in 1388, and from whom the earls down to 1455 were descended. 


@@@@@


doc= 7890


Douglas, James, second earl of Douglas and earl of Mar (c.1358-1388), magnate and soldier, was the son of William Douglas, first earl of Douglas, and his wife, Margaret of Mar. He was probably born in the late 1350s and was old enough to make a favourable impression on the chronicler Jean Froissart when he visited Scotland during the 1360s. In 1371 the newly crowned Robert II, in an attempt to win over James's father, knighted the Douglas heir and agreed a marriage alliance between James and his second daughter, Isabella (died 'c'.1410). In connection with this match James received annuities worth $266 from the king. This generosity may have been in part intended to compensate Douglas for the exclusion of his new wife from the succession under the male entail that was subsequently created, as well as representing the exercise of crown patronage on behalf of a great noble. 
During the later 1370s James Douglas assumed an active role in his family's affairs and was assigned the lordship of Liddesdale by his father. As Earl William's title to this estate was dubious, his grant forestalled future difficulties of James's inheritance. James's emergence as an active political figure was also marked by a royal grant of customs revenue to him in return for his service as a retainer of the king and his son John Stewart, earl of Carrick. Probably intended to finance Douglas's own military following, the grant symbolized a growing alliance between Carrick and the Douglases, one centred on the war with England. James clearly supported his father's prosecution of warfare in the marches and in 1381 was associated with Carrick in border diplomacy. The two men also received gifts from John of Gaunt for their hospitality when the latter took refuge briefly in Scotland in 1381. 
In spring 1384 full-scale war erupted with England. Shortly after leading an attack on Teviotdale in early April, Earl William died. James Douglas succeeded to the extensive southern estates of the Douglas earldom and to his mother's earldom of Mar in Aberdeenshire. The new earl immediately made his mark in war and politics. While Robert II and many Scots wished to suspend warfare and join the recent Anglo-French truce, Douglas was determined to continue the conflict and to respond to an English raid on Lothian in April. A significant group of magnates, led by Carrick, seems to have backed Douglas, perhaps after secret talks in Edinburgh, and there was a series of Scottish raids into northern England during the summer of 1384. Although a short truce was agreed, it is unlikely that Douglas observed its terms. Moreover, in November Robert II was sidelined politically and Carrick was appointed as lieutenant of the realm. Douglas gave Carrick vital support in this coup. In return he expected the lieutenant to give full support to the war with England. In a manner which would be repeated, Douglas military ambitions in the south had been a determining factor in the rivalries of the Stewart dynasty. 
In spring 1385 the war was resumed with active French help. A war subsidy was sent by the French to various Scottish magnates and Douglas received 7500 livres tournois, the largest sum given to any Scottish lord. In May an expeditionary force arrived from France at Leith to be met by Douglas and John Dunbar, earl of Moray. Douglas, whose father had had strong ties to France, may have been the sponsor of the whole venture. He went to the west to escort Robert II to Edinburgh to meet the French, and was one of the few Scots to make a favourable impression on these allies. However, even Douglas urged the French to be cautious in their attacks on the English and probably hoped to use the army for the capture of Roxburgh Castle, whose English garrison was based amid the earl's border lands. But after brief local campaigning the army withdrew in the face of a major English counter-attack and the French returned home. 
Douglas's role in war and politics depended in his extensive network of adherents in southern Scotland. He inherited much of this following from his father. The earl's closest allies were his cousin James Lindsay of Crawford and Sir Malcolm Drummond ['see under 'Drummond family], the husband of his sister Isabella. These men also formed a bridge to Carrick. Other kinsmen, like his uncle Patrick Hepburn, and his cousin James Sandilands, were men who had built connections with the old earl. However, in his short spell at the head of the Douglas lordships, James sought to extend his connection. That his father's rivals in the Douglas kindred, James Douglas, lord of Dalkeith, and Archibald Douglas, lord of Galloway, appeared on the new earl's council suggests improved relations, perhaps fostered by Carrick. James also sought to strengthen his kindred, as well as to provide for his own children, when he granted his bastard son William the lordship of Drumlanrig in Dumfriesshire in return for one knight in the earl's army. The marriage of his widowed mother to Sir John Swinton may have been encouraged by Earl James for military reasons. Swinton was an experienced soldier, and his good relations with his stepson are suggested by the earl's reference to him as 'our dearest father'. When Robert Colville, a Teviotdale lord who returned to Scottish allegiance only in 1384, married the daughter of James Lindsay, it was an alliance designed to bring a new recruit into the Douglas affinity. The needs of warfare were never far from Earl James's lordship. 
Given the importance of the earl of Douglas in Carrick's regime and his overriding interest in war with England, it is not surprising that the Scots renewed the conflict on a major scale in 1388 and that Douglas played a leading role in the campaign which was fought that summer. In late July 1388 Douglas assembled an army which was dominated by his own adherents. In the army were Drummond, the Lindsays, Swinton, Sandilands, and Hepburn, as well as the Dunbars, George, earl of March, and John, earl of Moray. The other leaders of the host were Lothian knights whose connections with James's father stretched back to the 1350s and marchers who traditionally followed the Douglas banner. Although some retainers of Carrick were also present, the bonds of Douglas lordship and kinship held the army together. Rather than as part of a national host, this force was raised and deployed as the earl's army. Douglas led his army into north-east England raiding as far south as Newcastle. In a skirmish outside the walls, Douglas's men captured the pennon of Henry Percy, Hotspur. This loss is supposed to have provoked Hotspur to pursue the Scots as they withdrew. On about 5 August 1388 the English army caught up with the Scots at Otterburn in Redesdale, attacking them in the evening. Led by Earl James, the Scots recovered from the surprise to defeat the English, but in the confused night-fighting Douglas was killed. His body was recovered by his men and carried back for burial alongside his father in Melrose Abbey. 
Although James Douglas had two bastard sons, William and Archibald, and one daughter, Eleanor, he had no children from his marriage to Isabella Stewart. James's death created a succession dispute over his estates during late 1388 and early 1389, which ended in the inheritance of the earldom of Douglas by Archibald the Grim, rather than by James's ally and brother-in-law Malcolm Drummond. This competition in turn precipitated the downfall of Carrick as lieutenant and his replacement by Robert Stewart, earl of Fife. The death of Douglas thus caused a major readjustment of political power in Scotland. His friends lost power to men who were, at best, ambivalent in their attitude to James. This upheaval had a major effect on the earl's posthumous reputation and has obscured the events of Douglas's last campaign. The contemporary Scottish account, used in the chronicles of Andrew Wyntoun and Walter Bower, is critical of the earl. It portrays him as rash and unwise, first in refusing to join the Scottish army assembled in the west march, then in rushing into battle without armour or bodyguard. By contrast, Fife and Archibald Douglas, the western leaders, are said to have showed wisdom in bringing their army home. The new regime wished to highlight the failings of the dead earl for political purposes. This account was not the only view of the 1388 campaign, however. Jean Froissart wrote an account of Otterburn based on the views of knights in Douglas's force which claims that Douglas's separate invasion was the result of a previously agreed plan. Froissart also presents the Scottish leaders as coolly planning to meet the English attack. Although Douglas was killed in the fight, Froissart portrays him as heroic rather than stupid, winning the fight but dying at the moment of triumph. Significantly, a similarly heroic tone was used in a poetic account of Otterburn written in the 1390s. Its author, Thomas Barry, was a clerical servant of Archibald Douglas and its approach may reflect the desire of the new Douglas earl to glorify his predecessor and smooth over past divisions. The earl's last fight similarly entered popular imagination. On both sides of the border, ballads were composed about the Otterburn campaign. While these vary in perspective and in their views of the outcome of the battle, they both present James as 'the dowghtye Douglas', a chivalrous enemy or a valiant leader. While Earl James's death may have divided historians, all agreed on his warlike character and readiness to fight the English. 


@@@@@


doc= 7891


Douglas, James, of Balvenie, seventh earl of Douglas and first earl of Avondale (d. 1443), magnate, was the younger son of Archibald Douglas, third earl of Douglas (c.1320-1400), and Joanna Murray, lady of Bothwell and Drumsargard (died after 1401). His exceptional rise to dominance in his family and in the kingdom began with the disastrous defeat of his elder brother, Archibald Douglas, fourth earl of Douglas, at Hamildon Hill in 1402. After the capture of the earl and his leading followers James was left to maintain Black Douglas influence in southern Scotland. He deputized for the earl as warden of the Scottish marches and keeper of Edinburgh Castle, but when he tried to maintain his family's position found himself increasingly challenged by a rival faction in the south led by Robert III's councillors, Sir David Fleming and Henry Sinclair, second earl of Orkney. Most worryingly for James, Fleming's and Orkney's support of the rebel Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, created tensions with England which led to attacks on Douglas lands and jeopardized negotiations for the earl's release. In early 1406 these tensions resulted in open conflict. James Douglas led a force from Edinburgh which caught Fleming, Orkney, and the young heir to the throne, the future James I, in Haddingtonshire. Orkney and Prince James escaped by sea, but Fleming was killed by Douglas's men in a running fight. 
James Douglas's success preserved Black Douglas dominance in the south. Between 1406 and the release of his brother in 1409 he managed the family's interests in the kingdom. He supervised the demolition of Jedburgh Castle in 1409, and the governor of Scotland, Robert Stewart, duke of Albany, recognized his significance by calling him 'our lieutenant' in 1407. Despite this importance James was never more than his brother's deputy and, when the earl returned to Scotland, James assumed the role of councillor to his senior kinsmen which would continue until 1440. His service to the earl brought rewards, albeit in a form which suggests a certain wariness on the latter's part. The grant of estates in 1408 included Balvenie in Banffshire, Avoch in Inverness, Aberdour in Buchan, Petty and Duffus in Moray, and Strathaven and Stonehouse in Lanarkshire, and without much doubt represents an attempt to direct James's interests and energies to the north. This appanage was created from the inheritance of James's mother, Joanna Murray, but in terms of James's future interests the earl's most notable grant to his brother was Abercorn Castle in Linlithgowshire. For the rest of his life Abercorn was James's principal residence. Between 1408 and 1424 it served as a base for his plundering of the Edinburgh and Linlithgow customs and as the basis for connections with the neighbouring Crichtons and Livingstons, which would later be of vital importance. 
During this period James Douglas remained a councillor of his brother and in the early 1420s he acted as the link between the earl and Murdoch Stewart, duke of Albany, the new governor. Although there may have been plans for him to marry into the Albany Stewarts, James Douglas's links with the duke did not prevent his appearing as a councillor of James I when the king returned in 1424, and he was on the assize which condemned Albany and his sons in 1425. In these roles Douglas acted in his family's interests, but his marriage (before March 1426) to Beatrix Sinclair (died in or before 1463), daughter of his former enemy the earl of Orkney, cemented his own connection with the royal council, and the king quickly appreciated the importance of Douglas's support for his relationship with Archibald Douglas, now fifth earl of Douglas, who was the nephew of both men. In 1426 James received royal confirmation of his lands at a time when the king was putting pressure on the earl, and in 1430-31, while his nephew was briefly imprisoned by the king, James replaced him as warden of the west march and remained a royal councillor. This backing from the earl's senior kinsman was vital to the king to prevent a clash with the Douglas affinity, and in the 1430s James received continued royal favour. His eldest son, William Douglas, was knighted by the king in 1430 and by 1435 he himself was sheriff of Lanark, confirming his place among the king's principal followers. 
Despite the often difficult relationship between the king and the earl of Douglas, James Douglas successfully maintained his place in family councils and, when, in 1437, the king was assassinated, he transferred his support to the earl. Along with two other Douglas adherents in royal service, Sir William Crichton and John Cameron, bishop of Glasgow, James backed the earl's appointment as lieutenant-general for the young James II, contrary to the expectations of James I, who had planned that in the event of his death his wife, Joan, should act as regent. Return to family loyalty paid James Douglas well. Within months he was made earl of Avondale and justiciar, and, with his grateful nephew in power, he was guaranteed an influential role on the lieutenant's council. Along with Crichton, he probably engineered the downfall of Bishop Cameron in April 1439, further securing their place in government. 
This security was shaken by the death of the fifth earl of Douglas in June 1439. Though James acted for his great-nephew William Douglas, sixth earl of Douglas, the future was now threatening. James's influence in the minority government and in the Douglas family were both at risk, the first from Queen Joan, the second from the new Douglas earl. Characteristically, both problems were resolved in James's favour by force applied by his allies with no certain guilt being attached to Douglas himself. In August 1439 the queen was arrested by Sir Alexander Livingston in Stirling Castle and released only when she surrendered her son, the king. Douglas was present throughout and had well-established links with Livingston. The settlement, which gave custody of the king to his ally, safeguarded Douglas's interests, and he produced his great-nephew to seal the agreement. Over the next year it was this great-nephew who caused James anxiety. Earl William was a potential rival who would soon have the lands and men to back any claim to his father's lieutenancy. James was no more prepared than Livingston and Crichton to risk this dominance and on 24 November 1440 Earl William and his brother, David, were arrested and executed at a feast in Edinburgh Castle. The deed was carried out on the direct order of Crichton, but to the chief advantage of James, who at the same time took the opportunity to remove Sir Malcolm Fleming, a close associate of the sixth earl who was also a local rival. This 'Black Dinner' left James as heir by male entail to the Douglas earldom and, together with the coup of 1439, made him the most powerful figure in the kingdom. 
In spite of his career as a royal councillor it is significant that, as seventh earl of Douglas and lord of Lauderdale, James concentrated on family aggrandizement, leaving custody of the king to Crichton and Livingston. The new Douglas earl sought to create a network of lands and alliances which was not limited to the southern interests of his predecessors. He directed his younger sons towards north-east Scotland. His third son, Archibald, was married to Elizabeth Dunbar, coheir of the earldom of Moray, and in 1442 was created earl of Moray. Archibald's twin brother, James Douglas, the future ninth earl of Douglas, was chosen as bishop of Aberdeen in 1441, a mark of his father's influence with the conciliar party, though the appointment proved ineffective; after the elder James's death his two youngest sons, Hugh and John, were provided for from his own northern estates. Earl James clearly intended to implant the Douglas family into the disturbed political society of the north. In the south he followed a similar course. In Berwickshire he intervened in a complex feud within the Hume family. His principal aim was to re-establish the influence exercised by his brother in the east march before 1424. James did not ignore the traditional territorial interests of the Black Douglases. Before his death he probably arranged the marriage of his eldest son, William, future eighth earl of Douglas, to Margaret, sister of William, the sixth earl. To achieve this he had to obtain a papal dispensation. Through this match Galloway, which James did not inherit, would be reunited with the earldom. By inclination and experience, Douglas was not a border magnate like his predecessors. His main residences at Abercorn and Lanark confirm him as a magnate whose lands and personal connections centred on Clydesdale and Lothian. The marriages of his daughters to landowners in these two sheriffdoms support this impression. It was thus appropriate that it was at Abercorn Castle that Douglas died on 10 March 1443. His grossly fat body, which earned him his nickname and which at his death reportedly contained 4 stone of tallow, was buried in a magnificent tomb in St Bride's Church in Douglas. 
Douglas's career as earl was one of superficial success. Family aggrandizement created enemies, including Crichton, Bishop James Kennedy, and the earls of Angus, without any secure increase in Douglas power. Relative neglect of the family's place in the marches loosened loyalties already shaken by the 'Black Dinner'. Finally, by centring his interests on Lothian, a heartland of royal interests, Earl James risked future conflict with James II. Douglas's career had parallels with that of his father. Both combined roles as royal servants, family councillors, and ambitious and forceful magnates, and both their long careers culminated in the acquisition of the Douglas earldom. But the 1440s were not the 1390s. Changes in Scottish political society and attitudes meant that the achievements of James Douglas would leave his sons a difficult legacy. 


@@@@@


doc= 7892


Douglas, James, ninth earl of Douglas and third earl of Avondale (c.1425-1491), magnate and rebel, was the second son of James Douglas, seventh earl of Douglas and first earl of Avondale (d. 1443), and Beatrix Sinclair (died in or before 1463), daughter of Henry Sinclair, second earl of Orkney. 
In his earliest years Douglas seemed destined for an ecclesiastical career. His father favoured the Council of Basel against the pope, representing a minority view within Scotland, and sought preferment from the anti-pope Felix V for James to the bishopric of Aberdeen in 1441 (despite his youth). As Scotland remained loyal to Eugenius IV, however, James's hopes were dashed. Although he seems to have matriculated at the University of Cologne in mid-1443, no more is heard of his ecclesiastical ambitions. That is probably no accident. He had a twin brother, Archibald, earl of Moray, and in 1447, after evidence was taken from his mother and other women, a decision was made that James was the elder and might therefore succeed to the title and estates if their brother, William Douglas, eighth earl of Douglas, remained childless. 
A more martial turn to James Douglas's career had already been demonstrated in late 1446, when he was briefly keeper of Hailes Castle. It was underlined by his fighting in the lists at Stirling in February 1449 in the presence of James II, with two other Scots against three Burgundians, all of whom were knighted by the king at the time. His own opponent, Jacques de Lalain, had apparently become aware of Douglas's prowess and issued a challenge to him, and was successful in their encounter. 
The occasion of Douglas's succession to the earldom could scarcely have been less propitious. He was among the notable entourage who accompanied his brother Earl William when he visited Rome in the jubilee year of 1450. On their return James spent part of 1451 in England, perhaps seeking English support, as the absence of the Douglases had brought to the surface discontent at court about the earl's posturing. The king harboured doubts about the earl's ambitions and about his confederacies with other nobles, and summoned him under a safe conduct to Stirling in February 1452, ostensibly to discuss his bonds with the earls of Crawford and Ross. When on 22 February Earl William refused to break them, the king suddenly stabbed him, setting in train a chain of blows from other courtiers standing near by from which he died instantly. 
A month passed before Earl James displayed his anger at the circumstances of his brother's death, when he and his allies wreaked havoc in Stirling, after denouncing the king and his courtiers to the blast of twenty-four horns and dragging the safe conduct through the town tied to a horse. It must have been a remarkable sight. The king was absent, and made no immediate effort to confront Douglas. In (probably) May 1452 the earl conferred with John MacDonald, lord of the Isles, in Knapdale, rewarding MacDonald's entourage with wine and clothes, perhaps as an inducement to foment trouble. When parliament met in Edinburgh in June and exonerated the king from blame for the slaying of Earl William, Earl James and others, including James, Lord Hamilton, fixed a letter on the parliament house door renouncing their allegiance to the king and saying that they would not hold their lands of him. This has been considered an example of 'diffidatio', the breaking by a vassal of his fealty to his lord. Meanwhile, Douglas was also holding negotiations with Henry VI of England. King James had to react, and he conducted a destructive raid upon the border areas where Douglas might have found followers. 
This military action seems to have persuaded Douglas to draw up a bond in August 1452 under which, among other matters, he and his party agreed to forgive those who had taken part in the killing of his brother and to make no bonds which threatened the king. Such notable concessions by Douglas imply that he considered that an accommodation with the king would serve him better in the long run. It was a useful boost for the king; he showed his uneasiness by sealing at the same time in parliament a pardon for the surviving members of the Livingston family who had been disgraced and forfeited in 1449-50. 
Perhaps to underline his concern to negotiate with Douglas, James II made a further accord with him in January 1453, whereby the earl promised to give manrent and service to the king in return for restoration of certain lands. About the same time the king granted Douglas permission to marry his brother's widow and cousin, Margaret, the fair maid of Galloway ('c'.1432- 'c'.1476?), daughter of Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Douglas, if the necessary dispensation could be obtained from the pope. This was a significant act of patronage, for Margaret was the sister and heir of the sixth earl of Douglas (died 1440), and therefore possessed the lordship of Galloway and other estates. Earl William's marriage to her had been engineered by his father to ensure that the Douglas patrimony was not sundered; but that marriage lacked offspring and the patrimony would have been divided had the king not been prepared to allow James to marry his sister-in-law. The marriage was duly celebrated, and Douglas was then accepted back into court circles, to the extent that he, as ambassador, sealed a new truce with England in May 1453. Even so, he remained a fringe figure. The only formal offices he held in Scotland were those of sheriff of Lanark, a post hereditary in his family, to which he succeeded on his brother's death, and warden of the west and middle marches (against England). 
Notwithstanding his concord with the king, Douglas seems to have continued to intrigue with potential supporters. Douglas castles in Moray, Kirkcudbrightshire, Lanarkshire, and Linlithgowshire were fortified, and the queen's dower lands and a grange of the king's justiciar were burnt. Early in 1455, however, the king, intending to pre-empt (and perhaps also to provoke) further manoeuvres by Douglas, besieged and threw down Douglas's castle of Inveravon near Linlithgow, and then began to sweep west and south to ravage Douglas lands. By April he was besieging Abercorn, Linlithgowshire, which Douglas attempted to defend with all his forces; but his lack of strength was all too clearly shown when Lord Hamilton, sensing that Douglas was wavering, switched sides, causing Douglas to flee to England. Without him his men were no match for a force of borderers loyal to the king when they met at Arkinholm on 1 May 1455. 
The consequences of defeat included the forfeiture in parliament in June of the earl, his mother, and brothers after a charge of treason, and also the execution of his younger brother Hugh, earl of Ormond. The sentence on Douglas was carried out in his absence since he was in England, where he remained for almost all the rest of his life. His extensive estates were split up, some being annexed in perpetuity by the crown and others forming significant prizes for its supporters. One of the Douglas kindred, George Douglas, fourth earl of Angus, the head of the so-called Red Douglases, was rewarded with the lordship of Douglas, and quickly sought to establish authority over former Douglas vassals in Lanarkshire. The Douglas estates formed a substantial bloc, and are estimated to have brought the king gross cash rents of about $2000 Scots, approximately one-third of the total for all crown lands. They comprised land in Dumfriesshire, Kirkcudbrightshire, Wigtownshire, Lanarkshire, Linlithgowshire, Edinburgh, Haddingtonshire, Berwickshire, Peeblesshire, Roxburghshire, Selkirkshire, Aberdeenshire, Ayrshire, and Renfrewshire: the largest accumulation of property held by one individual in Scotland apart from the king. The lands in the western and mid-borders lay at the traditional heart of the Douglas domains, but Earl James drew most of his support from his father's patrimony in Lanarkshire and Linlithgowshire. 
Douglas had now to rely on charity from the king of England. His first gift from Henry VI was received as early as 4 August 1455, a pension of $500 until his estates were restored by James II. Douglas, however, had already surrendered Threave Castle, his principal stronghold, to Henry in return for succour and provisions (an ineffectual move, as the castle was annexed by James II). The comparative peace between Scotland and England in the next few years provided no opportunities for Douglas, apart from a possible raid on Kirkcudbright in 1457 in the company of the Stanleys, English lords of the Isle of Man (a retaliation for an earlier Scottish attack on the island). 
The circumstances surrounding the accession of Edward IV in England in 1461, and the death of James II on 3 August 1460, renewed Douglas hopes of political influence in Scotland. The Lancastrians had made a successful bid for Scottish support in December 1460, and in response Edward sent Douglas, together with his brother John Douglas, Lord Balvenie, to communicate with John MacDonald, who as earl of Ross as well as lord of the Isles had continued to be a thorn in the flesh of successive Scottish kings. The result was the document known as the treaty of Westminster-Ardtornish, made in February 1462, by which Ross and his associates bound themselves to become vassals of Edward and to co-operate with his forces in the conquest of Scotland. Should this occur, the reward for Douglas would include the restoration of his estates and the division of the remainder of Scotland with the earl of Ross, all these lands to be held of the king of England. As Ross swiftly rebelled against James III, this approach brought some short-term benefit. The following spring Douglas, again with Edward's connivance, was in the field in the borders, culminating in early March in an encounter in which the earl of Crawford, among others, was temporarily imprisoned; Douglas also appears to have been in Galloway in the early summer. 
The Scots themselves had been pursuing an aggressive policy towards England, but this could not be sustained once a truce between England and France was agreed in October 1463, and they sealed their own truce with England in December. At that time Douglas, apparently at his own request, was appointed governor of Carrickfergus in Ireland by Edward. For his services Edward made Douglas a knight of the Garter, the first Scot to receive the distinction. 
The more stable relations between England and Scotland thereafter gave Douglas little leeway. He continued to collect his annuity from Edward, and served with the English army during Edward's major expedition to France in 1475, while in 1480 he was paid for services on the Anglo-Scottish border. Soon afterwards Douglas became involved with Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany (James III's brother but a fellow exile). In 1482 Albany had engaged, with English assistance, in a campaign to re-establish himself in Scotland. The attempt failed, but in February 1483 Edward made a treaty with the duke, whereby Albany renounced his Scottish allegiance in return for English help in capturing the Scottish throne; for his part Albany undertook to assist Douglas in recovering his Scottish estates. The childless Douglas apparently also made an agreement with Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus, who was also a rebel against James III, perhaps about the destination of Douglas's estates after his death. All these manoeuvres came to nothing. In July 1484 Douglas accompanied Albany and about 500 men when, without English support, they raided Lochmaben, in a lordship formerly held by his family where Douglas clearly expected to receive support. Instead they were attacked by local forces and easily defeated on 22 July, and Douglas was made captive. The king evidently now feared Douglas little, as he permitted him to reside thenceforth in the abbey of Lindores in Fife, where he died in mid-1491 and where he was most probably buried. By then he had become a pensioner of James IV. The later historian of the Douglas family, David Hume of Godscroft, claims that James III, aware of the pressure he had to face in 1488 -- he was eventually defeated in battle by forces including his son and heir, and was killed during his flight from the fray -- personally sought assistance from Douglas, offering restoration of his titles and possessions in return. The offer was curtly rebuffed. Hume was anxious to paint Douglas in a favourable light. He makes little reference to the earl's career as a liegeman of successive English kings; and he told this tale to emphasize Douglas's resolution against a suppliant king whose father had brought about the violent death of the earl's brother and had later forfeited the earl himself. 
Douglas's first marriage, to Margaret Douglas, probably occurred in early 1453. She fled to England with him, but (after apparently obtaining a divorce) returned to Scotland 'c'.1459, and then married the king's half-brother John Stewart, earl of Atholl; she may have died 'c'.1476, when Stewart remarried. Douglas's second marriage was to Anne ('c'.1430-1486), daughter of John Holland, duke of Exeter (died 1447), and his first wife, Anne Stafford (died 1432). Relict successively of John Neville (died 1450) and of the latter's uncle John, Lord Neville (died 1461), she married Douglas some time after 1461. She predeceased him, dying on 26 December 1486. From neither marriage did Douglas have children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7893


Douglas, James, fourth earl of Morton (c.1516-1581), regent and chancellor of Scotland, was the second son of Sir George Douglas, master of Angus (1490?-1552), of Pittendreich, near Elgin, Moray, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 'c'.1560), only daughter of David Douglas, also of Pittendreich. 
Details of Douglas's early life are sketchy. The quarrel of his paternal uncle, Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, with James V in 1528 forced some of the family, including his father, into exile in England. Whether James Douglas accompanied them is uncertain, and he is described by David Hume of Godscroft, the family biographer, as having spent the rest of James V's reign sheltering from the crown on the estates of his cousin Douglas of Glenbervie. On the other hand, the existence of a charter from 1536 which names James Douglas as heir to his mother suggests that he spent this period comparatively undisturbed on the Douglas lands at Pittendreich. It was claimed, however, that his education suffered from neglect. Between 18 March and 22 April 1543 Douglas married Lady Elizabeth Douglas (died in or after 1581), youngest daughter of James Douglas, third earl of Morton (died 1548), and Catherine Stewart (died in or after 1554), illegitimate daughter of James IV. As part of the marriage settlement Douglas became heir to the earldom of Morton; until his father-in-law's death he was known as master of Morton. He and his wife were childless, but according to Hume he had four natural sons. Only two of them, Archibald and James, played any part in his career. 
In the 1540s Morton's actions were largely dictated by his father and his uncle. As a result of the former's allegiance to Henry VIII as a diplomat and border official while in England, Morton and his elder brother, David, were drawn into collaboration with the earl of Hertford when in 1544 he invaded Scotland on behalf of Henry, frustrated at the pro-French policies of the Arran administration. However, in 1548 pensions to the Douglases from Henri II persuaded the family to support France. The outcome was Morton's defence of Dalkeith against the forces of Lord Gray, in the process of which he was not only 'sore hurt in the thigh' ('CSP Scot.', 1.118) but also taken as a prisoner to the Tower of London. Following his father-in-law's death, which probably occurred in December 1548, he succeeded as fourth earl of Morton; he was certainly using the title by mid-1550, on his release from captivity and return to Scotland. 
On 14 October 1552 Morton became a privy councillor in Arran's government. His rise to prominence was assisted when, following the death of his brother David in 1557, he became the tutor or guardian of his nephew Archibald Douglas, eighth earl of Angus (c.1555-1588). During Archibald's minority Morton administered on his behalf the regality of Bothwell, Tantallon Castle, Jedburgh Forest, and various other Douglas possessions in the borders. This role brought Morton considerable financial benefits. 
With the onset of the Reformation, Morton pursued what can only be described as an equivocal policy. Certainly in 1557 he was one of those who signed the 'first band', a declaration protesting allegiance to the reformed faith, but thereafter his behaviour vacillated so much that John Knox was led to comment that he 'promised to be ours but never did plainly join' ('John Knox's History of the Reformation in Scotland', ed. W. C. Dickinson, 2 vols., 1949, 1.261-2). However, once English support for the lords of the congregation was guaranteed through the treaty of Berwick, which Morton helped to ratify in May 1560, he backed the reformers wholeheartedly and was a signatory of the first 'Book of Discipline' in January 1561. 
The start of Mary's personal rule marked the emergence of Morton as a leading figure on the Scottish political scene, and later in 1561 he actively assisted the earl of Moray in his restoration of law and order in the borders. In the following year he played a prominent role in the campaign against the rebellious earl of Huntly. His reward in 1563 was to become chancellor, the key post in the administrative system. In 1565 he gave his approval to the proposed marriage between Mary and Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley, though his decision to do so was probably greatly influenced by the eventual agreement of the bridegroom's mother, Margaret Stewart, countess of Lennox, to renounce any claims to the inheritance of Morton's nephew, the earl of Angus. 
However, the queen's marriage was undoubtedly a turning point in Morton's relations with her. Although in August 1565 Morton helped Mary to suppress the chaseabout raid, the earl of Moray's ill-advised attempt at rebellion, a few months later he became deeply implicated in the conspiracy against David Riccio, the queen's unpopular Italian secretary. His motive for an involvement which extended to being actually present at Riccio's murder in March 1566 may have been based on a suspicion that he was about to lose his post as chancellor; but it is much more likely that Morton saw an opportunity to win the favour of Darnley, who hated Riccio, and in association with Morton create a situation where the queen's husband became a mere figurehead in a government dominated by the two powerful noblemen. Whatever his motivation, the upshot for Morton was the loss of his chancellorship and another period of exile in England. This lasted until December 1566 when, being granted a remission for his complicity in the Riccio affair, he arrived back in Edinburgh shortly before the next violent episode in Mary's reign, the Darnley murder. Morton's part in the mysterious events at Kirk o' Field remains uncertain, though he later insisted that while he had known about the plot he had not personally participated in the events. 
Thereafter, Morton initially supported Bothwell, being a signatory of the Ainslie bond in which several noblemen agreed to the proposition that Bothwell should marry the queen. However, like most of the nobility Morton quickly changed his attitude once the wedding took place, and he became a prominent member of the party in revolt against Mary and her new husband. He was consequently at Carberry, where the queen surrendered, though not before Bothwell had challenged him to a duel to settle outstanding issues between the two of them. Perhaps fortunately, considering Morton's age, Mary intervened and refused to countenance such a contest. 
Mary's abdication marked another significant stage in the fourth earl's career. On 29 July 1567 Morton took the coronation oath on behalf of the infant James VI; at the same time he became a member of the council in charge of the country until the earl of Moray returned from France; in December he was reappointed chancellor. During Moray's regency he remained a key figure, commanding the vanguard at the battle of Langside in May 1568 and later acting as a commissioner for the king's party at the inquiry into Mary's conduct organized at York by Elizabeth I. Moreover, it was Morton who possessed what he claimed was incriminating evidence against Mary, namely, the casket letters. These 'lettrez, missives, contractis sonnettis and utheris writles' ('CSP Scot.', 2.730) had, he said, been discovered by his agents eighteen months before, inside a box in a house in Edinburgh. 
In some ways Moray's assassination in January 1570 might seem to have been an appropriate occasion for Morton to seize control of the country. Yet he supported the claims of the earl of Lennox for the regency, acting in this fashion because, presumably, he judged the time inappropriate and the queen's party still in a strong position. In fact it was another year before Mary's most significant supporters, including Argyll, Eglinton, and Cassillis, forsook her. Again, in September 1571, when Lennox was killed at Stirling, Morton hesitated to contest the succession as regent of the earl of Mar, and it was not until the latter's sudden death in October 1572 that he felt absolutely convinced that his moment had arrived. Finally on 24 November 1572 at a convention of the Scottish estates in Edinburgh Morton was elected regent 'be pluralitie of votes of the saidis estaittis' (Calderwood, 3.242-3). 
Although on 12 January 1573 Morton placated one of his most powerful antagonists, Archibald Campbell, fifth earl of Argyll, by appointing him chancellor, he still faced internal opposition. First, certain members of the nobility were against him -- the Gordons, Hamiltons, and Setons, linked with the earl of Atholl; second, under Kirkcaldy of Grange's command within the strategically important Edinburgh Castle, there were such diehard Marians as Lord Home and Maitland of Lethington. To some extent the hostility of the former proved to be the lesser problem. With the considerable assistance of the English ambassador, Henry Killigrew, in February 1573 the agreement known as the pacification of Perth was reached with the Gordons and Hamiltons. In return for ending their allegiance to Mary, promising religious conformity, and recognizing the regent's authority, the two families were given an amnesty for their previous actions and much of their forfeited property was restored. When the earl of Atholl submitted separately in April, Morton's outstanding difficulties with the nobility were over. 
The struggle against the so-called Castilians lasted a bit longer, largely because Grange and the others, convinced that the fortress was impregnable, rejected Morton's attempts at mediation. Morton did not possess the military strength to capture the castle. Consequently it was not until May, when the English government provided the requisite artillery firepower, that Grange and his associates were eventually forced to agree to an unconditional surrender. 
For nearly five years thereafter, with an administration largely dominated by his relatives and trusted supporters, Morton ruled Scotland on James VI's behalf. For much of the time he experienced little serious opposition from the nobility. Unquestionably there were the occasional problems: George Gordon, fifth earl of Huntly (died 1576), and his exiled brother, Adam Gordon of Auchindoun, the Perth settlement notwithstanding, were still restless and disaffected. Morton countered this threat by placing the earl under house arrest in the south of Scotland and undertaking a punitive expedition to Gordon territory in the north-east in August 1574. Again, a dispute with Colin Campbell, sixth earl of Argyll, who had succeeded his brother the chancellor on the latter's sudden death in September 1573, was resolved in the regent's favour. At issue here were certain royal jewels retained by Argyll's wife, the earl of Moray's widow, which Morton insisted must be restored to the crown. However, in his handling of the feud which developed in 1576 between Argyll and John Stewart, twenty-third earl of Atholl, Morton was much less successful. In this instance disagreements between the earls over rights of jurisdiction with their respective territories escalated into a bitter wrangle which created widespread disorder between their followers. The regent attempted to tackle the situation by summoning both noblemen before the privy council, denouncing their actions, and demanding an end to the disturbances. But all he achieved was a hardening of Argyll's resolve and the disillusionment of Atholl, who became convinced that Morton had not done enough on his behalf. 
Whether Morton might have dealt with this affair more effectively and thus forestalled the coup against him in 1578 is a moot point. Certainly the outcome was unfortunate for him since it resulted in Atholl's retaliating by aligning himself with his recent enemy, Argyll. Furthermore, the two earls were a formidable coalition since they also had a crucial ally in Sir Alexander Erskine, the king's guardian, who was only too willing to give the regent's opponents access to James VI. The upshot was that they persuaded the twelve-year-old monarch to summon a convention at Stirling in March 1578 for the express purpose of ending Morton's regency. Sensing a 'fait accompli', the latter meekly offered his resignation, and after handing over Edinburgh Castle to the new regime he retired from the scene to contemplate events; a letter written at this time gave his age as sixty-one. 
In temporary retirement Morton must have reflected on how he had been outmanoeuvred by Argyll and Atholl, not to mention all those other noblemen who joined their faction. Included among these were the earl of Montrose, at odds with the regent over a disputed charter; the earl of Eglinton, aggrieved at being imprisoned for offences against the Hamiltons; Lord Maxwell, displeased at his dismissal as warden of the west march; Lord Herries, Maxwell's uncle, who sympathized with his nephew; and Lord Ogilvie, an incorrigible Marian who had also been imprisoned by Morton. The latter must also have realized how his opponents exploited his failure to devote sufficient attention to James VI who, at such an impressionable age, could easily be manipulated by older men. The former regent in his turn used this lever to recover his former position. Within three months he had himself restored to his previous status in all but title, by deploying the influence of the youthful earl of Mar over the king (at the end of April 1578 Mar had displaced his uncle, Sir Alexander Erskine, as the royal guardian). Although Morton subsequently denied any involvement in this change of personnel it certainly suited his purposes. In no time he was conducting negotiations with his former enemies and at a convention held at Stirling on 12 June 1578 persuaded a majority of those present that he should not only be restored to the privy council but should also have 'first rowme and place' on that body ('CSP Scot.', 5.296). 
However Morton's troubles were not quite over. That summer the Argyll-Atholl faction rallied to challenge him, and by August matters had come to such a head that civil war seemed imminent as the supporters of the rival parties faced each other at Falkirk. But wiser counsels prevailed, and largely through the intervention of the English ambassador, Robert Bowes, a settlement was reached which satisfied both sides. Further conciliatory meetings over the next few months tended to confirm that at least for the present Morton's position was reasonably secure. Morton, who had survived his most recent crisis by granting some of his rivals greater access to the king and admitting others to the privy council, was undoubtedly aware that he must tread warily in the future. Consequently he was attracted to a diversion which would prevent, as Hume of Godscroft put it, his opponents having 'leisure to think of him and his late greatness' ('History of the House of Douglas', 2.262). The stratagem of launching an attack on the Hamiltons early in 1579 was not only diversionary but also a popular move against a family with considerable financial assets. On the grounds that the terms of the pacification of Perth were no longer in force, on 1 May the Hamiltons were proscribed. Lords John and Claud escaped to France but their deranged brother, the earl of Arran, and his mother, the duchess of Chatelherault, were seized and forced to hand over the Hamilton possessions to the crown. The morality of Morton's actions against the Hamiltons is obviously questionable, and certainly Queen Elizabeth was critical of his tactics. None the less it did win favour with James VI, who was reported as saying that 'no nobleman's service to Scotland was to be compared to Morton's' ('CSP Scot.', 5.337). 
While Morton's relations with the nobility were highly significant and the breakdown in them led ultimately to his downfall, his dealings with the kirk formed another important aspect of his administration. Here, the two main issues were the finances and the organization of the church. Morton inherited a financial system adopted in Mary's reign whereby the former members of the unreformed church retained two-thirds of their income while the remaining third was shared between the state and the new kirk. In 1567 a further change had given the latter first claim to the thirds and the right to appoint its own collectors. However, John Knox and his colleagues had neither the organizational ability nor the clout to make these concessions effective, and when Morton took over in 1572, having coincidentally become regent on the day of Knox's death, he found the collectory in a chaotic condition. 
One of Morton's first tasks was to have the outstanding accounts audited while at the same time encouraging the clergy to collect the current thirds or duties from the members of their own parishes. To make this possible he had a new register of members compiled; one minister was responsible for three or four parishes on average. Additionally Morton revived the office of collector-general, and the state once again became responsible for the collection of the thirds. These innovations, which were introduced in 1573-4, were mostly received quite favourably by members of the kirk. However, there was one outspoken critic, John Davidson, regent of St Leonard's College, St Andrews, who, before fleeing into exile, protested that 'Four parish kirks are over a great charge for one minister', and that 'the order that would appoint so many was evil and consequentlie devilish' (Calderwood, 3.314). Some of the clergy were also unhappy about lay collection of the thirds, but there is little doubt that under Morton they were far more efficiently collected and administered than hitherto. 
The regent was less successful in the recovery of thirds which had been lost as a result of remissions and the granting of pensions, and there is little evidence that he was either very innovative or energetic enough to recover the kirk's wealth. Conversely, he certainly looked after his own family: always alert to the interests of his sons Archibald and James, he appointed the latter commendator of Pluscarden Abbey and awarded him a pension from Balmerino Abbey. Other kinsmen who benefited from his generosity with ecclesiastical revenues included Archibald Douglas, senator of the college of justice; William Douglas, commendator of Melrose Abbey; and George Douglas, bishop of Moray. However, it was the polity or constitution of the reformed church that gradually became the key issue dominating Morton's relations with its members, particularly in the later stages of his career. In 1571, before he became regent, Morton had his first taste of clerical opposition over the question of the appointment of bishops to the church and, in particular, that of his elderly kinsman John Douglas as archbishop of St Andrews. A conference at Leith in January 1572 seemed to resolve this at least for the time being, since the kirk's leaders agreed to a settlement whereby the government would continue to appoint bishops, but the latter would require the approval of the chapter concerned and also be subject to the discipline of the general assembly. It was not until 1574 with the return from Switzerland of the more radically inclined Andrew Melville and his appointment as principal of Glasgow University that the kirk acquired a leader prepared to challenge the regent and that Morton found himself under increasing pressure from the church. As it happened, it took Melville and his colleagues until 1578 to reach a position to seek approval from Morton's government of their revised blueprint for the reformed church, the second 'Book of Discipline'. While it reiterated many of the proposals of the first book, there were undoubtedly a number of controversial aspects within it. The reformed kirk now sought to obtain all the revenues of the old one, to abolish bishops altogether, and to seek acceptance of the so-called doctrine of the 'two kingdoms', whereby the church had sole control of ecclesiastical matters. 
To Morton, who was strongly convinced that the church should be subordinate to the state, the proposed reforms were totally unacceptable. However, faced with the political instability which existed between 1578 and 1580, he had to proceed cautiously and avoid antagonizing the Melvillian party too much, since the latter, as he discovered, were quite prepared to make difficulties for him by fraternizing with his adversaries. Therefore Morton's strategy was to procrastinate; conferences were held and committees were duly appointed. When the second 'Book of Discipline' was presented in June 1578 Morton told the kirk's commissioners that 'the said buik bein red and considerit... and mony headis thairof being found of so great wecht and consequence... na resolution nor determination can be presentlie gevin thairin' ('APS', 3.105). The final result was little different. 
The governmental system which Morton took over in 1572 was one in which the central authorities depended largely on the local wardens to impose law and order on their respective territories. These comprised three areas known as the east, west, and middle marches, with in addition Liddesdale -- technically part of the middle march but often assigned a separate keeper. While the virtually hereditary nature of the positions gave Morton little choice in selecting the wardens, his appointments nevertheless performed competently. On the east march between 1573 and 1578 Hume of Coldenknowes carried out his duties effectively as did his replacement, Hume of Wedderburn, between 1578 and 1580. Similarly, Morton had little to complain of in the efforts of Ker of Cessford and John Carmichael of that ilk on the middle march and Liddesdale respectively. But the situation was somewhat different on the west march, where Lord Maxwell's quirky personality (a characteristic also of the other wardens) proved too much for the regent, who in 1577 had him replaced by his nephew the earl of Angus. After the upheaval of 1578 the west march became more unstable; first Maxwell and then his uncle Lord Herries were in charge, until, perhaps unwisely, Morton appointed their great family rival, John Johnstone of that ilk. 
In the administration of the borders there were occasions when Morton reinforced the power of the wardens by attending in person. For instance, eight judicial and military raids on various parts of the frontier were planned between 1573 and 1578, of which six were implemented. Morton was present on all of these. Again, in 1574-5 he gave instructions for a detachment of 100 infantrymen and forty light horsemen to carry out operations in Liddesdale and the middle march, a tactic repeated at the suggestion of Lord Herries in 1579. Finally, the system of taking pledges was tightened up. The prevalent practice, which had been subject to various forms of abuse, was that prominent borderers, as a guarantee for the good behaviour of their family or dependants, were placed in a form of mild detention remote from their homes. Morton now insisted that any keeper who allowed a pledge to escape would be subject to a statutory fine of $2000. 
Lawlessness and disorder in other parts of Scotland also received Morton's attention. An expedition to the north-east in 1574 was aimed both at the suppression of the troublesome Gordon family and at 'the establishment of justice and punishment of disordouris and enormittis attemptit aganis our Soverane lordis authoritie and commonweill of the realme' ('Reg. PCS', 2.388). Undoubtedly there were still numerous turbulent outbreaks in various parts of the country, notably the Black Isle, where the Mackenzies of Kintail were the offenders. None the less, there seems good ground for believing the verdict of the Edinburgh burgess, Robert Birrell, that, overall, Morton 'kept the country in great justice and peace' (Dalyell, 21). 
The other main aspect of Morton's domestic administration was his supervision of the country's finances. Commendable efforts were made to obtain the outstanding revenues from the crown lands and customs. In addition Campveere in the Netherlands was at last established as the staple port for Scottish merchants. To some extent Morton's actions eased the financial position of the comptroller, William Murray of Tullibardine, yet escalating commodity prices ensured there was still a huge deficit in his department. In the context of rampant inflation the treasurer, Lord Ruthven, was faced with the expenses of the civil war (including the rebuilding of Edinburgh Castle with its famous half-moon battery) and of dealing with the unrest of 1578 and the Hamilton vendetta the following year. In response to constant financial difficulties Morton drew on his personal wealth and made regular loans to the treasury. He then recovered the debt from the profits which he made by manipulating the currency, an amount described by one modern commentator as 'unquantifiable' (Lynch, 227). 
However, while debasement was a fairly common measure in the sixteenth century it was inflationary and in the long term did little to improve the situation or enhance the regent's popularity with his subjects. Other expedients adopted by Morton included the placing of an embargo on the export of silver, a request to the convention of royal burghs for a subsidy, and, in an attempt to tackle the shortage of bullion, encouragement of attempts at gold and silver mining. Notwithstanding Morton's efforts, both financial departments registered continuing and substantial deficits. 
France still exercised some influence in Scottish affairs, especially at the beginning of Morton's regency, and there was a certain amount of diplomatic activity with Sweden and the Netherlands over the recruitment of Scottish mercenaries. Relations with England unquestionably dominated Morton's foreign policy, however, and Elizabeth and her government welcomed his appointment, correctly anticipating that the regent would continue to display those Anglophile tendencies which had been a feature of his earlier career. Morton's immediate task was to convince the English government of the necessity of providing support for his efforts at overcoming the resistance of the Castilians, backed as they were by France and actively seeking the latter's intervention on their behalf. Military and financial aid was crucial if the regent was ever to capture Edinburgh Castle, but fortunately for Morton both Lord Burghley and Sir Francis Walsingham appreciated his problems and supported his appeals to Queen Elizabeth for assistance. In April 1573, following the breakdown of further attempts at persuading the garrison to surrender, an alliance was signed between Morton's government and England. The unconditional surrender of the castle in May brought an end to the first chapter of Morton's relations with England. The last serious threat to the regent's authority had been removed, while the collapse of the Marian faction was popular in England and advantageous to Elizabeth. 
Thereafter, until his deposition in March 1578, the main feature of Morton's policy towards England was his attempt to persuade Elizabeth and her ministers to conclude a defensive pact with their neighbour. What the regent envisaged was an alliance in which both sides would give guarantees to defend the protestant cause, while at the same time promising mutual assistance in the event of a foreign attack. However, Morton's efforts were doomed to failure. In the 1570s Elizabeth experienced few serious threats from either France or Spain, and since there was little likelihood of Scotland being used as a base for attacking England she was not interested in Morton's proposition. Quite clearly she regarded Scotland as a minor power and treated its regent accordingly. In 1575 Morton required all his diplomatic skill to defuse the Redeswyre crisis, which arose when an English warden was killed in a border incident and Elizabeth furiously overreacted. 
None the less, when he recovered his position later in 1578, Elizabeth was not prepared to forsake Morton in his subsequent struggles with his opponents. During the threat from the Argyll-Atholl faction that summer he could take some reassurance from the knowledge that English forces were poised at Berwick to swoop, if necessary, on his border adversaries. Again in August 1578 it was largely through the diplomacy of Robert Bowes, the English ambassador, that a possible civil war was averted and Morton's position secured. The final occasion when there was a flurry of activity in Anglo-Scottish relations occurred late in 1579, when Esme Stewart, a kinsman of James VI, arrived from France. His influence with the impressionable young king (who created him earl of Lennox in April 1580), combined with his political connections, supposedly with both France and Spain, caused concern not only to Morton but also to Elizabeth. But embroiled as she was in negotiations for a possible marriage to the duc d'Alencon, the queen vacillated between sending modest subsidies to the Scottish government and ignoring Morton altogether. As Lennox tightened his grip on the country and gathered increasing support, Morton was left to reflect on the ineffectual nature of his partnership with England. Once Elizabeth perceived that the threat posed by Lennox was much less serious than originally imagined, she was prepared more or less to abandon her ally. Her reluctance to commit herself to Morton's cause was to have even more damaging consequences for him when he was finally overthrown by his enemies. 
In the course of a year Lennox had become the focus for all those who for one reason or another wished to end Morton's regime. Many of them were members of that group of Morton's opponents of the summer of 1578 referred to by Robert Bowes, the English ambassador, as the 'Fellowship of Falkirk' ('CSP Scot.', 5.378). The earl of Atholl had died in controversial circumstances in April 1579 amid allegations that he had been poisoned on Morton's instructions, but there were others who by this juncture had aligned themselves to the Lennox bandwagon, notably William Ruthven, Lord Ruthven, the treasurer, and Robert Pitcairn, commendator of Dunfermline and royal secretary, as well as a new star on the political horizon, Captain James Stewart. After his return from military service abroad Stewart, who was the second son of Lord Ochiltree, enjoyed a meteoric rise in the favour of both Lennox and James VI, who eventually elevated him to the earldom of Arran. It was Stewart who, at a meeting of the privy council on 31 December 1580 attended by the king, suddenly accused Morton of being an accessory to the murder of Lord Darnley. Following Morton's furious denial of the charge, the royal advocate, David Borthwick of Lochhill, recommended that the regent should be placed in custody pending his trial. Morton's political career ended; he was briefly imprisoned in Holyrood Palace and then in Edinburgh Castle before being transferred to Dumbarton, a fortress which was deep in Lennox territory, and chosen, according to the English ambassador, because the privy council was worried about 'what practices his friends would use either to give him intelligence or to carry him away' (ibid., 5.580). 
These fears were not groundless, since during the early part of 1581 Morton's followers attempted to rally support for him. Morton's principal agent was his nephew the earl of Angus, who at one point in February even contemplated attacking Dumbarton Castle. But in the end Angus found himself outmanoeuvred. The backing for the Lennox administration was too widespread, and it outflanked him by arresting his relatives Archibald Douglas, senator of the college of justice, William Douglas of Whittinghame, George Auchinleck of Balmanno, and William Hume of Spot, and by exiling his sons Archibald and James and his kinsmen John Carmichael of that ilk, Malcolm Douglas of Mains, and William Douglas of Lochleven. While the sympathies of Elizabeth and her ministers tended to lie with the former regent, they pursued a realistic foreign policy. Elizabeth instructed Lord Hunsdon, governor of Berwick, to raise troops for possible action on the borders, and her ambassador Thomas Randolph condemned the Lennox administration in front of the Scottish estates. Ultimately, however, the English government placed its own interests first. Consequently, when Elizabeth reflected upon the growing threat from Spain, the actual cost of intervention in Scottish affairs, and the poor condition of her border levies, it made sounder political sense to abandon Morton and concentrate on the maintenance of friendly relations with France. 
By April 1581 support for Morton within Scotland had dwindled even further: on 8 April his cousin, Douglas of Lochleven, was instructed to go into exile 'beyond the wattir of Cromartie' ('Registrum honoris de Morton', 1.127); and on 22 April John Johnstone of that ilk, one of his main allies in the borders, lost his wardenship of the west march to Lord Maxwell, one of Lennox's adherents. The same month, as a result of pressure from his uncle Alexander Erskine, the earl of Mar abandoned Angus and handed over the strategically important Stirling Castle to the government. Shortly afterwards Angus, recognizing the inevitable, prepared with the remnant of his followers to seek refuge in England. 
At this stage, confident that the opposition had been nullified, Lennox began to set in motion the arrangements for Morton's trial. On 23 May Morton was taken from Dumbarton to Edinburgh. Initially he faced a lengthy list of charges ranging from supporting Bothwell at the time of his marriage to Mary, committing various currency offences, plotting the removal of the master of Mar as royal guardian, conspiring to seize James VI in April 1580, and accepting English pensions, to the crucial charge of being implicated in the murder of Darnley. Significantly, there was no mention of the poisoning of the earl of Atholl; this suggests that his opponents, despite their efforts, had still insufficient evidence to offer against him. None the less, there was considerable substance to many of these accusations. For example, like numerous others Morton had briefly supported Bothwell; quite likely he was guilty of certain malpractices relating to the treasury; he may well have plotted the overthrow of Lennox and the seizure of the king; undoubtedly he pursued an Anglophile foreign policy and received some financial aid from England. 
Finally, however, the Lennox administration decided that it would merely accuse Morton of complicity in the murder of Darnley and that it would ignore all the other charges. This was a wise move considering the delay which might well have ensued in hearing nearly twenty charges, not to mention the embarrassment for some prominent figures which would have ensued from the raking up of the past. It remained only for Lennox to guarantee the verdict he wanted; hence the selection of a jury almost totally antagonistic to Morton. Obvious candidates were old foes such as the earls of Argyll, Glencairn, and Montrose, and lords Maxwell and Seton. Others with grievances against the former regent were the earl of Sutherland, a kinsman of Adam Gordon of Auchindoun, Lord Ogilvie (whom Morton had imprisoned between 1576 and 1578), Sir Patrick Learmonth of Dairsie, and Hepburn of Waughton. The last two were closely connected to Kirkcaldy of Grange, whose execution had been ordered by Morton after the fall of Edinburgh Castle in 1573. Lord Innermeath, the master of Livingston, and Sir William Livingston too were linked one way or another to the Lennox faction. Only the earls of Eglinton and Rothes with Lord Somerville could be regarded as in any way impartial. With such a jury the odds were stacked against Morton. 
After a brief hearing, the outcome of which was a foregone conclusion, on 1 June 1581 the earl of Montrose, on behalf of the jury, pronounced the accused guilty of 'airt, pairt, foir knowledge and conceling of the tresonable and unnatural murthow foirsaid' (Pitcairn, 1.114). The next morning, Friday 2 June, Morton had a lengthy discussion with some of the leading members of the kirk. Two of the churchmen present, Walter Balconquhall and John Durie, subsequently recorded the conversations which have become known as Morton's 'confession'. In fact it hardly merited this description since it was mainly a refutation of all the previous allegations, including a denial of any knowledge of the poisoning of Atholl. Morton conceded that he might have been 'a filthie abusare of my body in the pleasures of the flesh' (Calderwood, 3.574); yet, he insisted, he had always put the interests of the kirk at the forefront of his considerations. This questionable statement was followed by a final warning to the clergy: the king was surrounded by those 'knowin to he papistis' and 'the estait of the religion in this country appeired never to be in sic danger' (ibid., 575). About 2 o'clock that afternoon Morton had his last meal. Two hours later he was executed at the cross, Edinburgh, by the 'maiden', an instrument similar to the guillotine which he himself had allegedly introduced into Scotland from England. That evening his body was buried in Greyfriars churchyard. 
It seems clear that the Lennox administration eliminated Morton because it feared a possible repetition of his performance of 1578 and recovery of his position for a third time. Equally, there was the attraction of the various spoils attendant on the downfall of the Douglases. Not surprisingly Lennox and Arran did particularly well; the former acquired, among other rewards, the lordship, regality, and barony of Dalkeith and the baronies of Aberdour, Mordington, and Whittinghame; the latter obtained a substantial pension from Balmerino Abbey, formerly in the hands of Morton's natural son James, and a lease of the lead mines previously belonging to Morton's cousin George Douglas of Parkhead. Other members of the Stewart family were also handsomely rewarded, as were their close allies, especially John Maxwell, Lord Maxwell, who was created earl of Morton only three days after the execution. This particular victory was short-lived, however. Morton's attainder was reversed on 29 January 1586, and the earldom reverted to his heir of entail, his nephew the earl of Angus. Morton's wife survived him, but on 12 July 1581 a jury pronounced that she had been insane for twenty-two years. 
Morton's political performance must be regarded as uneven. He handled the turbulent nobility quite skilfully for much of the time, yet he failed to prevent the Argyll-Atholl partnership from undermining his position in 1578 and, even more crucially, to take decisive action against the partnership of Lennox and Captain James Stewart in 1580. The attack on the Hamiltons the previous year was a questionable stratagem. However, Morton was comparatively old when he took office in 1572 and by 1579 he was complaining of both his 'grit aige' and his 'disesis and infirmiteis' (Livingstone and others, 7.2093), so it is quite possible that his enthusiasm for day-to-day government waned while his judgments became less perceptive. The vexed question of the institution of the kirk was still very much unresolved at his downfall. Since, like the king, he had little time for the policies of Andrew Melville and the radical wing of the kirk, it seems unlikely that the favourable opinion held of him by certain presbyterian authors at the time of his death would have endured had he remained in power. In domestic affairs his administration of the borders displayed all the signs of an efficient regime, at least until the crisis of 1578. Elsewhere, despite his efforts, he was ultimately unable to prevent rising deficits occurring within the exchequer office. Moreover, his manipulation of the currency and certain other questionable practices gave rise to probably justifiable allegations that he 'was inclined to covetousness' (Spottiswoode, 2.197). 
Undoubtedly Morton was not a paragon of virtue in either public or private life. Nevertheless he did have one outstanding characteristic, a powerful personality. Consequently, he was the best individual available to administer Scotland during James VI's minority and for eight years gave the country a relatively strong and effective government. In the circumstances prevailing, this was a commendable achievement and one for which Morton should be principally remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 7894


Douglas, Lord James (c.1617-1645), army officer in the French service, was the third son of William Douglas, first marquess of Douglas and eleventh earl of Angus (1589-1660), and his first wife, Margaret Hamilton (1584/5-1623), daughter of Claud Hamilton, first Lord Paisley. He was born during a three-year period when his father was travelling in Europe after his Catholicism had exposed him to criticism by presbyterian clergy in Scotland. One of his two older brothers, William, died in childhood and there is some suggestion that James may have assumed the Christian name William in consequence. His eldest brother, Archibald, predeceased his father in 1655 and the Angus earldom and Douglas marquessate were inherited by Archibald's son in 1660. 
Lord James Douglas took the opportunity offered by the recruitment of Sir John Hepburn's regiment for service in France in 1633 to begin a military career, and by the time of Hepburn's death in 1636 had become first captain of the regiment. He was narrowly passed over for command in favour of Sir James Hepburn, who was himself killed in Lorraine in October 1637. Douglas had previously been favoured by Cardinal Richelieu for the regimental command on grounds of his Catholicism, and since James Hepburn died without a relative or designated successor in the regiment, Douglas's candidacy could be revived with success, the regiment subsequently being retitled Douglas. The appointment seems to have excited some tension among the established officers, however. In April 1638 a list of absentee captains from the regiment was publicized by the secretary of state for war, and concern was expressed that significant numbers of soldiers had deserted to other Scottish units. The shortfalls in officers and men led to disputes over appropriate levels of pay during the winter of 1638-9, and the unit limped through the campaign of 1639 with little distinction. The regiment would probably have been formally disbanded had it not, by a royal 'ordonnance' of 28 November 1636, acquired 'entretenu' (maintained) status, a royal undertaking to keep the unit on a permanent footing. 
In January 1640 Douglas was sent back to Scotland with 30,000 livres to levy 2000 men -- effectively a commission to raise the regiment again from scratch. This mission proved a failure and in July 1640 he was ordered to return the money that he had received for recruitment. The deepening crisis in Anglo-Scottish relations and Douglas's own Catholicism may well have contributed to this failure. The regiment remained in service in 1641 as a handful of 'compagnies reformees' with the army of Marshal Chatillon, and once again Douglas was ordered to return to Scotland with some of his officers to carry out levies. Strongly supported by the French ambassador, Douglas had more success and in January 1642 disembarked at Dieppe with 2000 recruits. Confusion with his brother, George Douglas, has led to the erroneous assumption that James was appointed to the highest rank of 'lieutenant-general' in the French armies. In fact he served ably as colonel of his regiment in the campaigns from 1642 to 1645, but was not promoted above this rank, which George Douglas himself did not receive until 1677. On 21 October 1645 James Douglas was leading his regiment on the Flanders frontier and was killed in a small-scale combat between Douai and Arras. His corpse was taken to Paris and buried in the abbey of St Germain des Pres near the remains of his grandfather, William, tenth earl of Angus. His brother George ultimately succeeded him in command of the regiment, which was to suffer extremely heavy casualties at the battle of Lens in 1648. 


@@@@@


doc= 7895


Douglas, James, second earl of Queensberry (d. 1671), nobleman, was the eldest son of William Douglas, first earl of Queensberry (d. 1640), and Isobel (died 1628), daughter of Mark Ker, first earl of Lothian, and his wife, Margaret Maxwell. In 1622 he was conjoined with his father in the charter by which the barony of Torthorwald was added to the family estates. By a contract dated 4 June 1630 he married Lady Mary Hamilton (died 1633), third daughter of James Hamilton, second marquess of Hamilton; the marriage produced no children. By a contract dated 26 March 1635 he married Lady Margaret Stewart (died 1673), eldest daughter of John Stewart, first earl of Traquair, with whom he had four sons, including William Douglas, later first duke of Queensberry, and five daughters. As heir to the earldom of Queensberry from 1633 he was styled Viscount Drumlanrig until he succeeded his father in 1640 as second earl of Queensberry, second viscount of Drumlanrig, and second Lord Douglas of Hawick and Tibberis. 
Initially Queensberry was a supporter of the Scottish national covenant. He was appointed a commissioner for the apprehension of papists in 1642, to the committee of war for Dumfriesshire in 1643, and the following year to the committee for the south. However, in 1645 he changed his allegiance to the king. He set out to join Montrose after his victory at Kilsyth, but on the way was captured and taken prisoner to Carlisle. William, first marquess of Douglas, who had accompanied him on his ill-fated journey, but had evaded capture, and others tried to bribe the governor of Carlisle to win his release, but they failed and were fined. Queensberry was fined 120,000 marks Scots by parliament for his delinquency, but in 1647, after half the amount had been paid, the remainder was discharged. Nevertheless, he remained out of favour during the rule of the kirk party. On 2 March 1649 parliament ruled against Queensberry in a case brought by the heritors of Glencairn, who wanted to remove the gift of the barony of Glencairn from the earl. In July 1649 he supplicated the general assembly to be received to the covenant, and his situation eased as Scottish divisions diminished in the face of invasion from England. In December 1650 his complaint to parliament about his treatment at the hands of the army of the western association was referred to the committee of estates, while in March 1651 he regained a command in the army. In 1654 he was fined $4000 by the protectorate's 'Act of Pardon and Grace', but this was reduced by three-quarters the following year. In 1656 he took advantage of the government's order for the relief of debtors in Scotland, registering debts of $290,000 Scots. 
After the Restoration Queensberry exploited the more favourable political climate to relieve his straitened financial position. In June 1661 a report estimated his losses to have been $234,879 Scots. Significantly, in addition to other grants, parliament ordered $2000 to be paid to him by those attached to the forces of the western association in 1650, when goods and cattle had been seized and the gates of Drumlanrig Castle burnt. He was appointed a commissioner of excise in 1661 and a JP in 1663. He added to his estates with the acquisition, among others, of the lands of Kininmont, Locharwood, and Cummertrees. He died in 1671 and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7896


Douglas, James, second marquess of Douglas (c.1646-1700), nobleman, was the only son of Archibald Douglas, earl of Angus ('c'.1609-1655), and his first wife, Lady Anna ('bap'. 1614, died 1646), daughter of Esme Stuart, third duke of Lennox (1579?-1624), and his wife, Katherine Clifton. Following the death of his father in 1655 he bore the courtesy title of earl of Angus, and he was still under age in 1660 when he succeeded his grandfather, William Douglas, first marquess of Douglas, as second marquess. On his father's request he had been placed in the care of his paternal aunt, Margaret, Lady Alexander, but she died at about the same time as her father. The family estates at Douglas's entry were in such an embarrassed condition, mainly because of accumulated debts, that it was estimated that his clear disposable income amounted to just $1000 Scots yearly. On 8 September 1668, after the attainment of his majority, he was served heir to his father in the earldom of Angus. In 1670, by a contract dated 7 September, he married Lady Barbara Erskine, eldest daughter of John Erskine, earl of Mar. Douglas Castle, which had fallen into disrepair, was renovated for their use. The marriage was not a happy one: the marchioness complained that her husband treated her with contempt, while he accused her of not affording him the respect he was due. A contract of separation, agreed in 1681, was made the subject of a popular ballad entitled 'Lord James Douglas' or 'The Marchioness of Douglas', beginning 'O Waly, waly up the bank' (C. Mackay, 'The Legendary and Romantic Ballads of Scotland', 1861, 189-94). The marchioness, with whom he had one son, died about August 1690. 

William Lawrie, tutor of Blackwood, the marquess's trusted factor and chamberlain, who was blamed by many for the estrangement, had since his appointment in 1670 exacerbated rather than improved Douglas's financial state. A royal commission of investigation into the marquess's affairs, initiated in 1684 by Charles II, came to nothing. When, following the battle of Bothwell Bridge, Blackwood was condemned to be beheaded, Douglas begged successfully for his life, asserting that Blackwood was the only man who knew his affairs. In 1692 the marquess married, by contract dated 13 December, his second wife, Lady Mary Kerr ('bap'. 1674, died 1736), daughter of Robert Kerr, first marquess of Lothian. They had two sons and one daughter, Lady Jane Douglas. Mary refused to allow Blackwood's interference in domestic affairs and after acquainting herself with the financial condition of the estate accused him of gross mismanagement. With the help of her father she managed to secure the appointment of a commission to take charge of the estate in 1698. It found debts in excess of $240,000 Scots. The commissioners dismissed Blackwood, but it was to be a few months before the marquess's view of him was changed. 
Douglas was frequently present in parliament, and after his admission to the privy council in 1671 he regularly attended its meetings, but he was not at the forefront of politics during the reigns of Charles II and James VII. In the spring of 1689, however, he was a member of the committee of estates that ushered in the revolution, and in May was named as one of William III's council. About 1690 the new king granted him the forfeited estates of John Graham of Claverhouse, Viscount Dundee, and he was also appointed to the heritable office of constable of the castle and town of Dundee. He died at Douglas on 25 February 1700 and was buried in the old chapel of St Bride on 1 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 7897


Douglas, James, second duke of Queensberry and first duke of Dover (1662-1711), politician, was born at Sanquhar Castle, Dumfriesshire, on 18 December 1662, the eldest son of William Douglas, third earl and first duke of Queensberry (1637-1695), and Lady Isabel Douglas (died 1691), sixth daughter of William Douglas, first marquess of Douglas. He entered his studies at Glasgow University in 1676 and thereafter travelled in continental Europe, returning in 1684. On 1 December 1685, aged nearly twenty-three, he married Lady Mary Boyle (1670/71-1709), second daughter of Charles Boyle, styled Viscount Dungarvan, and Jane Seymour, daughter of William, duke of Somerset; the marriage produced four sons and five daughters. His title was lord and then earl of Drumlanrig, before he succeeded his father in March 1695. 
Drumlanrig appears to have first entered the political scene in February 1684, when he was named by the privy council as one of the commissioners for the borders, and on 15 July 1684 he was sworn of the new privy council. On the same day he was appointed to the privy council's committee for public affairs, and he was also made a lieutenant-colonel of the regiment of John Graham of Claverhouse. On 1 August Drumlanrig's troop of horse was ordered to lie at Dumfries as part of the privy council's policy of suppressing conventicles. He was issued with a licence from the privy council on 12 August for importing English cloth to clothe his troop. Following a petition by the partners of Newmilns cloth manufactory against the imports, on 19 August the privy council set up a committee on which Drumlanrig sat to consider the claim that these partners were capable of providing Scottish cloth. The privy council received a letter from Charles II on 6 September ordering members of the council to 'proceed to the disaffected shires with the object of securing obedience to the laws' ('Reg. PCS', 8.155-6). In line with the king's instructions, Drumlanrig and John Graham of Claverhouse (later first Viscount Dundee) were to be sent to Dumfriesshire and Wigtownshire. On 13 September Drumlanrig's troop of horse and Captain Strachan's dragoons were ordered by the council to proceed to Dumfries to attend the district commissioners appointed as part of the policy of the suppression of religious disorders in the western shires. On 15 November five rebels and fugitives subscribed the 'Test Act' in the presence of Drumlanrig at Sanquhar Castle, and on 5 December he was appointed to a privy council committee to consider the cases of gentlemen and their wives in Teviotdale who were fined for their 'irregularities' (ibid., 10.47). The activities of Drumlanrig and Graham of Claverhouse in the south-western shires were applauded by the privy council on 12 December, and they were given 'hearty thanks for ther so good and acceptable service done to the King on this occasione' (ibid., 10.58). In 1685 Drumlanrig was appointed as a member of the new privy council on 9 April. His father was summoned to court in 1685, and on 7 August the privy council allowed Drumlanrig to accompany him. On 12 August a precept for $500 sterling was issued to cover Drumlanrig's expenses at court. He was appointed to the privy council in 1686 and 1687, though he attended only once, on 30 March 1686. With the escalating tension in the reign of James VII and II, a commission to Drumlanrig as a lieutenant-colonel of horse was issued from Whitehall on 19 September 1688. Nine days later, on 27 September, orders were sent from Whitehall to the Scottish privy council ordering troops to march into England and magazines to be removed from Edinburgh Castle to Stirling Castle. Acting on the king's orders, John Drummond, first earl of Melfort, was to instruct Drumlanrig to go to his command in Scotland. 
Drumlanrig was present at the privy council meeting of 1 October 1688, but he was shortly to change his allegiance to William of Orange, following his landing in England. Along with Prince George and the duke of Ormond, Drumlanrig joined Prince William at Sherborne, Dorset, on 30 November 1688. Drumlanrig's shift in allegiance away from James to William was scathingly commented on later by the Jacobite George Lockhart of Carnwath. According to Lockhart, Drumlanrig was 'the first Scotsman that deserted over to the Prince of Orange, and from thence acquired the epithet (among honest men) of Proto-rebel, and has ever since been so faithful to the revolution party, and averse to the king and all his advisers, that he laid hold on all occasions to oppress the royal party and interest' (''Scotland's Ruine'', 11). Drumlanrig did not attend the convention of estates (1689), nor was he present in the parliamentary sessions of 1689-90 which enacted the revolution settlement in Scotland. A commission for William's privy council was issued from Hampton Court on 27 May 1689. Drumlanrig was included on the king's council, and he attended the diets of 6 and 17 July 1689. That he had found favour with William was further reflected in his appointment as one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber and his appointment as colonel of the sixth or Scottish troop of Horse Guards. 
In April 1690 Drumlanrig wrote to William Carstares seeking the position of extraordinary lord of session, an office which had been held by his father before the revolution. However, he failed to secure this position, which was later bestowed on his father on 23 November 1692. Drumlanrig served William's military cause against his former associate, now Viscount Dundee, in the first Jacobite rising. Drumlanrig was also a member of the 1690 privy council and, from 16 April, of a specialized committee dealing with artillery. Later, in September 1690, he was sent to Stirling with government forces for the potential defence of the town, and was instructed by the privy council to be ready to attack enemy forces should they proceed towards Dumbarton to the west or Perthshire to the east. Drumlanrig was present at the extraordinary meeting of the privy council on 4 November 1691 which issued a proclamation celebrating William's safe return from Ireland following his military success there. Having been appointed as a Treasury commissioner on 3 March 1692, he made his first formal appearance in the Scottish parliament in the fourth session of the parliament of William and Mary, which sat from 18 April to 15 June. George, first earl of Melville, the parliament's high commissioner, produced a letter from William authorizing Drumlanrig to sit and vote as lord high treasurer. Drumlanrig took his place in the 1693 parliamentary session as an officer of state. In accordance with current parliamentary legislation, he took the oath of allegiance, the parliamentary oath, and he signed the assurance. 
On 28 March 1695 Drumlanrig succeeded to the dukedom following the death of his father, and thereafter attended that year's parliamentary session (9 May to 17 July). On 25 May 1696 he was appointed as lord privy seal, and on 26 June he took his seat as an extraordinary lord of session. In the next parliamentary session (7 September to 12 October 1696) Queensberry was present in the capacity of an officer of state as lord privy seal, and on 10 September he signed the association directed against Jacobite conspiracy towards King William, which also acknowledged the king as the rightful and lawful monarch. On 25 September he was named as one of the commissioners of supply for Dumfriesshire. Queensberry also attended the parliamentary session of 19 July to 1 September 1698 as lord privy seal. He was reappointed as a commissioner of supply for Dumfriesshire on 30 July, and on 31 August parliament passed legislation which ratified his earldom and regality of Drumlanrig. His general political and specific parliamentary profile was raised by the Darien disaster in 1699. Owing to public outcry William was reluctantly forced to summon a parliament in Scotland, and Queensberry was appointed as high commissioner to the parliamentary session which met from 21 to 30 May. He also served as high commissioner in the remaining sessions of the Williamite parliament (29 October 1700 to 1 February 1701 and 9 to 30 June 1702, the latter sitting under Queen Anne's authority after William's death). Queensberry's political credit was significantly enhanced by his successful political handling and containment of the Darien crisis in Scotland on William's behalf. As a reward for these services, Queensberry was made a knight of the Garter on 18 June 1701. He maintained his important political profile with the accession of Queen Anne, not only being retained as high commissioner to parliament, but also being appointed as one of the secretaries of state for Scotland, along with George Mackenzie, first earl of Cromarty. The 1702 session fulfilled the last wish of William III and met with the first request of Queen Anne by empowering the crown to appoint commissioners to treat for a union of the kingdoms. However, Queensberry had to bring the session to a sudden end on 30 June. 
Queensberry played an important role in the abortive negotiations of 27 October 1702 to 3 February 1703 for a treaty of union with England. As the spokesman for the Scottish commissioners, on 10 November he made a speech in which he spoke of the union as 'highly advantageous for the peace and wealth of both Kingdoms and a great security for the Protestant Religion everywhere'; he also stressed the 'sincere intentions' of the Scottish commissioners to 'advance this great design' ('APS', '1670-1707', 11, appendix, 148). Queensberry was appointed as high commissioner to the 1703 parliamentary session, which met from 6 May to 16 September and was the first session of a newly elected parliament which met over four sessions between 1703 and 1707. On 1 July the earl of Seafield wrote to Sidney, first earl of Godolphin, informing him that he and Queensberry had worked together in parliament concerning the disputed elections of the commissioners of the shires for Orkney. Seafield and Queensberry had therefore used their influence to secure 'the electione by a great majority' of those 'very well inclined' for the queen's service ('Letters Relating to Scotland', 2). Nevertheless, in the face of aggressive constitutional nationalism in the 1703 session and the possibility that Scotland and England might have different monarchs in the future, Queensberry prorogued the session on 16 September. 
Soon after, the duke's political fortunes suffered a severe setback with the exposure of the 'Scotch' or 'Queensberry plot'. Queensberry was discredited by his involvement with Simon Fraser, later Lord Lovat, a political charlatan closely associated with the exiled Jacobite court, who had returned to Scotland in summer 1703 (as a result of a government indemnity allowing Jacobite exiles to return to Scotland) ostensibly to co-ordinate a Jacobite rising. Fraser was driven by personal ambition to secure the restitution of his estates, following their earlier confiscation and his being declared an outlaw for the rape of, and forced marriage to, the daughter of the marquess of Atholl (she was the widow of the previous chieftain of the Frasers) in his drive to secure the Lovat title and chieftainship of the Frasers. The unreliable Fraser turned Jacobite informer and sought Queensberry's protection in an attempt to secure these personal objectives. Fraser implicated some of Queensberry's main Scottish political rivals in the Jacobite plot, especially John Murray, second marquess and first duke of Atholl. Without exploring the details of the plot in full, Queensberry secretly passed on the information to the queen, and provided Fraser with a feigned name and pass to go to France and report on Jacobite activity. However, the conspiracy was exposed when Fraser unwittingly passed on the details to one Robert Ferguson, who then warned Atholl and others of their implication in the supposed plot. Lockhart of Carnwath later argued that Queensberry and his associates deliberately 'resolved one way or other to frame such a plot, as, when lodged upon those they designed it against, should, in all humane probability, be their utter ruin and destruction' (''Scotland's Ruine'', 49). Queensberry's subsequent fall from favour was accelerated by two key events. Firstly, following a memorial presented to the queen by Atholl, exposing the conspiracy against him, the House of Lords resolved that there had been a dangerous conspiracy in Scotland in favour of the Pretender (James Stuart). Secondly, a deputation from Scotland, consisting of politicians from the country party who were shortly to become part of what was known as the 'new party', arrived in London to protest at Queensberry's behaviour. Queensberry was replaced as high commissioner to the 1704 parliamentary session by John Hay, second marquess of Tweeddale, and the 'new party' was installed in power. 
Yet Queensberry's power base in Scotland was too strong to be ignored, and the demands of the escalating crisis in Anglo-Scottish relations resulted in his rehabilitation in 1705 when he was reappointed as lord privy seal and made a lord of the Treasury. John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, was appointed as high commissioner to the parliamentary session which met from 28 June to 18 September 1705. Queensberry attended in the capacity of lord privy seal, but Lockhart of Carnwath argued that Argyll operated in liaison with Queensberry. Indeed, Lockhart claimed that Queensberry 'used him as the monkey did the cat in pulling out the hot roasted chestnuts' (''Scotland's Ruine'', 85). It is clear, however, that lobbying took place for the rehabilitation of Queensberry, within the court interest in general and in the run-up to the 1705 parliamentary session in particular. Accordingly, David Boyle, first earl of Glasgow, wrote to the earl of Godolphin on 12 May, informing him that 'It is my opinion that the only means and way to setle the succesion is that the Duke of Queensberrie come down to Scotland as soon as possible and cordially assist my Lord Duke of Argyll, her Majesties Commissioner' ('Letters relating to Scotland', 179). In response to the outrage among Scottish politicians caused by the English 'Alien Act', Queensberry introduced a motion in the 1705 session that a separate address should be made to Queen Anne informing her of the indignation of the nation at the interference of the House of Lords in Scottish affairs. Queensberry's motion was successfully carried, and his personal anger at the Lords may have been related to its stance over and interference in the recent 'Scotch plot'. Of greater importance is the fact that Argyll and Queensberry collaborated to ensure that James Douglas, fourth duke of Hamilton, was not nominated to the 1705 council of trade. Chancellor Seafield informed Godolphin of this in a letter from Edinburgh on 18 August 1705. Hamilton was not to be nominated, despite his own intense personal lobbying, because of his leading role in ensuring that the council of trade was to be elected by the parliament and not nominated by the queen. Accordingly, Argyll and Queensberry were 'positive not to have him named, nor any that voted against the Queens nominatione' (ibid., 71). 
Queensberry was one of the Scottish commissioners who negotiated the treaty of union with their English counterparts in the summer of 1706, but, unlike the 1702-3 negotiations, Chancellor Seafield, and not Queensberry, was their spokesman. As high commissioner, Queensberry played a crucial role in the last session of the Scottish parliament, sitting from 3 October 1706 to 25 March 1707, which ratified the treaty of union. Instructions issued to Queensberry from Anne at Windsor on 31 July stressed that 'an entire Union' was the only acceptable political option for 'the Peace and happiness of our Subjects of this Island' ('Letters relating to Scotland', 190-91). Thus Queensberry was instructed to endeavour to obtain the ratification of the articles of the treaty in the forthcoming session of the Scottish parliament. Moreover, he was clearly informed that if 'a Federal Union or any other measure in opposition to an entire Union will carry in Parliament' then he was 'in that case to adjourn the Parliament' (ibid., 191). 
Queensberry was also empowered to give the royal assent to any parliamentary legislation for the security of the presbyterian Church of Scotland for the post-Union future, as well as being instructed that the Scottish parliament was to decide on the manner of choosing the sixteen elective peers for the House of Lords and the forty-five MPs as the Scottish representation for the new British parliament. He was in correspondence with Godolphin prior to the opening of the parliamentary session on 3 October, and during the actual progress of the session. In a letter of 22 September John Erskine, twenty-second earl of Mar, secretary of state, wrote to Godolphin from Edinburgh and informed him that Queensberry and the court interest were currently considering 'what are the most advisable methods and measurs for manadging and cairying on business when the Parl. Meets' ('Letters Relating to Scotland', 176). Popular disquiet at the Union meant that Queensberry was subjected to verbal abuse by the Edinburgh mob, suffered an attack on his coach, and saw his guards and servants wounded on a regular basis. Despite these external pressures, Queensberry played a crucial part in steering the treaty through the house, and he had a key role in the covert distribution of the $20,000 sterling sent north to pay the debts and arrears due to government servants. He worked closely with Chancellor Seafield and the Scottish treasurer, David Boyle, first earl of Glasgow, along these lines. On 4 October Glasgow wrote to Godolphin informing him that he had been ordered by Queensberry to acquaint Godolphin that: 'you would be pleased to remitt the sd money to Scotland so soon as possible, in regard that many of our nobility who are come to Parliament, that want their bygone pensiones, are calling for some money, and it is for her Maties service that they have a part at this juncture. (ibid., 182-3)' Ironically, Queensberry received the bulk of this money with a payment of $12,325, though he actually had recorded arrears of $26,756 9's'. 1/2died 
As a reward for his services to the queen and securing the treaty in Scotland, Queensberry was rewarded with a British peerage. On 26 May 1708 he was created duke of Dover, marquess of Beverley, and earl of Ripon, with remainder to his third son, Charles Douglas, earl of Solway, who was later to succeed him as third duke of Queensberry. Queensberry's post-1707 political career was consolidated by his appointment as joint keeper of the privy seal, and on 9 February 1709 he was appointed as third secretary of state. This latter appointment gave Queensberry a continued significant influence in the management of Scottish affairs. Yet his position as a British peer aroused controversy during the general election of 1708, in the context of the election of the sixteen Scottish peers to be represented in the new British parliament. His vote was protested against at the general election of the Scottish peers on 17 June 1708. This resulted in a more general resolution issued by the House of Lords on 17 January 1709. Accordingly, the Lords resolved that a peer in Scotland, who chose to sit in the House of Lords by virtue of a patent under the great seal of Britain, was to have no voting rights in the election of the Scottish representative peers. Nevertheless, it would appear that the Queensberry interest secured a strong profile in the 1708 election. One Alexander Rigby, writing from Edinburgh on 19 June 1708, stated that prior to the election nine of the sixteen elected peers were 'supposed to be for D. Queensberrys party', and that 'the D. of Dover and his friends have the greatest stroak in the Knts of the Shires and in the burroughs' ('Letters Relating to Scotland', 185-6). As secretary of state, in January 1711 Queensberry was in correspondence with the Board of Trade and Plantations concerning the reopening of trade to ports in Livonia and Ingria. 
Queensberry died in London on 6 July 1711, just under two years after his wife's death in October 1709. He was buried at Durisdeer, near Drumlanrig, Dumfriesshire. He is remembered as one of the Scottish statesmen and politicians who were responsible for securing the safe passage of the treaty of union through the Scottish parliament. In an essay written in 1703 on the 'character of families', Lord Cromarty stated that Queensberry was 'in estate as great as any mentioned, and considerable in his following; but the more by his being now the most considerable family of Douglass, who ever were the most eminent family and most active in Scotland, or perhaps elsewhere' ('Letters Relating to Scotland', 130). 


@@@@@


doc= 7898


Hamilton, James, fourth duke of Hamilton and first duke of Brandon (1658-1712), nobleman, was born in Hamilton Palace on 11 April 1658 and baptized that same day. His father was William Douglas ['see 'Hamilton, William, third duke of Hamilton (1634-1694)], and his mother was Anne Hamilton (1632-1716), third duchess of Hamilton in her own right, daughter of James Hamilton, first duke of Hamilton, and his wife, Lady Mary Feilding, whose father was William, first earl of Denbigh. 
Called after his maternal grandfather, James, like his twelve brothers and sisters, took his mother's surname, for the second duke of Hamilton's entail stipulated that her husband and children were to 'take on, use and weir the name and armes of the house of Hamilton' (Notes by third duke on the second duke's entail, Hamilton archives at Lennoxlove, RH 55/32/4; also 1693 memorandum for the fourth duke, RH 89/36/21). 
As the eldest son James Hamilton bore the title of earl of Arran, and his birth was particularly significant, coming as it did after all the traumas suffered by the family during the civil wars. Since their marriage in 1656, Duchess Anne and her husband had worked painstakingly to retrieve her inheritance, a process completed after the Restoration in 1660. Their ambitious plans for the future centred on their heir, and the duchess was doubly attached to her first-born son because, small, dark and swarthy, he bore a close resemblance to her dead father. The duke and duchess gave careful thought to Arran's upbringing. Following the accepted practice of the Scottish peerage they decided to send him to the local school at Hamilton when he was about six. They also appointed John Bannantyne of Corehouse to be his governor. When he was eleven they anxiously consulted Sir Robert Moray as to what they should do next. In the end, however, they ignored Moray's advice that they should keep the boy at home with his governor, and instead they sent him to the grammar school in Glasgow, where he and Bannantyne lodged with Gilbert Burnet, at that time professor of theology in the university there. In 1671 Arran entered Glasgow University to read Greek and Latin, French, theology, geography, and logic. He had a singing-master, attended a dancing-school, and also learned to handle pike and musket. Both Burnet and Bannantyne complained that, high-spirited and thoroughly spoilt, he persistently wasted his time in low-born company, spent too much money, and lied to cover up his misdemeanours. 'Pray consider', his mother wrote to him in her usual forthright manner, 'what credit it will be to you that after four years being at the college you come from it a dunce' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/5878). 
In spite of their misgivings, the duke and duchess then sent Arran off on the grand tour. Whatever his deficiencies, the future head of the house of Hamilton must lack no advantage. After sailing to La Rochelle at the end of October 1675 the earl, his governor, and a page travelled first to Angers, where Arran made the most of his new found freedom. Bannantyne had to send home regular accounts of expenditure and when the duke of Hamilton read how much his son was spending on balls, masquerades, unnecessary clothes, and tennis he was furious. He replaced Bannantyne with James Forbes, who he hoped would be stricter, and wrote to warn Arran that if he did not regulate his expenditure better, 'your abode abroad will not be long, for it was to improve you in useful breeding you was sent there, and not to follow vanity and folly' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/5878). Forbes escorted Arran to Blois, where they spent a few weeks before moving to Paris. After some carefully planned sightseeing the earl was enrolled in Monsieur Faubert's academy in the rue St Marguerite, off the faubourg St Germain. He passed the winter of 1676-7 there, and when Arran was presented at court Forbes was able to report with satisfaction that Louis XIV actually smiled at the earl, 'which it is not very common to that king to do' (NA Scot., GD 406/5993). A few days before term ended on 4 May 1677 an unexpected letter came from the duke, instructing Forbes to take his charge to Italy. 
Not many Scots on the grand tour went as far as Rome, in part because of the expense, in part because of presbyterian disapproval, but it was fashionable in English aristocratic circles and so Arran must have the opportunity. After a summer spent in Bourges they set off for Turin, where Arran was welcomed by the duke and duchess of Savoy, who treated him like a son. Travelling by way of Venice and Florence he and Forbes reached Rome on 20 February 1678. Arran visited all the antiquities, made friends with Philip Howard, known as Cardinal Norfolk, and sat for his portrait to Ferdinand Voet. He had by now developed a passion for paintings which was to remain with him for the rest of his life. 
It was more than two years since Arran had left home; the duke of Hamilton had already spent more than $1200 sterling on his son's travels, and he decided that it was high time that his heir came home, found a sensible Scottish wife, and settled down to produce a family. Reluctantly the earl returned to Paris, crossed the channel in the yacht 'Merlin' and made his way to London, where his father was waiting. Although at first the duke reported that 'he carys himself discreetly and I use him as a comarade' he was soon telling his wife that their son had neglected his studies abroad, wasted his time in bad company, and 'as for his sincerity, I fear he retains too much of the way he had when he was a child'. Worst of all, the earl made it clear that returning to settle down in Scotland was, as his father remarked wryly, 'much the same to him as to go to the gallies' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/8130). 
After a fleeting visit to Hamilton Palace at the end of the year Arran hurried back to court where Charles II, on 25 January 1679, obligingly made his presence necessary by appointing him to be a gentleman of the bedchamber. Free at last from the oversight of father and governor Arran ran up huge debts, fought in duels, and engaged in numerous affairs, fathering at least three illegitimate children, James Abercrombie and Katherine and Mary Ruthven. In response to repeated parental urgings he also entered into marriage negotiations with a long series of aristocratic English ladies, but always withdrew before any contract could be finalized. In 1683 he was overjoyed when Charles II sent him to France as ambassador-extraordinary to congratulate Louis XIV on the birth of his grandson, Philippe, duc d'Anjou, and instead of returning home when his mission was over he stayed on. In the spring of 1684 he was made one of the French king's three aides-de-camp, along with the dauphin and the duc de Gramont, and told Lord Dartmouth proudly that this was 'an honour that no stranger ever had but myself' ('Dartmouth MSS', 1.115-16). He also boasted that he had 'in prospect one of the finest ladies in France with a million' (ibid.). 
Arran accompanied Louis XIV on two campaigns and when not on duty lived at Versailles in an apartment lent to him by the duc de Bouillon, swimming each day with the dauphin and walking with the king. He would probably have remained there indefinitely, but on 6 February 1685 Charles II died, and he was recalled to London. As a close friend of the new king, James VII and II, he was in July 1686 given command of a regiment of horse in the force raised to suppress the duke of Monmouth's rebellion. Two years later James made him a knight of the newly revived Order of the Thistle. The earl's financial problems were by now, however, acute. His debts amounted to some $10,000 sterling, and his father had long since told him bluntly, 'untill you marry and thereby you bring in a portion [dowry] to the family, I will nether medle in your transactions nor concern myself in your debts' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/7068). 
Arran's old friend and patron Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland, at this point came to the rescue by suggesting that the earl marry his eldest daughter, Lady Anne Spencer (1667/8-1690). Sunderland had his own reasons for suggesting the match. As James II turned increasingly to his Roman Catholic favourites Sunderland's power had been slipping away. The king was, however, relying on the duke of Hamilton in his dealings with Scotland and so Sunderland believed that he would retrieve his own position if he could form an alliance with the duke. The main difficulty lay in Arran's reluctance to commit himself to matrimony. Attractive and intelligent Lady Anne might be, but the earl did not want a wife. When, however, Sunderland suggested that they could work together to extract the best possible financial terms from the duke of Hamilton asking, for example, for a clause binding the duke to pay his son's debts, Arran was immediately won over. 
On his arrival in London the duke of Hamilton was none too pleased to discover that negotiations had begun without his knowledge, but he was so relieved that Arran was actually considering a suitable bride that he gave his approval and set about scrutinizing the proposed conditions for the contract. He discussed the details with his wife, who remained at Hamilton, confiding to her that their son was 'in as much perplexety of thinking to be maried as I have been in fears not to be married to you' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/7755). Although he was affronted by many of Arran's demands, the dowry of $10,000 sterling, which he would control, reconciled him to these difficulties and the contract was finalized at last. During the ceremonial signing, on 5 January 1687, the duke noticed that Lady Anne 'seamed in some concern... which I thought no wonder of, for she cannot but know his wildness and she is not twenty till nixt summer' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/7806). He went across to speak some encouraging words to her, for he liked her, and felt that if anyone could reclaim his son from his unfortunate way of life, it would be Lady Anne. She still looked very grave when the bishop of Rochester conducted the marriage in the dining-room of her father's lodgings at Whitehall on 10 January 1688, a wedding described by the diarist John Evelyn as being of 'extraordinary splendour' ('The Diary of John Evelyn', ed. W. Bray, 2 vols., 1966, 2.273). However, against all expectation, she was won over by her husband's charm and fell deeply in love with him. Their first child, a daughter whom they named Anne, was born in London on 18 January 1689, only to die less than a month later. 
That was the least of the couple's problems, for on 5 November 1688 William of Orange had landed in England. Arran had accompanied James VII and II to Salisbury and remained loyally by his side until his embarkation for France. The earl then returned to Whitehall, where he was shown into the new monarch's presence and greeted him defiantly, saying that he came by the command of the king his master. William promptly sent him to the Tower of London. Later claims that the third duke had advised the king to do so were based on a comment in Swift's 'Memoirs of Captain Crichton' ('Works', 12.75) and could have been true. His father may have seen this as the only way of restraining his heir from further folly but, on the other hand, it is unlikely that he would have sought such a public humiliation for the family. 
Although Arran was released on a technicality when he was about to be tried in April 1689, he made no secret of his Jacobite sympathies and was incarcerated in the Tower again a few weeks later on suspicion of conspiring with the French court. It was almost a year before his father managed to negotiate his release, whereupon the earl promptly announced that he would rather stay in prison than face his irate creditors. The duke eventually managed to have him smuggled out one Sunday morning when no one was about, and Arran rode at once for Scotland, his heavily pregnant wife and his exasperated father following behind in a coach. 
Arran and his countess went to live at Kinneil Castle in Linlithgowshire, which was small, but conveniently near Edinburgh. It seemed that, at last, he would be content to settle in Scotland, but all future plans were shattered when Lady Arran gave birth to a second daughter, Mary, but died soon afterwards of puerperal fever. Genuinely distraught, the earl left the baby with his mother and returned to London, where he began an affair with Charles II's illegitimate daughter, Lady Barbara Fitzroy. Nine months later she had his son, whom they named Charles Hamilton (1691-1754). Arran also seems to have sought solace in a more unexpected quarter. When Patrick Home later gave a public oration on the earl in the College of Edinburgh, he recalled Arran's diligent researches in libraries after the death of his wife. The earl had made volumes of notes on Scottish history, which, said Home, 'wee hope will transmitt his fame to posterity' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/5902). He had apparently inherited his father's fascination with historical research. 
Unwelcome at court and still in financial difficulties, Arran was forced to spend 1691-2 at Kinneil, but by 1693 he was back in London once more. The death of his father in 1694 made no difference to his position, for the family titles and estates remained with his mother, and so he spent much of his time in a renewed pursuit of wealthy heiresses. All his relatives were urging him to remarry and produce an heir, and Duchess Anne now held out the inducement that, if he did take a suitable wife, she would resign her titles to him. She would, of course, remain duchess of Hamilton and she would keep entire control of her estates, but he would have the title of fourth duke of Hamilton and he would be able to represent the family in the Scottish parliament. Thus encouraged, Arran began making serious approaches to Elizabeth Gerard ('c'.1682-1744), the only child and heir of the late Digby, fifth Baron Gerard. Elizabeth was just thirteen when she came to his attention and he was nearing forty, but she was very rich, having inherited extensive properties in Lancashire and Staffordshire. Negotiations dragged on for more than three years but on 9 July 1698 Duchess Anne resigned her titles. The next day William III and II created her eldest son fourth duke of Hamilton; by 16 July 1698 the marriage contract had been signed and the wedding took place on 17 July at Bushy Park. Among James's and Elizabeth's seven children was Lady Susanna Keck, political manager. 
The new duke of Hamilton sat in the Scottish parliament for the first time on 21 May 1700, and spoke in an important debate on the Darien scheme. His mother had been the first person to subscribe to the company trading to Africa and the Indies, investing $3000. The Scots blamed William III and II and the English for its subsequent disastrous failure, and the duke earned great popularity by his apparently patriotic stance. In 1702 Queen Anne succeeded William, and when negotiations began for a union of the Scottish and English parliaments the duke led the opposition. He spoke and voted against every article of the treaty of union, moving friend and foe alike to tears with his eloquence, but whenever any really decisive action was required of him he suffered a series of illnesses which seem to have been either diplomatic or psychosomatic. 'Everie one is sparring ether to speak or writ of your brother Hamilton to me', his mother told her eldest daughter, Katherine, on 7 September 1705, adding three days later, 'itt passes my comprehension to find out a tolerable face for his actings this session of parliament and I am so ashamd on his behalfe that I know nither what to say or how to look' (Atholl MS 45 V 119, 120). 
Hamilton's supporters were bitterly disappointed by his erratic behaviour, which was occasioned not only by his awareness that his wife had brought him extensive estates in the south, but by his belief that if James VII and II were restored, he himself could become an acceptably protestant king of Scots because of his Stewart ancestry. When he went so far as to draw up a protest in the name of his mother and himself, declaring that the treaty of union should in no way prejudice their right to the crown of Scotland, not only Duchess Anne but the entire family were mortified. She refused to sign, telling him that the petition would do no good and would 'only expose me to be laughed at' (NA Scot., GD 406/C1/9744). 
Hamilton seemed at first to support Cunningham of Eckatt's plan for an armed rising of the western shires, but suddenly sent a message to all those involved announcing a postponement and the scheme fell through. He then summoned the country gentlemen to Edinburgh to petition the queen for a new parliament and abruptly decided that unless their address insisted on a Hanoverian succession he could have nothing to do with it; in the ensuing arguments that plan also collapsed. When the twenty-second article of the treaty was being debated it was expected that the marquess of Annandale would move for the settlement of the Hanoverian succession. Everyone assumed that the motion would be defeated, and the duke told his friends that when that happened he would enter a protest and they would all walk out. On the day, however, he first refused to go to parliament at all, claiming that he had toothache, and then, although he was eventually persuaded to attend, he declined to present the counter-resolution. Torn between his old loyalties to the house of Stewart, his desire to please Queen Anne, and his personal ambitions, he felt unable to do anything in case he made the wrong decision. 
After the 'Act of Union' was passed Hamilton remained in Scotland until the autumn of 1707, complaining that he could not afford to live anywhere else and hinting that his mother should invite him to stay permanently at Hamilton Palace. He nagged her until she gave him $8000 sterling and then, leaving his two sons and three surviving daughters with her, to be brought up at her expense, he departed with his petulant young wife for the south. During the Jacobite invasion of Scotland in January 1708 he was arrested on his English estates, but he was soon released after he promised to support the whigs in the election of the Scottish representative peers. He himself became a representative peer that summer, and moved to London, renting a large house in St James's Square. He never visited Scotland again. 
On the impeachment of Dr Sacheverell, Hamilton abandoned the whigs and was rewarded by the incoming tory administration with the lord lieutenancy of Lancashire. Still preoccupied with his claim to the throne, he was very conscious that Queen Anne's children had all died, and he seems to have decided to ingratiate himself with her in the hope of being recognized as her heir. In 1709 he astonished his friends by calling his third son Anne in her honour. In December 1710 he became a privy councillor and on 11 September 1711 was created a peer of Great Britain with the titles of duke of Brandon and Baron Dutton. There then ensued a long wrangle over whether a Scottish representative peer could sit in parliament by virtue of having been made a peer of Great Britain, and he never actually did so. He was also embroiled in a complicated lawsuit with his wife's family. One of the clauses in his marriage contract with Elizabeth had stated that he would pay her mother $10,000 for her expenses in bringing up his wife. He failed to hand over the money and Lady Gerard sued him. When she died, leaving her daughter only 5's'. and a diamond necklace, Lady Gerard's brother Charles, second earl of Macclesfield, continued the legal proceedings, eventually passing on the Gerard claims to his own heir Charles, fourth Baron Mohun. By 1711 Hamilton was insisting that Mohun owed him $43,979 12's'. 7died, the alleged profits from the Gerard estates during Elizabeth's minority together with the value of her parents' personal property. 
In autumn 1712 Queen Anne appointed Hamilton to be her ambassador to France, and on 26 October conferred upon him the Order of the Garter. This alarmed the whigs, who feared that he was being sent to negotiate the succession of Prince James Francis Edward Stuart to the British throne, but instead of carrying out his plans and going to Paris at once, Hamilton delayed his departure at the last moment and on 13 November encountered Lord Mohun at the law courts. Mohun was drunk, they quarrelled violently, and the following day Mohun sent him a message challenging him to a duel. The duke accepted. Accompanied by his illegitimate son, seventeen-year-old Charles Hamilton, he left his St James's Square house between seven and eight o'clock on the morning of 15 November 1712. He and Mohun met in Hyde Park. The duke had been involved in many duels in the past but he was fifty-four now, stout and out of condition, and his opponent was a much younger man with an unsavoury reputation for violence. The signal was given. Fighting with his sword in his left hand, for he was ambidextrous, the duke wounded Mohun fatally in the chest. Even as Mohun fell dying he managed to slash at his adversary's unprotected right arm, severing an artery. The duke staggered away, collapsed against a tree, and died there a few moments later. His furious friends declared that the fatal blow had been struck, not by Mohun himself, but by his second, General George MacCartney. Excited pamphleteers elaborated on the murder theory, MacCartney fled, sightseers flocked to Hyde Park to carry away as macabre souvenirs fragments of the tree where the duke had died, and Thackeray later used the duel in his novel 'Henry Esmond'. The death of the duke was no mere fiction, of course, but a dreadful reality for his family. His widow shed not a single tear but stormed and raged against her dead husband as well as against Mohun and MacCartney, while Duchess Anne sat motionless in her chair in Hamilton Palace, overwhelmed by the tragedy of her son's wasted life. Hamilton was buried in Hamilton parish church. MacCartney was eventually tried for murder and acquitted, but there is little doubt that he had played a sinister part in the whole affair, fanning the flames of Mohun's hatred of Hamilton. 
Lively and engaging, a lover of fine art, and an enthusiastic Francophile, James Hamilton might have had a very different career had he not been weighed down by his devoted parents' demands on him. It was their tragedy and his that, unable to live up to their expectations, he took refuge in subterfuge and evasion, told people whatever they wanted to hear, and was all too easily led into an extravagant and profligate way of life by his self-seeking friends. Swift thought him 'a worthy good-natured person, very generous but of a middle understanding', Macky described him as 'brave in person, with a rough air of boldness; of good sense, very forward and hot for what he undertakes, ambitious and haughty, a violent enemy, supposed to have thoughts towards the crown of England' ('Works', 17.252), and Gilbert Burnet remarked, 'I am sorry I cannot say so much good of him as I could wish, and I had too much kindness for him to say any evil without necessity' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 6.130). 'He has ben', Duchess Anne had said sadly, 'many a sore hart both to his father and me' (Atholl MS 45, V, 122). 


@@@@@


doc= 7899


Douglas, James (bap. 1675, d. 1742), anatomist and man-midwife, was the third child of a family of eight sons, four of whom became fellows of the Royal Society, and five daughters of William Douglas (died 1705), of Baads, West Calder, 5 miles west of Edinburgh, and his wife, Joan Mason. The date of his birth is not known but he was baptized on 21 March 1675. Nothing is known of his early education, although a James Douglas graduated MA at Edinburgh University in 1694. In 1698 Douglas was a medical student at Utrecht and may have spent time in Paris before graduating MD at Rheims in 1699. In London by 1700 he became associated with Paul Chamberlen in the practice of midwifery, and on one occasion, in 1702, used (unsuccessfully) 'modo nostro' (forceps), the Chamberlens' secret instrument. A large collection of Douglas's case histories, both midwifery and clinical, survive for the period 1700-11 and illustrate contemporary medical practice. The accuracy with which symptoms are recorded often makes modern diagnosis possible. After 1711 only records of patients' prescriptions survive, an indication that Douglas had a considerable practice among the upper class. 
In 1706 Douglas began teaching anatomy, for which he published a syllabus. Cadavers not being available, students dissected dogs. Douglas intended publishing a series of handbooks comparing the anatomy of dogs and humans but got no further than 'Myographiae comparatae specimen, or, A comparative description of all the muscles in a man and in a quadruped' (1707), long used as a dissecting guide, and republished in 1760 and 1775 with a Latin translation (1729). In 1705 he reviewed Valsava's 'De aure humana tractatus' for the Royal Society ('PTRS', 25.2214) and on 4 December 1706 he was elected a fellow of the society. Eleven of his papers on medical, botanical, and zoological subjects were published in 'Philosophical Transactions' and he read at least fifty-seven unpublished papers. In 1740 he was excused further annual subscriptions. The Barber-Surgeons' Company elected him Gale osteology lecturer for 1712, and to the Arris lectureship on the muscles in 1716, for which a syllabus survives. He resigned this lectureship over disagreement with the masters of surgery. 
Interested in all aspects of medicine Douglas published 'Bibliographiae anatomicae specimen, sive, Catalogus omnium pene auctorum, qui ab Hippocrate ad Harveum rem anatomicum... scriptus illustravat' (1715) with another edition in 1734. All his medical and other writings started with a historical review. A number of assistants helped Douglas with his work over the years. His brother George worked with him for many years and he had other able assistants in Robert Nesbitt, Joseph Hurlock, William Douglas (no relation), James Parsons, and, finally, William Hunter. Douglas's published work was often illustrated by talented artists and engravers. Many of his papers are in the handwriting of amanuenses. Hunter acquired all Douglas's papers, some of his medical books, and preparations from the latter's famous anatomy museum. 
Douglas's interest in comparative anatomy covered not only mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibia, and fish but also extended to invertebrates. From about 1719 he took an interest in botany, possibly as a result of acquiring a garden. At first he lived in Fetter Lane, London, an area of dense housing. In 1721, when he was made an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, he was living in Bow Lane, where most houses had gardens. Moving to the Grand Piazza, Covent Garden, he grew in his garden many medicinal plants for observation and experiment. He gave to the Royal Society a series of papers on medicinal plants including wild valerian that he had found plant hunting near Ilford. Plants were part of his interest in materia medica and in 1724 he published 'Index materia medicae, or, A catalogue of simple medicines that are fit to be used in the practice of physic and surgery'. In 1733, together with Thomas Wilkins, a chemist, he considered setting up a laboratory for the preparation of 'curious medicines'. His most important botanical work, although it contains nothing of medical interest, is 'Lilium sarniense, or, A description of the Guernsay-Lilly; to which is added, the botanical description of the coffee berry'. On the title page Douglas is described as physician-extraordinary to the queen. In 1726 he sent the gardener Thomas Knowlton to Guernsey to learn what he could of the history and cultivation of the Guernsey lily there and in 1729 published a second edition incorporating Knowlton's findings; it was reprinted in 1737. In 1727 Douglas published 'The Description and History of the Coffee Tree' and 'A Supplement to the Description of the Coffee Tree'. His work on chocolate and tea was not published. 
An advertisement in 'Lilium sarniense' told readers that George I had given Douglas $500 'to communicate the observations and discoveries he has made in anatomy' and 'a treatise on diseases incident to women'. Douglas had been working on an osteology since at least 1713; the plan was monumental: the book was to comprise plates of all the bones, together with their weights, chemical composition, connections, cartilages, glandulae, and sacculi mucosi (first described by Douglas), and associated muscles and ligaments. It was also to include sections on diseases of bones and a history of osteology and osteological figures. It was virtually complete at his death, but his assistant William Hunter's wish to publish it remained unfulfilled. All that remains extant is a large collection of drawings of dissections of normal and abnormal reproductive systems, gravid uteri and foetuses for the treatise on diseases of women. In order to assist his brother, the surgeon John Douglas, James undertook an investigation of the relevant anatomy to enable John to reintroduce safely suprapubic lithotomy. Indeed, Douglas intended a complete history of lithotomy but got no further than 'The History of the Lateral Operation' (1726), reprinted 1731 with an 'Appendix Containing Mr Cheselden's Present Method' with French (1726) and Latin (1733) translations. Much unpublished material survives. 
Douglas was also involved in the case of Mary Toft, of Godalming, who claimed in 1726 to have given birth to a number of rabbits. Toft was brought to London and examined by Sir Richard Manningham and Douglas. She eventually admitted her deception and it was Douglas who took down her confession. When Manningham published his diary of the case Douglas became concerned that Manningham had implied that he (Douglas) had been duped by Toft. He therefore defended himself in 'An Advertisement Occasioned by some Passages in Sir R. Manningham's Diary Lately Published' (1727). A satire on Douglas's account of the Toft affair and his earlier actions in it was ''Flamingo', a shorter and truer advertisement by way of supplement, to what was published the 7th instant, or, Dr D-g-l-s in an extasy, at Lacy's Bagie, December 4th 1726' (1727). 
Douglas's most important medical work, 'A Description of the Peritoneum', was published in 1730. In it Douglas described the fold in the peritoneum between the rectum and the bladder, later called the pouch of Douglas. In an early draft of this work he acknowledged Winslow's priority in describing this fold but this was left out in the published version. Douglas described the fold as being: 'where the pertionaeum leaves the foreside of the rectum, it makes an angle and changes its course upwards and forwards over the bladder; and a little above this angle there is a remarkable transverse stricture or semi-oval fold of the peritonaeum which I have constantly observed for many years past, especially in women. (J. Douglas, 'A Description of the Peritoneum', 1730, 37)' In 1734 Douglas attended Princess Anne, daughter of George II and wife of the prince of Orange. Setting out for a return to the Netherlands in November 1734 after a visit to England the princess became ill. She was believed to be pregnant and Douglas and a midwife were sent to attend her. Douglas thought it was inadvisable for her to make a sea crossing but George II insisted on her return to the Netherlands. Whether or not Douglas accompanied her on this trip, he was in the Netherlands in 1735 when she was found not to be pregnant. Queen Caroline awarded Douglas an annuity of $500 for his attendance on the princess. However, the princess had taken a dislike to him and he did not attend her pregnancy in 1736, but did so in 1739 when her daughter lived only half an hour. 
About 1735 Douglas began working on a treatise on aneurysms. The work remained unpublished although much of the material still remains. He also produced the papers on English, Latin, and Greek languages which may have been written for his children. Assessments of these papers have been made by Holmbert (1956) and Michael (1970). Alexander Pope (1743) described Douglas as 'above all curious in what related to Horace' (Pope, 4.187). In the 'Dunciad' Pope refers to Douglas in the couplet: '
There all the learn'd shall at the labour stand, 

And Douglas lend his soft obstetric hand. 

' Douglas collected editions of Horace and published 'Catalogus editionum Quinti Horatii Flacci ab 1476 ad an 1739 quae in bibliotheca Jacob Douglas... adservantur' (1739). He also made a translation of Horace's first ode. 
Douglas married twice. The identity of his first wife is unknown, but there was a daughter of this marriage. His second wife was Martha Wilkes (died 1752), aunt of John Wilkes the radical politician. They had two sons, Israel James, an apothecary, and William George, who studied medicine, and a daughter, Martha Jane, who was said to have been engaged to William Hunter but who died in 1744. Nothing is known of Douglas's private life. His friends tended to be colleagues and others who shared his interests. Latterly Douglas lived in Red Lion Square, London, where he died on 2 April 1742; he was buried on 9 April in St Andrew's Church, Holborn. His wife applied to administer his will, but the will has not survived. William Hunter helped William George Douglas to assemble, from his father's notes, the substance of what would have been James Douglas's second Croonian lecture on the bladder, which George read to the Royal Society on 27 May 1742. In 1748 he published 'Nine Anatomical Figures Representing the External Parts, Muscles and Bones of the Human Body', being the proposed first plates in Douglas's osteology. 


@@@@@


doc= 7900


Douglas, James, fourteenth earl of Morton (1702-1768), natural philosopher, was born in Edinburgh, the eldest of three sons of George Douglas, thirteenth earl of Morton (1662-1738), politician, and his second wife, Frances, daughter of William Adderley of Halstow, Kent. He graduated MA from King's College, Cambridge, in 1722; he may also have attended the University of Edinburgh. Upon leaving Cambridge he embarked on the grand tour, and established connections with French scientists. After returning to Scotland he entered scientific circles in Edinburgh, and became close friends with the mathematician Colin Maclaurin. Lord Aberdour, as he was known at this time, was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London on 19 April 1733. With Maclaurin and several others, Aberdour observed a solar eclipse in February 1737. He was one of the six men (Maclaurin, Lord Hope, Andrew Plummer, Alexander Lind of Gorgie, and Alexander Monro 'primus' were the others) who in May 1737 proposed the formation of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh, which expanded the Medical Society founded in 1731 by Monro into a broader society devoted to natural philosophy and related subjects. Aberdour was named the society's president. Early recipients of his patronage via the society include the applied mathematician and Church of Scotland minister Alexander Bryce. 
In 1738 Aberdour succeeded to the title of earl of Morton, and was invested with the Order of the Thistle. The following year, after the death of the earl of Selkirk, he was appointed a lord of the bedchamber, and succeeded Selkirk as a representative peer for Scotland. He regularly spoke in the House of Lords. Before 1731 he had married Agatha (died 1748), daughter and heir of James Halyburton of Pitcur, Forfarshire; they had five sons and two daughters. 
Morton was involved in many scientific activities. He was a patron of the instrument maker James Short (whom he hired to tutor his children) and owned several of Short's telescopes. With Maclaurin and the earl of Hopetoun he was successful in establishing an observatory at the University of Edinburgh, and gave $100 toward the fund in 1740. A member of the Honourable Society for Improvement in the Knowledge of Agriculture in Scotland, he was also interested in mining and chemistry, and was keen to exploit resources of lead and coal on his estates. One of the two articles he published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society, concerning the validity of a supposed cure for hydrophobia, further demonstrates Morton's involvement in the study of medicine. The paper well displays his critical and empirical turn of mind: after reading a newspaper story that an Italian cured the illness by administering draughts of vinegar, he wrote to a friend in Venice to ascertain the truth of the story, which turned out to be false. 
In 1739 Morton travelled to Orkney to survey his estates there and also to measure a degree of latitude. These lands had been held under form of mortgage from the crown since 1707, by which Morton was sheriff and steward of Orkney and Shetland. During the 1739 visit he was assaulted by Sir James Steuart of Burray, bt, one of the principal Orkney lairds, during a dispute over the amount owed by Orkney landholders to Morton in feudal duties, before the court of session in Edinburgh since 1735, and Morton's investigation as sheriff into Steuart's alleged intimidation of his tenants on South Ronaldsay. Steuart was fined and imprisoned. In 1742 Morton obtained an act of parliament which made the grant of Orkney and Shetland absolute to himself. Morton eventually defeated Steuart's party in court in 1759, but the failure of the campaign left several landholders in Orkney out of pocket. Their hostility, combined with Morton's wish to concentrate on natural philosophy, and increasing prosperity in the islands which encouraged a younger generation of lairds to assert their independence from Morton's authority, contributed to his decision to sell the islands in 1766 to Sir Lawrence Dundas for $63,000. 
Morton's politics are unclear, though he was associated with the duke of Newcastle in parliament. In September 1746, during a visit to Paris, he was imprisoned in the Bastille (along with his wife, child, and sister-in-law) for three months for failure to produce documentation to validate his residence. Horace Walpole commented on Morton's 'imprudence' and the 'Daily Advertiser' claimed a private cipher was found in his papers with Jacobite connections. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.301). Having been released in late 1746, the family did not return to Britain until May 1747, but Morton must have gone back to France a year later, for he reported in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (vol. 45) on an eclipse of the sun he observed in Paris in July 1748. He had hoped to make his observations in Scotland, but the meridian line set by Maclaurin had been destroyed during the rising of 1745-6. Morton's first wife died on 12 December 1748, and on 31 July 1755 he married Bridget (1722/3-1805), eldest daughter of Sir John Heathcote, bt, of Normanton, Rutland; they had one son, John (1756-1818), and a daughter, Bridget (1758-1842). 
In the 1750s Morton acted as an intermediary between Robert Wallace and the French 'philosophe' Montesquieu, in regard to Wallace's debate over ancient population with David Hume. In 1760, after the death of the Hon. Alexander Hume Campbell, Morton was named lord clerk register of Scotland, and developed plans to preserve the archives. A trustee of the British Museum and member of the longitude commission, he was also one of the commissioners of annexed estates between 1755 and 1760, but never attended a meeting. Having been elected to the council of the Royal Society on 30 November 1763, he was elected president following the death of the earl of Macclesfield six months later. He also filled Macclesfield's place as a foreign member of the Academie Royale des Sciences in Paris. During Morton's presidency of the Royal Society the Greenwich observatory was placed under the society's management, Mason and Dixon were charged to measure a degree of latitude during the course of their famous survey, and preparations were made for the observation of the 1769 transit of Venus for which Morton, in his capacity as a commissioner of longitude, had obtained government funding. Unfortunately, he did not live to see Cook embark, but died at Chiswick on 12 October 1768. Morton was anatomized by Sir John Pringle of Edinburgh, where he was probably buried. He was survived by his wife, who died on 2 March 1805. Of the surviving children of his first marriage, his second son, Sholto Charles (1732-1774), succeeded his father as fifteenth earl, and the younger daughter, Mary (1740?-1816), married Charles Gordon, fourth earl of Aboyne, in 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 7901


Douglas, Sir James, first baronet (1703-1787), naval officer, was the son of George Douglas of Friarshaw, Roxburghshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Patrick Scott, baronet, of Ancrum, in the same county. Douglas, despite entering the navy in 1715, had to wait until 1732 to be commissioned. However, he was -- and remained -- politically well-connected. In 1741, when he was serving at Cartagena in the 'Tilbury', his patron was William Pulteney. On 14 March 1744 Douglas was posted to the 'Mermaid' (40 guns) and he commanded her at the capture of Louisbourg in 1745. On that station in 1746 he commanded the 'Vigilant' (64 guns). From 1754 to 1768 he was MP for the seat of Orkney and Shetland, a constituency which provided a number of men for the navy. Often absent from parliament, he followed his patron, the earl of Morton, in his support of the duke of Newcastle. 
In 1756 Douglas commanded the 'Bedford' in the Home Fleet and in December and January he sat on Admiral John Byng's court martial. In the following year he commanded the 'Alcide' (64 guns) on the fruitless Rochefort expedition. In 1759, while in the same ship, he served at the capture of Quebec. Admiral Charles Saunders valued his knowledge of 'the French language, and particularly their sea-terms' and found him 'very useful' in dealing with 'the French pilots' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/482, part 1, fol. 50). In September Saunders sent Douglas home with the tidings of victory and the king duly rewarded him with a knighthood and a gift of $500. In 1760 Douglas was appointed to the 'Dublin' as commodore and commander-in-chief at the Leeward Islands. Here he displayed administrative and diplomatic skills, and dealt effectively with troublesome enemy privateers. In 1761 he moved swiftly and successfully, in conjunction with Lord Rollo and his troops, to take the island of Dominica. 
In 1762 Douglas was understandably surprised to be superseded by Rear-Admiral George Rodney, and he served as Rodney's second-in-command at the capture of Martinique. Later that year Douglas was appointed to the chief command at Jamaica where he handled the local planters with characteristic tact. He gave indispensable support to the Havana expedition but, to his chagrin, did not share in the lavish subsequent rewards. On 21 October he was promoted rear-admiral of the white. During the peace he went out again to the West Indies as commander-in-chief. Douglas was twice married: first in 1753 to Helen (died 1766), daughter of Thomas Brisbane of Brisbane in Ayrshire; the couple had four sons and three daughters. His second wife was Lady Helen Boyle, daughter of John, second earl of Glasgow and Helenor, 'nee' Morison. 
In October 1770 Douglas advanced to vice-admiral, and from 1773 to 1777 he was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. In January 1778 he became an admiral of the blue and, in April 1782, an admiral of the white. Having been created a baronet on 27 June 1786, he died on 2 November 1787 and was survived by children from his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 7902


Douglas, James (1753-1819), antiquary and geologist, third and youngest son of John Douglas (died 1762), innkeeper of the Hercules Pillars in Hyde Park Road, and Mary Gardiner (died 1766), was born in London on 7 January 1753. Of nine siblings only the three boys survived. After the deaths of his parents he was brought up by his elder brother William (1745-1810) in Manchester, where James belatedly attended Manchester grammar school. 
The chronology of Douglas's next few years remains obscure, but he was employed by his brother William, a cloth merchant, and was eventually sent overseas as his agent in Italy -- only to be dismissed and cut off when he misappropriated some of the funds with which he had been entrusted. Desperate to support himself, he entered the Austrian army as a cadet and was soon in Vienna. After some time in that service he was sent on a mission to England and decided to remain there. He certainly toured the Low Countries in 1773 and he may have briefly attended a military college in Flanders. In 1777 and 1778, however, he was a student at Peterhouse, Cambridge, though he did not graduate. In 1779 he accepted a commission as a lieutenant in the Leicester militia, served on the staff of Colonel Hugh Debbieg, and was put to work as an engineer fortifying Chatham Lines (1758-1807), on the Medway, adjacent to Rochester in Kent. 
On 6 January 1780 Douglas married Margaret (1760-1820), daughter of John Oldershaw of Rochester, a surgeon. In 1781 Douglas published a two-volume translation from the French of J. A. H. Guibert entitled 'A General Essay on Military Tactics' 'by an Officer'. The next year he likewise issued and illustrated an anonymous 'Travelling Anecdotes, through Various Parts of Europe' (1782), which was successful enough to require London editions in 1785 and 1786, with a Dublin one following in 1787 -- by which time the author's name had been added. Written primarily at Cambridge during his student years, and in an unconventional manner reminiscent of 'Tristram Shandy', the 'Anecdotes' (some of them military) recalled the author's earlier experiences at Vienna and in the Low Countries, where, at Tongres especially, his antiquarian interests had been aroused. 
At one point in his youth Douglas had been associated with the noted collector and antiquary Sir Ashton Lever, even assisting him in stuffing some of the birds later displayed in Lever's Leicester Square museum (1774-88). In 1783, sponsored by Lever and others, Douglas was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, a learned society that meant more to him than any other. He was ordained the same year. Though Douglas would later exemplify his clerical devotion with 'Twelve Discourses on the Influence of the Christian Religion on Civil Society' (1792), he identified himself on the title-page first as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and only second as chaplain in ordinary to the prince of Wales. 
Between 1785 and 1793 Douglas wrote the two works for which he is most often remembered. The first of these, 'A Dissertation on the Antiquity of the Earth' (1785), had been presented originally on 12 May as a paper before the Royal Society. Without having been refereed, the paper was then withdrawn (and retitled) for publication as an independent work. In its final form Douglas's 'Dissertation', illustrated with aquatints by himself, consisted of three inductive 'cases' and a lengthy appendix commenting on previous geological theories. The first case comprised a group of relics from a barrow on Chatham Hill that Douglas had had opened in 1779; the second, another group from a barrow at Kingston opened by Bryan Fawsett in 1771; and the third, fossils from the Isle of Sheppey collected by himself and Sir Joseph Banks. Though Douglas, like most men of his time, believed in the reality of the Noachian flood, the Sheppey fossils and others demonstrated independently of 'Genesis' -- for him, at least -- that there had been an inhabited antediluvian world full of animals (and probably human beings) subsequently destroyed by just such a global catastrophe as the Flood. 
At the time Douglas was writing, the vast duration of geological time was entirely unrecognized. His final remarks nevertheless emphasized four important points: the fossilized animals and plants, though tropical, had lived where they were found; the climate then was much warmer than in his day; a forty-day flood (as in 'Genesis') would not have sufficed to transport animal remains from afar (as other theorists had contended); and the earth had some unknown power within it to fossilize organic remains. These conclusions, though not unique to himself, were of far-reaching intellectual significance. 
Douglas's second major work, and no less important than the 'Dissertation', was 'Nenia Britannica, or, A sepulchural history of Great Britain from the earliest period to its general conversion to Christianity', which was published in twelve parts from May 1786 to 1793 and as a book in 1793, again with his own illustrations. Consisting primarily of archaeological reports, the book ('nenia' meaning 'dirge') aspired to be a general history of the funerary customs of ancient Britons, whether Celtic, Anglo-Saxon, Roman, or Danish. Douglas therefore described excavations by himself of barrows at Chatham Lines (1779-93) and of graves at Ashford, Kent (1771 and 1783), and in Leicestershire (undated). Other portions of the book discuss some early barrow diggings on Chartham Downs, Kent, near Ashford, by Cromwell Mortimer (an early founder of the Society of Antiquaries) in 1730; miscellaneous antiquities; the opening of ditched barrows in Greenwich Park; and the contents of numerous 'small barrows' recognized for the first time as being Anglo-Saxon. Douglas also describes Roman graves in Britain and at Tongres in Flanders. Finally, there is a lengthy analysis of Stonehenge. His interest in funerary monuments may have been caused by his many bereavements, having lost both parents, his six sisters and two brothers. Douglas's personal copy of 'Nenia Britannica' in the British Library includes his original drawings, twenty-six extra illustrations, and some manuscript additions. Many of the relics he described are now in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford. He also published several other papers on antiquarian subjects, of which 'Two dissertations on the brass [in fact, bronze] instruments called Celts' (1785) is the most important. 
Finally, Douglas tried his hand at novels, of which there were three, though none were of permanent literary value: 'Fashionable Infidelity' (3 vols., 1790; no surviving copy); 'The Maid of Kent' (3 vols., 1790); and 'The History of Julia d'Haumont' (2 vols., 1797). In addition to the illustrations for his own works, he painted some excellent portraits of his friends, both in oils and miniature, and drew a caricature of his fellow antiquary Francis Grose, at which Grose reportedly took offence; an engraving was published anonymously. He also contributed an engraving of Coston church to John Nichols's 'History and Antiquities of the County of Leicester'. 
Douglas's wandering ministry brought him livings successively in Chiddingfold, Surrey, in 1785; Litchborough, Northamptonshire, in 1787; Middleton, Sussex, in 1799; and Kenton, Suffolk, in 1803. After 1809 he lived in several further locations in Sussex, and he died of a chill at Vicarage House, Preston, near Brighton, Sussex, on 11 November 1819. He was buried in the local churchyard three days later. He was survived by his wife, who died the next year, and by three sons and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 7903


Douglas, James, fourth Baron Douglas (1787-1857), Church of England clergyman and aristocrat, fifth son of Archibald Stewart Douglas, first Baron Douglas (1748-1827), and his second wife, Lady Frances Scott (1750-1817), youngest daughter of Francis Scott, earl of Dalkeith, was born on 9 July 1787. Having been educated for the church at Christ Church, Oxford, he was appointed in 1819 rector of Marsh Gibbon, Buckinghamshire, and in 1825 rector of Broughton in Northamptonshire. At the time of these appointments, which he held concurrently until 1848, there was little prospect of his succeeding to the title and estates, as he was then the third surviving son. But both his elder brothers died unmarried -- Archibald, second Baron Douglas, in 1844, and Charles, third Baron Douglas, in 1848, when the estates and title fell to him. On 18 May 1813 James Douglas married Wilhelmina (1791-1857), daughter of General James Murray, fifth son of the fourth Lord Elibank. They had no children and, on his death at Bothwell Castle on 6 April 1857, the title of Lord Douglas became extinct, and the estates passed to his sister, Lady Montagu. He was buried at Douglas. 


@@@@@


doc= 7904


Douglas, Sir James Dawes (1785-1862), army officer, was born on 14 January 1785, the elder son of Major James Sholto Douglas of Grange in Jamaica (first cousin of the fifth and sixth marquesses of Queensberry) and Sarah, daughter of James Dawes. He was commissioned ensign in the 42nd regiment (Black Watch) and was at once taken on the staff of Major-General Sir James Duff, commanding at Limerick, where he became a close friend of his fellow aide-de-camp, William Napier, the military historian. In 1801 he was promoted lieutenant and joined the Royal Military College at Great Marlow. He was promoted captain in 1804, and, being pronounced fit for staff duty, was appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general with the force sent to South America in 1806. He was praised in dispatches, and in 1807 was nominated in the same capacity to the corps proceeding to Portugal under Sir Arthur Wellesley, and was present at the battles of Rolica and Vimeiro. He advanced into Spain with Sir John Moore, and served with the 2nd division through the disastrous retreat from Salamanca and at the battle of Corunna. 
When Beresford was sent to Portugal in 1809 to organize the Portuguese army, Douglas accompanied him; he was in February 1809 promoted major in the English army and appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 8th Portuguese regiment. He soon got his regiment fit for service, and was present at the brilliant passage of the Douro in May 1809; at the end of the year his regiment was attached to Picton's, the 3rd division, and brigaded with the 88th and 45th regiments. At the battle of Busaco this brigade had to bear the brunt of the French attack, and Douglas's Portuguese were praised for their conduct, which was specially mentioned in Lord Wellington's dispatch. 
Douglas commanded this regiment all through the campaign of 1811, and in 1812, when the Portuguese were considered sufficiently disciplined to be brigaded alone, it formed part of Pack's Portuguese brigade. This was the brigade which distinguished itself at the battle of Salamanca by its gallant though vain attempt to carry the hill of the Arapiles, and Douglas was again mentioned in dispatches. At the beginning of 1813 Major-General Pack was removed to the command of a British brigade, and Douglas, who had been promoted lieutenant-colonel in May 1811, succeeded him in the 7th Portuguese brigade, part of Sir John Hamilton's Portuguese division. At the head of this brigade he distinguished himself at the battles of the Pyrenees, where he was wounded, of the Nivelle, the Nive, Orthez and Toulouse, where he was twice severely wounded and lost a leg (for which he received a pension of $350 per annum). At the conclusion of the war he received a gold cross and three clasps for the battles in which he had been engaged with a regiment or brigade, and was made knight of the Tower and Sword (Portugal) and KCB (January 1815). In 1815 Douglas married Marianne, daughter of William Bullock of Jamaica, and they had eleven children; she predeceased him. 
Douglas was deputy quartermaster-general in Scotland (1815-22) and in Ireland (1825-30). He was promoted colonel in 1819 and major-general in 1830, when he received the command of the south-western district of Ireland. From 1837 to 1842 he was lieutenant-governor of Guernsey. He was promoted lieutenant-general in 1838, and was made a GCB in May 1860. He had been made colonel of the 93rd foot in 1840 and of the 42nd highlanders in 1850, and was promoted general in 1854. After leaving Guernsey he retired to Clifton, Bristol, where he died at his residence, 25 Royal York Crescent, on 6 March 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 7905


Douglas, Lady Jane (1698-1753), noblewoman, was the second child and only daughter of James Douglas, second marquess of Douglas (c.1646-1700), and his wife, Lady Mary ('bap'. 1674, died 1736), daughter of Robert Kerr, first marquess of Lothian, and his wife, Lady Jean Campbell. Jane was born on 17 March 1698; her father died when she was two, but her mother made sure that she was carefully educated. Slim, beautiful, intelligent, and devout, she was highly eligible and when she was twenty-two she almost married Francis, earl of Dalkeith, later second duke of Buccleuch. However, the duchess of Queensberry broke the match so that the earl could marry her own sister-in-law, another Jane Douglas. Jane fled to the continent where, the story goes, she planned to enter a nunnery, but was retrieved by her mother and brother. This seems unlikely for, by her own account, Jane had been brought up as a Presbyterian, but she certainly declined all subsequent suitors, though they included the dukes of Hamilton and Atholl, and the earls of Hopetoun, Aberdeen, and Panmure. 
Living with her mother at Merchiston Castle, Edinburgh, Lady Jane Douglas initially enjoyed a good relationship with her difficult, eccentric brother, Archibald Douglas, third marquess and first duke of Douglas. He granted her an allowance and made her his sole executor. Having decided to remain a bachelor (though he was later to marry), he now began to urge his sister to find a husband and carry on the family line. When she met the handsome, dashing, but penniless Jacobite widower, Colonel John Steuart of Grandtully (1687-1764), Jane encouraged him. The colonel courted her for two years until the day when she unaccountably refused to see him, returned all his love tokens and sent back his letters unopened. Steuart left the country to resume his continental military career and did not return for another ten years. By then, living on her own at Drumsheugh House since the death of her mother in 1736, Jane sent him a note, explaining that she had broken off their friendship because she had believed false rumours about him. He promptly called on her, they resumed their relationship, and they were married in August 1746 at Drumsheugh by the well-known episcopal minister Robert Keith. Jane's faithful serving-woman, Helen Hewat, was the only witness. 
The marriage was kept secret because of the duke of Douglas's disapproval. A Hanoverian, he had turned against Colonel Steuart and had also quarrelled with Jane, perhaps after hearing how she had sheltered the Jacobite James, Chevalier de Johnstone, at Drumsheugh for two months after the battle of Culloden. The newly married couple left Scotland separately, Jane using the name Mrs Gray. Reunited at Huntingdon, they sailed from Harwich to the Low Countries and settled first at The Hague, later moving to Utrecht and then Aix-la-Chapelle. Not until the summer of 1748 did the very pregnant Jane reveal that she was Steuart's wife. The couple had by now run up such large debts that their friends advised them to escape their creditors by moving to Paris. This they did, Jane allegedly having to be lifted into the stagecoach by two men because she was so heavy. 
After taking up residence at the Hotel Chalons in the rue St Martin, Lady Jane gave birth to non-identical twin sons on 10 July 1748, or so she claimed. Many people were incredulous, for she was fifty years old. Such late births were not unknown, but her enemies soon began to circulate the rumour that became the centre of a 'cause celebre' fifteen years later. Jane had never been pregnant, people said. She and Steuart had obtained two French babies which they passed off as their own, in the hope of securing the duke of Douglas's inheritance. The voluminous papers in the complex court case known as the Douglas cause record these accusations and the very different evidence provided by Helen Hewat and Jane's other servants and friends. According to them, Sholto Thomas, the younger child, was very delicate, and had been baptized immediately after birth by Pierre la Marr, the man-midwife who delivered him. When Jane and the colonel decided to return to Rheims they took the older twin, Archibald James Edward Douglas (formerly Steuart), with them but left Sholto with a wet-nurse, fearing that he would not survive the journey. 
Four weeks after Archibald's public baptism in Rheims, Lady Jane found that she was pregnant again, but she miscarried at three months. Meanwhile Sholto was thriving in the care of his wet-nurse, and in November 1749 his parents travelled to Paris to collect him. They had resolved to return to Britain in the hope of improving their financial situation, more desperate than ever since the duke had cut off Jane's allowance on hearing the rumours about the twins. When Jane appealed to George II for financial assistance, writing pathetically, 'Presumptive heiress of a great estate and family, with two children, I want bread' (Fraser, 'Douglas Book', 2.498), he granted her an annual pension of $300, the equivalent of her brother's allowance. Meanwhile Steuart had been incarcerated in the king's bench prison at the instigation of his creditors. 
Sending affectionate messages to her husband almost every day, Lady Jane decided to take her sons to Scotland to see the duke. He, however, declined to answer her letters and, when she and the twins arrived at Douglas Castle in April 1753, they were turned away. 'The children, poor babies, have never yet done any fault', Jane protested. 'May I not then plead for their being admitted and allowed to see you and to kiss your hands?' ('Letters', 125). The duke ignored her pleas. Anxious about her husband, Jane set off for London a few days later, leaving the twins with her law agent. Two days after she left, Sholto fell ill, and on 5 May he died. Jane was inconsolable. She wrote to her brother to give him the news. Still he did not reply. 
Now seriously ill herself, with violent pains in her stomach, Lady Jane travelled back to Edinburgh that August and tried once more to see the duke. It was no use. Weak and emaciated, she died in her Edinburgh lodgings at noon on 21 November 1753 and was buried five days later in her mother's grave in the Chapel Royal at Holyrood. With her brother's death in 1761, the scandal surrounding the birth of the twins was revived, as Archibald's claim to the Douglas estates was contested on behalf of the duke's kinsman James-George, seventh duke of Hamilton. Years of legal debate followed, with both sides sending investigators to Paris to try to discover what had really happened there in the summer of 1748. Finally, the House of Lords decided in favour of Archibald, and Lady Jane Douglas was publicly vindicated. 


@@@@@


doc= 7906


Douglas, Janet, Lady Glamis (c.1504-1537), noblewoman, was the daughter of George Douglas, master of Douglas, who was killed at Flodden in 1513 and so predeceased his father, Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus, by a few weeks, and of his wife Elizabeth Drummond. Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, and Sir George Douglas of Pittendriech were her brothers; she also had at least one other brother and four sisters. In 1520, when she was probably aged about sixteen, she married John Lyon, sixth Lord Glamis. He died on 17 September 1528, leaving a minor as his heir, and three other children. In the same year James V succeeded in escaping from the control of his stepfather, the sixth earl of Angus, who had married James IV's widow Margaret Tudor and established his own authority. James had come to loathe his guardian, a development evident in the proclamation made at Stirling on 29 June that year, that Angus should not come within 7 miles of the king, ostensibly because of his misrule and failure to maintain justice. Within a year Angus was in exile in England. 
The king's antagonism extended to other members of the Douglas family, and particularly to Janet, who in December 1528 and again in January 1529 was summoned to appear before parliament to answer the charge of art and part assistance to her brothers given at Edinburgh the previous June. Her husband had made his final appearance on the council early in July 1528, so it is certainly possible that his wife could have been in Edinburgh at that time. Patrick Charteris of Cuthilgurdy, Hugh Kennedy of Girvanmains, and John Hume of Blackadder were summoned for the same offence, but Kennedy and Hume received a remission, whereas (perhaps as an alternative to remission) Janet and Charteris were granted licence to go overseas on pilgrimage on 20 September 1529, being given respite from actions against them until their return. However, Janet does not appear to have left the country, as she was pursuing a legal action against John Lyon of Knockany through the winter of 1529-30. 
Janet Douglas had come under suspicion again by June 1531, when she was described as 'fugitive fra the law and at the horne... for intercommonying with our soverane lordis rebellis' (Livingstone, no. 951). By 31 January 1532 she was being prosecuted for the alleged poisoning of her late husband, whose early death was obviously now being viewed as suspicious. However, the assizes which followed in January and February were drawn from the localities of Forfar, Perth, Aberdeen, and Fife, areas where the Lyon family held estates, and the reluctance of local lairds to serve on them is reflected in the numerous fines which were levied for default. The prosecution against Janet was dropped, and James V's suspicions against her seem to have been allayed, since by July 1532 she had contracted a second marriage, to Archibald Campbell of Skipness (died 1537), the younger son of Archibald Campbell, second earl of Argyll, and uncle of the fourth earl. They had no children. 
In the years which followed Janet brought several legal actions concerning rents and payments, mostly with success, but events were to turn against her in 1537. On 15 June her son John Lyon, the young seventh Lord Glamis, was ordered to remain in ward in Edinburgh Castle, and on 17 July Janet Douglas herself was convicted on two points of treason: conspiring and imagining the death of the king by poison, and assisting and communicating with her brothers. This assize was mixed in composition, with no overwhelming local bias; the sentence which followed, that Janet should be burned on Edinburgh's castle hill, was carried out at once. Her husband, who had been imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, broke his neck while trying to escape on the following day. Her son was convicted, also on 18 July, of concealing his mother's conspiracy to poison the king, though the sentence of hanging and drawing was commuted to imprisonment. On 22 August John Lyon of Knockany was convicted of concealing Janet's conspiracy, and of plotting to use the same poison to kill the earl of Rothes. One Alexander Mackie was convicted of supplying the poison, and was sentenced to be banished to Aberdeenshire, while Lyon was hanged and beheaded. After the death of James V, Lord Lyon claimed that he had been tortured into confessing to a poison plot, and in any case, given the king's obvious suspicion of Janet, it is difficult to see how she could have been in a position to poison him, as she does not appear to have attended court. It is possible that the antipathy felt by the earl of Rothes to the Glamis family played some part in the poison allegations, as he certainly stood to benefit from their downfall, though in the event he profited less than he would have liked: the king's annexation of the Glamis estates, of Janet's terce in Aberdeenshire, and of the estate of John Lyon of Knockany raised $5770 for the exchequer between 1538 and the end of James's reign. 
The real motive behind the king's pursuit of the case against Janet Douglas is far more likely to have been implicit in the second part of the charge, the assistance she had allegedly given to her brothers. The popular sympathy said to have been felt for her as a beautiful young woman, taken together with the fact that she was the highest-ranking person to be executed during the personal rule of James V, may obscure the fact that the king genuinely detested the Angus faction and had just returned from a nine-month absence in France during which various potentially treasonable plots had been reported. Unlike her sisters Janet had always been suspected by the king of close links with her brothers, and he was anxious to underline his supremacy on his return and to emphasize the end of Angus influence, not least by his commitment to a French alliance, rejecting the foreign policy once pursued by his stepfather. Notwithstanding its brutality the public execution of Janet Douglas was not without a rationale, in that it sent an unmistakable message not only to the Douglases but also to any other potential rebels. 


@@@@@


doc= 7907


Douglas, John (d. 1743), surgeon, was one of the seven sons of William Douglas (died 1705) and his wife, Joan, daughter of James Mason of Park, Blantyre. James Douglas (bap. 1675, d. 1742) was his brother. In 1712 he became chirurgeon-general of the Leeward Islands, where his brother Walter was governor from 1711 to 1714; by June 1714 he was in Antigua. He was admitted a foreign brother to the Company of Barber-Surgeons in 1717. In 1719 Douglas was giving anatomical lectures at his house in Fetter Lane, London; he was living in Lad Lane, near Guildhall, in 1735, and Downing Street from 1739. Douglas's first publication was 'A syllabus of what is to be performed in a course of anatomy, chirurgical operations, and bandages' (1719). 
Douglas came to prominence in 1719 when he introduced the supra-pubic operation for the stone, details of which he published in his 'Lithotomia Douglassiana, or, An account of a new method of making the high operation, in order to extract the stone out of the bladder, invented and successfully performed by J. D.' (1720). An enlarged second edition was published in 1723 and translations appeared in France (1724) and Germany (1729). Douglas's invention won him in 1723 the freedom of both the City of London and of the Company of Barber-Surgeons. It also brought him letters of congratulation from Boerhaave, Winslow, and Heister. Douglas's operation was, however, superseded in 1726 by William Cheselden's lateral operation, a development which caused Douglas much bitterness. 
Douglas, who believed that he had never received due credit for his work on lithotomy, became embroiled in a number of medical controversies, one of them causing him to publish 'Animadversions on a late pompous book intituled 'Osteographia, or, The anatomy of the bones' by William Cheselden, esq' (1735). Douglas, who had been appointed surgeon to the Westminster Hospital in 1721, then published 'A Short Account of the State of Midwifery in London and Westminster' (1736), in which he attacked Edmund Chapman, William Giffard, and Hugh Chamberlen the elder, who had all criticized midwives and claimed that men-midwives such as themselves should be responsible for all difficult deliveries. Douglas considered that midwives, if trained correctly, could be responsible for most births, and put forward a five-point plan for their instruction (see Wilson, 111-12). Adrian Wilson argued that Douglas's defence of the midwives arose from a fear that the incursion into midwifery of practitioners skilled in the use of forceps would upset the traditional division of labour established between the midwife, who delivered live babies, and the surgeon, who delivered dead infants. Forceps practitioners would be able to monopolize most of the work carried out by both surgeons, such as Douglas, and midwives. 
Douglas was married and had one daughter, who married the surgeon Robert Owen. Owen managed his father-in-law's practice during his illness and carried it on after Douglas's death on 25 June 1743. Douglas, who was survived by his wife, left Owen his silver, his prints, and his 'fine coat-of-arms in the fore-parlour' (Peachey, 258). 


@@@@@


doc= 7908


Douglas, John (1721-1807), bishop of Salisbury and writer, was born on 14 July 1721 in Pittenweem, Fife, the second son of Archibald Douglas, a merchant, and his wife, who was the daughter of Melvill of Carsender in Fife. His paternal grandfather was a distinguished minister in the Scottish Episcopal church, who, in 1669, had succeeded the historian Gilbert Burnet in the living of Saltoun, Haddingtonshire. Douglas attended the grammar school at Dunbar, where he received a good classical education, and was then sent for a short time to two private schools in London. In 1736 he was entered as a commoner at St Mary Hall, Oxford, and two years later he was elected to a Warner exhibition at Balliol College, where Adam Smith, a distant relative, was his contemporary. He graduated BA (1740) and MA (1743). He was sent abroad by his father, from 1740 to 1742, to learn French, and on taking deacon's orders in 1743 he embarked on a highly successful career as a clergyman. In July 1744 he became chaplain to the 3rd foot (Scots) guards, serving as an aide-de-camp at the battle of Fontenoy (29 April 1745). He resigned his commission on the army's return home the next year to fight the Jacobites, and was elected Snell exhibitioner at Balliol (1745-7). 
Ordained priest in 1747, Douglas became curate of Tilehurst, near Reading, and also of Duns Tew, Oxfordshire. At about this time friends of his mother introduced him to William Pulteney, first earl of Bath, whose wealth and political and literary connections made him a highly desirable patron. An early assignment was to take Bath's 'difficult' heir, Lord Pulteney, on a grand tour of Holland, Germany, and France between July 1748 and October 1749. In Paris Douglas met Montesquieu but his journal of his tour devoted more pages to the Jansenist controversy and to the exposure of the miracles at deacon Paris's tomb, which later figured in his pamphlet on supernatural phenomena, 'The Criterion'. On his return to England he was presented by Lord Bath to the free chapel of Eaton Constantine and to the donative of Uppington in Shropshire, exchanging the latter, in 1750, for the vicarage of High Ercall, also in Shropshire. He seldom visited his livings but spent the winter in London, in a house next to that of his patron, whom he accompanied in the summer to Bath, Tunbridge Wells, and to nobles' houses, acting as Bath's chaplain and secretary. Douglas's first marriage, to Dorothy Pershore (died 1752), sister of Richard Pershore of Reynolds Hall, Staffordshire, in September 1752, ended with her death in December of the same year. In April 1765 he married Elizabeth Rooke, daughter of Henry Brudenell Rooke. They had two children: William, who became chancellor of the diocese of Salisbury, and Elizabeth. 
Douglas began to earn a reputation as a critic and controversialist, first by exposing the forgeries of William Lauder, who had accused Milton of plagiarism. His pamphlet on this subject, 'Milton No Plagiary', went into two editions (1750-51 and 1754), and caused Samuel Johnson, who had written a preface to Lauder's book, to dictate to Lauder a letter to Douglas, confessing to the imposture. Douglas then sought to elude David Hume's arguments against miracles in 'The Criterion' (1752, 1754, and 1757), which made much of differences between alleged modern contraventions of the laws of nature and those presented in the Christian gospels. Later Douglas dined in a friendly spirit with Hume, who in 1773 considered him a 'better hand' than either Sir John Dalrymple or James Macpherson (Ossian) for continuing his 'History of England' beyond 1689 ('Letters', 2.269). After trouncing the Hutchesonian sect in an 'Apology for the Clergy' (1755), Douglas then turned on the Scottish Jesuit mole Archibald Bower in several pamphlets published between 1756 and 1758, pillorying him for dishonesty and plagiarism. 
Oxford University granted Douglas a DD in 1758, and Lord Bath presented him to the perpetual curacy of Kenley, Shropshire, also securing him a canonry at Windsor in 1762. The previous year Douglas had exchanged his Shropshire livings for the rectory of St Augustine with St Faith, Watling Street, London. He worked for Bath and his heir in Shropshire politics and wrote several political pamphlets, mainly under his patron's direction. He assisted Samuel Johnson in 1762 in the detection of the Cock Lane ghost. In the following year he edited the 'Diary and Letters' of the second earl of Clarendon and accompanied his patron to Spa, where he made the acquaintance of the duke of Brunswick. Bath died on 1 July 1764, leaving his library to Douglas, who sold it for $1000 to Bath's brother and heir, General Henry Pulteney; on inheriting it a second time, on the latter's death, Douglas sold it again, on the same terms, to Sir William Pulteney so that it would remain at Bath House. He is believed to have been prevented from writing a biography of Lord Bath by General Pulteney's destruction of his brother's papers. 
Douglas wrote more political articles, in 1766, 1767, and 1768, which were published by the 'Public Advertiser'; he also contributed all the letters signed by Tacitus and by Manlius which appeared in that periodical in 1770 and 1771. In 1775-6, at the request of Lord Sandwich, he helped Captain James Cook to edit his journals ('Voyage towards the South Pole', 1777); he also edited and wrote an influential introduction to Cook's last journals ('Voyage to the Pacific Ocean', 1784). The second earl of Hardwicke enlisted him to edit his 'Miscellaneous Papers', for publication in 1778, and the same year he was elected FRS and FSA. In March 1787 he was appointed a trustee of the British Museum, which had opened on 15 January 1759. 
Throughout these years Douglas advanced steadily in his clerical career. In 1776 he exchanged his Windsor canonry for one at St Paul's; on 18 October 1787 he became bishop of Carlisle, on 21 March 1788 dean of Windsor, and on 28 July 1791 bishop of Salisbury. James Boswell obtained anecdotes and information from Douglas for his 'Life of Johnson' and proposed him for membership of the Johnson Club on 14 December 1790; he was elected on 22 December 1792. Acknowledging his 'advanced years and infirmities' Douglas made a will, on 21 April 1806, which reflected his wealth, his fairness but not excessive charity to dependants, and his complete trust in his son William as executor. He died of a gradual decay on 18 May 1807, his wife having predeceased him. He was buried a week later, on 25 May, in St George's Chapel, Windsor. 
Average for his time in the performance of clerical duties, Douglas was regarded as a likeable, sociable, and respectable figure in the Church of England. As a man of letters he was notably industrious, and his family rarely saw him without a pen or a book in his hand when company was absent. He was well read in history and literature as well as in the church fathers and English divines, and made a telling case in controversies within his knowledge. Of his writings his introduction to Cook's last explorations had perhaps the greatest impact, drawing wide European and American attention to the resources of the Pacific north-west. 


@@@@@


doc= 7909


Douglas, John Sholto, ninth marquess of Queensberry (1844-1900), sportsman and controversialist, was born in Florence on 20 July 1844, the first son of Archibald William Douglas, eighth marquess (1818-1858), and Caroline Margaret (1821-1904), daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir William Clayton of Harleyford, Buckinghamshire. He was the brother of the author and traveller Florence Dixie (1855-1905). Such formal education as he received was gained at the naval training school, Portsmouth, before his transfer to the naval training ship 'Britannia'. Douglas became Viscount Drumlanrig in 1856, the year in which he first went to sea as a twelve-year-old midshipman. He remained a sailor after inheriting the marquessate in 1858, following his father's apparent suicide, and became a lieutenant in the navy in 1859. He returned to dry land only in 1864 to matriculate at Magdalene College, Cambridge. While an undergraduate he became engaged to Sybil Montgomery (1845-1935), daughter of Alfred Montgomery, commissioner of the Inland Revenue, and Fanny Charlotte Wyndham, daughter of George, first Baron Leconfield. The couple married at St George, Hanover Square, on 26 February 1866. 
At Cambridge Queensberry distinguished himself at hunting, steeplechasing, running, and cricket: he left after two years without graduating, and would maintain throughout his life that he had 'never known a degree to be worth twopence to anybody' (Roberts, 27). His sporting education would indeed prove more useful to him than any academic work he might have undertaken. In 1866 he embarked on a tour of the United States in the company of the duke of Manchester and the lightweight boxing champion J. G. Chambers to promote the sport of boxing, then somewhat in disrepute, across the Atlantic. The chief outcome of the trip was the formulation of the Queensberry rules, devised to replace the permissive London prize ring rules of 1839. The rules established the fundamental provisions which have governed the sport ever since, concerning, for instance, the conduct of fighters, the length of rounds, and the duration of the count following a knock-out. Though Queensberry was said to have been responsible for the definition of boxing weights, most of the Queensberry rules were drawn up by Chambers, the aristocratic title being adopted in the hope of enhancing the sport's respectability. Queensberry's own pugilism was not, in fact, always respectable -- as a sailor he had briefly been imprisoned following a fracas in Madeira, and in 1872 he would be fined 20's'. by Bow Street magistrates for assaulting a man who had attempted to prevent him assaulting a hotel porter -- but he was said to be the finest amateur boxer of his time and was at one point amateur lightweight champion. He was also said, though, to care more for steeplechasing than for boxing. He gained his first success in the Dumfriesshire Hunt Club chase in 1865, but 'his ambition as a rider was greater than his abilities', according to one authority: in the course of his career he would break both arms and legs, twice fracture his collar bone and frequently sustain concussion (Roberts, 71). He rode his last winner at Sandown Park in 1883. Though a member of the Grand National Hunt committee, he never realized his ambition of winning the National. A last-minute substitution deprived him of a ride on the victorious Old Joe in 1886 -- a cause of lasting distress to him. 
Queensberry was also a keen huntsman, becoming master of the Worcester foxhounds in 1870. His move south reflected his alienation from his wife. Four sons were born in the first six years of the marriage -- Francis Archibald (1867-1894), Percy Sholto Douglas (1868-1920), Alfred Bruce Douglas (1870-1945), and George Sholto (1872-1932) -- but marital friction was evident almost from the start. Queensberry returned to the family home of Kinmount in Dumfriesshire in 1872, when he was elected a representative Scottish peer, but from that year he and his wife 'met only to quarrel' (Roberts, 70). His children grew up under the wing of a doting mother, and would side with her in the developing family dispute. 'The truth is that we hardly ever saw him', Lord Alfred Douglas said of his father, 'while his own public conduct was hardly such as... to command the sort of slavish obedience to his orders which he seemed to expect from his children' (A. Douglas, 'Without Apology', 236). Queensberry's private conduct was hardly more edifying: he underlined his estrangement from his wife by establishing a London home in James Street, Marylebone, where he entertained a succession of mistresses. 
Queensberry's peerage did not confer the right to sit in the House of Lords, which he attained only by virtue of election by the body of Scottish peers. He had hoped for elevation to the British peerage by Derby's government in 1867 -- his father had been a Conservative and he would generally vote with the tories as a representative peer -- but the Conservatives' defeat in 1868 ended any immediate prospect of a British title. The position of a Scottish elective peer was generally secure enough, and Queensberry was re-elected in 1874, but he was unseated by his peers in 1880, in explicit reaction to his unorthodox views on religion, which he expressed with increasing emphasis during the 1870s. Queensberry had been brought up a high-churchman, though his mother and one of his brothers converted to Catholicism in the early 1860s. The sequence of family tragedies which befell Queensberry -- the premature deaths of his father, two brothers, and his eldest son, three of them probably by suicide -- would have tested anybody's faith. It is not clear whether Queensberry's move towards agnosticism was prompted by the death of his brother Francis in a mountaineering accident on the Matterhorn in July 1865, but it is the case that the most extended statement of Queensberry's creed took the form of a poem, 'The Spirit of the Matterhorn', written in Zermatt in 1873. He published the poem in 1881, dedicating it to the peers of Scotland who had denied him re-election. It represents an unconventional attempt to come to terms with the concept of death without recourse to consoling doctrines of the afterlife. Queensberry denied that the soul was an entity separate from the body and refused to categorize as 'God' a power which he believed 'undefinable by man' (preface, 5-6). He argued that in death souls slept, surrendering their individuality 'in the great essence of an Eternal Power' before gaining fresh identities in new human frames: 'for death is life and life eternity' (ibid., 17, 21). This process tended towards the perfection of man (indeed, the sinful were held to 'possess no right to be progenitors'), a perfection defined as 'man's complete adaptation, socially, morally and physically, to his surroundings' (ibid., 24; preface, 15). The poem is an idiosyncratic confection of theism, humanism, and social Darwinism (Herbert Spencer was the only authority cited in Queensberry's 1881 preface, and Alfred Douglas believed Spencer and Huxley to be the only non-fiction writers to have captured Queensberry's attention). It defined Queensberry, in his own mind, as an agnostic rather than an atheist, but the distinction carried little weight in the eyes of polite society when, influenced by the freethinkers G. J. Holyoake and Moncure Conway, he fell into the company of the London secularist community. Queensberry became president of the British Secularist Union on its formation in 1877. This body was a secession from Charles Bradlaugh's National Secular Society, and Queensberry played little part in the debates over Bradlaugh's refusal to take the parliamentary oath in the early 1880s, but he did attain notoriety in November 1882 with a public protest to interrupt a performance of Tennyson's stage play, 'The Promise of May', with its unflattering portrayal of a freethinker. In 1884, though, the disbandment of the British Secularist Union robbed Queensberry of his public platform, and he returned to a life of private hedonism. This life was led largely in London. At the Pelican Club in Gerrard Street he entertained his fellow sporting aristocrats with songs delivered in what Alfred Douglas remembered as a pleasant baritone voice. He continued to entertain women at James Street and various hotels, conduct which provided the grounds for his eventual divorce from Sybil in November 1887, when two servants testified to his adultery with Mabel Gilroy of Camden Town ('The Times', 24 Jan 1887; Ellmann, 366). 
Queensberry's second marriage, at Eastbourne register office on 7 November 1893, remains mysterious. The new marchioness, whom Queensberry was said to have met on the Eastbourne promenade, was Ethel, daughter of Edward Charles Weeden of Eastbourne. The union was unsuccessful. After only four months of marriage, spent entirely in hotels in London and the Isle of Wight, Ethel petitioned for annulment, alleging at an 'in camera' hearing in October 1894 that Queensberry had been 'wholly unable to consummate [the marriage] by reason of the frigidity and impotence of his parts of generation,... incurable by art or skill'. Queensberry claimed in response to be 'apt for coition as will appear on inspection', but the annulment was eventually granted on the grounds not only of frigidity and impotence, but also of 'malformation of the parts of generation of the said Respondent'. What effect this private humiliation had on Queensberry's attitude during the legal contest with Oscar Wilde, over the next few months, remains unknowable, but he is unlikely to have felt entirely temperate about sexual issues (TNA: PRO, J77/532/16267). 
The context for the battle with Wilde was another family tragedy, the death of Queensberry's eldest son, Francis, Viscount Drumlanrig, in October 1894. Drumlanrig had become a protege of the prime minister Lord Rosebery during Rosebery's tenure of the Foreign Office in 1892-4. Rumours that he had been drawn into a homosexual relationship with the statesman led to Queensberry's quixotic trip to Bad Homburg in the hope -- unrealized -- of horse-whipping Rosebery. Queensberry, like many others, believed his son's death during a shooting party to have been suicide. His sensitivity to any hint of homosexuality in the family had already been evident in his claims that his father-in-law was a homosexual (Hyde, 'Douglas', 8) and in his insistence that Alfred Douglas should not follow his closest prep school friend to Eton College (Roberts, 150). The ill-concealed sexual basis of Alfred's friendship with Oscar Wilde provided a constant public provocation to Queensberry. He attempted first to humiliate Wilde with an exercise in audience participation similar to his Tennyson protest, arriving for the first performance of 'The Importance of being Earnest' with a bunch of carrots which he hoped to throw at Wilde. Denied entry to the theatre, he sought other means of goading Wilde, and succeeded spectacularly with a card left at Wilde's club, said to depict him 'posing as a somdomite ['sic']'. Wilde's response, an ill-advised libel action, brought not only Queensberry's acquittal, to public acclaim, but also the clear advertisement of Wilde's homosexuality -- a criminal offence under the 1885 'Criminal Law Amendment Act'. Wilde was prosecuted, convicted, and imprisoned and Queensberry lionized, 'taking the place of the great Duke of Wellington in the hearts of the British people', in Alfred Douglas's sardonic words (Roberts, 255). 
This unfamiliar adulation did not last long, and Queensberry lapsed rapidly during the remainder of the decade into obscurity, decline, and death. It seems likely -- though this is a conjecture and an induction -- that he fell victim to syphilis, a common -- and commonly concealed -- cause of aristocratic death in the late Victorian period. It is clear that neither the impotence nor the 'malformation' attested in the 1894 annulment were the lifelong afflictions of a man who had fathered four children and been divorced for adultery. Syphilis would be consistent both with Alfred Douglas's claim that his father's mental powers deteriorated rapidly after the age of forty (A. Douglas, 'Without Apology', 247) and with his temperamental volatility in his relationships with those around him. He disowned his second son, Percy, 'that so-called skunk of a son of mine' (Douglas and Colson, 63), for marrying a clergyman's daughter in 1893, affected an emotional reconciliation with him on his return from Australia, assaulted him in the street during the Wilde trial (both parties were bound over for $500), and finally acknowledged a deathbed visit by spitting at his son and heir. Syphilitic dementia would be consistent with the delusions of Queensberry's last years, when he believed that he was being persecuted by the 'Oscar Wilders' (Hyde, 'Trials of Oscar Wilde', 10), and syphilitic paresis could explain his early death on 31 January 1900, attributed publicly to 'a serious illness of a paralytic nature' after a stroke two months earlier had confined him to a bed in his club in Welbeck Street ('Dumfries and Galloway Standard', 3 Feb 1900; Roberts, 270). One who had once invoked as man's destiny the 'perfection of the body and the mind' (J. S. Douglas, 21) endured the erosion of both in his final months. Queensberry was cremated at Woking crematorium on 2 February 1900, his ashes being buried at the family burial-ground at Kinmount the following day. The burial-ground was part of only 2000 remaining acres of the 30,000 acres of Scottish estate that Queensberry had inherited. The rest had been sold, as had paintings by Kneller, Lely, Stubbs, and Reynolds in 1897, to fund his London lifestyle, his allowances to his first wife and sons, and the costs -- estimated at $2000 -- of pursuing Wilde. 
The Victorians could be most tolerant of the shortcomings of their aristocracy, but Queensberry's combination of profligacy and violence, of adultery, promiscuity, and family neglect, went beyond the limits of society's tolerance. 'The Times', in a critical obituary (1 February 1900), considered him representative of 'a type of aristocracy which is less common in our time than it was a century ago -- the type which is associated in the public mind with a life of idleness and indulgence'. An eighteenth-century Queensberry had in fact been the model for the dissolute Lord March in Thackeray's 'The Virginians', and 'The Scotsman' (2 February 1900) observed that 'it cannot be said that the eighth [ninth] Marquis... did anything to bring the title into better repute'. Newspaper obituaries were notably sparse for one who had been a celebrity only five years earlier, and those that did appear made little effort to extend the usual courtesies to the dead. The 'Dumfries and Galloway Standard' (3 February 1900) noted soberly that 'a want of certain commonplace but useful and admirable qualities' had prevented him from playing an appropriate role in public life. 'The Field' (3 February 1900) even questioned his competence as a boxing referee. 
Queensberry left a relieved family which, Wilde claimed, had 'often discussed the possibility of getting him put into a lunatic asylum so as to keep him out of the way' (Hyde, 'Trials of Oscar Wilde', 29). Within three weeks of the funeral Wilde recorded receiving Percy and Alfred Douglas in Paris, 'in deep mourning and the highest spirits. The English are like that' (Hyde, 'Douglas', 126). Driven by this sense of euphoric release, Percy, who succeeded to his father's title, dissipated what remained of the family fortune in less than eighteen months, being sued for bankruptcy in December 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 7910


Mackenzie, Kenneth (1754-1833), army officer, was born at Dundee, the son and heir of Kenneth Mackenzie of Kilcoy, Ross-shire, and his wife, Janet, daughter of Sir Robert Douglas, baronet, author of the 'Scots Peerage', and sister of Sir Alexander Douglas of Glenbervie, last baronet. On 26 August 1767, aged thirteen, Mackenzie joined the 33rd regiment as an ensign. Having been promoted lieutenant in 1775, he transferred to the 14th regiment in 1783, with which he served in the West Indies until 1791 and thereafter in the Netherlands campaign, during which, as a senior lieutenant, he commanded a company. He was wounded at the ill-fated siege of Dunkirk, but his prowess as an officer caught the attention of Thomas Graham of Balgowan (later General Lord Lynedoch), who, when raising the 90th regiment in 1794, asked for Mackenzie's services. The latter, appointed first captain and then major in the new unit, which was considered a light infantry battalion and drilled accordingly, accompanied it to the Ile Dieu, Gibraltar, and, in 1796, Portugal. Here, under Sir Charles Stuart, Mackenzie headed and instructed an improvised battalion comprising the light companies of the various regiments in Stuart's force. Accompanying Stuart's expedition to Minorca, he served as deputy adjutant-general and was made lieutenant-colonel when the island fell in October 1798. 
Sir Ralph Abercromby superseded Stuart and, after landing in Egypt, defeated General Menou at Abu Qir on 20 March 1801. Mackenzie, with the 90th, saw heavy fighting, during which not only Abercromby but also Lieutenant-Colonel Ogilvie of the 44th was killed. Mackenzie took command of that unit in his stead, and remained with it in Egypt and Gibraltar until 1803, when he was recalled and attached to a training camp at Shorncliffe, Kent. 
Shorncliffe was under the jurisdiction of General Sir John Moore, commander of the southern military district. Moore realized that because, over the preceding decades, afforestation, enclosure, and urbanization had transformed the south of England and numerous other areas of the European terrain, military tactics were in a state of flux; and light troops, once confined to a subordinate role on the periphery of armies, were now playing an ever greater part in set-piece battles, with the French fielding thousands of 'tirailleurs', 'voltigeurs', and 'chasseurs'. Encouraged by the duke of York, the commander-in-chief, Moore wanted to transform some regiments of the line into permanent bodies of light infantry which, suitably equipped and trained, would be capable of fighting, not only in the customary close-order formations of the period but also as free-thinking, free-firing skirmishers. However militarily prudent this might seem, it was a somewhat controversial proposal at the time, since it involved liberating troops from both the physical and psychological constraints of orthodox linear tactics, and to encourage common soldiers to show initiative was regarded by many as potentially destabilizing. 
The first regiment converted to light infantry was Moore's own, the 52nd, which was officially retitled on 18 January 1803. Mackenzie was appointed its lieutenant-colonel because of his particular talent for training skirmishers, and he played a pivotal role in the instruction of the new unit. An accomplished marksman whose principal pastime was shooting, he applied some of the practices of the hunt to the battlefield, educating his troops in fieldcraft and in the work of the scout. He also devised a new tactical drill and manual exercise, together with a more natural style of marching which enabled the soldiers to move more rapidly and with less fatigue. This was the famous 'Shorncliffe system' of drill, of which Mackenzie was the principal architect. He also promoted a more relaxed form of discipline woven from strands of Enlightenment thinking: the common soldier was no longer treated like an automaton, to be flogged and drilled into obedience, but more like a member of a family in which his seniors were encouraged to take on a paternal role. 
By July 1803 the 43rd foot had also been redesignated as a light regiment. Brigaded together with the 95th (rifles), they and the 52nd had plenty of time to hone their new skills while awaiting Napoleon's expected invasion of southern England. Mackenzie, however, was seriously injured -- suffering 'a very severe concussion of the brain' ('GM', 443) -- in a fall from his horse in November 1803. He had to take sick leave during the summer of 1804, but on 18 December at Hythe, Kent, he married Rachel, only child of Robert Andrews of Shorncliffe; they had six sons and a daughter. Promoted colonel on 25 April 1808, he accompanied Graham to Cadiz in 1810 and took command of a brigade. His health remained precarious, however, and he soon returned to Britain to recuperate. His convalescence continued until 1811, when, in June, he was promoted major-general and subsequently placed in charge of another light infantry training camp, at Brabourne Lees, east Kent. 
During 1813 he accompanied Sir Thomas Graham to the Netherlands and had command of the 2nd division before being incapacitated by another fall from his horse. He was made governor of Antwerp in 1814 but, appointed to command and train new light troops in England, was recalled just before Waterloo. Thereafter he retired to Hythe, where he took a keen interest in local affairs and became a jurat. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 19 July 1821, made colonel of the 58th regiment on 1 March 1828, and created a baronet on 30 September 1831, assuming by royal licence in October 1831 the name and arms of Douglas of Glenbervie, the baronetcy of which was dormant since the death of his wife's brother, Alexander Douglas, seventh baronet (1738-1812). He died at Holles Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 22 November 1833 and was buried at Hythe. He was succeeded as second baronet by his son Robert Andrews Douglas (1807-1843), army officer. 


