@@@@@


doc= 7911


Douglas, Lady Margaret, countess of Lennox (1515-1578), noblewoman, only child of Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus (c.1489-1557), and his second wife, Margaret Tudor ['see 'Margaret (1489-1541)], daughter of Henry VII of England and Elizabeth of York, was born on 8 October 1515 at Harbottle Castle in Northumberland. 
Margaret's mother's first husband had been James IV, king of Scots, and her childhood was complicated by her parents' matrimonial adventures and the bitter power struggles in which they engaged during the minority of her half-brother, James V. Having lost the regency of Scotland by her hasty second marriage, Queen Margaret had been fleeing south to the court of her brother, Henry VIII, when she was seized with labour pains and forced to seek shelter in the castle of Thomas, second Lord Dacre, at Harbottle. A hastily arranged baptism was held the day after her daughter's birth, 'with such provisions as couthe or mought be had in this baron and wyld country' (Ellis, 265-7), so Lord Dacre told Henry VIII. The queen dowager was ill for a long time after the birth, but the following spring she took Margaret to the English court, and the baby stayed in the royal nurseries at Greenwich Palace until in June 1517 Henry VIII sent mother and daughter back to Scotland. 
Margaret's parents were reunited, but their domestic harmony was brief. When she was three, her mother discovered that Angus was keeping a mistress; a violent quarrel erupted and the earl, conscious of his daughter's dynastic significance, snatched her from her mother's arms and took her first to his fortress of Tantallon in Haddingtonshire, probably to France, then to England, and finally back to Scotland again. Ignoring his wife's attempts to marry her to James IV's illegitimate son, James Stewart, fourteenth earl of Moray, Angus kept custody of the child and when he was driven out of Scotland in 1528, found shelter for her at Norham Castle and then at Berwick, with Thomas Strangeways, comptroller of the household of Cardinal Wolsey, who was her godfather. After Wolsey's death in November 1530, Margaret's aunt Mary, duchess of Suffolk and dowager queen of France, came to the rescue and invited her to London. Henry VIII then decreed that she should live at Beaulieu, in the household of his daughter Mary. With only four months between them in age, the two girls became lifelong friends, despite the fact that in 1536 Henry removed both his daughters from the succession on the grounds of their alleged illegitimacy, and for a time treated his niece as heiress presumptive. 
Margaret was a great favourite at court. The French ambassador, Louis de Perreau, noted in 1534 that she was both 'beautiful and highly esteemed' ('LP Henry VIII', 7, appx 13). Apart from a Holbein miniature in the Royal Collection speculatively reidentified as Lady Margaret, the surviving portraits show her in later life. In these her hair is covered and so its colour is not shown, but she had heavy-lidded, deep-set eyes, a long nose, broad jaw, and fairly thin lips. Lively and attractive, she was somehow able to charm reformers and Catholics alike. Sent to be lady-in-waiting to Anne Boleyn, she got on surprisingly well with the new queen, and fell in love with Anne's uncle, Thomas Howard. The two became secretly engaged but Henry VIII was furious when he found out, declaring that Howard was aiming at the throne by trying to capture a royal bride. Henry sent him to the Tower and imprisoned Margaret there too, until she fell ill with a recurring fever. He then allowed her to live at the abbey of Sion, near Isleworth, under the supervision of the abbess, who was soon complaining about the large number of servants she kept and her constant stream of visitors. She was finally released on 29 October 1537. Howard died in the Tower two days later. 
When Henry VIII's son, Edward, was born, the king convinced himself that Margaret, like his daughters, was illegitimate. Thus rendered harmless, she was restored to favour, becoming successively first lady of honour to Anne of Cleves and Katherine Howard. However, when she fell in love with Katherine's brother Charles, Henry sent her back to Sion and then to Kenninghall, in Norfolk, where Thomas Cranmer reproved her for 'over much lightness', warning her to 'beware the third time' (Fraser, 'Lennox', 1.427). She remained at Sion until Henry VIII decided to use her father again to promote his own interests in Scotland and allowed her to return to court. On 10 July 1543 she was a bridesmaid at his wedding to Katherine Parr and the following year Henry arranged her own marriage. 
On 6 July 1544, in St James's Palace, London, Margaret married Matthew Stewart, thirteenth or fourth earl of Lennox (1516-1571), one of Scotland's leading noblemen. A descendant of James I of Scotland, he had been brought up in France by an uncle, and was well educated and handsome, 'a strong man, of personage well shaped... fair and pleasant faced, with a good and manly countenance' ('Historie and Cronicles', 2.16-18). He had been lured back to Scotland with promises that Mary of Guise might marry him, but he soon realized that she simply wanted to use him as a counterpoise to his hereditary enemy, James Hamilton, second earl of Arran. Disillusioned, he entered into negotiations with the pro-English earl of Angus, asking for Margaret as his bride in return for his future support of Henry VIII. On his wedding day he became a naturalized Englishman, receiving from the king grants of property in London and Yorkshire. 
Margaret and her husband were deeply in love with each other, but Lennox had to leave London almost at once to attempt to advance Henry's policies in Scotland and was forfeited by the Scottish parliament on 1 October 1545 as a result. His wife remained in the south, first in the household of Queen Katherine and then in her own residence of Stepney Palace, where she gave birth to a son, Henry, Lord Darnley, named after the king. Leaving the baby at Stepney, she moved to Temple Newsam, one of Lennox's properties in Yorkshire, to be closer to Scotland. Her first child died on 28 November 1545 and was buried in St Dunstan's Church, Stepney, but just over a week later she gave birth to another son, a second Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley. 
Shortly before Henry VIII's death in 1547 Margaret quarrelled bitterly with him over her attachment to the Roman Catholic church, and when he made his will he cut her out of the succession. Her parents were by now divorced and she began a lengthy dispute with her father when he too bypassed her and entailed his property on his heirs male. After Queen Margaret's death he remarried and had two sons, but although neither survived infancy, he still insisted that his titles would eventually go to his brother, not to his daughter, and they were on bad terms for several years. 
When Edward VI succeeded his father, Margaret hastened to court with little Lord Darnley to show him off to the young king, but for much of protestant Edward's reign she found it prudent to stay at Temple Newsam, her household becoming the centre for Roman Catholics in England. In 1553 Edward VI died, Mary I became queen, and Margaret suddenly found herself at the centre of court life once more. Mary granted her apartments in Westminster Palace, sent her luxurious furniture and tapestries, authorized the provision of food and drink for her household free of charge, and showered her with gifts: new gowns, a girdle of gold set with diamonds and rubies, diamond rings, and revenues of nearly 3000 marks a year from taxes on the wool trade. Moreover, as Mary's relations with her half-sister, Elizabeth, deteriorated, she began to give Margaret precedence over the latter, treating her as though she were heir presumptive once more. When Mary married Philip of Spain, Margaret was in attendance as first lady and soon afterwards she named her next child Philip. 
Margaret and her father were reconciled shortly before his death in 1557. For a time she styled herself 'countess of Lennox and Angus', but the fact that her husband had forfeited his Scottish lands complicated her claim and in the end her father's earldom passed to a male cousin. Mary was by now seriously ill; she died the following year. As always the earl and countess of Lennox were among the first to congratulate the new monarch, and Elizabeth I received them graciously. In private Margaret made no secret of the fact that she thought she had the better claim to the throne, for she considered Elizabeth to be illegitimate. Once more Roman Catholics in England looked to the countess of Lennox for leadership and she moved from Temple Newsam to Settrington House, near Burlington Bay, where she could have more direct contact with France, and with her niece Mary, queen of Scots. Soon her house was full of secret agents, plotting both for and against Elizabeth I. 
Margaret had always envisaged a splendid future for her son Lord Darnley. Tall and fair, with a ready smile, handsome, athletic, well-educated, and apparently intelligent, he was the focus of her life and she had long cherished hopes that he would one day marry her niece Mary, queen of Scots. Mary was the wife of the French dauphin, of course, but Francois was delicate and immature. Perhaps he would not survive. Determined to draw Mary's attention to the boy, Margaret sent him across with congratulations when Francois succeeded his father, and again with condolences when he died. Now all her hopes could be realized. Lennox, who according to a contemporary was 'wholly governed by his wife' (Strickland, 2.366), was happy to go along with her plans. 
When Mary, queen of Scots, arrived safely back in Scotland in August 1561, Margaret was so delighted that she forgot to be discreet, telling people openly that her son would marry Mary, they would rule Scotland together, claim the English throne and dispose of protestant Elizabeth. Needless to say, the various spies in the Lennox household were quick to report this to the English queen, who immediately summoned Margaret and her family to London, imprisoned Lennox in the Tower, and sent Margaret and two of her younger children to the custody of Sir Richard and Lady Sackville at Sheen. When Lennox fell ill Margaret pleaded for his release, reminding Elizabeth that he suffered from an illness that made him unable to tolerate being alone, but it was not until November 1562 that he was allowed to join his wife and the following February before they were released. 
Undeterred by their recent reverses Margaret set about winning Elizabeth's confidence once more by means of flattering letters. By July 1564 she was back at court, acting with the queen as godmother to William Cecil's new daughter, while Lord Darnley carried the sword before Elizabeth on official occasions, as the prince nearest to the throne. Gratifying though that might be, Margaret had not abandoned her ambitious plans for him, and although her husband and son later denied it, she may well have had a hand in Elizabeth's puzzling decision to allow Darnley to travel to Scotland, where his father had recently gone to reclaim his estates. Lennox's restoration and his wife's final abandonment of her claims to the earldom of Angus in November 1565 were the key events that ushered in the reshaping of the Scottish court as a prelude to Queen Mary's marriage to Darnley. Moreover Lady Lennox plied Mary with letters urging her son's virtues, and sent gifts of jewellery to the Scottish nobility to encourage them to favour the union. 
It had suited Elizabeth to divert Queen Mary with thoughts of Darnley as a possible husband, but when Mary took her at her word and announced her betrothal to him, the English queen was appalled. Realizing that she had made a dreadful mistake, she immediately summoned Darnley and Lennox back to London. They refused to go and so Margaret was sent to the Tower once more, arriving by water at Traitors' Gate on 20 June 1565. At the same time the privy council seized all the Lennox properties. An inventory of the contents of Temple Newsam, made for the court, records sumptuous furnishings, portraits of Margaret and her husband, her mother, and Henry VIII, and some touching personal items such as the ermine-trimmed crimson velvet and crimson satin bearing cloths used at the baptisms of the all too often short-lived Lennox children. 
Margaret was still in the Tower on the afternoon of 19 February 1567 when William Cecil's wife and Lady William Howard arrived with terrible news. Lord Darnley had been murdered, and they mistakenly told her that Lennox had been killed too. This was later contradicted, but Margaret was in such a state of shock that her visitors had to summon Dr Huick, one of the royal physicians, and the dean of Westminster to come to her assistance. She was later allowed to go back to Sheen, while Lennox remained in Scotland, trying to prosecute James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell, for his son's murder. 
Bothwell was acquitted, and Lennox left Scotland in disgust. He joined his wife at Sheen and Elizabeth gave them the dilapidated royal palace of Coldharbour in London as their residence. They were desperately short of money, but although the queen at last permitted them to have the revenues from their estates she refused to allow them to administer their properties themselves. In spite of these difficulties, in January 1568 they commissioned a large picture showing the body of Darnley in gilded armour, with the earl, countess, their younger son, Charles, and their grandson James VI grouped around, calling for vengeance. According to one of the many inscriptions, the countess commissioned the painting so that if she and her husband did not live long enough to see their grandson and tell him to seek revenge, the picture would convey the message for them. 
When they heard that autumn that Mary, queen of Scots, had arrived in England, the earl and countess hurried to court, clad in deepest mourning, and threw themselves on their knees before Elizabeth, begging for justice. Margaret's face 'was all swelled and stained with tears' (Strickland, 2.423) but her passionate cries for vengeance lasted so long that Elizabeth's initial sympathy turned to impatience and she told her not to prejudge the issue. In 1570, however, when the Scottish regent, the earl of Moray, was assassinated, Elizabeth agreed to consider a plan for bringing James VI to England. At her urging Lennox became the next regent, and set off for Scotland, intending to bring his grandson south. Margaret stayed with the queen to guarantee his good faith. 
It seems to have been Elizabeth I herself who broke the news to Margaret when Lennox was shot in the back in a fracas outside Stirling Castle on 4 September 1571 and died at four o'clock that same afternoon, asking his friends to 'remember my love to my wife Meg, whom I beseech God to comfort' (Fraser, 'Lennox', 1.416). He was buried in the castle chapel, and Margaret put up an elaborate monument. According to some accounts she commissioned the famous Lennox jewel, now in the Royal Collection, at this time. A locket made in the shape of a heart, it is richly enamelled, set with a large sapphire and decorated with allegorical figures, her husband's initials and enigmatic inscriptions which seem to refer to her future hopes for James VI. 
Margaret's son Charles was now the only one of her eight children still alive. In 1574 she obtained the queen's permission to visit Scotland with him, but from the very beginning Elizabeth was suspicious, believing that she might be plotting with Mary, queen of Scots. Margaret's passionate grief and rage at Mary had long since passed and soon after the death of Lennox the two women had been reconciled, united by their shared concern for their 'peerless jewel', James VI (Fraser, 'Lennox', 2.449). Knowing this, Elizabeth was convinced that Margaret would try to see Mary, but although Margaret does not seem to have done so, she found herself in trouble for another reason. Staying at Rufford on the way north, Charles fell in love with Lady Shrewsbury's daughter, Elizabeth Cavendish, and the two mothers arranged their marriage. Her suspicions redoubled, the queen summoned them to London and sent both Margaret and Lady Shrewsbury to the Tower. During this imprisonment Margaret corresponded regularly with Mary, queen of Scots, sending her the gift of a small piece of lace made partly from her own white hairs. 
Released in the autumn of 1574, Margaret lived at Stepney with her son, his wife, and their baby daughter, Arabella Stuart. By now she was deeply in debt and Charles, earl of Lennox, was seriously ill with tuberculosis. When he died in 1576, his mother fell into 'a languishing decay' (Strickland, 2.448) but she roused herself to try to claim the earldom of Lennox for Arabella. Her efforts were unsuccessful, and on 7 March 1578 she was taken violently ill after entertaining Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, to supper. She died peacefully two days later, on the evening of 9 March. There was talk of poisoning, but such rumours often accompanied a sudden death in court circles at the time. In fact, Margaret had long been suffering from a colic, presumably a digestive disorder. She was buried in Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey on 3 April, at the expense of the queen, and a quarter of a century later her grandson James VI and I erected a fine monument in her memory. 
Margaret Douglas's position as granddaughter of Henry VII of England, aunt of Mary, queen of Scots, and countess of Lennox drew her into many of the complex political events of her time. She never hesitated to employ her consummate charm as well as her taste for devious scheming in her efforts to advance the interests of both her family and the Roman Catholic religion. It was her tragedy that her ambitions brought nothing but disaster to herself, her husband, and her adored son Lord Darnley. 


@@@@@


doc= 7912


Douglas, Niel (1750-1823), poet and minister of the Relief church, was educated at the University of Glasgow, and married Mary Anne Isabella Millar on 26 August 1787. As minister of the Relief church at Cupar, Fife, he published 'Sermons on Important Subjects, with some Essays in Poetry' in 1789. Among the poems are two extremely loyal odes on the king's illness and recovery, to which their author referred nearly thirty years later when charged with disaffection to the royal family. Under the pseudonym of Britannicus, Douglas next published 'A Monitory Address to Great Britain' in 1792, lamenting the degeneracy of the times and calling upon the king to abolish the anti-Christian practices of the slave trade, duelling, and church patronage. That same year he published 'The African Slave Trade', and the year after, 'Thoughts on Modern Politics', also concerned with the slave trade. 
By 1793 Douglas had moved to Dundee, where he officiated as a minister of relief charge at Dudhope Crescent. The following year he brought out 'The Lady's Scull', a sermon in verse upon the text 'A place called the place of a skull'. Another collection of sermons, 'Britain's Guilt, Danger, and Duty', appeared in 1795, and 'Dialogues on the Lord's Supper' and 'The Duty of Pastors' in 1796. 
In the summer of 1797 Douglas, who was fluent in Gaelic, went on a mission to remote regions of Argyll, after first collecting some funds by preaching at Dundee and Glasgow 'Messiah's Glorious Rest in the Latter Days', published that year. On his return he described his experiences in a series of letters published as 'A Journal of a Mission to Part of the Highlands of Scotland' in 1799. At this time he issued proposals for publishing the 'Psalms' and 'New Testament' in Gaelic, but abandoned the project through lack of encouragement. After resigning his charge at Dundee, Douglas moved in 1798 to Edinburgh, where he published 'Lavinia', based on the book of 'Ruth'. He moved afterwards to Greenock, where he published 'Leonidas' and 'Sign of the Times' in 1805. That year Douglas settled in Stockwell Street, Glasgow, and in 1807 he published 'The Messiah's Proper Deity'. About 1809 he seceded from the Relief church to set up on his own account as a 'preacher of restoration', or 'universalist preacher'. As such he published 'The Royal Penitent' in 1811, on the repentance of King David, then 'King David's Psalms' in 1815. His sermons advocated peaceful political reform, and he was a delegate to the Convention of the Friends of the People in Edinburgh. 
In 1817, while promulgating his restoration views in Glasgow, Douglas was indicted for sedition in drawing a parallel between George III and Nebuchadnezzar, the prince regent and Belshazzar, and representing the House of Commons as a den of thieves. He appeared before the high court of justiciary, Edinburgh, on 26 May, aged sixty-seven and, in his own words, 'loaded with infirmities'. Cockburn, one of his four advocates, after referring to him as 'a poor, old, deaf, obstinate, doited body', says: 'The crown witnesses all gave their evidence in a way that showed they had smelt sedition because they were sent by their superiors to find it. The trial had scarcely begun before it became ridiculous, from the imputations thrown on the regent -- and the difficulty with which people refrained from laughing at the prosecutors, who were visibly ashamed of the scandal they had brought on their own master. (manuscript note on flyleaf of J. Dow, ed., 'The Trial of the Rev. Niel Douglas', BL)' A unanimous verdict of acquittal was returned, and Douglas left the court loyally declaring, 'I have a high regard for his Majesty and for the Royal Family, and I pray that every Briton may have the same' (Dow, 50). He had prepared for the worst, as he published soon after the trial 'An Address to the Judges and Jury in a Case of Alleged Sedition', which was intended to be delivered before sentence was passed. 
Douglas was not perceived as belonging to the Scottish establishment, and was described as a 'wavering nonconformist' ('N&Q', 3rd ser., 1, 1862, 92). 'A Catechism with Proofs', published in 1822, gives a statement of the religious views of Douglas and his church. 'The analogy', attributed to him, is found in 'A Collection of Hymns' for universalists (1824). He also wrote numerous tracts, such as 'Causes of our public calamity', 'The Baptist', 'A word in season', and others. 
Douglas died at Glasgow on 9 January 1823, aged seventy-three. His wife had died before him, and his only surviving son, Neil Douglas, was a constant source of trouble to him and narrowly escaped hanging (see his trial for 'falsehood, fraud, and wilful imposition', 12 July 1816, in the 'Scots Magazine', 78.552-3). 


@@@@@


doc= 7913


Douglas, Sir Neil (1779/80-1853), army officer, born in Glasgow, was the fifth son of John Douglas, a Glasgow merchant, and descendant of the Douglases, earls of Angus, through the Douglases of Cruxton and Stobbs. He entered the army as second lieutenant in the 95th regiment (later the Rifle brigade) on 28 January 1801. He was promoted lieutenant on 16 July 1802, and captain into the 79th (Cameron Highlanders) on 19 April 1804. This was the regiment with which he served most of the rest of his military career. 
Douglas first saw active service in the siege of Copenhagen in 1807, and then he and his regiment accompanied Sir John Moore to Sweden and Portugal. He served throughout Moore's retreat and in the battle of Corunna, in the expedition to the Walcheren and at the siege of Flushing in 1809, and in the Peninsula from December 1809; he served in Portugal until he was promoted major on 31 January 1811. The only great Peninsular battle at which he was present in this period was Busaco, during which he was shot through the left arm and shoulder; on promotion he left the Peninsula to join the 2nd battalion of his regiment. 
Douglas was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 3 December 1812, and in the following April rejoined the 1st battalion in the Peninsula. He commanded this force, which was attached to the 2nd brigade of Cole's division, in the battles of the Pyrenees -- the Nivelle, the Nive, and Toulouse -- and at the end of the war he was rewarded with a gold cross for these victories. In the following year the regiment was reduced to one battalion, which Douglas commanded both at Quatre Bras, where he was wounded in the right knee, and at Waterloo. After this campaign he was made a CB (June 1815) and also received a wound pension of $300 a year. In 1816 Douglas married the daughter of George Robertson, a banker, of Greenock. They had one son. 
Douglas continued to command his regiment for twenty-two years until he became a major-general, and during that period many distinctions were conferred upon him. In 1825 he was promoted colonel, and from 1825 to 1837 he was an aide-de-camp to the king; in 1831 he was knighted (September), made a KCH, and permitted to wear the orders of Maria Theresa and St Vladimir, conferred for his services at Waterloo. In July 1838 he was made a KCB. He was promoted major-general in June 1838, and lieutenant-general on 9 November 1846. In 1845 he was made colonel of the 81st regiment, from which he was transferred to the 72nd in 1847, and to the 78th, in 1851. From April 1842 to January 1847 he was governor of Edinburgh Castle. 
Douglas died in Brussels on 1 September 1853 and was buried that month. His son was General Sir John Douglas GCB (1817-1887), a distinguished commander in India during the suppression of the mutiny. 


@@@@@


doc= 7914


Douglas, Philip (1758-1822), college head, was born at Witham, Essex, on 27 September 1758, one of the family of six sons and five daughters of Archibald Douglas (1707-1778) and Elizabeth, daughter of Edmund Burchard of Witham. His father was colonel of the 13th dragoons and sat as MP for Dumfries Boroughs (1754-61) and for Dumfriesshire (1761-74). Philip was educated at Harrow School, where he was a scholar in 1777, and matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, at Michaelmas 1778. He graduated BA in 1781, when he was third in the second class of the mathematical tripos, and won the members' prize in 1782; he proceeded MA (1784), BD (1792), and DD (1795). He was elected fellow of his college in 1782 and joint tutor in 1787, and proctor of the university in 1788. 
Ordained deacon on 26 May 1782 and priest on 10 November 1783, Douglas was made curate of Whittlesford, Cambridgeshire, in 1785. From 1 January 1795 he was master of his college, an office that he held until his death; he twice served as vice-chancellor of the university, in 1795-6 and 1810-11. In 1796 he was presented by the crown, on the recommendation of William Pitt, then MP for the university, to the vicarage of Gedney, Lincolnshire. On 15 June 1797 he married Mary (died 1809), daughter of Anthony Mainwaring, of Shirrall Hall, Staffordshire, and niece of Dr Mainwaring, Lady Margaret professor of divinity. In the same year he was defeated by Thomas Kerrich in the election for principal librarian of the university. 
By that time Douglas lived almost entirely in his lodgings, confined by poor health and the loss of sight in one eye. Despite his infirmities he presided over the installation of the duke of Gloucester as chancellor of the university in 1811, and in his address drew attention to the fact that the duke was the first of the Hanoverian dynasty to have been educated at the university. He also warmly praised the duke's support for the movement to abolish the slave trade. Douglas died in college, after a short illness, on 2 January 1822, aged sixty-three, and was buried in the chapel. He was survived by two of his children, Philip William and Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 7915


Douglas, Robert, Viscount Belhaven (1573/4-1639), politician, was the third son of Malcolm Douglas (died 1585) of Mains, Dunbartonshire, and his wife, Janet, daughter of John Cunninghame of Drumquassle. His father was executed at Edinburgh Cross on 9 February 1585 for his alleged complicity in the plot of the banished lords to assassinate James VI. Having been page of honour to Prince Henry, he later became his master of horse. He was knighted by the king on 7 February 1609. On 12 January 1611 he married at St Mary Woolnoth, London, Nicola, the eldest daughter of Robert Moray of Abercairny. She died in November 1612 giving birth to their only child, who did not survive. 
Following the death of Prince Henry the same month, Sir Robert was appointed one of the king's gentlemen of the bedchamber, and his wealth and standing increased. He had charters of an annual rent out of the lordship of Torthorwald (3 June 1613 and 11 September 1617) and Carlyle (3 June 1613), as well as the lands of Spott and the office of chamberlain (1622) and baillie of the lordship of Dunbar, which were united into the free barony of Spott (24 April 1624). In 1631 he also acquired a charter of annual rent of lands in the Dunbar lordship. Douglas continued as a gentleman of the bedchamber under Charles I and was appointed master of the household. However, Sir Archibald Primrose related to Gilbert Burnet a story which, if true, indicated that Douglas might be ruthless in opposing royal policy. When in the third year of Charles's reign Robert Maxwell, earl of Nithsdale, arrived in Scotland with a commission for the resumption of church lands and tithes, the interested parties agreed in Edinburgh, 'if no other argument did prevail to make the earl of Nithisdale desist, they would fall upon him and all his party in the old Scotish manner, and knock them on the head'. Douglas, who was blind, asked to be placed next to one of the commissioners to 'make sure of' him. Sitting with the earl of Dumfries, 'he was all the while holding him fast', an action he put down, when challenged, to his blindness, but 'he had all the while a poinard in his other hand, with which he had certainly stabbed Dumfrize, if any disorder had happened' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.36-7). Nithsdale and his party were duly intimidated, and temporarily abandoned their mission. 
In the long term Douglas's career was not adversely affected. On 5 July 1631 he was admitted to the Scottish privy council. He was one of the many aspirants who were raised to the Scottish peerage during the period of the king's coronation visit to Scotland, being on 24 June 1633 created Viscount Belhaven in the county of Haddington. That he was a favourite of Charles I is apparent from the report of Sir Robert Pye in 1637, in which it is stated that Belhaven had: 'received out of the exchequer since his majesty's accession, besides his pension of 666'l'. 13's'. 14died per annum and his fee for keeping his majesty's house and park at Richmond, 7000'l'. by virtue of two privy seals, one, dated 5 Aug 1625, being for 2000'l'. for acceptable services done to his majesty, and the other, dated 25 June 1630, for 5000'l'. in consideration of long and acceptable services. ('CSP dom.', '1637', 130)' On 22 September 1638 Belhaven signed the 'king's covenant', a royally approved alternative to the national covenant, in the presence of the Scottish privy council, and was appointed to superintend its subscription in the sheriffdom of Renfrew. Belhaven died at Edinburgh on 12 January 1639 and was buried in the abbey church of Holyrood, where a monument to him was erected by his nephews, Sir Archibald and Sir Robert Douglas. Since Belhaven was childless, the viscountcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 7916


Douglas, Robert (1594-1674), Church of Scotland minister, was the son of George Douglas, in turn the illegitimate son of Sir George Douglas of Lochleven and, according to commonly held contemporary opinion, of Mary, queen of Scots. However, while Robert never denied the rumour of his royal heritage, there is no historical evidence to substantiate it. Little is known of his early life other than that he was educated at the University of St Andrews and that he graduated MA in 1614. Licensed to preach the gospel about 1617, he was ordained to the second charge of Kirkcaldy in 1628 and, soon after, became chaplain to one of the brigades of Scottish auxiliaries sent to aid Gustavus Adolphus in the Thirty Years' War. By all reports Douglas was a man of majestic appearance, great wit, and strength of character which, combined with the rumours of his parentage, caused many of his contemporaries to stand in awe of him. According to the historian Robert Wodrow, Gustavus was so impressed with him that upon Douglas's departure he declared, 'There is a man who, for wisdom and prudence, might be a counsellour to any king in Europe' (Wodrow, 'Analecta', 3.82). 
In 1638 Douglas subscribed the national covenant and was a member of the famous Glasgow general assembly that abjured episcopacy. The following year he was translated to the second charge of St Giles, Edinburgh, and on 24 December 1641 he was removed to the city's north-west quarter, or Tolbooth parish. He was elected moderator of the 1642 general assembly and at its close was chosen moderator of the assembly's revived standing committee, the powerful commission for the public affairs of the kirk. The next year he was named as one of the Scottish commissioners to the assembly of divines at Westminster, but did not serve because of other responsibilities. From January to November 1644 he served as moderator of the presbytery of the Scottish army and as chaplain to the earl of Leven during the army's expedition into England. By the summer of 1646 Douglas's first wife, Margaret Kirkaldy, whom he had married at an unknown date, had died, and on 20 August 1646 he married Margaret Boyd (died 1692). 
During the remainder of the decade Douglas emerged as the kirk's leading minister. He was elected moderator of the general assembly three more times, in 1645, 1647, and 1649, and served as moderator of its commission from 1646 to 1650. During the period known as the theocracy, or kirk regime, following the duke of Hamilton's failed engagement, his sphere of power was greatly expanded as the assembly and its commission exercised an unprecedented influence on the affairs of state. Accordingly, in early 1649 he was translated again to Edinburgh's High Kirk, this time to the prestigious first charge, where he remained until the Restoration. 
In February 1650 Douglas joined with the marquess of Argyll and other leading moderates in kirk and state in calling for renewed negotiations with the exiled Charles II. During the ensuing controversy between the regime's radical and moderate wings he led the moderates in a staunch defence of the king's royal prerogatives. Following the Cromwellian invasion of Scotland in the summer of 1650 he resisted the radicals' desire to purge all royalist malignants and former engagers from the covenanting army, and instead advocated the raising of all fencible men in the nation's defence. From December 1650 to May 1651 he led the commission in passing a number of public resolutions which resulted in parliament's full repeal of the 1646 and 1649 acts of classes and the readmittance of royalists and engagers to the military and public office. On 1 January 1651 he officiated at the coronation of Charles II at Scone, and preached a sermon in which he reminded the king of his covenanted responsibility to establish presbyterianism in all three of his kingdoms. In July he was elected moderator of the infamous 'pretended' general assembly at St Andrews and Dundee, which ratified the commission's public resolutions, and saw the kirk irreparably divided between resolutioners and protesters. 
On 28 August 1651 Douglas and other leading members of the commission and committee of estates were captured at Alyth, near Dundee, by a large troop of English horse. He was transported to England and imprisoned in the Tower of London. During his confinement Douglas continued to have a large influence on the affairs of the national kirk, even going so far as to send his resolutioner colleagues detailed instructions on how to conduct the business of the 1652 general assembly. 
In early April 1653 Douglas was released from the Tower and returned to Edinburgh amid much public jubilation. Immediately upon his arrival in the city he began to preach against sectarianism and religious toleration and persuaded the synod of Lothian to emit a protestation 'against the usurpation of the English' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', vol. 3, appendix 1, 446). He also encouraged the resolutioner ministers to give covert support to the royalist rebellion in the highlands known as Glencairn's rising. For his suspected complicity in this matter he was identified by the commander of the English army in Scotland, Colonel Robert Lilburne, as 'the principall man in their plott' (Firth, 160). With the failure of the rising he changed tack and, together with his colleagues 'the Ministers of Edinburgh', led the national party in pursuing an accommodation with the English authorities. In September 1655 he and his ministerial colleagues reached an accord with the Lord Broghill and the Scottish council wherein the resolutioners agreed to suspend their public prayers for the king. The following year he was instrumental in the party's decision to grant tacit recognition to the English regime's authority in ecclesiastical matters. During the years 1657 and 1659 he directed the activities of the resolutioners' agent, James Sharp, during his struggles with the protesters in London. 
In late 1659 and early 1660 Douglas assisted General Monck, soliciting support for his intervention in England, and using his influence to ensure that Scotland remained calm after the general's march into England. During the remainder of 1660 he also continued to direct Sharp in his ill-fated attempts to secure a presbyterian settlement for the Scottish church. Due to his efforts in effecting the Restoration, in the autumn of 1661 Douglas was offered, via Sharp, a bishopric. Douglas flatly refused, but perceiving Sharp's intention to take the archbishopric of St Andrews, told him, 'take it, and the curse of God with it' (Kilpatrick, 44). Douglas was removed from his charge at St Giles in June 1662 to make way for the new bishop of Edinburgh, and translated to Greyfriars, Edinburgh. On 1 October that year he was deprived from his new charge for refusing to conform to episcopacy. Virtually nothing is known of his activities during the remainder of the 1660s, but in the spring of 1669 Douglas supported the government's plan to settle deposed presbyterian ministers in vacant parishes. He accepted the resultant indulgence and, on 2 September 1669, at the age of seventy-five, was admitted to the parish of Pencaitland in Haddingtonshire, where he continued quietly until his death there in February 1674. He was buried on 6 February at Edinburgh. He was survived by his second wife, Margaret, who died in July 1692. 


@@@@@


doc= 7917


Douglas, Sir Robert, of Glenbervie, sixth baronet (1694-1770), genealogist, was the son of Sir Robert Douglas of Glenbervie ('c'.1662-1748), fourth baronet, and his second wife, Janet Paterson (1655-1750). His father, who inherited the baronetcy from a cousin in 1692, changed the name of his lands at Ardit, Fife, to Glenbervie, the name of the family's original barony in Kincardineshire. Details of Douglas's early life are few. The Glenbervie line was descended from a younger son of the fifth earl of Angus who died at Flodden in 1513. Born a younger son, Robert developed an abiding interest in the genealogy of Scotland's landed families that became his life's work. 
Douglas is best known as the author of the most influential eighteenth-century account of the Scottish peerage. The field was pioneered by George Crawford's peerage of 1716. In 1759 Nathaniel Salmon's 'Short View of the Families of the Scottish Nobility' appeared, noting that 'there has been no good account of the Scottish Peerage for several years past' (Salmon, iv). The 'indefatigable and judicious Douglas' (Almon, ii) spent many years gathering material. He gained access to numerous collections of family papers and public records, and also drew on the work of the antiquary Walter MacFarlane (died 1767). Douglas gave peers a chance to correct or add to the entries on their families, if they could provide 'sufficient Documents in Support of any Alteration made' (Douglas, 'Peerage of Scotland', 1764, v). 'The Peerage of Scotland' was published in Edinburgh in one folio volume in 1764, and was much acclaimed. Dedicated to James Douglas, fourteenth earl of Morton, the work was strongly supported by the Scottish aristocracy. The subscription list numbered 396, including some 56 peers (approximately sixty per cent of the Scottish peerage). Sections on individual families were excerpted and privately printed; that on the Wemyss family, for example, appeared in French in 1765. Having inherited his half-brother's baronetcy in 1764, Douglas reissued the peerage in 1768 with a new title-page denoting the author as 'Sir Robert Douglas of Glenbervie, Bart.' 
Douglas's peerage was generally accepted as authoritative in its day and served as the base for later efforts, particularly John Philp Wood's 'Peerage of Scotland', published in two volumes in 1813. 'Wood's Douglas', as the revision became known, remained the dominant reference work for the rest of the nineteenth century. In the early twentieth century Sir James Balfour Paul edited the massively expanded and revised 'Scots Peerage, Founded on Wood's Edition of Sir Robert Douglas's Peerage of Scotland' (9 vols., 1904-14). As his subtitle indicated, Paul saw himself in direct succession to Douglas and Wood, and retained some of their wording. 
During his lifetime Douglas also gathered much material for a companion work on the Scottish gentry, some of it with the help of James Cummyng (died 1793), herald-painter and Lyon clerk depute. Though announced as forthcoming in 1767, the work was left in manuscript at Douglas's death. The first -- and only -- volume of 'The baronage of Scotland, containing an historical and genealogical account of the gentry of that kingdom' appeared posthumously in 1796, with Douglas's name on the title-page and a notation that it had been completed by 'other hands'. Douglas used the term 'baronage' in the Scottish sense of those who held land in free barony as tenants-in-chief of the crown. The work was well known long before publication, and at least parts of it circulated in manuscript during Sir Robert's lifetime. Indeed, his death notice in the 'Scots Magazine' (1770, 24) described Douglas as 'author of the Peerage and Baronage of Scotland'. 
Douglas married three times. His first wife was Dorothea, daughter of Anthony Chester, attorney-general of Barbados. At some time before 1738 he married Margaret, daughter of Sir James MacDonald of Slate, sixth baronet. Finally, he wed Anne (died 1770), daughter of Alexander Hay of Huntingdon. He died at Edinburgh on 24 April 1770, and was survived by Anne (who died on 17 September) and his only surviving son (from his second marriage) and heir, Alexander Douglas (1738-1812), a prominent physician. 


@@@@@


doc= 7918


Douglas, Sylvester, Baron Glenbervie (1743-1823), politician and diarist, was born in Fechil, Aberdeenshire, on 24 May 1743, the elder and only surviving son of John Douglas (1713/14-1762), landowner, of Whiteriggs, Kincardineshire, and his first wife, Margaret Gordon (died 1747), daughter and coheir of James Gordon of Fechil. His father was descended from a brother of Sir William Douglas of Glenbervie, later earl of Angus, and resided at Fechil after having bought out his wife's two sisters, who were second cousins of George Keith, the Jacobite Earl Marischal. Douglas's pride in his genealogy is displayed in the account of his family which he published in the third edition of 'Lyric Poems' (1806) by his brother-in-law, the poet James Mercer (1734-1804), who had married his only sister, Katherine Douglas. 
Douglas was educated at Foveran School, Aberdeen, where bullying by a young kinsman, so he later alleged, damaged his development. From 1754 his father engaged tutors (Alan Gordon, John Calder, and Alexander Gall) to teach him at home, until in 1757 he entered King's College, Aberdeen, of which he later became rector from 1805 to 1814. He lived at home, his father having moved to Aberdeen, and left college without a degree in 1760. After his father's death he spent some time in Edinburgh, proceeded to London in 1765, and took a medical degree at Leiden in 1766, with a dissertation 'De stimulis'. He travelled to Paris, then toured Italy and progressed to Vienna, from where he visited Hungary; his first publication was to be an account of Tokay wines in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (1773). He returned to London in 1769, switched from medicine to the law, and entered Lincoln's Inn in 1771. When called to the bar in 1776 he had already embarked on reporting the disputed parliamentary elections to the 1774 House of Commons, which were published in four volumes in 1775 and 1777. From 1778 he reported Lord Mansfield's judicial decisions in king's bench, published in 1783. He was elected FSA in 1781 and FRS 1795. In 1779 he published 'Treatise on the Provincial Dialect of Scotland', described as 'by far the most sophisticated example of the Pronouncing Dictionary in eighteenth-century Scotland' (C. Jones, ed., 'The Edinburgh History of the Scots Language', 1997, 289), and reprinted in 1991. 
By 1784 Douglas's election reports were said to earn him $3000 a year. He had also, since his call, practised on the Oxford circuit, and for a decade to 1794 he was king's attorney. Tall and high-nosed with beetling black brows, he was more remarkable for his assimilative capacity and ambition than for any originality. One of the prosecuting counsel for Warren Hastings's impeachment, he moved in whig circles, joining Brooks's Club and the Whig Club in 1789, when he made a momentous marriage on 25 September that year. His bride, Catherine Anne North (1760-1817), to whom he had been introduced by Lord Sheffield, was the eldest daughter of Frederick North, second earl of Guilford (1732-1792), the former premier, and his wife, Anne Speke, and was her father's match for wit and ugliness. They had a son, Frederick Sylvester North Douglas ['see below'], but both of their daughters were stillborn. Douglas's whig friends had encouraged him to look to high legal office during the Regency crisis, but even the solicitor-generalship would have left him much poorer than his professional income, and he was in no hurry to enter parliament, which served him better with its crop of election and canal disputes. 
The death of his father-in-law in 1792 freed Douglas from whig shackles. He joined the phalanx of Portland whigs who went over to Pitt the younger's administration. He took silk on 7 February 1793, and became a bencher of his inn (of which he was to be treasurer in 1799). After complaining loudly of not having been made solicitor-general to the prince of Wales, he was offered a commissionership at Toulon, captured from the French, in September 1793. As this appointment was worth $1500 a year and not pensionable, Douglas declined, preferring an under-secretaryship at the Foreign Office. In January 1794, however, he agreed to become chief secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, and was sworn of the Irish privy council on 20 January and of the British privy council on 4 May. Report had it that having failed to 'bustle himself into the Chancellorship of Ireland', he 'bullied himself into the Secretaryship' (Walpole, 12.124). He sat for St Canice in the Irish parliament. Recalled from Dublin with Viceroy Westmorland in January 1795, he was unable to obtain the sinecure Irish secretaryship of state, being told this was reserved for Irishmen, but he was offered compensations: the first vacant lordship of the Treasury at home, a seat at the Board of Control for India, a pension of $800, half of which was to descend to his son, and a seat in parliament. The latter was for Fowey, where he was by-elected on 14 February 1795 with ministerial backing, having failed in his negotiations elsewhere. His pension, awarded on 21 March 1795, was actually set at $600 for life and the same in survivorship for himself or his son unless he accepted office of $1000 a year (a condition which reflected his stated aspiration to succeed John Robinson as surveyor of woods and forests). He gave his maiden speech on disputed elections on 14 April 1795, but was shouted down when he defended Westmorland's Irish administration on 19 May. In June he took his seat at the Board of Control, but chafed for further employment. Lord Camden would not have him as his chief secretary at Dublin, although the king had suggested it, and he tried to make himself useful to ministers in debate, coming to the defence of Henry Dundas and of Pitt, whose 'Poor Relief Bill' he helped to prepare. In March 1796 he obtained a seat at the Board of Trade. 
Douglas sat for Midhurst on Lord Carrington's interest in the 1796 parliament. In September he was invited to accompany Lord Macartney to the Cape with the promise of succeeding him as governor in eighteen months' time, and of receiving a $2000 pension two years later. He agreed, on condition that he would be raised to the Irish peerage, but his wife disapproved, and her influence on his decisions was paramount. He jobbed with Dundas to place him at the Treasury board instead. In the Commons he served as committee chairman and teller, and was a notable promoter of the Irish union: his speech of 22 April 1799 answering objections to it was published in 1800. When in January 1800 he was again offered the governorship of the Cape, his wife took the blame for his refusal. After talk of a continental mission, he settled for the Cape in October 1800, and was duly created Baron Glenbervie on 30 November. Pitt's resignation spared him the Cape, and from Addington he requested the Home Office. Instead he was appointed joint paymaster-general, in March 1801, to which he would have preferred a return to Dublin or promotion on the Board of Control, and finding himself second fiddle at the pay office, he angled to replace Dundas in charge of Scottish affairs. As his Irish peerage enabled him to sit at Westminster, he was by-elected for Plympton Erle as a government nominee on 6 July 1801; he made himself useful in debate, and was offered the presidency of the Board of Control. This still did not satisfy his ambitions as he would have preferred the vice-presidency of the Board of Trade, presiding in Lord Liverpool's absence, or better still, the speakership. He scorned, as Lord North's son-in-law, Addington's proposal of a diplomatic mission to the United States in December 1801, even though he introduced a bill easing commercial relations with America, and on 24 May 1802 reminded Addington that he had no objection to negotiating a commercial treaty with France. 
In January 1803 Glenbervie, who sat for Hastings as a Treasury nominee in that parliament, succeeded Robinson as surveyor of woods and forests, thereby enabling Addington's brother to replace him at the pay office, although he would have preferred to have held both. He obtained $3000 a year, but not for life, and promotion in the peerage might have compensated him. Ostensibly for health reasons he took little part in debate, and in February 1804 gave up the Board of Trade. On Pitt's return to power that year he was a doubtful supporter, and offered to relinquish office only if compensated. By September he was listed as a reliable government supporter, and in 1805 defended Lord Melville against charges of naval maladministration. He was mortified to lose his surveyorship when the Grenville administration took over in February 1806. He complained that the pension he negotiated was only a fifth of what he had been earning in 1793, and tried to obtain compensatory employment hearing appeals to the privy council. He did not seek re-election to parliament that year. The Portland ministry restored him to the surveyorship of the woods and forests in April 1807, reducing his salary but not sufficiently to allow him to retain his pension: this saved the public $1600 a year. In July 1810, when his office was reformed, he became first of three commissioners. Then, and in 1812, he was criticized as a jobber in the Commons, and Lord Liverpool was reluctant to let him serve in 1814 in view of his pension claims. He travelled on the continent, and his later years were devoted to a vain attempt to guide his son's career. His wife died on 6 February 1817 and his son in 1819. Cared for by his daughter-in-law, he turned to literary pursuits. Nothing came of a projected biography of Lord North, but he managed a translation of part of the Italian poet Fortiguerri's 'Ricciardetto', published in 1822. From 1812 he was a trustee of the British Museum. He died at Cheltenham on 2 May 1823, whereupon his title became extinct. His journals and diaries, published piecemeal in 1910 and 1928, are a record of his aspirations and disappointments, interlaced with scandalous anecdotes, political gossip, and travel notes, which account for their attraction as a period piece. 
His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 7919


Douglas, Thomas (d. c.1684), ejected minister and physician, is of unknown parentage and background. He graduated MA of the University of Edinburgh on 23 May 1655 and by at least 1661 was the rector of St Olave, Silver Street, London. Douglas wrote several tracts including ''Theanthropos', or, The Great Mysterie of Godlines' (1661) in which he described ceremonial in worship as 'derogatory... to the ripe and mature age of the church' (p. 56). By March 1662 he had been ejected from his parish as a result of the Restoration religious settlement and during 1664 he was reported to have preached on three occasions at conventicles in London. He then became involved in a scandal of which the details are unknown and left the country, travelling abroad for some time, and then settling at Padua, where he was admitted to the university on 15 September 1665 and eventually received the degree of MD. Douglas afterwards returned to London where he practised medicine and where, as a widower, he married Elizabeth Juxon, aged twenty-eight, of co. Meath, Ireland, by licence dated 28 October 1678. Records suggest that they lived at St Dunstan-in-the-West, but they later moved to Ireland. Little is known of Douglas's later life except that he died in debt in Ireland in or about 1684 and was survived by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 7920


Douglas, Thomas, fifth earl of Selkirk (1771-1820), colonist and proponent of colonization in North America, was born at St Mary's Isle, Kirkcudbrightshire, Scotland, on 20 June 1771, the youngest of the seven sons of Dunbar Douglas, fourth earl of Selkirk (1722-1799), and his wife, Helen Hamilton (1737/8-1802), the daughter of the Hon. John Hamilton and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Home. His father was an obscure Scottish nobleman of 'true whig' political proclivities who had been educated under Francis Hutcheson at the University of Glasgow and spent most of his life improving his estates. Only around the time of Thomas's birth did he begin to become involved in a prolonged political struggle for the independence of the Scots peerage from English ministerial authority. During the war against America he was an outspoken critic of government conduct. 
Like several of his elder brothers, Thomas was educated at Palgrave, a Unitarian dissenting academy located about 30 miles north of Cambridge and run by the Revd Rochemont Barbauld and his wife, Anna Laetitia. Mrs Barbauld was a minor poet who believed in the unity of moral and intellectual development. Besides English accents, the Douglas boys probably acquired at Palgrave the consumptive tendencies that bedevilled them throughout their adult lives. While Thomas was attending Palgrave, his father and his eldest brother, Basil William Douglas (Lord Daer) ['see under 'London Corresponding Society], increased the intensity of the family campaign not only for the reform of the political privileges enjoyed by the Scottish peerage but for wide-ranging parliamentary reform, which made the family politically and socially unacceptable to most of its contemporaries. 
In 1785 Douglas matriculated at the University of Edinburgh, where he was taught by Dugald Stewart and joined 'the Club', an informal association of students that included Walter Scott, William Clerk, Adam Ferguson, and George Abercromby. He entered the undergraduate Speculative Society of Edinburgh in 1789 and was active at its meetings until he left Edinburgh in early April 1791 for revolutionary Paris with his brother-in-law Sir James Hall. Douglas never returned to student life or obtained a degree. If Edinburgh had provided an undergraduate education, Paris provided graduate-level training. Sir James Hall was a well-known scientist with a wide acquaintance among the French 'philosophes', and Lord Daer was a notorious radical who personally transported Thomas Paine and 'The Rights of Man' to Britain in 1791. Young Douglas was able to mingle -- and even argue informally -- with the likes of Condorcet, Brissot de Warville, and du Chastellet. Paris provided him with several exemplary lessons, including the dangers of totally ignoring reform and the possibility of intellectuals also becoming men of action. Throughout the early 1790s he continued to travel, mainly abroad, although he made an eye-opening tour of the highlands of Scotland in 1792. His brother Lord Daer became increasingly involved in radical political agitation and Scottish nationalism, and died in 1794 in Devon, just before repressive action was taken by the government. 
With the death of Daer, followed over the next few years by the deaths of his other brothers, Douglas moved inexorably closer to the family title: he became Lord Daer himself in 1797 and the fifth earl of Selkirk in May 1799. That same year saw the publication of his first writing in political economy, an anonymous and untitled pamphlet describing the poor relief system of Galloway as lately reformed under his direction. Little is known of his movements between late 1799 and 1801. In Kirkcudbrightshire he worked to settle the sale of the family estate at Baldoon agreed between his father and Lord Galloway in 1793, which brought a substantial sum to the family coffers. Late in 1801, however, the Roman Catholic vicar-general of the highland district, John Chisholm, informed his superiors in Edinburgh that the earl of Selkirk wanted to discuss matters of importance with him, and in February 1802 Selkirk prepared the draft of a memorial to the British government proposing that he take charge of a plan for Irish Catholics to set up a colony in Louisiana. Selkirk's lifelong involvement with North American colonization had begun. 
The British government found the Louisiana proposal -- and a revision proposing to relocate the scheme at the confluence of the waters which fell into Lake Winnipeg and the rivers which drained into Hudson Bay -- unacceptable. Selkirk was prepared to change locations, and subsequently offered Upper Canada or Prince Edward Island as well, but was initially more stubborn about the source of his colonists. Lord Hobart, secretary of state for the colonies, suggested that Selkirk shift from Irish to Scottish families, and the earl eventually took up this idea with enthusiasm. Thus was he manoeuvred into the midst of the highland emigration crisis, which was becoming a major public issue in Scotland. Characteristically, he plunged into emigration mania with little thought for the implications of his actions. He was soon in the highlands, especially the Hebrides, actively recruiting settlers. When in late 1802 a number of books and pamphlets began to appear criticizing the highland operations of unscrupulous promoters of North America, Selkirk was a principal target. Matters became more complicated when his negotiations over land concessions with the British government broke down late in 1802, forcing him to buy land in Prince Edward Island on the open market. The passage of parliamentary legislation regulating the emigrant trade in the spring of 1803 was a godsend for Selkirk, for he was the only promoter whose project seemed likely to survive the stringent new laws. He acquired many new recruits as a result. Ultimately Selkirk sent more than 800 highlanders to Prince Edward Island aboard three ships in the spring of 1803, and, as promised, accompanied the party to the island. It proved his only successful colonization venture. 
Selkirk spent a month on Prince Edward Island organizing his settlement, and then made a tour of the United States and Upper Canada. Here he still had plans of creating a personal estate, at Baldoon on the Chenail Ecarte, near Windsor, which would, he envisaged, breed the finest possible sheep for North America. He left Baldoon in July 1804, just before the arrival of 102 settlers for the estate. They later experienced a malaria epidemic, and the settlement eventually succumbed to the disruptions of the Anglo-American War. After his return to Britain Selkirk began writing the manuscript that would become 'Observations on the Present State of the Highlands of Scotland' (1805), his major contribution to political economy and the debate over emigration. In this work he emphasized the illogical self-interest of the various objections against highland emigration to North America, arguing that highlanders were entitled to move to preserve their language, culture, and manners. The hearty applause he received from the reviewers helped him in December 1806 to gain election to the House of Lords as a representative Scottish peer, loosely associated with the reform whigs. Once elected, he continued the family tradition of arguing for reform of the Scottish peerage, with a pamphlet, 'A Letter to the Peers of Scotland'. He made a sufficient impact upon his contemporaries that the newly installed tory government offered to support him at the general election of 1807. Once re-elected, he shifted his energy to advocating reform of the militia, calling for the establishment of a citizen army under a system of universal military training. On 29 November 1807 he married Jean Wedderburn, the daughter of James Wedderburn (later Wedderburn-Colvile) of Inveresk, a distinguished Scottish lawyer. 
In 1808 Selkirk became involved with the noted explorer Sir Alexander Mackenzie in purchasing stock in the Hudson's Bay Company, a process that continued through 1809, the year he published 'A Letter Addressed to John Cartwright', disavowing parliamentary reform for its encouragement of popular demagogues and the abuses of the American political system. He was now poised on the verge of the great project and adventure of his life: the establishment of a colony at Red River, the first European settlement in what is now western Canada. As with his previous scheme, Selkirk started by establishing a goal that many thought chimerical, surrounded that goal with well-conceived theoretical justifications, and then proceeded to improvise his way towards its realization. He assumed that his title, status, and connections would make it possible to work within the system and gain its support. This turned out not to be the case. 
The Hudson's Bay Company was in serious difficulty by 1809, its shares of stock declining in value on the London market in the face of aggressive competition from its Montreal-based rivals. Selkirk and his merchant brother-in-law Andrew Wedderburn proposed drastic reforms in early 1810, calling initially for profit-sharing with the employees and an orderly inland expansion based upon newly recruited highlanders. A year later Selkirk unveiled his great scheme, by which he would accept a grant of land within the bounds of the company's territories in return for supplying the necessary recruits for expansion. Agents of the North West Company desperately, but unsuccessfully, opposed the grant at the stockholders' meeting and then turned to opposing the recruitment of highlanders in Scotland itself. Nevertheless, the first party, headed by Miles Macdonell, departed in July 1811. 
Because of his place in the House of Lords (he was re-elected as a representative peer in 1812) and his position as lord lieutenant of Kirkcudbright (from 1807), Selkirk found it impossible during wartime to cross the Atlantic to lead his people personally, as he had planned. Instead, he sought to take advantage of the worsening military situation in North America for the benefit of both Red River and the British empire, and he proposed to the secretary of war that he should raise and lead a corps modelled on the Canadian fencible regiment. A stipulation added that the men should settle in Red River at the close of service, and their families should be transported there beforehand at government expense. The regiment received cabinet approval, but was eventually rejected by the commander-in-chief, the duke of York. During the months when its acceptance seemed likely, Selkirk had discussed the possibility of recruiting his regiment from among the tenants of the marquess of Stafford in Sutherland, whose lands were being cleared for sheep. Instead, he was forced to transport to Red River families recruited without his consent, on his own account. 
The Sutherland settlers, sent to North America beginning in the summer of 1813, put additional pressures upon the limited food supply at the settlement. The potential for conflict between the settlers and the Montreal-based traders of the North West Company who dominated the western fur trade was always high, and was exacerbated by the decision of Selkirk's local governor, Miles Macdonell, to issue on 8 January 1814 a proclamation forbidding the export of provisions from the territory without licence. Open warfare resulted from the subsequent decision of the Hudson's Bay Company to establish a large trading presence in the rich Athabasca territory to compete directly with the Montreal traders. Selkirk was helpless to provide much assistance to his beleaguered settlement, and spent his spare time doing research on the fur trade of North America. This work resulted in the publication in 1816 of 'A Sketch of the British Fur Trade in North America', a systematic exposure of the abuse of the aboriginal peoples of the west by the North West Company, based chiefly on Hudson's Bay Company documents. Selkirk's health remained precarious, with increasing signs of consumption. 
After the end of the wars in Europe and America, Selkirk and his family planned to visit America, and departed in September 1815. In the meantime, earlier in the year and unbeknown to Selkirk, the Nor'Westers (agents of the North West Company), with a mixture of threats and promises, convinced many of Selkirk's settlers to move to Upper Canada with the canoe brigades. In the wake of this disaster Miles Macdonell was replaced as governor by Robert Semple. In Montreal, Selkirk was unable to gain any military protection from the government for the Red River settlement, and he decided to recruit a small mobile force of well-armed and well-disciplined men from among the disbanded De Meuron regiment of Swiss mercenaries. With a large party of these mercenaries, Selkirk started west for Fort William (the North West Company's headquarters on the western shore of Lake Superior) in July 1816. 'En route', he learned that Governor Semple and twenty-one settlers had been killed by a party of mixed-race men at Seven Oaks on 19 June 1816. The Selkirk party hastened to Fort William and captured it easily. Selkirk arrested the leading partners, who happened to be present for the annual company meeting, and shipped them east for trial. But he then proceeded to make one of the great blunders of his life: he purchased all the furs held in Fort William from one of the more vulnerable North West Company partners for a pittance, and thus exposed himself to charges of personal profiteering. 
Despite the successful seizure of Fort William, the forces arrayed against Selkirk grew in confidence, particularly when the governments in Canada and in London agreed that none of the various parties to the fur trade war in the west was entitled to claim any moral advantage in the controversy. A considerable pamphlet war, in which Selkirk was worsted, erupted in Montreal, Toronto, and London in late 1816 and 1817. Selkirk's forces recaptured Red River early in 1817, while he wintered at Fort William. He finally arrived at his settlement in the spring of 1817. Meanwhile, the colonial secretary, Lord Bathurst, angrily ordered the governor of Lower Canada, Sir John Sherbrooke, to arrest Selkirk. Sherbrooke had already appointed an investigating commission headed by W. B. Coltman, which arrived at Red River on 1 July 1817. Coltman's approach was to regard all parties involved as equally culpable, a position that Selkirk abhorred, since he regarded his settlers as innocent victims of North West Company aggression. If Selkirk did not succeed in gaining the support of Coltman, whose published report did indeed blame everyone, he did manage to put his settlement back on its feet before heading south on horseback in September 1817. His decision to return east via the United States was prudent, given the hostility to him in many parts of Canada: he arrived back in York, Upper Canada, in January 1818. 
Selkirk spent the next few months embroiled in legal complications in the Canadian courts, his health continually deteriorating through the ensuing period of turmoil. He had remained in remarkably good health during his time in the western outdoors, but this condition did not long survive his return to the east. He was unable to vindicate his position in the courts, and was not re-elected to the House of Lords in 1818 despite government support, ostensibly because of his prolonged absence in America. He returned to Britain late in 1818, and, despite increasing illness, spent long hours at his desk preparing a series of statements outlining his interpretation of events in North America and defending his conduct. Because of his death most of these explanations were not published at the time, and have appeared in print only a century and a half later. Some contemporary breakthrough did occur in his favour when his brother-in-law Sir James Montgomery called successfully in the House of Commons in June 1819 for the tabling of the relevant Colonial Office documents of the Red River settlement. The papers were printed within weeks and made clear that the North West Company had indeed criminally conspired against Selkirk's settlement, as he had always claimed. On doctor's orders he headed for southern Europe in September 1819, and had reached as far as the town of Pau in the foothills of the Pyrenees when the languor of ill health forced him to stop. He died there on 8 April 1820, and was buried in the protestant cemetery at Orthez. Although his efforts to vindicate his name were largely unsuccessful in his lifetime, Selkirk has since become a mythical figure in the development of the Canadian west and a prophet of western agricultural settlement. 


@@@@@


doc= 7921


Douglas, Sir Thomas Monteath (1788-1868), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 25 November 1788 at Hanover, Jamaica, the son of Thomas Monteath. He took the surname Douglas on 18 December 1850, on inheriting the estate of Douglas Support, which had been entailed to the descendants of his paternal grandmother by her sister Margaret, duchess of Douglas. 
Monteath entered the East India Company's service as a cadet in 1805. He was appointed an ensign in the Bengal army on 4 December 1806, and was at once attached to the 35th Bengal infantry, with which he served throughout his long career. He was promoted lieutenant on 9 September 1808. He first saw service under Sir Gabriel Martindall in the campaigns in Bundelkhand in 1809 and 1810, during which Monteath was twice wounded. He next served throughout the Gurkha and Nepalese campaigns in 1814 and 1815 under generals Sir Jasper Nicolls and Sir David Ochterlony. He was present at the battles of the Timli Pass and of Kalanga, and at the assaults of Jountgarh and Srinagar, where he was again wounded. In the marquess of Hastings' campaign against the Pindaris in 1818, the 35th Bengal native infantry was attached to the brigade which was sent to Bikaner in the extreme east of Rajputana, in order to drive the Pindaris back into central India, where Lord Hastings was waiting for them. Douglas was next engaged in the Merwara campaign of 1820, and was promoted captain on 24 May 1821. In 1826 he was present at Viscount Combermere's successful siege of Bharatpur and took part in the assault. On 20 July 1826 Monteath married Mrs Lucinda Florence Whish, at Meerut. He and his wife had at least one daughter, before his wife died at Lucknow in 1837, at the age of thirty-nine. 
Monteath was promoted major on 17 January 1829 and lieutenant-colonel on 2 April 1834, and commanded his regiment throughout the First Anglo-Afghan War of 1838-42. His regiment was one of those which, under Sir Claude Wade, forced the Khyber Pass and co-operated with Sir John Keane's army from Bombay in the storming of Ghazni and the capture of Kabul in 1838. For his services Monteath was made a CB on 20 December 1839 and selected by Shah Shuja as one of the officers to receive his newly formed Durani order. Monteath's regiment was one of those left to garrison Kabul, and remained there until October 1841, when it was ordered with the 13th light infantry to return to India under the command of Sir Robert Sale. Hardly had this brigade started when the Afghans resumed hostilities and Sale had to fight his way to Jalalabad, where he was besieged. In the defence of that city Monteath, who from his rank was second in command, greatly distinguished himself. On 16 April 1842 the garrison was relieved by General Sir George Pollock, and in the campaign which followed Monteath commanded a brigade. For his gallant conduct he was appointed an aide-de-camp to the queen on 4 October 1842. On 7 September 1845 he was appointed colonel of his old regiment, and on 10 March 1846 he was given command of the district of Ambala, with the rank of brigadier. Soon after he left India. 
Douglas was promoted major-general on 20 June 1854, lieutenant-general on 18 March 1856, and general on 9 April 1865. On 28 March 1865 he was made a KCB for his long services during the early years of the century. He died at Stonebyres in Lanarkshire on 18 October 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 7922


William Douglas (d. 1298). This William was still under age in 1256, but had begun to earn his sobriquet of 'le Hardi', 'the Tough', by 1267, when he was severely wounded defending his father's house. Before 1288, when he was a widower, he had married Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Stewart and sister of James Stewart, both stewards of Scotland ['see under 'Stewart family]. In that year, at Tranent in Haddingtonshire, he seized Eleanor de Lorain, the widow of William de Ferrars, who was in Scotland to take sasine of her third of Ferrars's sixth of the lordship of Galloway. Imprisoned in Leeds Castle (Kent) in 1290, Douglas fined for $100 on 18 February 1291 for the marriage of the lady. He was not named in the Great Cause of 1291-2, except that he swore fealty to Edward I as overlord, near Dunbar on 5 July 1291. 
During these two years, when three men of John de Balliol came to Douglas Castle, William threw them into the dungeon, beheaded one, allowed another to die, and (most unwisely) let the third escape to John, now king. Douglas was fined for absence from John's first parliament in February 1293, but attended the August 1293 parliament to answer for his misdeeds. About 1292 he had refused to deliver her terce (or widow's portion) to his mother, and when she successfully took legal action against him, he seized the justiciar's officials who had come from Lanark to Douglas Castle to levy damages of 140 merks and to deliver sasine to the lady, detained them overnight, promised to release them, but still delayed doing so; his excuse was that he needed time to raise the money. 
Whatever fine was imposed on this trouble-maker did not prevent his being placed in command of Berwick Castle in 1295 by the council set over King John to resist Edward I. When the town fell quickly to Edward I's invading army on 30 March 1296, the castle garrison of 200 surrendered for life, limb, lands, and goods, but Douglas was to be attached to Edward's household until the campaign ended. On 10 June 1296 he swore fealty to Edward, the fourth rebelling magnate to do so, and on 28 August his lands were restored. On 24 May 1297, along with other barons, he was told to hear and obey the king's agents in Scotland -- doubtless to join Edward in service in France. The threat of that service may have been the factor which pushed Douglas, before the end of May, into joining the rising of William Wallace by attacking the king's justiciar at Scone. Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick (the future Robert I), to prove his loyalty to the king, ravaged Douglasdale and seized William's wife and children, but soon launched his own rebellion with James Stewart; William Douglas, possibly to save his family, joined them, both in rebelling and in their submission at Irvine on 7 July 1297. 
Surrendered to the English by his allies, Douglas was taken to Berwick, and, 'very wild and very abusive', was imprisoned in Berwick Castle in irons. His gaoler begged the king 'let him not be freed, not for any profit or influence' (Stevenson, 1.205-6), and he was indeed transferred south for safe keeping after the English defeat at the battle of Stirling Bridge in September. From 13 October 1297 he was a prisoner in the Tower of London, attended by one valet, until he died there on 9 November 1298. The story in Barbour's 'Bruce' that Edward I had him poisoned (after spending 4died per day keeping him alive) is to be dismissed; but Edward certainly gave his estate of Douglas to Sir Robert Clifford, perhaps while he was still alive. It was a suitably dismal end of the road for a career of political expediency and physical violence. 
William Douglas's first wife, Elizabeth, was a Stewart, with whom he had a son, James Douglas, later known as the Black Douglas, who showed his father's ruthlessness and determination, but tempered by outstanding military ability; from this James's illegitimate son Archibald came the 'black' Douglases, earls of Douglas until their forfeiture in 1455. From William's son from his second marriage, also Archibald, came the 'red' Douglas line, earls of Angus, dukes of Hamilton. 


@@@@@


doc= 7923


Douglas, Sir William, lord of Liddesdale (c.1310-1353), soldier and magnate, was the eldest son of Sir James Douglas of Lothian, who was a young valet in 1306, and his wife, Joan. He had possession of his heritage in April 1323, when his father was dead, but seems not yet to have been of age; he was knighted between 1323 and 1330. In 1330 he was a warden of the marches, probably in succession to Sir James Douglas, his distant cousin, and this probably kept him in the south of Scotland when the 'disinherited' attacked in 1332. On 25 March 1333, in response to a Scottish incursion into Cumberland (though the two realms were nominally still at peace), Sir Anthony Lucy raided across the Solway, and on his return was attacked by the garrison of Lochmaben, including Douglas of Lothian, as he was known. The Scots were beaten and Douglas was carried off to two years' captivity in Carlisle Castle. When back in Scotland he engaged with Edward Balliol's supporters in Galloway, attended the guardian's parliament at Dairsie in April 1335, and later in the same year served with the guardian (John Randolph, earl of Moray) in fighting the count of Namur, come to help Edward III, driving him into Edinburgh and securing his promise to depart the Scottish war. As Namur's escort made its way to the border it was set upon; the guardian was taken and Douglas was lucky to escape. 
Douglas joined the new guardian, Sir Andrew Murray, in refusing the submission which others made to Edward III, and together they cornered and killed David Strathbogie, titular earl of Atholl, a leading supporter of Edward Balliol, at Culblean in Aberdeenshire on 30 November 1335. For his actions in leading the van, the Lanercost chronicle claims that Douglas was given the earldom of Atholl; but it is more likely that he was only promised the earldom. While Edward III was at Perth, and his brother John was ravaging in the south-west in 1336, the latter was harassed by Douglas, who in 1337 was active with Murray in Fife and elsewhere. In 1338, during a truce granted by Edward III, Douglas visited the court of David II at Chateau Gaillard, whence he came with a hired pirate and five galleys to the Tay in 1339. Perth was blockaded, and Douglas bribed the constable of Cupar Castle to surrender it and join in the assault on Perth, which surrendered on 17 August 1339. In 1341 he took part in the ruse which led to the taking of Edinburgh Castle (bogus supplies were lodged in the entrance, so that the gates could not be closed), and by the return of David II in that year he was outstanding among the military commanders on the patriotic side. He had charters of lands in various parts from Robert the Steward and others, possibly as part of the arrangements to finance his war. 
The king saw Douglas's value and heaped rewards upon him: the earldom of Atholl, lands in Peeblesshire, Eskdale, and Ewesdale, and a charter of the barony of Dalkeith. He is not known to have used the title of Atholl. In February 1342 the Steward claimed Liddesdale, which Douglas opposed as guardian of William Douglas (c.1330-1384), the heir of Archibald Douglas (1294?-1333). Archibald Douglas had in effect seized Liddesdale during wartime disturbance, and the council found for the Steward, to whom William Douglas promptly surrendered Atholl in return for Liddesdale. The whole transaction was clearly fixed to transfer Liddesdale to William's possession, and he is thereafter known as William Douglas of Liddesdale. But his ambitions now took him into more dangerous territory. Jealous of Sir Alexander Ramsay, who had won a high reputation in both war and tournament and was sheriff of Roxburgh, an office Douglas coveted, Douglas seized Ramsay while holding a sheriff court on 20 June 1342, and took him to Hermitage Castle in Liddesdale, where Ramsay died, in effect murdered. Douglas obtained a royal pardon, but the feud won him few friends. 
In 1345 the truces with England came to an end, and when, in 1346, David II invaded England in support of the hard-pressed French king after Crecy, he and Douglas were taken prisoner at Nevilles Cross on 17 October 1346, fortunate not to be among the many dead. Douglas now languished in the Tower of London, but about 1348 became involved in the efforts of David II to secure liberty. By 1350 Edward III had once more conceded the title of king to David, and in November negotiations for the latter's release were under way at York. By the end of the year Douglas was in Scotland, evidently with a proposition that David II be ransomed for $40,000, that he be succeeded, if he died childless, by a younger son of Edward III, and also that the 'disinherited' be restored. Douglas was back in England with some kind of response by March 1351; negotiations were pushed ahead and Douglas was again allowed to go home. Eventually proposals were agreed at Newcastle, and David II returned to Scotland in November 1351 with Douglas to secure their acceptance. This they failed to do in a parliament held at Scone in February-March 1352, though in February 1352 Edward III had given leave to all the Scots in his allegiance to join Douglas in putting down any Scots who rebelled against David over acceptance of the Newcastle terms. 
Once more in prison, Douglas clearly despaired of a general political settlement and of his own freedom; it is not known why his ransom was not negotiated, when that of, for example, the earl of Fife seemed to give little trouble. Instead he entered into an agreement on 17 July 1352, whereby he promised allegiance to Edward, service in war except against Scots, free passage through his lands at all times to invade Scotland, and hostages, and he received in return the assurance of his English-occupied lands as well as release. In August 1353 he was back in Scotland, his treason still unknown, when his cousin William, later first earl of Douglas, the boy who in effect had lost Liddesdale in 1342, killed him in Williamhope, Ettrick Forest. He was buried at Melrose Abbey, Roxburghshire. 
According to Bower, Douglas was killed in revenge for the death of Ramsay; but Fordun's annals, Bower's source for the death, do not make that claim. Nor does Fordun have the verdict passed by Bower, that Douglas was 'an energetic man when fighting, who endured much for the freedom of the kingdom, expert in war, faithful to his promises, a scourge of the English and a wall to the Scots' (Bower, 7.275). His career was also marred by cupidity for baronies and rents. He did not fear the risks of war, and showed considerable tactical skill in siege and battle, but the defeat of Nevilles Cross and consequent imprisonment seem to have altered his priorities and consigned him to the category of shameful Scot. 
Douglas married an Elizabeth of unknown family before 1346. Their daughter, Mary, who was surrendered as a hostage in 1352, eventually returned to Scotland and married, but died without issue. In 1351 William had entailed his lands on the son of his deceased brother John, from whom the lords of Dalkeith and earls of Morton descended. 


@@@@@


doc= 7924


Douglas, William, first earl of Douglas and earl of Mar (c.1330-1384), magnate, was the younger son of Archibald Douglas (1294?-1333), guardian of Scotland in 1332-3, and Beatrice, daughter of Alexander Lindsay, lord of Crawford. 
The deaths in the battle of Halidon Hill both of William's father and of his cousin, William, lord of Douglas, son of Sir James Douglas, made William and his elder brother, John, heirs to the Douglas estates. Their uncle Hugh succeeded to lands which had largely passed into English or Balliol allegiance, but, a former ecclesiastic, he does not seem to have married, and may have designated his nephews as his heirs. The significance of William and John explains their dispatch to France for safety, probably in 1334, when David II also went into exile. For the next thirteen years William remained in France. In 1340 his brother John was in David II's household at Chateau Gaillard in Normandy and it is likely that William also reached adulthood in this Franco-Scottish environment. The death of John in France between 1340 and 1342 made William heir to the Douglas estates. Probably because of his youth, though, he stayed in France in 1341, when King David returned to Scotland. 
While he was in France, William Douglas's rights were eroded by the impact of war on southern Scotland. Active leadership in the Douglas family's border lordships was provided not by Hugh, nicknamed the Dull, but by a distant, junior kinsman, Sir William Douglas of Lothian. Douglas of Lothian recovered the local communities of the forest of Selkirk, Liddesdale, and upper Annandale from English allegiance and in the early 1340s was looking to secure his local leadership by obtaining formal rights in the lands of the senior Douglas line. He sought to achieve this through championing the rights of the young and exiled heir to the Douglas lands, who was also his godson. In 1337 the interests of the young Douglas heirs were represented by their mother, but by 1342 Douglas of Lothian was claiming to act as William's guardian. His aims in this role were predatory. In February 1342 his ward's claim to Liddesdale was rejected, and he subsequently secured the lordship for himself. On 26 May Douglas of Lothian engineered a charter of entail to the Douglas estates. In this Hugh the Dull resigned his rights to Douglasdale, Selkirk Forest, Lauderdale, and other estates, which were granted to his nephew William. The succession of the younger William to these lands was overshadowed by the insertion of Douglas of Lothian as his heir, an act followed by the grant of a number of estates by Hugh to this ambitious kinsman. Although he had become lord of Douglas, William remained in France. The threat to his survival now came not from England, but from his own guardian and heir. The rights of the absentee lord were usurped by his well-backed and aggressive relation. 
The lessons of this situation were not wasted on William, lord of Douglas. He recognized the Scottish defeat at Nevilles Cross in 1346, in which Sir William Douglas, now lord of Liddesdale, was captured, as his own opportunity. In 1347 he returned to Scotland with the aim of recovering his southern lands from English allegiance. He regained his ancestral lordship of Douglas and was received into Edinburgh Castle by his uncle David Lindsay of Crawford. With the support of the Edinburgh burgesses he then moved south. He was welcomed by the men of Selkirk Forest and defeated a force of English garrison troops and men from Teviotdale, forcing some of the latter to return to Scottish allegiance. For the next decade Douglas's activities centred on local warfare against the English and their allies in the marches, leading campaigns in the Merse, Tweeddale, and Galloway. Such war leadership had a political purpose. The submission of the local landowners of these regions combined a return to Scottish allegiance with the acceptance of Douglas's own lordship. When, for example, Dungal MacDowell and the men of Galloway 'surrendered' to him at Cumnock in 1353, this may have marked the extension of Douglas's influence into the province where he held the lands of Buittle, the traditional seat of the lords of Galloway. 
William's achievements in local warfare were complicated by the continued ambitions of his godfather, Sir William Douglas of Liddesdale. Although an English prisoner, Douglas of Liddesdale was allowed increasing liberty to return to Scotland, where he acted as David II's agent in discussions with the Scottish estates for the king's release on English terms. His appearances on William's council, attested by three charters, suggest he was also seeking to maintain influence in the marches. The tension this must have created between William, lord of Douglas, and Douglas of Liddesdale burst into open conflict in 1352. Initially with David II's backing, Douglas of Liddesdale worked against his kinsman with English help, using Liddesdale, Eskdale, and English-held Teviotdale as bases for his efforts. Despite this opposition, William retained his hold on Scottish border communities and a charter of 1353 suggests that Douglas of Liddesdale may have been brought to recognize the former's lordship. In any event, William took advantage of any improvement in relations that resulted to have his rival ambushed and killed in Ettrick Forest in August 1353, ensuring there was no renewal of the conflict. 
William Douglas's success in border warfare and in dealing with Douglas of Liddesdale stemmed from the wide network of allies and adherents he had built up since 1347. With considerable long-term significance for Scotland, he provided a focus of lordship for men in the middle marches. While his hold on Teviotdale families, such as the Kerrs, Rutherfords, and Colvilles, remained insecure into the 1380s, he probably brought families based in the upland areas of the borders, such as the Glendinnings, Gledstones, and Pringles, firmly into Scottish allegiance; by 1355 he was also warden of the east march. Douglas acted as a principal leader for important Lothian families which had been active in resisting the English since 1334, winning support and a commitment to further warfare by grants of land in Lauderdale. The maintenance of this community's backing was crucial to his regional dominance. He arranged three successive marriages between his frequently widowed sister, Eleanor, and influential Lothian knights, and, as a base for his influence, constructed Tantallon Castle in his barony of North Berwick. His position in Lothian was aided by close relations with Patrick Dunbar, earl of March. The two magnates generally co-operated in war and politics and in a truce of 1356 Douglas specifically included Dunbar's lands in his protection. By 1356, though, Douglas was the senior partner. His status in the marches was confirmed by his leadership of Scottish resistance to Edward III's invasion of that year. In the aftermath of the attack Douglas rounded off this period of military success by capturing Hermitage Castle in Liddesdale. 
David II had already recognized Douglas's importance. In 1354 he had confirmed Douglas in all the lands of his uncle Sir James and his father, including many granted previously to Douglas of Liddesdale. David also gave William powers to lead the men of upper Clydesdale, Roxburghshire, Selkirkshire, and Peeblesshire, acknowledging Douglas's military role. When the king was released by the English in 1357, his apparent benevolence went further: in early 1358 William was created earl of Douglas. Although the terms of this creation are unknown, it secured William's status. David also either confirmed or appointed Douglas as justiciar south of Forth, and may have consented to his marriage about 1357 to Margaret, sister and heir of Thomas, earl of Mar. However, this political honeymoon was short-lived. By 1363 David was successfully promoting royal authority, especially in Lothian, winning such men as William Ramsay and Douglas's own cousin Archibald Douglas, known as Archibald the Grim, to his service. At the same time the king displayed hostility towards the earl's allies. Douglas's associate Thomas Stewart, earl of Angus, died in royal custody in 1361 and in early 1363 David seized Mar's castle of Kildrummy. Douglas feared that the settlement between Mar and the king would end his hopes to succeed his brother-in-law, and this may have been one of the reasons for his joining Robert Stewart and Patrick, earl of March, in open rebellion in 1363, claiming to be acting to obtain 'wiser government'. While Stewart quickly came to terms, Douglas stayed in arms for several weeks before being defeated at Lanark. 
David's principal aim after the revolt was to detach Douglas from Stewart. He exacted no major retribution from Douglas, but appears to have associated him with attempts to deny Stewart's rights of succession to the throne. At the same time, though, David also supported rivals for Douglas's lands and influence in the south. These included two of William's kinsmen, Archibald the Grim and James Douglas of Dalkeith, the nephew and under form of law the coheir of Douglas of Liddesdale. William was made to relinquish several estates, among them Dalkeith and Buittle, to James and to accept Archibald as lord of Galloway and leading magnate in the west march. The succession of another royal protege, George Dunbar, as earl of March in 1368 further isolated Douglas in the south. If the period of Anglo-Scottish truce since 1356 removed one threat to his lordship, the king seemed increasingly to represent another. 
On the sudden death of David II in 1371 Earl William displayed his determination to prevent renewed royal pressure. In an assembly at Linlithgow Douglas challenged Robert Stewart's right to the throne. Later accounts suggest Douglas sought to become king himself, but his aims were clearly more limited. Though he may have threatened Robert with the revival of proposals made in the 1350s and 1360s to offer the throne to John of Gaunt, son of Edward III, his likeliest motive was a wish simply to demonstrate his own power, one which may have been directed as much against the Erskines, favourites of the late king, as against David II's successor. In the event, Douglas allowed himself to be bought off by Robert. He was restored to the justiciarship south of Forth, his son James Douglas was married to the new king's daughter, and both Douglases received large sums in cash and annuities. Moreover, while they had ultimately backed away from open defiance of Robert II, in 1371 William had received support from many former adherents of King David, who now needed a new protector. Old allies, such as Douglas's cousins the Lindsays, and new ones, such as the earl of March, worked closely with him in the 1370s. Even the marriage of his daughter, Isabella, to David II's favourite Sir Malcolm Drummond ['see under 'Drummond family], which had probably occurred against Douglas's will during the 1360s, worked in his favour after 1371. 
Drummond, the Lindsays, and his son's marriage made Douglas, who was a constant witness of royal charters, a member of the extended royal family and formed the basis for his alliance with John Stewart, earl of Carrick, the heir to the throne, and the only son of Robert II with interests in the south. Douglas's favoured position helped him to achieve his ambitions, implicit in his marriage, with regard to the earldom of Mar. In July 1377, following the death of Earl Thomas, Douglas travelled north with the king and was made earl of Mar, issuing his first charter from Kildrummy Castle on 27 July. He had obtained Kildrummy from the widowed countess, Margaret Stewart ('b'. 1353x62, died in or before 1418), who received in return a 200 merk annuity for her terce and the right to reside in Tantallon. This arrangement had a personal side. Margaret became William's mistress and probably about 1380 gave birth to his son George Douglas, the future earl of Angus. This relationship also brought William the support of Margaret's own connection. She was the daughter and heir of Douglas's former associate Thomas, earl of Angus, and would prove to be a determined defender of her inheritance and an influential figure in Haddingtonshire. 
Despite his new northern earldom, Earl William's interests continued to focus on the marches. In the 1370s he participated in escalating warfare in the region led by him, his fellow wardens, and lesser men, many of whom were his adherents. In 1380 he was leader of a raid which destroyed Penrith, and before this the renewal of warfare with the English march warden, Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland, over Jedforest resulted in efforts by their respective governments to control their conflict. However, in spite of the active role in border diplomacy played by John Stewart, earl of Carrick, as 'lieutenant on the marches', by the early 1380s Douglas was taking a more aggressive line. This attitude was probably forced by the desire of his southern associates for warfare. Earl William, in particular, was looking beyond Scotland for allies in any conflict and, when the period of formal truce ended in early 1384, he immediately led an attack on Teviotdale which secured the lasting adherence to the Scottish crown of many local landowners. Appropriately, this proved to be the earl's last public act. Before 24 April he had died at Douglas Castle, Lanarkshire, of a fever contracted during the campaign. 
Douglas was not simply a Scottish magnate. The effect of his formative years in France was to give him European interests. In 1356, once he was established in Scotland, he took a retinue of forty knights through England to France, with the aim of travelling as pilgrims, perhaps to Spain. Instead he joined the French army, which met defeat at the battle of Poitiers. Douglas was knighted by Jean II of France before the fight and consulted for his military experience, but escaped the field only through the efforts of his household. He also held lands in France, at St Saens in Normandy, and retained his continental connections throughout his life. He had co-operated with French troops in Scotland in 1355, and in 1378 one of his servants, Andrew Mercer, led a combined Scottish, French, and Castilian fleet in attacks on English shipping, his efforts possibly reflecting an alliance entered by his master (at a time when effective royal leadership was lacking) with kingdoms involved in war with England. As the actions of Douglas's successors would show, such a continental perspective was not beyond the capacity of the Douglas family, and may have prepared the way for the Franco-Scottish campaign of 1385. Earl William certainly impressed foreign contemporaries. The chronicler Jean Froissart clearly retained a good impression of the Douglas castle of Dalkeith, which he visited in 1365, and spoke favourably of both William and his son James. 
Earl William was also aware of his image within Scotland. To enhance his own status during the 1340s and 1350s he consciously appealed to the heroic reputation of his uncle Sir James Douglas. He adopted the red heart in his coat of arms as a reminder of James's expedition to Spain in 1330, carrying Robert I's heart against the Moors. He himself may have intended to repeat his uncle's journey when he crossed to France in 1356 and, despite periods of friction, established close relations with Melrose Abbey, where King Robert's heart was buried on its return to Scotland. These attempts to glory in his predecessor's achievements owed much to William's own difficulties, in particular with Sir William Douglas of Liddesdale. In his leadership and in this image building William sought first to supplant his rival and then to heal the rifts within the Douglas family caused by Douglas of Liddesdale's murder. In 1360 he went so far as to endow masses for his guardian at Melrose Abbey. On his own death in 1384 Melrose was chosen as the site of his tomb. The site symbolized his successful creation of his family's dominance in the central borders and of a dynastic image which his successors exploited to great effect in extending their lordship. 


@@@@@


doc= 7925


Douglas, Sir William, lord of Nithsdale (c.1360-1391), soldier, was the illegitimate son of Archibald Douglas, third earl of Douglas (called Archibald the Grim; 'c'.1320-1400), and an unknown mother. He was presumably prominent as a warrior by September 1384, when, already a knight, he was awarded a royal annuity of a type used to maintain participants in border conflict with England. Scottish chronicle accounts relate some of his early military exploits. They are not possible to date accurately, but probably refer to the Anglo-Scottish warfare of 1384 and 1385, and suggest that Douglas was particularly active in the fighting on the western marches. The details of his triumphs as recorded in the chronicles cannot, however, be relied upon: he is depicted as a conventional chivalric hero with all the requisite attendant qualities. Among these is a comely and statuesque physical appearance, a detail which gives no accurate guidance as to how Sir William looked. The accumulation of enthusiastic chronicle tales regarding his military activities do, none the less, point to his being an effective border warrior. At a time when attacking England was an important plank of royal policy, such prowess had its rewards. His chivalric reputation helped him to secure marriage to Egidia, a daughter of Robert II and allegedly an internationally renowned beauty, by 26 December 1387. On that date Douglas and his new wife were granted the substantial annuity of $300 from the royal customs. By then, too, he had been granted the royal lordship of Nithsdale, which probably brought him little in the way of land, but conferred substantial jurisdictional authority -- rights as warden, sheriff, justiciar, and chamberlain -- within the area between Galloway and Annandale. This area was also, of course, a handy base from which to launch attacks on Cumbria or oppose English incursions into south-west Scotland. 
When Anglo-Scottish war recommenced in 1388, Douglas was again heavily embroiled in the fighting. In June of that year he led a seaborne expedition to Ulster which defeated the local defensive forces, sacked the town of Carlingford, and then raided the Isle of Man before returning to Galloway. The exercise was hugely successful for Douglas and his colleagues. On one level the plundering provided the opportunity for personal profit: the chronicler Walter Bower claims the raiders were greatly enriched by their journey across the Irish Sea. On another level the naval venture was part of a carefully organized and fruitful national offensive in 1388 which involved simultaneous invasions of the western and eastern marches of England, culminating in victory for the Scottish eastern force at the battle of Otterburn. One repercussion of this battle was to propel Douglas into an even more prominent position among the aristocracy of Scotland. The second earl of Douglas died at Otterburn, and Archibald the Grim inherited the title and lands of the earldom. Douglas of Nithsdale was now the son of indisputably the most powerful magnate in southern Scotland. 
Scotland's war effort, as fighting with England continued into 1389, was led by the third earl of Douglas and his political ally Robert Stewart, earl of Fife and Menteith and guardian of Scotland in the name of Robert II. In these circumstances it seems likely that Douglas of Nithsdale continued to fight on the marches, yet no details of his participation are known. We know, however, that a personal animosity rose at about this time between Douglas and Thomas, Lord Clifford. This may well have been connected to grants made by Edward I in 1298 and Edward Balliol in 1333, giving lands belonging to the Douglases to members of the Clifford family. Whether fundamentally territorial or not, the dispute was serious enough for Douglas to seek and receive English safe conducts in June 1390 for a judicial combat to be fought with Clifford. It is thought that the proposed duel was never fought, but Douglas went to France to buy armour for it and while he was there exchanged insults with Clifford, who accused him of cowardice. 
The hostility between the two men was ultimately to have fatal consequences for Douglas when he was on crusade in the Baltic in 1391. He was in Bruges in December 1390, accompanied by other Scottish knights who had been his companions in the recent Anglo-Scottish conflict, and they were intending to be in Danzig by Easter 1391. Douglas probably took part in the summer 'Reise' of the Teutonic knights, although Scottish chronicle accounts of his prominence in the fighting and of his status among the assembled chivalry cannot be relied upon. In any case it is entirely fitting that a figure whose career was founded on martial activity should have taken the well-worn path to the northern crusades when opportunities for fighting had dried up at home. Indeed, a fifteenth-century chronicler suggests that Douglas was a frequent crusader in the Baltic. The crusade of 1391 was to be his last. Some time between June and August of that year, according to the most reliable account, the Westminster chronicle, he and his party attempted to attend mass in Konigsberg, but were turned away on the grounds of their adherence to Clement VII, the Avignon pope. Douglas blamed a group of English crusading knights for this rebuff. While the group was certainly associated with Clifford, he himself may not have been present. The Scots allegedly ambushed their English adversaries outside the church, and in the ensuing struggle Douglas was killed. The communal aristocratic ethos of the crusade had clearly been unable on this occasion to overcome personal and national animosities. Nor were the Scots and English alone in this, for other crusaders are recorded as involving themselves in the dispute. All were apparently supportive of the English cause, save only the French contingent. 


@@@@@


doc= 7926


Douglas, William, second earl of Angus (c.1398-1437), magnate, was the only son of George Douglas, first earl of Angus, lord of Liddesdale and Jedburgh (1378x80?-1403?), and of Mary Stewart (died in or after 1458), daughter of Robert III. He succeeded his father between 1402 and 1404. His interests were safeguarded by his grandmother, Margaret Stewart, countess of Angus, and her half-brother, Sir William Sinclair of Herdmanston. Although they secured Angus's rights to the earldom and to the lordships of Abernethy and Bunkle, his claims to the share of the Douglas estates held by his father were opposed. Liddesdale and Jedburgh were eventually obtained, but other lesser estates to which he had a claim were granted to rival kinsmen by Archibald, fourth earl of Douglas (died 1424). The dominance of the Black Douglas earl limited Angus's influence in southern Scotland. His marriage about 1415 to Margaret, daughter of William Hay of Yester, represented an attempt to strengthen his following in the south-east, and may also, since Hay was a very prominent retainer of the earl of Douglas, have been intended to promote a reconciliation between the two earls. But the potential rapprochement came to nothing, and from 1420 Angus was a rival to his Douglas cousins. 
The turning point of Angus's career occurred in 1424 with the return of his uncle, James I, who included him in the group of nobles whom he knighted at his coronation in May that year. Angus was to be one of the king's closest allies among the nobility and the marriage of his sister Elizabeth to Alexander Forbes (died 1448), a trusted royal councillor, reinforced his links with the royal circle. He backed the king's attacks on the house of Albany in 1425 and the lord of the Isles in 1429, and his castle of Tantallon, Haddingtonshire, was used as a gaol for two royal captives, the duchess of Albany and Alexander MacDonald of the Isles. The rewards of this service came in the south. Angus's efforts to replace the fourth earl of Douglas as the principal magnate in the region after the latter's death in 1424 were aided by the king, who secured Angus's appointment as protector of Coldingham Priory in 1428 and made him warden of the east and middle marches. This promotion brought him into conflict with George Dunbar, earl of March (died 1456). Friction between Angus and March, combined with Anglo-Scottish tension, persuaded James I to intervene. In 1434 Angus seized March's castle at Dunbar and became the king's lieutenant on the border; he defeated an English attempt to aid the Dunbars at Piperdean, near Cockburnspath, in 1435. The bond between Angus and James I was evident in the crisis which followed the king's murder on 21 February 1437. Angus's capture of the earl of Atholl was the crucial victory of the king's adherents. The death of Angus himself, in October 1437, deprived the queen mother of the earl's support when she and his sons, James Douglas (who became third earl of Angus) and George, were eclipsed by the Black Douglases. 


@@@@@


doc= 7927


Douglas, William, sixth earl of Douglas, and duke of Touraine in the French nobility (1422/3-1440), magnate, was the elder son of Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Douglas (c.1391-1439), and Euphemia Graham (died 1468/9), sister of Malise Graham, earl of Menteith (died 1490). Although he survived only into his eighteenth year, his career marked a crisis in the history of the Black Douglas family. His earliest appearance was in 1430 when he was knighted, along with other nobles 'of tender years', by James I at the baptism of the king's twin sons. Despite his youth, he may have assumed a political role during the lieutenancy of his father for the young James II between 1437 and 1439. His younger brother, David, acted as an auditor in this period, and William's marriage to Jean Lindsay (died 1482x4), daughter of David Lindsay, third earl of Crawford (died 1446), about 1437 forged an alliance with another major magnate house. 
When Douglas succeeded his father in June 1439 he was still a minor. His tenure of the earldom of Douglas would last just seventeen months and was overshadowed by its violent end. Contemporary accounts are uninformative, but later accounts provide circumstantial details of the so-called Black Dinner, the feast in Edinburgh Castle on 24 November 1440 to which the young earl and his even younger brother were lured. The placing of a bull's head on the table by Sir William Crichton was the signal for their being seized, given the barest formality of a trial, and beheaded. The background to this act is uncertain. The near contemporary Auchinleck chronicle restricts itself to the bald facts, while later chroniclers indulge in sermons on the pride of youth. It is clear, though, that Douglas fell victim to the instability of minority politics. The men held responsible for his death were the chancellor, Sir William Crichton, and Sir Alexander Livingston, the custodian of the king. The power of these men was based on the accumulation of royal offices, and Douglas may have appeared to threaten this by reclaiming the lieutenancy of his father on the basis of his descent from Robert III. He was certainly beginning to exercise his rights as the greatest magnate in the kingdom, but this threatened the power of his great-uncle James Douglas of Balvenie, earl of Douglas and of Avondale, rather than that of Livingston and Crichton. 
Avondale was the senior kinsman of the sixth earl and had been a major figure in royal and Black Douglas circles for decades. Following the fifth earl's death it would have been Avondale who stepped in to act as tutor, or guardian, for William. In September 1439, when William's signet was appended to the agreement between the queen mother and Livingston, Avondale represented the family on the council. The prospect of relinquishing his power to William would not have been welcome, especially as there may have been tension between the two. This is suggested by the appearance of Malcolm Fleming of Biggar (who was arrested with William and executed a day later) as William's 'speciall counsellor' in November 1440. Avondale had killed Fleming's father in 1406 and was a local rival of the family in Lanarkshire. William's association with Fleming may have been a further reason why Avondale encouraged or accepted the attack on the earl, to which, as justiciar south of Forth, Avondale could have given an appearance of legality. 
The involvement of Avondale and Crichton in the Black Dinner indicates flaws in the Black Douglas support by 1440. Both men had strong and well-established ties to the family, but both were prepared to see the young earl executed in pursuit of their interests. These interests were not just those of minor baronial families. Service to James I and the Douglases had allowed Crichton and Avondale to exercise power on a large scale, and in 1440 they were not prepared to withdraw into the following of a magnate lieutenant. William Douglas's death was part of the changing structure of the Scottish nobility. Avondale was certainly the main beneficiary of his kinsman's death, inheriting the earldom and the bulk of the Douglas lands. William's grandmother Margaret Stewart and sister, Margaret, retained the rights to Galloway and Bothwell, and Annandale, where Crichton had his own interests, was annexed to the crown. While the new earls of Douglas -- Avondale and his sons -- dominated Scottish politics after 1440, the Black Dinner left a powerful legacy of mistrust which affected their affairs and support. 


@@@@@


doc= 7928


Douglas, William, eighth earl of Douglas and second earl of Avondale (1424/5-1452), magnate, was the eldest son of James Douglas, seventh earl of Douglas and first earl of Avondale, known as the Gross, and Beatrix Sinclair, daughter of Henry, earl of Orkney. An adult when he succeeded his father in 1443, William must have been born within a year of his parents' marriage in early 1424. He is first recorded at the baptismal celebrations for the twin sons of King James I on 16 October 1430 at Holyrood Abbey. As a mark of favour to William's father, a trusted royal councillor, the young William was knighted by the king alongside the two princes and a number of other noble children, including his cousin and namesake, the future sixth earl of Douglas. 
It was the violent death of this other William Douglas at the so-called 'Black Dinner' on 24 November 1440 which led to the succession of James Douglas to the earldom of Douglas and to the bulk of the family lands which passed by entail to the heirs male. William was heir to the greatest magnate inheritance in Scotland but his father sought to add to his fortune by arranging the marriage of his son and Margaret Douglas, the Fair Maid of Galloway ('c'.1426- 'c'.1476). Margaret was the sister of the sixth earl and heir to the lordship of Galloway. The match between these cousins was intended to reunite the Black Douglas estates, but Earl James's attempts to achieve it antagonized many other councillors of the young King James II. The earl's leading enemies were the chancellor, William, Lord Crichton, and his family, but there were many other Scottish magnates who were reluctant to see the power of the Black Douglases reconstituted and, when Earl James died in March 1443, his son was still unmarried. 
William Douglas succeeded his father in extensive lands, titles, and offices, and also in his readiness to dispense with legalities. Along with the earldom of Douglas, William also inherited his father's lands in Clydesdale and Lothian which had been united to form the earldom of Avondale in 1437. The lord of castles like Abercorn, Bothwell, Douglas, and Newark in Ettrick Forest, Earl William was the greatest magnate in southern Scotland and assumed his father's offices of justiciar, sheriff of Lanark, and warden in the west and middle marches towards England. The new earl may well have spent the spring and summer of 1443 securing this southern inheritance and building new alliances with those on the royal council and especially the Livingston family, which had custody of the young king. With the backing of these allies Douglas sought to defeat those who remained opposed to his marriage and the other interests of his house. 
On 22 August 1443 Douglas led a large army against the lands of the Crichtons where they bordered his own in Linlithgowshire. The earl presented his attack as more than a private feud. The young king was in his force and Douglas flew the royal banner, demanding that his opponents surrender to the crown. Control of the king was further exploited in the aftermath of military victory. In November the Crichtons were summoned to parliament to answer for their resistance and, on their failure to appear, were stripped of their offices. Although he had not finally defeated the Crichtons, during late 1443 Douglas had successfully allied physical force and legal justification to achieve private goals. It was an approach to politics which would characterize the rest of his career. Earl William's ascendancy was evident in 1444. He abandoned his father's support of the conciliar movement in the church, and thereby removed the last obstacle to his marriage, receiving a papal dispensation (dated 24 July) for a match which reunited Galloway with the rest of the Douglas lands. Elsewhere, too, Earl William secured his family's interests where his father had failed, imposing his will in local disputes in Lothian and Berwickshire. 
These actions demonstrated Douglas's predominance in southern Scotland but by the end of the year the earl was looking to extend his family's influence in the north of the kingdom. In alliance with a group which included David Lindsay, earl of Crawford, and the Livingstons, Douglas participated in a series of attacks on their enemies, a group headed by Queen Joan, Bishop Kennedy of St Andrews, and Crichton. This sporadic conflict lasted from late 1444 until the following summer and ended with the eclipse of Crichton and the death of Queen Joan while under siege in Dunbar Castle. Even before victory had been secured Douglas and his allies held a parliament to secure their gains. Two of Douglas's brothers, Archibald and Hugh, were created earls of Moray and Ormond. These new Douglas earldoms lay in the north, and to ensure his brothers' ability to enjoy their estates, Douglas sought friends in the north. Initially these included Alexander Gordon, earl of Huntly. However, Huntly soon clashed with Douglas's other northern ally, the earl of Crawford, and it may have been in March 1446 that Douglas entered into a band, or private alliance, with Crawford and Alexander, earl of Ross and lord of the Isles. Designed to secure Douglas lands in the north, this agreement would ultimately prove fatal to Earl William. 
However, in the later 1440s the position of Douglas and his brothers seemed secure. Control of king and council was largely left to the Livingstons, while Douglas sought to increase his status further. During 1447 Earl William secured direct control of the lordship of Galloway. His wife's grandmother, Margaret Stewart, the widow of the fourth earl of Douglas, had been given custody of Galloway for life but Douglas forced her to spend her last years in the priory of Lincluden near Dumfries, and took possession (illegally) of her principal castle of Threave. In the late 1440s Douglas also followed the example of his forebears in attitudes to European politics. The ascendancy of Douglas over the king's council from late 1444 coincided with the adoption of a closer relationship with Charles VII of France. Three sisters of James II (and of the dauphin's wife, Margaret) were sent to the continent to become pawns in French diplomatic ventures, and in 1448 the alliance with France was formally renewed. During the negotiations with France, Douglas put forward a claim to a share of the duchy of Touraine on behalf of the recently dispossessed Margaret Stewart. His claim was politely denied, but Douglas still sought fame abroad. In the border war with England which broke out in 1448 Douglas and his brothers took a leading role, defending the Scottish marches and raiding into northern England. 
Such echoing of traditional Douglas roles had a serious domestic purpose. For all Earl William's political successes since 1443, his lordship rested on shallower roots than that of his predecessors. The Black Dinner had brought his family to power but had weakened the cohesion of the traditional Douglas following. The murder of James Auchinleck by Richard Colville in 1449, which Earl William punished, was the killing of one Douglas adherent by another. When, during 1448, the earl reissued a code of march law established by his predecessors, he was not just reorganizing border defence. He was also emphasizing the link between his lordship in the marches and that of earlier Douglas magnates. Earl William had other problems. In 1447 his brother James Douglas was designated as his heir and was consistently referred to as master of Douglas. An exceptional instance of such a title being held by a magnate's brother, this may in part have reflected problems in the earl's marriage, which had produced no offspring in nearly a decade. Without children from this match the earl's hold on Galloway remained uncertain, which in turn emphasized his difficulties with local men who resented his treatment of Margaret Stewart. 
By 1449 Earl William had established his branch of the Douglas family at the head of Scottish political society. However, flaws remained in this strength and, with hindsight, the emergence of James II as an active force with his destruction of his Livingston keepers in September 1449 heralded a new political atmosphere. There was no obvious sign of impending conflict between crown and Douglases, nor of personal animus between the two young men at the head of Scottish politics. Earl William had aided and benefited from the fall of the Livingstons. In January 1450 he received royal charters confirming his hold on Galloway and Ettrick Forest, and he joined a number of major magnates in giving loans to the king. Like others, Douglas was seeking to secure his position with the king while maintaining his family's gains since 1437. The only indication of the earl's anxiety was his decision to leave Scotland on a pilgrimage to Rome in October 1450. Yet his journey had other purposes. Douglas travelled with an impressive entourage via the courts of Burgundy, France, and England. As well as winning papal blessings, William may have been offering his services at a moment of crisis in the Anglo-French conflict. 
However, in his absence the king launched an assault on the estates of the pilgrim. In December 1450 James II travelled to Melrose, in the middle of Douglas's border lordships, and called together the earl's local enemies. Early the next year the king went south-west to Annandale and Galloway, this time using force to obtain the submission of the earl's tenants. His aim was not the destruction of Douglas power but the establishment of control over lands to which Douglas's rights were dubious. James II was able to win over a significant number of the earl's allies and may have expected Douglas to accept his losses. When Earl William returned to Scotland in April 1451, though, it was to resist not submit. He secured English support and may have been acclaimed lieutenant by his followers to justify his opposition to the king. During May and early June Douglas clearly forced the king to recognize his failure. In a parliament in late June Douglas resigned his lands to receive a fresh grant and a remission for his actions. Only the lands of Wigtown and of Stewarton in Ayrshire were withheld by James. In October these too were restored to the earl. 
Douglas's ability to withstand royal attack was testament to his power. It was also a product of the king's wider problems. During late 1451 royal actions had driven two of the major northern magnates, the earls of Crawford and Ross, to take up arms. In this crisis, the king turned to Douglas and his brothers, Moray, Ormond, and John, lord of Balvenie, to provide support in the north. At a series of meetings during the winter of 1451-2, the king sought Douglas's aid in an increasingly tense atmosphere. By late February Douglas would only attend the king's council at Stirling with a written safe conduct. When the two men met in Stirling Castle on 22 February 1452 Douglas once again refused to take action which would break his band with Ross and Crawford. In response the king replied that if Douglas would not break the band he would, and stabbed William in the neck. The wounded earl was then killed by others at the council, among them his own former adherents. 
Earl William's killing precipitated a conflict which the king was fortunate to survive. Ultimately he failed for a second time to defeat the Douglases and was forced to recognize William's brother James Douglas as heir to all the dead earl's lands and as the husband of his widow. Subsequently the death of Douglas became recognized as a defining moment in crown-magnate relations in fifteenth-century Scotland. To sixteenth-century historians like Hector Boece and Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie, Douglas epitomized the overmighty subject, arrogant, lawless, and heedless of royal justice. Stories of the earl's tyrannous treatment of his own vassals justified the king's killing of a protected guest, but may also derive from Douglas's own difficulties in maintaining the support of his own followers after the disruption of his family's lordship between 1424 and 1449. In his short career, Douglas represented the power, ambition, and independence of the greatest Scottish magnate dynasty at its fullest extent. 


@@@@@


doc= 7929


Douglas, William, ninth earl of Angus (1532/3-1591), magnate, was the son of Archibald Douglas of Glenbervie and Agnes Keith, daughter of William, second Earl Marischal. In 1552 he married Egidia, daughter of Robert Graham of Morphie; they had thirteen children -- nine sons and four daughters. His paternal grandfather having been a son of Archibald, fifth earl of Angus, William Douglas succeeded to the earldom under an entail on 25 December 1588 following the death of Archibald, the eighth earl, on 4 August, after his right had been contested in the court of session by James VI. The king claimed the title through his grandmother Margaret, countess of Lennox, a daughter of Archibald, the sixth earl, whereas Douglas of Glenbervie based his claim on Archibald's will, drafted in 1547, and on Countess Margaret's renunciation of her claims in 1565. Although Douglas was awarded the title, under pressure from the king he had to pay James 35,000 merks and also relinquish his lands at Braidwood to the crown. James immediately conferred Braidwood on his chancellor, John Maitland of Thirlestane, who (perhaps significantly) was a prominent member of the court which had decided in the new earl's favour. 
Shortly before he succeeded to the earldom, Douglas had begun to be actively involved in national affairs. In 1585, in association with Maitland, he presented a petition to the king seeking to revive the system whereby lairds attended parliament and took part in its business. In 1589 he took part in the suppression of the rising by the sixth earl of Huntly and his fellow 'northern earls', serving as chairman of the jury at the trial of the earl of Bothwell, a leading insurgent. Shortly afterwards he was a member of the body responsible for the government of Scotland while the king was in Scandinavia for his marriage to Anne of Denmark, and on 7 May 1590 he carried the sword at the new queen's coronation. But overall his career was uneventful, and he has been justly described as 'one of the most pacific of all the earls' (Lee, 222). Angus died on 1 July 1591, in his fifty-ninth year, at Glenbervie, where he was also buried. His widow was still living in 1606. His eldest son, William Douglas, succeeded as tenth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 7930


Douglas, William, sixth earl of Morton (c.1540-1606), magnate, was the son of Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven (killed at the battle of Pinkie in 1547) and Lady Margaret Erskine ['see under 'James V, mistresses and children of], daughter of John, fifth Lord Erskine. His parents, who were married in 1527, had two other sons, Robert (earl of Buchan in right of his wife, Christian Stewart) and George, and three daughters, Euphemia, Janet, and Katherine. In 1531 Margaret Erskine bore a son to James V, Lord James Stewart (1531/2-1570), later earl of Moray and regent of Scotland, a half-brother whom William Douglas thus shared with Mary, queen of Scots. William spent some time in France during his minority after his father's death, when his mother managed his affairs. His 'Memoir', an extended testament-cum-memoir written by him in 1568 during an illness, throws light on his participation in and attitude to the events of the 1550s and 1560s (Morton muniments, GD 150/2234). In the 1550s he identified with the movement for religious reform and developed an admiration for some of its leaders, including both his half-brother James and John Knox, whose preaching impressed him during the reformer's visit to Scotland in 1555-6. His marriage to Lady Agnes Leslie, eldest daughter of George, fourth earl of Rothes (contract 19 August 1545, revised 1554), strengthened his association with the protestant party; the Leslies were ringleaders in the assassination of Cardinal David Beaton in 1546. 
In 1559-60 Douglas joined the army of the protestant lords of the congregation in their military confrontation with the French-backed forces of the regent, Mary of Guise, which resulted in the withdrawal of the French from Scotland and the treaty of Edinburgh between France and Scotland's new ally, England. Only the prospect of victory for protestantism, he admitted, enabled him to accept Scotland's political alignment with England, the former enemy: 'quhilk wes a begynning of the reconciliatioun amang us, and that the hairtis of thaim quhilkis wer in malice aganis thaim [the English] throw want of thair predecessouris in battaill wes begun to be slokinit [quenched] as I knaw be experience in my selff for the want of my fader at the feild of Pinky, quhilk wes the first occasioun that I did remit the sam with my hairt. (Douglas, fol. 14'r')' He was present at the parliament of August 1560 which confirmed the reformation settlement. 
In Mary's personal reign (1561-7) Douglas was a staunch supporter of the protestant establishment. During the brief uprising of 1565 against the queen's marriage to Henry, Lord Darnley, known as the chaseabout raid, Douglas was commanded to hand over Lochleven Castle, with the munitions stored there by Moray, one of the leaders, but he was allowed to retain it on a plea of illness and on promising to surrender it on twenty-four hours' notice if required. He shared the resentment of others towards the queen's Italian secretary, David Riccio, whose growing influence, they claimed, prevented their direct access to the queen. Douglas himself says that he approached Riccio with an offer of $1000 if the secretary would 'stay the earl of Moray's forfaltour' for his part in the chaseabout raid, 'bot his answer wes twenty thowsand' (Douglas, fol. 20'v'). He was denounced as one of those implicated in the murder of Riccio on 9 March 1566, although he maintained that he never intended that the secretary should be dealt with other than by process of law. After the event he retired to Argyll 'ane whill in quiet maner' (ibid.). He rejoiced at the birth of Prince James on 19 June 1566 and thereafter kept a watchful eye on the prince's interests in the light of his parents' estrangement and the queen's growing attachment to the earl of Bothwell, whom Douglas believed had 'crually put doun his [the prince's] fader in ane maist abominabill maner in Edinburt' (ibid., fol. 21'r') in February 1567. He was gratified when the prince was placed in the guardianship of his own uncle and his wife, the earl and countess of Mar, in Stirling Castle. He was periodically associated with Mar in his keepership of that castle. 
After Mary's marriage to Bothwell in May 1567 Douglas joined the confederate lords who pledged themselves to protect the prince and avenge his father's murder. He was far from happy, however, when after the queen's surrender to the lords at Carberry in June 1567 they chose to detain her in his own castle of Lochleven, where on 24 July she was compelled to demit the crown. Four days later Douglas formally protested that her demission had taken place in his absence, 'in respect thereof [he] protestit that her majestie suld not be comptit heirefter as captive or in prisoun with hym. Quhilk her majestie allowit and admittit' (Thomson, Macdonald, and Innes, 1.26-7). 'I desirit', he recorded, 'that [the] nobilitie wald haiff relevit me off my burden, quhilk I culd nott get' (Douglas, fol. 22'r'). During her ten-month stay at Lochleven Mary maintained friendly relations with Douglas and members of his family, including his wife and his mother, and with his brother George and a young orphaned relative, who between them contrived her escape on 2 May 1568. He himself was never charged with failure of his trust as custodian. At the battle of Langside, near Glasgow, on 13 May 1568 Douglas led the rearguard of the king's forces and he later accompanied Moray to York for the investigation into the so-called Casket Letters, which allegedly incriminated Mary in Darnley's murder. On the collapse of the northern rising in 1569 the earl of Northumberland took refuge in Scotland, only to be imprisoned at Lochleven. His extradition to England to stand trial on a charge of treason was delayed while Douglas haggled with the English government for substantial remuneration; they eventually guaranteed him $2000. 
On the assassination of Moray in January 1570 Douglas and his brother Robert, as the regent's nearest of kin, called for the summary execution of the killer, James Hamilton of Bothwelhaugh, and in 1575, when Lord John Hamilton was reported to be intending to bring the murderer home, Douglas raised 1200 men to confront them. As a result of his attack on Lord John Hamilton while he was travelling through Fife both Douglas and Hamilton were called before the privy council to give assurances for their good behaviour. Douglas also quarrelled with Lord Ruthven over the earldom of Buchan, of which he had received a crown gift of ward on his brother Robert's death in 1580, a gift contested by Ruthven. William was closely associated with his cousin James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, who became regent in 1572, although Morton reprimanded him for his vendetta against the Hamiltons, which threatened to wreck the regent's attempts at reconciliation with potential opponents. When Morton lost the regency in 1578, he went to his cousin's castle of Lochleven, where Douglas kept him informed of political movements that might help Morton to recover power; in 1580 Douglas co-operated with his kinsman the earl of Mar in a final attempt to build up support for Morton. Douglas served as a commissioner for musters in 1574, commissioner for the laws in 1578, when he also took part in musters for the pacification of the borders, and was sheriff principal of Banff in 1584. He was knighted before 1581. 
After Morton's arrest in 1580 on a charge of complicity in Darnley's murder Douglas with others of the regent's party was summoned before the privy council to answer questions, and was ordered to ward himself in the north on penalty of $10,000. His son participated in the attempt of the so-called Ruthven raiders on 22 August 1582 to remove King James from the influence of Esme Stewart, first duke of Lennox. Douglas, released from detention on security of $20,000, but still suspected of alliance with the ultra-protestant Ruthven raiders, went into exile in France. From there he co-operated with those in Scotland who plotted the downfall of the earl of Arran in October 1585, and he returned to Scotland in 1586. In 1587 he was made a commissioner for executing acts against the Jesuits. In 1588, on the death of Archibald Douglas, eighth earl of Angus, who had acquired the earldom of Morton in 1585 following the revocation of a grant of the title made to Lord Maxwell in 1581, William Douglas succeeded as earl under the will of the former regent Morton. Strictly speaking this made him sixth earl of Morton, but the continued claim of Lord Maxwell caused personal animosity between the two men. In 1592 Maxwell's title was revived, with the ambiguous proviso that this should in no way prejudice Douglas's rights; the claimants came to blows over precedence in 1593. Eventually in 1620 the tenth Lord Maxwell was made earl of Nithsdale. 
Douglas's 'Memoir' and surviving letters give the impression of a serious, almost introspective personality. For much of his life he suffered from recurrent bouts of illness, which required a constant supply of medicines, the services of a nurse, and the use of a litter when travelling around his estates, which after he became earl of Morton in 1588 were scattered over ten sheriffdoms, from Angus (Forfarshire) in the north-east to Roxburghshire in the borders. His wife, Agnes, with whom he enjoyed a married life of over fifty years, survived him. She played an active part in the running of these estates, going regularly to Auchterhouse in Angus for that purpose, from where she wrote to her husband about her activities. They had four sons, all of whom predeceased their father, and seven daughters. The earl died on 27 September 1606 and was succeeded in the earldom and estates by his grandson William Douglas (1582-1648). 


@@@@@


doc= 7931


Douglas, William, tenth earl of Angus (c.1554-1611), magnate, was the eldest son of William Douglas, ninth earl of Angus (d. 1591), and his wife, Egidia or Giles Graham (died in or after 1606), daughter of Robert Graham of Morphie. He studied at St Andrews University and then served his great-uncle James Douglas, earl of Morton, before going to France in 1577. While there he was converted to Roman Catholicism, to the annoyance of his protestant family. In 1585 (contract dated 12 April) he married Elizabeth Oliphant, eldest daughter of Laurence, Lord Oliphant, a supporter of Queen Mary in the Scottish civil war and a Catholic sympathizer. Douglas was ordered to leave the country on account of his religion in September 1589. He took legal instruments the following month affirming that he had gone to Aberdeen in obedience to this instruction, but found the sailing season over and was therefore obliged to remain at home. In May 1591 he was again ordered into exile, but the death of his father on 1 July that year prevented him from complying. 
Having succeeded to the earldom, Angus took a notable part in public life, opposing James VI's wish to promote his favourite the duke of Lennox to prominence in the parliament of 1592. In the same year he was employed as king's lieutenant in the north, where he was successful in healing the feud between the earls of Atholl and Huntly which had arisen following the latter's murder of the earl of Moray. At the end of that year he was accused of involvement in the 'Spanish blanks' affair, a putative conspiracy among Huntly and his Catholic associates, who were alleged to be encouraging Spanish intervention in Scotland in furtherance of the Catholic cause. On 3 January 1593 Angus was imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, but on 13 February he escaped with the help of his wife. She was said to have smuggled a rope into his cell with which he got out. It was also claimed that the authorities were aware of the possibility of his escape and that one of his warders connived at it. He made his way north and entered into a bond of mutual defence with the earls of Huntly and Erroll. 
Later in February 1593 King James and an army marched to Aberdeen against the Catholic earls, who proved reluctant to oppose the king personally and fled to Caithness. A parliament met in July, but James ensured that proceedings against the earls were impeded and that they were not forfeited. He was perhaps concerned at the threat from ultra-protestant elements in the kirk and wished, by protecting the earls, to ensure the survival of a Catholic counter-weight to strict Calvinist influence. An act of oblivion was offered to the earls should they submit to the reformed kirk; if they refused to accept this, they were to go into exile, but be allowed to retain their estates. The earls rejected the accommodation and in June 1594 were tried at the parliament in Edinburgh. Angus's possessions were forfeited and given to the duke of Lennox, while all three earls were excommunicated by the general assembly of the church. 
During this time the earls remained at large in the north-east, where they mounted a punitive raid on the burgh of Aberdeen to release some unnamed foreign emissaries who had been imprisoned in the town on their way to meet Huntly. In the autumn the king sent the young earl of Argyll, a rival of Huntly, north to settle matters. He was defeated at Glenlivet on 3 October 1594. James then came in person, the earls once more declined to meet him in the field, and Huntly's castle and lands were ravaged. Although Angus was not present at Glenlivet, he had associated with the earl of Bothwell in stirring up unsuccessful diversionary activities in the south of Scotland. Erroll and Huntly now agreed to go abroad, but Angus remained in hiding in the north. In 1595 he reached a partial settlement with the king, in negotiations which were still in progress when Huntly and Erroll returned from exile in June 1596. In March 1597 the countess of Angus petitioned the general assembly, then sitting at Perth, to depute some ministers to confer with her husband on religious matters, and in June the three earls were publicly reconciled with the kirk. 
Soon afterwards, on 29 June 1598, Angus was appointed lieutenant of the borders, where he discharged his duties so effectively, financing his administration from his own resources, that his post was renewed after a year. Doubts persisted about the sincerity of his protestant convictions, however, and in 1602 the church authorities appointed James Law, later bishop of Orkney, to act as his chaplain -- in effect he was a spy in the earl's house, charged with the daily catechizing of the family, removing suspected Catholics from the earl's service, and ensuring the appointment of reliable protestant pastors in the earl's territory. During this time Angus was reported to be wearing a cross openly and refusing to communicate in the kirk, and in 1608 the church once more began proceedings against him. He was briefly imprisoned in Glasgow before retiring to France. In 1609 he passed through England on his way to exile; he requested an interview with King James and also that he might take his second son with him to France, but permission for both was refused. Later that year, in October, he asked the king if he might return to Scotland to settle his affairs and to put his house in order, but this was once more denied. 
A few of Angus's letters survive from this period in which he describes himself as old and sick, although he was no more than fifty-five years old. He lived near the abbey of St Germain-des-Pres in Paris, where he was recognized as a regular attender at mass and the monastic offices. He died in Paris on 3 March 1611, and was buried in St Christopher's aisle in the abbey church. His son William Douglas, first marquess of Douglas, erected a monument to his memory in the shape of a sarcophagus of black marble, on which lies a white marble effigy of the earl clad in armour, with an inscription recording his life and achievements. The earl's wife survived him and subsequently married James Hamilton. She and Angus had three sons and three daughters: William, who succeeded his father as eleventh earl; James, who was raised to the peerage by Charles I in 1641 as Lord Mordington and who married Anne, only child of Laurence, fifth Lord Oliphant; Sir Francis Douglas of Sandilands; Catherine; Mary, who became the second wife of Alexander Livingstone, second earl of Linlithgow; and Elizabeth, who married John Campbell, fiar of Cawdor. 


@@@@@


doc= 7932


Douglas, William, first earl of Queensberry (d. 1640), landowner, was the eldest son of Sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig (died 1615) and his wife, Mary, eldest daughter of John Fleming, fifth Lord Fleming, and his wife, Elizabeth; his parents married in 1581. By a contract dated 20 July 1603 he married Isobel (died 1628), later Lady Isobel, daughter of Mark Ker, Lord Newbattle (b. in or before 1559, d. 1609), who was created earl of Lothian in 1606, and his wife, Margaret Maxwell. They had four sons and two daughters. 
Having been knighted before 14 July 1612, Douglas entered into possession of the regality of Drumlanrig on the death of his father. He was active in his family's often violent disputes with their neighbours, being rebuked by the privy council in 1606 and fined in 1614. Nevertheless, in 1617 he entertained James VI at Drumlanrig, and he played a leading role in the government's attempts to tackle the lawlessness of the middle shires. In the early 1620s he was involved in the discussions on the wool trade and manufacturing, and, a decade later, on Charles I's plans for fishing. He was created viscount of Drumlanrig, Lord Douglas of Hawick and Tibberis in 1628, and earl of Queensberry in 1633. He added the barony of Torthorwald to his estates in 1622, the town of Hawick in 1623, and the baronies of Sanquhar and Cumnock in 1637. He died on 8 March 1640, and was succeeded by his eldest son, James Douglas (d. 1671). 


@@@@@


doc= 7933


Douglas, William, seventh earl of Morton (1582-1648), politician and nobleman, was the son of Robert Douglas of Lochleven (died 1585) and Jean Lyon (died 1608x10), daughter of John Lyon, eighth Lord Glamis (c.1544-1578). Following his father's death in March 1585 his mother married Archibald Douglas, eighth earl of Angus (c.1555-1588), and then, before 31 May 1590, Alexander Lindsay, first Lord Spynie (c.1563-1607); Alexander Lindsay, second Lord Spynie (c.1597-1646), was thus his half-brother. Little is known of Douglas's early life, although he seems to have had a good education. On 5 March 1604 he was contracted to marry Lady Anne Keith (died 1649), daughter of George Keith, fourth Earl Marischal (1549/50-1623), and in June 1605 was served heir to his father. 
Douglas and his grandfather, William Douglas, sixth earl of Morton (c.1540-1606), waged a jurisdictional feud against the Maxwells, who had held the earldom of Morton after 1581. Both sides were discharged from holding justiciary courts in Eskdale on the western border, and on 3 September 1606 were forbidden any armed convocations in the middle shires, Edinburgh, or Fife. On 4 November, still in his early twenties, Douglas succeeded his grandfather, becoming seventh (sometimes rendered eighth) earl, and began his political career by attempting to mitigate this longstanding civil conflict. On 14 July 1607 the privy council accused John Maxwell, ninth Lord Maxwell, of holding courts in Eskdale, a charge that he ably deflected on a legal technicality; at this stage his feud with Morton had reached such a pitch that both parties were forbidden from sitting in parliament that month, sent home, and made to find caution of $10,000 each. Ignoring this order, on 3 August Maxwell dispatched a cartel with messages to intimidate Morton, whose own political loyalty was assured through the oath of allegiance, and his subsequent sitting at the convention of estates on 20 May 1608. In November 1610 Morton was appointed to the new Scottish peace commission for Peeblesshire, Edinburgh, Fife, and Kinross, an indication of his status and general reliability, which resulted in further appointments as a JP between 1613 and 1615. A landowner with extensive property Morton also partook of taxations worth over $800 derived from Melrose Abbey and, having resigned the barony of Dunfedling to the king in March 1613, he received a charter of Segy barony on 9 October 1616. 
On 16 January 1617 Morton received a special licence to travel in France, Germany, or Italy for up to three years 'without skaith to his person, lands, and goods, provided he behave as a loyal subject' ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 9.10; NL Scot., MS 73, no. 83). He did not leave immediately, probably because he had to attend King James VI; he appeared at the convention of estates in March 1617 and from 11 to 14 June entertained the king at Dalkeith Palace. His continental tour began shortly afterwards, and in July he joined his cousin, William Douglas, eleventh earl of Angus, and Henry Erskine at Bourges. By spring 1618 they were in Paris, where Morton feared that he had contracted a fatal disease. He had returned to Scotland by 1621, if not before: on 13 September 1620 he was appointed a JP for Edinburgh. Morton attended parliament at Edinburgh on 25 July 1621, and by November had been officially admitted as a Scottish privy councillor and a member of a select conciliar cabinet to undertake the king's 'most weyghtie affairis' ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 12.604). The following year he cemented an alliance with the new lord chancellor, Sir George Hay, by marrying his eldest daughter, Ann, on 7 September to Hay's heir, George Hay (died 1644), later second earl of Kinnoull. In 1623 he attended an exhausting number of conciliar committees, discussing the exclusive export of undraped wool into England, serving on the commission of grievances, and presiding over the commission of manufactures. His political focus changed dramatically in January 1624, when he was appointed to the prince's council -- the first step in his career as a court-based statesman. Thereafter he spent much of his time at Whitehall and was present during the changeover of administration following the death of James, whose funeral Morton attended as standard-bearer with the second earl of Mar. 
By November 1625 Morton had returned to Scotland to attend the convention of estates, and on 6 December he received a charter of the baronies of Aberdalgy, Dupplin, and Gask. After being reappointed to the Scottish privy council in March 1626 he was soon assigned to the commission of the exchequer and later, in February 1627, to the controversial commission of surrenders and teinds. It was during this period that Morton made two more strategic marriages, between his teenage daughter Margaret and Archibald Campbell, Lord Lorne, in August 1626, and between his eldest son, Robert, and Buckingham's niece Anne Villiers in April 1627. The latter secured Morton's place in the British court and formed the backdrop to his command of between 2000 and 3000 Scottish troops in the expedition to La Rochelle that August. By 12 April 1630 he had replaced the ageing Mar as lord high treasurer of Scotland, inheriting 'an empty cupboard' and facing the prospect of a new taxation (Lee, 31, 87). His record as treasurer was unexceptional but did coincide with the king's first return visit to Scotland in June 1633, for which Morton had been appointed to a seven member preparatory committee in the previous January. By June 1634 the earl's accounts as treasurer were audited by John Maitland, first earl of Lauderdale, and David Carnegie, first earl of Southesk, the first indication that Morton was about to be shuffled out of office. However, this shift permitted him to concentrate on his active court life: on 21 April he was promoted to the Order of the Garter and in 1635 he was appointed captain of the yeomen of the guard. He willingly stepped down as treasurer on 24 June 1636, but only on the king's personal assurance of protection against his creditors and the repayment of his substantial debts; Charles had earlier written to the Edinburgh financier William Dick, asking him to forgive Morton's loan of $5000. 
Morton was at court during the signing of the national covenant in 1638, and he was awarded a charter incorporating all of his lands into the earldom of Morton and Aberdour. He was sent home to make preparations for James Hamilton, marquess of Hamilton, who had insisted that a royal faction be established at Edinburgh before he himself set out as lord high commissioner. Morton witnessed the king's proclamation at the Scottish camp in Duns Law on 22 June 1639, but as the conflict between the king and the covenanting movement intensified Morton found himself losing control of the properties he had used as pledges during the 1620s and 1630s. In September 1640 he attended the assembly of peers with the earls of Traquair and Lanark, later helping to draw up the treaty of Ripon in the following month. Morton personally accompanied the king to Edinburgh in 1641, and on 18 August was himself obliged to sign the covenant before sitting in parliament. In September he tactfully declined the king's offer of the chancellorship in light of the loud protestations as to his unsuitability by his son-in-law Argyll. 
In March 1642 Morton attended the king at York as a member of the council of peers, returning temporarily to his palace of Dalkeith, which he was obliged to sell on 14 July to mitigate his debts. He accepted a charter of the regalities of Orkney and Shetland from the king, who had the option of redeeming them for $30,000, but immediately afterwards the Scottish commissioners passed an act to apprehend Morton and other 'incendiaries between the two kingdoms' (GEC, 'Peerage'). He eluded capture and apart from his sporadic participation in the civil wars (including attendance on Charles at Newcastle in 1646), Morton used Kirkwall as his base and served as commissioner of justiciary for Shetland and Orkney. His last major act was to sign an obligation to pay Michael Shaw of Kirkwall $2000 Scots on 1 May 1648. As the political conflict in England reopened that year Morton sheltered his son-in-law Kinnoull, who had recently evaded the parliamentarian sea blockade in a vain attempt to spur support for a royalist land campaign. The earl himself died on 7 August 1648 at Kirkwall Castle, where he was also buried; his remarkable wife, Anne, who had long attempted to manage his estates during his prolonged absences, died a few months later on 30 May 1649. Their eldest son, Robert, succeeded to the earldom of Morton, but himself died at Kirkwall on 12 November 1649, leaving as his heir his son William (died 1681). 


@@@@@


doc= 7934


Douglas, William, first marquess of Douglas (1589-1660), magnate and scholar, was the eldest son of William Douglas, tenth earl of Angus (c.1554-1611), and his wife, Elizabeth (died in or after 1611), daughter of Laurence Oliphant, fourth Lord Oliphant. From early childhood, the master of Angus was affected by the repercussions of his father's involvement in Catholic conspiracies. Taken into custody as a royal hostage, in 1596 he received by special arrangement the Douglas estates, which had been granted temporarily to the duke of Lennox, and in the following year he was released after suffering an accident. However, the conditions of his father's reinstatement stipulated that the Angus heir be handed over to his kinsman William Douglas, sixth earl of Morton (died 1606), for education as a protestant. At the exceptionally young age of twelve he was contracted on 11 July 1601 to marry Margaret (1584/5-1623), daughter of Claud Hamilton, Lord Paisley (1546?-1621), and sister of James Hamilton, later first earl of Abercorn (1575-1618). Although Lord Claud was a Catholic, his son, who had inherited the estates following the former's insanity, was a prominent protestant privy councillor. Meanwhile, the tenth earl of Angus had been reconciled to the kirk, but his allegiance became increasingly suspect and in 1608 he left Scotland, dying in exile in Paris on 3 March 1611. 
In May 1612 William Douglas, now eleventh earl of Angus, appeared before the privy council as a result of altercations with the Kerrs of Ferniehirst over their respective rights to hold bailie courts in Jedburgh Forest. Angus's case was upheld by conciliar decision on the understanding that he could not hold a court with a gathering of more than sixty retainers. However, his more hotheaded brother Lord James Douglas was imprisoned at Blackness Castle for his part in antagonizing the Kerr family. On 8 August 1616 Angus obtained a royal licence to travel on the continent -- officially to relieve 'his disease and seikness' (Fraser, 2.416) -- a journey in which he was joined by William Douglas, seventh earl of Morton (1582-1648), grandson of his former guardian. In August 1617 the earl of Mar's European agent, Schau, reported from Bourges that this Douglas party had 'concludit to begin thair travelling upon the 4 of September' ('Supplementary Mar and Kellie MSS', 78), in a journey that was to encompass Lyons, Geneva, Marseilles, Bordeaux, La Rochelle, and Orleans. On his return to Scotland in 1619 Angus assumed a greater interest in the political affairs of the nation, attending the special conference of the council and nobility in November 1620, when he served on the committee to recommend fund-raising possibilities for the war effort in the Palatinate. Controversially, he insisted (unsuccessfully) on claiming, as traditional crown-bearer to the Scottish king, precedence over the marquess of Huntly in the procession which opened the ensuing parliament in January 1621. Angus very early demonstrated his loyalty to the Anglicizing policies of James VI and I, openly supporting the parliamentary ratification of the controversial five articles of Perth. 
However, Angus's political activities soon gave way to his lifelong fascination with travel and genealogical research, both of which led him on 26 May 1623 back to the continent, leaving his wife, who died on 11 September, and the earl of Morton to assume responsibility for his financial affairs and the administration of his estates. He travelled throughout France and Italy, probably drawn to the latter mainly through his correspondence with the Italian nobleman Marc Antonio Scoto d'Agazano, who claimed kinship with the Douglases, albeit 'on somewhat mythical grounds' ('Scots peerage', 1.203), but divided his time mainly between Paris (where he is known to have been based in November 1623) and Rome, where he paid a controversial visit to St Peter's in early 1625. The apparent lure of continental Catholicism alarmed his home presbytery of Lanark, whose elders interrogated him upon his return to Scotland that September, exhorting him to reassure his parishioners by attending services at his local parish kirk. Their concern over his religious integrity and annoyance at his sporadic church attendance continued to be expressed until his death. 
Angus appears to have been favoured by Charles I, possibly owing to his careful political inactivity as a suspected Catholic and consistent covert loyalty to the king's manifestly episcopalian policies. On 10 March 1631 the king officially regranted him the earldom of Angus, restoring in addition his heritable rights to carry the crown during parliamentary processions and to cast the first vote. On 15 September 1632 at the Gordon stronghold of 'the Bog' he married Lady Mary Gordon (1610/11-1674), third daughter of the ageing marquess of Huntly. After spending a fortnight in Aberdeenshire, during which they visited the earl of Moray, Angus and Mary returned to a comparatively quiet life divided between Douglas Castle in Lanarkshire and Tantallon on the Lothian coast. In the following year Angus resumed his political career at Edinburgh in preparation for the king's state visit, having been personally selected by the king as commissioner of articles for parliament alongside the Catholic noble Winton. After bearing the crown in the coronation ceremony on 17 June 1633, Angus was made marquess of Douglas, earl of Angus, and lord of Abernethy and Jedburgh Forest. Yet he never exploited royal favour to gain national prominence, choosing this time to retreat from the increasingly complex political problems and ecclesiastical issues developing between Whitehall and Edinburgh and concentrate on his studies and expanding family, which eventually numbered six sons and ten daughters. He also began to strengthen his administrative control over his territories in Lanarkshire and Roxburghshire, an authority enhanced by his commission of justiciary for Walston parish, Lanark (1 August 1634), and appointment as justice of the peace for Lanark (18 September). Following the apparent increase in frontier lawlessness throughout the western border, Douglas was also enlisted in 1635 to appear on the new conjunct commission, an Anglo-Scottish collective originally instituted by King James thirty years earlier. In the following year the presbytery of Lanarkshire again registered its annoyance with the truant marquess, alleging that he had refused to permit his daughter to attend local church services. 
After the renewal of his place on the border commission in September 1636 little was heard of Douglas until the signing of the national covenant in February 1638 and the subsequent outbreak of war. Douglas himself escaped to England before the troops of John Fleming, Lord Fleming began besieging Douglas Castle. Expecting a harsh reception and resistance, Fleming was surprised at how easily he was able to take the stronghold, which was occupied by the marchioness; she was permitted to remain in the castle due to her 'delicate health' (Baillie, 1.420). After the imposition of an uneasy peace in Scotland, on 27 March 1640 Charles forewarned both Douglas and his border kinsman Robert Maxwell, earl of Nithsdale, to re-garrison their castles in the light of his impending breach with the covenanters. In the context of further destabilization, the marquess shied away from active involvement in politics, and conspicuously absented himself from parliament on 17 November 1641, when his place as crown-bearer was assumed by the earl of Argyll. 
By the time civil war broke out in England in 1642 Douglas was firmly established as a border magnate and scholar who only rarely participated in national events. His half-hearted commitment to the covenant can be observed in his refusal to assist Lanark presbytery in disciplining the 'braincracked' young James Baillie of Todholes for regularly assaulting the minister of Dunsyre throughout 1642 (Fraser, 2.421 n. 4), and it was only under some pressure that he eventually signed the covenant in his parish kirk in Lanark in July 1644. His true interests lay in his genealogical work and in the preparation for publication of David Home of Godscroft's 'History of the House of Douglas', which was ultimately published by Evan Tyler in 1644. Encouraged by the marquess of Montrose's military success at Kilsyth in August 1645 Douglas was inspired to side with the royalist movement, which was then gaining new momentum in Scotland. After being awarded the lieutenancy of Clydesdale by Montrose, Douglas led a march on Hawick but found himself obliged to escape the defeat suffered by Montrose's forces at Philiphaugh on 13 September. This humiliation was followed by the death on 21 October of Douglas's third son, Colonel James Douglas, while serving in the French army at Douai. In April 1646 Douglas was himself imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle by the committee of estates, but later freed after admitting his breach of the terms outlined in the covenant and upon the payment of a fine. 
In 1647 and 1648 Douglas maintained contact with the French diplomatic agent Montereul, with whom he discussed the plight of Catholic Scots and the breakdown of his relationship with his eldest son, Archibald Douglas ('c'.1609-1655), styled since 1633 earl of Angus, who was initially a covenanter sympathizer and considered by his father as 'the principal author of the hardships that he has been made to endure' (Fotheringham, 225). However, both Douglas and his son Angus attended the coronation of Charles II on 1 January 1651, and the marquess took part in the Scottish parliaments at Perth and Stirling in 1651, when he served on the committees for the army and estates. His allegiance to the royalist effort earned him the distrust of Cromwell, who had him (and his son) charged with a fine of $1000 under the 1654 'Act of Grace', though this was later reduced to $333 6's'. 8died on 6 April 1655 in recognition of his good faith and disempowerment. Despite this reduction, Cromwell's fiscal penalty symbolized the nullification of his powers as head of the house of Douglas and led him to reduce permanently his political activity, including any outward support for the exiled Stuart court. On 19 July 1654 the presbyterian Robert Baillie -- an erstwhile polemicist for the covenanters -- lamented that 'Dowglass and his sonne Angus are quyet men, of no respect' (Baillie, 3.249), a glaring indication of the deleterious social upheavals endured by the Scottish nobility over the previous decade. By 30 October eighteen Lanarkshire landholders certified the conformity and continuing good behaviour of the marquess, a sign that the presbytery of Lanark had won its long struggle with its patron, or that Douglas himself had given up the fight in favour of the quiet scholastic life. Angus died in Edinburgh on 16 April 1655, and Douglas's virtual disappearance from the political and ecclesiastical affairs of Scotland after this date made his own death at Douglas Castle on 19 February 1660 and subsequent burial in Douglas church something of a non-event, and one considerably overshadowed by the ensuing Restoration. He was succeeded as second marquess of Douglas by his grandson James Douglas (c.1646-1700). 


@@@@@


doc= 7935


Hamilton, William, third duke of Hamilton (1634-1694), nobleman, was born on 24 December 1634, probably at Douglas Castle, Lanarkshire, the principal residence of his father. He was the fourth son of William Douglas, first marquess of Douglas (1589-1660), and the first by his second marriage, to Lady Mary (died 1674), daughter of George Gordon, first marquess of Huntly. 
Douglas's parents, both Roman Catholics, were in constant trouble with the Church of Scotland, not only for their non-attendance at services but also because they made no attempt to give young William and his two younger brothers a protestant education. The local presbytery investigated and, after questioning the family chaplain, wanted to take the children away from their parents, but the marquess refused to give them up. For a short time he sent them to Glasgow grammar school, and in 1644 he offered to send them to board with the minister of Douglas. Perhaps as a reward for this apparent compliance, on 4 August 1646, aged eleven, William was created earl of Selkirk, Lord Daer, and Lord Shortcleuch. Not long afterwards, however, his father sent him to Paris so that he could be brought up as a Catholic. 
When the presbytery found out the marquess was charged with keeping his son in France and failing to provide a tutor for him. This was certainly true, for Selkirk had been sent abroad without any companion, either governor or servant. However, his grandfather had lived in exile in the French capital and his father had spent some time there, so presumably he was not entirely without friends. Douglas told the presbytery that it was impossible for him to recall the boy to Scotland and it is not known when exactly Selkirk returned. He was definitely back by 1655, when negotiations were in hand for him to marry Scotland's greatest heiress. The Douglas lands in Lanarkshire lay both to the north and to the south of the Hamilton estates, at that time the property of Anne Hamilton (1632-1716), third duchess of Hamilton in her own right. At twenty-three, she was just two years older than Selkirk, and in many ways it was a most appropriate match. There was, however, one great difficulty in the way, and that was the earl's Catholicism, no mere matter of form. Twenty years later his brother Lord James Douglas was to tell him, 'I pray God that he [their brother George] and you and all our family were good Catholics as our ancestors have been' (NA Scot., GD406/C1/11743). 
For her part, not only had Duchess Anne been brought up by her covenanting grandmother to hold strictly presbyterian views, but also the entail made by her uncle, William, second duke of Hamilton, had stipulated that if she did not marry a nobleman of the name of Hamilton, then her husband must be 'a nobleman of any other name, of the reformed Protestant religion and of untainted loyalty and fidelity to the king'. Moreover, if the chosen husband began to fall away from his support of either church or king, he would lose all his rights over the estates. According to a note in the 1857 edition of Burnet's 'History', Selkirk 'was a very handsome man and, having gained the affections of the youthful duchess, to obtain her wide domains he consented to embrace the Protestant religion' ('Burnet's History', 1.71n.). 
Whatever his motives, Selkirk was undoubtedly determined to marry Anne and he persevered with the negotiations for three years. Just when everything seemed to have been agreed, his father changed his mind about the lands to be settled on the duchess by way of jointure. Deploring the delay, the earl took the initiative and had his own lawyers draw up a document settling the previously promised annuity on her. He then sent her the deed with a little note, declaring that 'if it wer more, I wold thinke it all to little for Your Grace, for I confess I can not expres the sence and hie estime I have of your Grace's deservings' (NA Scot., GD406/10749). Finally everything was in order and on 28 April 1656 the earl wrote on a small piece of paper, 'I do hereby declaire in the presence of God and as I shall answer at the great day of judgment, that I am not a papist nor does never resolve to be one' (NA Scot., GD406/C1/10750). The following day he and the duchess were married in Corstorphine church, just outside Edinburgh, and it was presumably then that Selkirk changed his name to Hamilton, in accordance with yet another condition of Duke William's entail. The first of his and Duchess Anne's thirteen children, a daughter, Mary, was born a year and a day later. Among the other children was George Hamilton, first earl of Orkney. 
At least there were no complications with the other condition in the second duke's entail, for Selkirk was an active royalist. After William, ninth earl of Glencairn, obtained a commission from Charles II in 1653 as commander-in-chief in Scotland, landed in the highlands, and raised a force of some 5000 men, Selkirk was one of those who joined him. The First Anglo-Dutch War ended in April 1654, any possibility of continental help evaporated, and on 3 May General Monck issued a pass for Selkirk, his servants, horses, and arms to go to Dalkeith 'to treat for his lordship's coming in' (NA Scot., GD406/C1/2591). Selkirk duly capitulated. 
According to Gilbert Burnet, when the duke first married 'he then pass'd for a soft man, who minded nothing but the recovery of that family from the great debts under which it was sinking, till it was raised up again by his great management' ('Burnet's History', 1.71), and he took little part in public life during his first few years as Duchess Anne's husband. Although in theory Anne's inheritance was a very rich one, the reality was rather different. All her estates had been sequestrated by the Cromwellian government because of her family's support of Charles I, heavy fines had to be paid before any of her properties could be reclaimed, her father had lent large sums of money to the king, and she was virtually penniless. Fortunately, Hamilton possessed considerable business acumen and the family archives dating from that period bear evidence of his meticulous attention to detail in the form of the many annotations in his handwriting. He had little time for anything else, although there was one alarming incident in September 1659 when he refused to sign 'the Engagement' (NA Scot., Ailsa Muniments, GD25/9/30), tendered by General Monck to those who had earlier given bonds for their peaceable living, pledging them not to act for the exiled Charles II. As a result he was imprisoned in Douglas Castle, now in the hands of the Cromwellians. The duchess hastily enlisted the support of her powerful friends, however, and by the beginning of November William was home again. 
With the Restoration of 1660, the Hamilton family fortunes were dramatically improved and at the duchess's special request Charles II on 20 September 1660 created her husband duke of Hamilton, marquess of Clydesdale, earl of Arran, Lanark, and Selkirk, and Lord Aven, Machanshire, Polmont, and Daer for life. The third duke of Hamilton sat in parliament for the first time in 1661 and was made a member of the Scottish privy council, but even so he was still spending most of the time working hard with the duchess to put their finances on a sound footing. From 1661 to 1669 he attended only 149 of a possible 330 meetings of the council. It was not until the 1670s that he began to play a really prominent part in public affairs. Charles II was governing Scotland through his secretary of state John Maitland, first duke of Lauderdale, an old friend of both the first and second dukes of Hamilton. Lauderdale's rule was, however, becoming ever more unpopular, in part because of corruption, in part because of his repressive measures against the covenanters. Guided by Duchess Anne, Hamilton took a strongly presbyterian line and his relationship with Lauderdale deteriorated sharply. In 1672 several members of the Scottish nobility, including William Douglas, third earl of Queensberry, and John Leslie, seventh earl of Rothes, urged him to take on the role of leader of the opposition to the government. 
When parliament opened that year, Hamilton opposed the granting of supplies for the latest Anglo-Dutch war, moving that the state of the nation be considered first and grievances redressed. Lauderdale responded by adjourning parliament, and so the opposition politicians dispatched Hamilton and William Crichton, earl of Dumfries, to court to complain that Lauderdale and his brother Charles Maitland of Hatton, the lord treasurer, had accumulated all the profitable public offices for themselves and their friends. Because Hamilton refused to set down their grievances on paper, for fear of being accused of treason, the king sent the group away, removed all of them except Hamilton from the privy council, and dissolved parliament. The duke lost his place on the council in 1676 as a result of a further disagreement. 
By now the government's ecclesiastical policies were reaching a new crisis, and in July 1678 a convention of estates voted the sum of $1.8 million Scots, mainly to suppress the growing number of conventicles. Because of the difficulties of raising the sum and fears that local militia would refuse to act against the conventiclers, Lauderdale quartered a force known as 'the highland host' on the western shires, arousing great opposition. After the defeat of the covenanters by the duke of Monmouth at the battle of Bothwell Bridge on 22 June 1679, Duchess Anne allowed the fleeing rebels to shelter on her estates while the duke, who had learned that writs of law burrows were to be issued against him, had already hurried to court with fourteen other noblemen and fifty country gentlemen to complain again about Lauderdale's rule. The king declined to receive them, and because they once more refused to put their grievances in writing, they were sent away. 
Lauderdale finally fell from power two years later and after that policy in Scotland was directed at ensuring that the Roman Catholic James, duke of York, would be accepted as king on the death of Charles II. When James was made commissioner to the Scottish parliament in 1681, presbyterian statesmen looked to Hamilton to oppose the appointment on the grounds that it was illegal but, always conscious of the second duke's requirement that Duchess Anne's husband support the monarchy, he refused and voted for the act settling the succession. As a result, he was rewarded with the Order of the Garter, filling the vacancy left by Lauderdale. 
When James VII and II succeeded in 1685, Hamilton was restored to his place on the Scottish privy council and made commissioner to the Treasury. In March 1686 he became an extraordinary lord of session and in October 1687 was given a place on the English privy council. He was in London when news came that William of Orange had landed, and those other Scottish privy councillors then at court sought his advice as to what should be done. The duke urged them to remain loyal to James, but as early as 1674 he had been suspected of corresponding with the prince of Orange, and his presbyterian stance meant that he privately viewed William's arrival with relief. As soon as Hamilton heard that James had fled for France he went to Sion House, where William was staying, and received a warm welcome. The new king and queen looked to Hamilton to settle affairs in Scotland and he was made president of the convention of estates which met in Edinburgh on 14 March 1689 to declare the throne vacant and proclaim William and Mary. He became commissioner when the convention was transformed into a parliament, and served in that capacity again in April 1693, living in almost viceregal state in his Holyroodhouse apartments for the duration of the parliament. 
The duke and duchess had by this time embarked on an ambitious programme of expansion. They began by adding an elegant, five-storey wing to Kinneil, their tower house above the River Forth near Bo'ness in Linlithgowshire, and then turned their attention to Hamilton Palace. This was a great period of building and improvement, and they were determined not to be left behind. The palace was a late sixteenth-century structure, with four ranges surrounding a quadrangle, and a clutter of office houses at the back. The duke had seen the fine palaces of France during his boyhood, he made a point of visiting English country houses on his way to and from court, and he purchased books on architecture. As early as 1678 he had plans for a new palace drawn up in London, telling his wife: 'I shall make you a fine house in paper which will be some charges, yet I thinke well bestowed, to have such a thing by us againest wee be able to build itt' (NA Scot., GD406/C1/8147). In the end, however, he selected the Scottish architect James Smith to undertake the work, paying him $14 on 30 March 1682 for drawing drafts. 
These were not the final plans for the new palace, for its design evolved as the work progressed. In essence, the scheme was to demolish three ranges, leaving only the north front standing, for it contained all the principal rooms. Two entirely new wings would then be built on the site of the former east and west ranges, the new main entrance would be from the courtyard sheltered by the two new wings, and the entire building would now face south instead of north. It was not, of course, possible to demolish everything at once, because the household of more than 200 people had to go on living in the palace, and in any case it would have been far too expensive to do it all at the same time. Work began in 1684 and was not in fact completed for almost twenty years, but in the meantime the duke took the opportunity of buying expensive new furniture and furnishings every time he went to London on business, shipping them home by way of Leith. 
Like many of his contemporaries, Hamilton was also an enthusiastic planter and a keen gardener. He planted elders, ash, alders, and avenues of limes in the parkland surrounding the palace and edged the gravel walks with thorns. Purchasing seeds in both Edinburgh and London, he gave particular attention to the huge kitchen garden where he grew everything from French cucumbers to Italian celery and Dutch parsnips. He had special hotbeds for asparagus as well as frames for bringing on melons, gourds, and tender herbs. Extending the brick walls, he grew peaches, apricots, and cherries against them, importing grafts from the Netherlands. He also laid out a new bowling green. 
All this work came to an abrupt halt in the spring of 1694. Returning home from his annual winter stay at court, Hamilton suffered a stroke on the coach journey north and lost the use of his left leg. He insisted on continuing, and when his wife heard the news she set off in a coach to meet him, with several eminent doctors and the minister of Hamilton. They were reunited just north of the Scottish border, and managed to get as far as Edinburgh, but the duke was sinking rapidly and he died about half past five on the morning of 18 April in his apartments in the palace of Holyroodhouse. His body was embalmed a few hours later, and on 24 May, as the guns of Edinburgh Castle fired a salute, his funeral procession left for Hamilton. He was buried with suitable pomp in the parish church, five of his surviving six sons walking behind his coffin. James Smith designed a huge and impressive monument, and in December 1694 the duchess authorized the purchase of black and white marble from the Netherlands for it. Placed above the vault where the duke was buried, it remained there until Hamilton church was demolished, when it was removed to St Bride's Church, near Bothwell. 
According to Gilbert Burnet, the third duke of Hamilton: 'wanted all sort of polishing.... His temper was boisterous, neither fit to submit nor to govern. He was mutinous when out of power and imperious in it. He wrote well but spoke ill; for his judgement when calm was better than his imagination... a narrow and selfish temper brought such an habitual meanness on him that he was not capable of designing or undertaking great things. ('Burnet's History', 1.71)' The fact that Burnet's patron in later years was none other than the duke of Lauderdale no doubt accounts for this somewhat jaundiced assessment. Irritable the duke might be, and heavy-handed in his dealings with others, particularly his own eldest son, James Hamilton, earl of Arran (1658-1712), but his transformation of the Hamilton estates was little short of remarkable. Whatever his reason for marrying Duchess Anne, and in spite of infidelity to her, which resulted in his having an illegitimate daughter, they were a devoted couple, brought all the closer by the 'turmoilings' they had endured together. Amid her great grief for him, the duchess completed all her husband's unfinished improvements at Hamilton Palace. On 24 April 1696, referring to the second anniversary of his death, she told their daughter Katherine: 'That day... I shall not forget while I live, and now I am writing where he used to do it, and everything I see is marks of his industry. I fear his son will not leave such behind him' (Atholl MSS, Blair Castle, 29 I 8, 166). 


@@@@@


doc= 7936


Douglas, William, first duke of Queensberry (1637-1695), politician, was the eldest son of James Douglas, second earl of Queensberry (d. 1671), and Lady Margaret Stewart (died 1673), daughter of the first earl of Traquair. Born on the eve of the revolutionary upheavals of the 1640s and 1650s, he did not receive the usual education of a young nobleman, 'but being a Man of very good natural Parts, and of a clear Judgment, when he came to engage in publict Business, he made a good Figure, and managed Affairs with great Dexterity and Address' (Crawfurd, 419). He served a political apprenticeship locally in the 1660s, obtaining appointments as a commissioner of excise in 1661, as a justice of the peace in 1663, and as sheriff and coroner of Dumfriesshire in 1664 and 1667. In 1667 he also made his entry into national politics when he was appointed a privy councillor. It was during these years that he started a family. He married Lady Isabel Douglas ('bap'. 1642, died 1691), daughter of the first marquess of Douglas, in 1657, and together they had four children. Their son James Douglas (1662-1711) succeeded in due course as the second duke of Queensberry; William became the first earl of March; George, who died unmarried in 1693, left a valuable library which his father donated to the Faculty of Advocates; and their daughter, Anne, married the third earl of Wemyss in 1697. 
Queensberry was well placed to benefit from the collapse of the Lauderdale regime at the end of the 1670s. He was appointed justice-general of Scotland on 1 June 1680, an extraordinary lord of session on 1 November 1681, and constable and governor of Edinburgh Castle on 21 September 1682. But it was as high treasurer of Scotland that he was to make his mark. After his father's death in 1671 he had demonstrated a gift for financial management in restoring his family's wealth, greatly depleted by the war and by the imposition of a severe financial penalty by Cromwell. On 12 May 1682 he was appointed high treasurer with instructions to raise $40,000 per annum for the king and with permission to retain any surplus for himself. According to Sir John Lauder, 'he, like a new byssom, fell on sundry methods to inrich the Tresurie' ('Historical Notices', 359). According to Gilbert Burnet, he 'was for every thing that would bring money into the treasury' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 378). Husbands were to be fined when their wives failed to attend church, dissidents were to be prevented from travelling to the colonies until every fine possible had been extracted from them, new powers were to be exercised in reviewing the financial administration of burghs and other bodies, and generally no opportunity was to be missed in recovering the payments due to the crown. Not surprisingly, both the king and the duke of York held Douglas in high esteem. He was created marquess of Queensberry on 11 February 1682 and duke of Queensberry on 3 February 1684. In 1685 he was appointed commissioner to the first session of the parliament of James VII and II, and the shires through which he passed on his journey from London to Edinburgh as the king's representative were ordered to wait upon him. He had reached the zenith of his political career. 
Burnet noted that Queensberry was reckoned by his colleagues to be 'haughty' and 'imperious', and his own view was that he had difficulty in maintaining an alliance with anyone because he 'loved to be absolute, and to direct every thing' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 418, 613). When he first came to office as treasurer he worked closely with the chancellor, the earl of Aberdeen, but a deep antipathy developed between them which manifested itself in a series of public confrontations. In December 1683 the power of the chancellor was curbed and in July 1684 he was ousted from office and replaced by the earl of Perth, who had contrived with Queensberry to bring about his downfall. For a few months Queensberry worked in harmony with the new chancellor, but within a year he was leading one faction in the privy council and the chancellor another. Although the chancellor failed in his attempt to gather evidence of malpractice in the Treasury and could only present the king with a series of complaints that were deemed to be lacking in substance, he did manage to undermine the king's confidence in Queensberry. He was not appointed royal commissioner to the second session of the 1685 parliament and in March 1686 he was deprived of overall control of the Treasury. Technically he became one of a commission of five treasurers, another of whom was the chancellor, and at the same time he was made president of the privy council, but as Lauder observed, this was 'first to break his head, and then to put on his kowll' ('Historical Notices', 712). Little over a week later he was replaced as constable and governor of Edinburgh Castle by the duke of Gordon, and the cloak of continuing favour finally slipped away in June 1686 when he was deprived of his places in the Treasury, privy council, and session, under orders to remain in Edinburgh until the accounts of the Treasury could be audited. 
During his brief period in high office Queensberry had concentrated his attention on financial administration and had gained and retained power partly by gathering in the king's revenues with exceptional efficiency, partly by paying the king's creditors with uncommon promptness, and partly by using government funds to buy influence. Ultimately, however, his survival had not been dependent on his financial dealings. If Queensberry's differences with the earl of Aberdeen over the treatment of conventiclers had been motivated by a desire to draw in as much revenue from the imposition of fines as he could, what had pleased Charles II was the firm line he appeared to be taking against religious dissent. Similarly, what had turned James VII and II against him had not been any malpractice in the management of the Treasury but his refusal to offer assistance in the promotion of Catholicism. When James first came to the throne Queensberry warned the king that he would be party to no assault on the established religion, and it was on the basis of an assurance from the king that no such assault was intended that he saw a series of acts through the parliament of 1685 to secure the revenues of the crown, to authorize the privy council to impose a religious test on all levels of society, and to clamp down further on religious dissent. In the following year the earl of Perth was able to suggest that the programme of legislation devised by the king could have been carried through the parliament without all the promises Queensberry made on behalf of the king that there would be no change in religious policy. Unlike the earl of Perth, Queensberry refused the attempts made to convert him, including, he claimed, an offer of some $20,000, and he was praised for his public demonstration of commitment to the reformed faith. 
Despite prolonged efforts to find fault with the Treasury accounts and a search for informants to testify to maladministration, Queensberry was able to retire quietly from public life until the arrival of William and Mary. He then equivocated, hoping on the one hand that if James survived he would turn again to his successful ministers, and on the other hand that if James was deposed the new monarchs would look favourably on the experienced father of the first notable Scot to join their ranks after the landing at Torbay. In fact, it was not until after the duke's death on 28 March 1695, at the age of fifty-eight, that his eldest son was able to obtain one of the major offices of state again for the family. Although Queensberry had been appointed an extraordinary lord of session once more in 1693, he had spent most of the early 1690s in retirement from political life, devoting his time to the construction of Drumlanrig Castle. He was laid to rest in the parish church of Durisdeer, Dumfriesshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 7937


Douglas, William, fourth duke of Queensberry (1725-1810), sybarite and politician, only son of William Douglas, second earl of March ('c'.1696-1731), and his wife, Anne Hamilton, 'suo jure' countess of Ruglen (1698-1748), was born on 16 December 1725 at Queensberry Lodging, Peebles. He succeeded his father as earl of March in 1731 and was known by that title until succeeding his father's first cousin as duke of Queensberry in 1778. The latter also acted as March's guardian after the second earl's death on 7 March 1731, and was instrumental in the decision to educate him at Winchester College, which he attended from 1735 to 1740. He succeeded to the earldom of Ruglen on his mother's death on 21 April 1748. 
After reaching his majority, March settled in London and dedicated himself to the pursuit of pleasure in a variety of forms. By the time he became heir to the third duke of Queensberry in 1756, he had established himself as a leading man about town. Lady Louisa Stuart noted that by then he was: 'the most fashionable, most dissipated young man in London, the leading character at Newmarket, the support of the gaming table, the supreme dictator of the Opera-house, the pattern whose dress and equipage were to be copied by all who aimed at distinction and... the person most universally admired by the ladies. ('Letters and Journals', l.lxxiii)' No crude sensualist, March was a man of discerning taste and common sense who single-mindedly devoted himself to whatever interested him. 
Admitted to the young club at White's in 1747, March soon became known as an active and successful gambler. His reputation soared after the 'chaise match' in 1750 in which he and the earl of Eglinton bet Theodore Taafe and Andrew Sproule 1000 guineas that a carriage could carry a passenger 19 miles in one hour. March arranged for the construction of a skeletal vehicle of lightweight materials that barely fitted the definition of a carriage and trained horses specially to pull it. The trial was held at Newmarket, and March's vehicle completed the 19 miles in under fifty-four minutes. As in much of his gaming, March shrewdly assessed the variables before committing to the wager and stretched the terms of the bet to his advantage. He seldom risked more than he was prepared to lose and manifested a degree of self-control that often eluded his fellow gamblers. 
Success in the match was facilitated by March's expert knowledge of horses. He had run his first horses at Newmarket in 1748 -- winning three out of three races. Five years later he bought a house overlooking the racecourse. Though not a charter member of the Jockey Club, he was an early recruit and influential member. He was a careful breeder of horses and occasionally rode himself in the crimson colours that marked his stable. One of the turf's most successful and visible patrons, he continued to run horses until his eighty-first year. 
Another passion was music. A founder member of the Catch Club in 1762, March became better known as a patron of the opera. He continued to attend the latter, according to Nathaniel Wraxall, even after losing much of his hearing in order to gratify 'his wish of being still seen upon the great arena of the world' ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 4.359). To contemporaries, March's musical interests seemed keyed more to opera singers and ballet dancers, and some of his better-known mistresses, such as Teresina Tondino and Anna Zamparini, were divas. 
Indeed it was as a pursuer and seducer of the opposite sex that March would be most remembered. He had a long string of mistresses, whom he neither flaunted nor concealed. Despite his lecherous reputation, he was regarded as one of the most eligible bachelors in the kingdom, especially after he became heir to the Queensberry title and estates. Though often rumoured to be on the verge of marriage, he successfully eluded all attempts to get him to the altar and died unmarried. He was probably the father of at least one daughter (with the Marchesa Fagnani). The child, Maria Emily Fagnani, familiarly known as Mie-Mie (later Maria Emily Seymour-Conway, marchioness of Hertford) ['see under 'Conway, Francis Ingram-Seymour-, second marquess of Hertford], was raised largely by his best friend, George Selwyn, and in 1798 married the heir of the marquess of Hertford. 
Though his career as a pleasure-seeker tended to predominate in the public mind, March was also a figure of at least middling importance in politics. His paternal inheritance gave him the dominant parliamentary influence in Peeblesshire and as heir to the dukedom of Queensberry he gained a similar influence in Dumfriesshire and a less commanding interest in Dumfries burghs. He generally followed the lead of the third duke of Queensberry during the 1750s, becoming associated with the Leicester House group clustered around the prince of Wales. On the latter's accession, as George III, March was named a lord of the bedchamber and elected a representative peer in 1761. Honours and sinecures followed: knight of the Thistle (1763), vice-admiral of Scotland (1766-76), and first lord of police (1776-82). In 1763 he played a role in the prosecution of John Wilkes when his chaplain, the Revd John Kidgell, helped the government obtain a copy of Wilkes's privately printed poem 'Essay on Woman'. 
As a representative peer March was more regular than most in attending the House of Lords but sought no reputation as a speaker. He usually supported the ministry of the day, though in 1766 he opposed the first Rockingham administration on the repeal of the 'Stamp Act', and in December 1783 opposed by proxy the Fox-North coalition's 'India Bill'. He was in many ways a nominal Scot. Usually voting in peers' elections by sealed list, he attended in person only in 1747, 1761, and 1784, and generally spent little time in Scotland. In 1786 he was created a British peer as Baron Douglas of Amesbury. In 1789 he made the major political miscalculation of his career when he backed the prince of Wales and voted against William Pitt on the regency question, the only lord of the bedchamber to do so. He approached the issue as he would a prospective wager and had obtained from the king's doctor an opinion that a recovery was unlikely. When the king's health did improve, Queensberry was dismissed and subjected to much criticism. He tried unsuccessfully to make amends with the king and thereafter ceased to be a prominent figure at court. In the 1790s he frequently offered hospitality to aristocratic refugees from the French Revolution. In 1794 he became lord lieutenant of Dumfriesshire when that office was revived for Scottish counties. 
Already comfortably off, on the inheritance of the Queensberry estates in 1778 (said to be worth $18,000 a year) the duke became one of the richest men in the kingdom. As he grew older, his actions brought increasing notoriety and criticism. To some, perhaps, he was emblematic of aristocratic licence, to others merely a dirty old man. He was often referred to as Old Q, his continued pursuit of young women grist to the mill of caricaturists and salacious biographers. His decision to cut down large stands of timber on his Scottish estates provoked the ire of major poets. Thus Burns concluded his 'Verses on the Destruction of the Woods Near Drumlanrig': '
The worm that gnaw'd my bonnie trees, 

That reptile wears a ducal crown. 

' Wordsworth reacted: 'Degenerate Douglas! Oh, the unworthy lord!' (Blyth, 184-5). None of this bothered Queensberry, who remained contemptuous of public opinion. He did enjoy seeing and being seen, however, and fitted a balcony to his Piccadilly house so that he might watch the traffic below. Among other things he interested himself in underwriting the defence of Sir Thomas Picton, accused of brutality as governor of Trinidad. Prior to his death, the prospective disposition of his estate occasioned much speculation. He continued to add codicils to his will (twenty-five in all) until his death on 23 December 1810 at 138 Piccadilly, London. According to Wraxall he was then worth $900,000. He made numerous bequests and was notably generous to his male servants, though the largest share of his estate went to his natural daughter. He was buried on 31 December at St James's, Piccadilly, under the communion table. 
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of Queensberry's career is that despite slender contributions to public life, he has remained a subject of popular interest. Refuting the obituary prediction of the 'Scots Magazine' that because he had 'fulfilled none of the present duties of society, self-preservation only excepted', his name would be forgotten by all but his legatees and racing aficionados (Melville, 15), he has remained in the popular mind one of the best-known of eighteenth-century peers. He has been the subject of three serious biographies since the late nineteenth century, a statement that cannot be made about many of his noble contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 7938


Douglas, William (1780-1832), miniature and portrait painter, a descendant of the family of Douglas of Glenbervie, was born in Fife on 14 April 1780. He received a liberal education and showed an interest in painting at an early age. This led to his being placed as an apprentice to the engraver Robert Scott in Edinburgh, the engraver John Burnet being one of his fellow apprentices. However, he decided to specialize in miniature painting, generally producing miniatures in watercolour on ivory, but also full-length pencil drawings with the head often finished in watercolour, and oil paintings. His favoured subjects on a large scale were combined portraits of sitters and their animals, and his expertise at landscape painting meant that he often included extensive landscape backgrounds in both his drawings and oil paintings. Latterly he also painted miniatures of animal subjects alone. His work was usually signed, either with his initials W. D. and the date, or, in the case of his miniatures, in full on the reverse (for example, 'W. Douglas Edinburgh Pinxt 1816'). He achieved considerable success in Scotland and England, exhibiting at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1808-9 and the Society of Associated Artists between 1808 and 1816. His patrons in Scotland included numerous members of the Edinburgh middle classes and members of the Scottish aristocracy such as the ninth earl of Dalhousie and the fourth duke of Buccleuch, who commissioned him to paint portraits of their families and retainers, such as his oil painting of Thomas Hudson, keeper at Bowhill, of about 1810 (Bowhill, Selkirk). 
On 9 July 1817 Douglas was appointed miniature painter in Scotland to Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld and was commissioned to paint a miniature of his wife, Princess Charlotte of Wales, the only daughter of George IV. He then visited London, undertaking several commissions for William Balliol Best of Chilston Park, Kent. Although he subsequently returned to Edinburgh, he continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy in London from 1818 to 1826. In 1822 he painted a miniature of Sir Walter Scott's son, Walter. He died in Edinburgh on 30 January 1832. A pencil and watercolour drawing and a miniature by Douglas are in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh. 
Douglas and his wife, whose name is unknown, had one son and two daughters, the eldest of whom was Miss 


@@@@@


doc= 7939


Hamilton, William Alexander Anthony Archibald Douglas-, eleventh duke of Hamilton and eighth duke of Brandon (1811-1863), aristocrat, was the only son of Alexander Douglas-Hamilton, the tenth duke (1767-1852), and Susan Euphemia Beckford (1786-1859). He was born on 19 February 1811, at Grosvenor Place, London, and was known as marquess of Douglas until he succeeded to his father's several titles and estates in 1852. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford. He was knight marischal of Scotland, colonel of the Lanarkshire militia, lord lieutenant of that county, deputy lieutenant of the county of Bute, major-commandant of the Glasgow yeomanry from 1849 to 1857, and grand master of the society of freemasons. On 23 February 1843 he married the Princess Marie Amelie (1818-1888), youngest daughter of Karl Ludwig Friedrich, grand duke of Baden, and his wife, Stephanie de Beauharnais, and a cousin of Napoleon III. They had a son and a daughter. After his marriage he lived chiefly in Paris and Baden Baden, and was frequently a guest at the Tuileries, taking very little interest in British politics. He died on 15 July 1863 from the effects of a fall after a supper at the Maison Doree, boulevard des Italiens, Paris. He inherited the pride for which his family was noted, and was described by the lord chancellor, Lord Brougham, as 'Very Duke of Very Duke' (GEC, 'Peerage'). 


@@@@@


doc= 7940


Douglas, Sir William Fettes (1822-1891), painter, antiquary, and curator, was born in the parish of St Cuthbert, Edinburgh, on 29 March 1822, eldest son of Douglas James Douglas, accountant with the Commercial Bank of Scotland, and Martha Brook, great-niece of Sir William Fettes, bt, the founder of Fettes College. He was educated at the Southern Academy and the Royal High School in Edinburgh. In 1836 he took up a post as a clerk in the Commercial Bank where he remained for about ten years. During this period he resolved to become an artist and devoted his spare time to drawing and painting. However, his formal art training was limited: he enrolled at the Trustees' Academy for a few months in 1848 and attended the Royal Scottish Academy Life School for the 1851-2 session. More informally, in 1848 he joined the Smashers' Club. This was a group of Edinburgh-based artists whose meetings combined sketching sessions and criticisms of each other's work with general drinking and socializing. As the members migrated south, the group re-formed in London in the 1860s and Fettes Douglas was an occasional visitor there. He also attended botany and anatomy classes at Edinburgh University. In addition he travelled with the painter Alexander Fraser to Warwickshire and the Lake District in 1851. 
Fettes Douglas first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1845 and thereafter became a regular exhibitor. Although he showed portraits, figure studies, and a few landscapes to begin with, he very quickly immersed himself in historical, literary, and occult subjects. He frequently used the works of Shakespeare and Walter Scott as source material but picture titles show his wider interests, for example 'Benvenuto Cellini Showing a Chased Salver' (1856; Hospitalfield House, Arbroath), 'The Summons to the Secret Tribunal: an Incident in the Life of Vesalius the Great Anatomist' (1860; Perth Museum and Art Gallery), and 'The Spell' (1864; National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh). His paintings were meticulously researched, particularly in the details of furnishings, costumes, and 'objets d'art'. It is likely that he was influenced by Pre-Raphaelitism through Millais's painting 'Mariana' (1851), which was exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1852. Unlike many of his Scottish contemporaries whose brushwork is characterized by a looseness and freedom of handling, Fettes Douglas relied on thin layers of oil carefully applied with linear precision. His paintings were signed with his monogram in the Douglas heart, usually painted in red. 
In 1857 Fettes Douglas first visited Italy. This trip fostered his antiquarian interests and he began to collect coins and medals. His collection expanded to include costume, furniture, ceramics, glass, and silver and he used it in his paintings. He also acquired an important library which reflected his serious interest in history, particularly that of Scotland. After his death his collection of antiquities and fine art was sold at auction over four consecutive days and his library over five. 
During the 1860s Fettes Douglas travelled widely in Europe and in 1866-7 he made a lengthy journey through France, Italy, and Sicily. Not only did his travels feed his antiquarian imagination but he also began to paint his immediate surroundings. For example 'On a Housetop, Rome' (1871; Royal Bank of Scotland) is one of a series of paintings of contemporary Italian subjects. Later in his career he turned increasingly to landscape, for example 'The Village of the Water of Leith from a Window in Rothesay Terrace' (1879; Edinburgh City Museums and Art Galleries), painted on a strong vertical format. In the late 1870s, due to ill health, he began painting in watercolours, particularly landscapes, for example 'On the Shores of the Lake of Menteith' (1887; Dundee Museums and Art Galleries). 
Fettes Douglas was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1851, and an academician in 1854. He was involved with the raising of the Artists' company of the City of Edinburgh artillery volunteers in 1859. During the late 1860s he served as a visitor to the Royal Scottish Academy Life School and from 1869 to 1870 was the academy's secretary. In 1877 he was appointed curator of the National Gallery of Scotland but he resigned in 1882 in order to become president of the Royal Scottish Academy, a position he retained until his death. In 1880 he married Marion Barclay Grahame ('c'.1836-1916), the second daughter of Baron Grahame of Morphie; they had no children. He was knighted on 17 May 1882 at Windsor Castle. Fettes Douglas died at Monkswell, Abdie, near Newburgh, Fife, on 20 July 1891. After a funeral in Edinburgh his body was taken by train to St Cyrus, Kincardineshire, for burial in the Barclay family plot on 28 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 7941


Douglas, William Scott (1815-1883), editor, was born in Hawick on 10 January 1815, the son of Alexander Douglas and his wife, Isabella Scott. He was educated at Heriot's Hospital, Edinburgh. On 5 June 1862 he married Isabella Forbes, with whom he had at least five children: William ('b'. 1863), Daniel ('b'. 1865), David Gordon ('b'. 1868), Isabella Scott ('b'. 1873), and Jessie Irving ('b'. 1874). 
Douglas worked as a mercantile accountant, like his father before him, but in his leisure time he put much effort into studying the life and works of Burns, acquiring perhaps a more thorough mastery of them than any previous editor of Burns's works. In 1850 he read a paper on the 'Highland Mary' incident of Burns's life before the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. His principal publications were a reissue of the Kilmarnock, 'popular edition' of 'The Complete Poetical Works of Robert Burns with Memoir, &c' (1871; rev. edn, 1876); 'Descriptive Picture of the County of Ayr' (1874); and a splendid, six-volume library edition of 'The Works of Robert Burns' (1877-9). The poems in this edition are arranged chronologically, and while it was the most sumptuous yet published it was also the most complete and correct regarding both text and notes. He also supplied letterpress for an edition of B. W. Coombie's 'Modern Athenians', published in 1882. In 1877 he succeeded James Ballantine as secretary of the Edinburgh Burns Club. He was found, drowned, off the East Pier at Leith on 23 June 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 7942


Douglass, Sir James Nicholas (1826-1898), civil engineer, eldest son of Nicholas Douglass of Northumberland, and his wife, Alice, daughter of James Douglass of Winlaton, co. Durham, was born on 16 October 1826 at Bow, London, where his father was employed by the engineering firm of Hunter and English. He was educated at Blaydon, co. Durham, on the Tyne, and at Bridgend under the Revd E. Jones, and was then apprenticed to Hunter and English at Bow. His father, meanwhile, having ventured his own capital on an engineering and shipbuilding business on the Thames which failed, joined the engineering staff of Trinity House in 1839 and rose to be superintending engineer. 
In 1847 Douglass became assistant to his father in the erection of the Bishop's Rock lighthouse in the Isles of Scilly. He then became manager at R. J. and R. Laycock's railway carriage works on the Tyne. He returned briefly to Scilly in 1854 to marry Mary, second daughter of Captain James Tregarthen, shipowner of St Mary's. They had two sons and a daughter. In 1855 he was appointed resident engineer of the Gun Fleet Pile lighthouse, and afterwards of the Smalls Rock lighthouse near Milford Haven. This latter work was one of extraordinary difficulty and danger. Douglass always accompanied the working party, and was the first to land and the last to leave. He had many narrow escapes; during the terrible gale of October 1859, when the passenger steamer 'Royal Charter' was wrecked, it was thought that the whole of the working party had been drowned, but the small sailing tender in which the party embarked from the rock succeeded at length in making Swansea harbour. 
In 1861 Douglass became resident engineer on the Wolf Rock lighthouse, situated in deep water between Land's End and the Isles of Scilly. The structure was not completed until 1870, and the dangerous nature of the work was made plain in Douglass's account to the Institution of Civil Engineers. In October 1862 he was appointed chief engineer to the corporation of Trinity House in succession to James Walker. Foremost among the many important lighthouses which he designed was his replacement of John Smeaton's famous Eddystone lighthouse, necessitated by the disintegration of the rock upon which it stood. Douglass found a new site, and took down most of the old lighthouse, which was re-erected on Plymouth Hoe, itself a difficult task. Work was begun on 17 July 1878, and the new lighthouse was opened on 18 May 1882, the cost (below the original estimate) being $59,250. On the completion of this work he was knighted in June 1882. 
Douglass carried out, in conjunction with John Tyndall and Michael Faraday, many exhaustive experiments with fog signals and on lighthouse illumination by Argand oil lamps and by electric arc lamps. In 1884 he was a member of the committee appointed by Trinity House to assess the effectiveness of different kinds of light for lighthouse work. The committee made its experiments at the North Foreland, reporting that oil was the most economical and suitable illuminant for ordinary lighthouses, but that electric lighting was preferable for the more important structures on lofty headlands. 
Douglass became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 5 February 1861, and was elected to the council in 1881. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1887, and in 1886, at the Birmingham meeting of the British Association, he served as president of the mechanical section. He attended the Montreal meeting of the association in 1884, preceding it by travelling with his wife and daughter across Canada to the Rocky Mountains and back by train, a tour which, with the meeting, lasted some three months. He was a governor of Dulwich College and of University College, London, and retained his position with Trinity House until an attack of paralysis in 1892 obliged him to resign. He spent his last years at Stella, Bonchurch, on the Isle of Wight, where he died on 19 June 1898. He was buried at Bonchurch. 


@@@@@


doc= 7943


Douglass, John (1743?-1812), vicar apostolic of the London district, was born at Yarm, Yorkshire, probably in December 1743, the son of John Douglass, originally from Scotland, whose occupation is unknown, and his wife, Bridget Semson. His sister Ann became a Carmelite nun. He was educated by the secular priest Simon Bordley at Salwick Hall, Lancashire, and from October 1757 at the English College, Douai. After ordination and after graduating DD, he set out on 20 May 1768 with eight students from Douai to the English College, Valladolid, from which the Jesuits had recently been expelled. Here he taught humanities and philosophy, a contemporary noting: 'He is young and has a great narrowness of mind and thinking, as yet; such persons stick close to their own few ideas, and to try and persuade them directly not to cleave to their own preconceived and narrow notions, is the way to throw them entirely off their hinges and to get their ill will for one's pains. (Williams, 76)' Owing to ill health he left Valladolid on 30 July 1773 and became a mission priest at Linton upon Ouse, Newton upon Ouse, and York by 24 March 1776. 
In 1790 he was chosen to succeed James Talbot as vicar apostolic of the London district against the wishes of the Catholic Committee, composed of liberal lay Catholics, who insisted that he was being 'imposed by a foreign power' (Nelson, 146). The success of the conservative vicars apostolic in having Douglass appointed against the wishes of the leading laity suggests a decline in the gentry's influence on English Catholicism. He was consecrated on 19 December 1790 as bishop of Centuria 'in partibus infidelium' -- in the chapel at Lulworth Castle, Dorset -- by Dr William Gibson, the northern vicar apostolic, the Jesuit Charles Plowden giving a discourse on episcopal authority. The Catholic committee -- which demanded that bishops be elected, and campaigned for Catholic emancipation, a reduction of papal influence in England, and more accommodation with the British government -- identified him, not altogether correctly, as siding with the conservative vicars apostolic. Douglass certainly provided his fellow bishops with essential information, and was in communication with politicians like William Pitt the younger and Edmund Burke, whom he called 'our sincere friend' (diary, 72). In the interests of unity he supported the substitution of the Irish oath of allegiance, adopted from the 1779 'Irish Catholic Relief Act', and this was included in the 'Catholic Relief Bill' which became law on 24 June 1791. 
Douglass exploited the new opportunities brought about by the act, helping religious orders to establish themselves, and he began publishing an annual 'new year's gift' and Lenten pastoral letter. About 1790 he had moved to his official residence at 4 Castle Street, Holborn, where, in his wainscoted study, surrounded by portraits of English Catholic clergy and martyrs yellow with smoke, Douglass, a tall thin man in a 'suit of black, not very fresh, with a little close white wig' (Ward, 'Catholic London', 64), would openly wear his pectoral cross and amethyst ring. Despite some protestant opposition, he began to pontificate with mitre and crosier at high mass in the new London chapels, and in 1805 ordered a 'Te Deum' and prayers for the royal family after Trafalgar. After 1791 he acted as mediator in further disputes between the orthodox party and the Catholic Committee, now called the Cisalpine Club, and remained a close friend of the leading Cisalpine, Charles Butler. From 1792 until 1801 he struggled with another Cisalpine, Sir John Throckmorton, by refusing to give priestly faculties to his outspoken and liberal chaplain, Joseph Berington. It was hard for one so mild as he to resort to harsh measures; in the parable of the tares, he saw 'encouragement to leave doubtful doctrine uncondemned till the Last Day' (Duffy, 'Doctor Douglass', 262), and therefore more aggressive bishops, like John Milner, insinuated that he had 'deserted the faith of his fathers' (Duffy, 'Ecclesiastical democracy', part III, 125). Still, his enhancement of episcopal authority can be said to have paved the way for the grand Catholic prelates of the following century. He remained from 1808 a determined opponent of the veto by which the crown would exercise some control over episcopal appointments. In the apocalyptic gloom of the 1790s he had to face the problem of hundreds of emigre clergy without direction or means of livelihood swarming into London during the French Revolution, and insisted that they, as well as the Irish in the capital, be subject to his immediate jurisdiction. In 1808 he suspended the Blanchardist schismatics who opposed Pius VII's concordat of 1801 with Napoleon. 
To ensure a continuity of Catholic education after the closure of English institutions in France during the Revolution, Douglass used his influence and financial resources to begin in November 1793 the foundation of a college at his property at Old Hall Green, Hertfordshire, as the successor of Douai College in France, which ultimately became the seminary of St Edmund, Ware. He appointed its president and was a frequent visitor. After a long illness Douglass died at his residence, 4 Castle Street, Holborn, London, on 8 May 1812, leaving money in his will to his brother James, at Ealing, and to his two nephews. He was buried at St Pancras churchyard on 15 May 1812, and in 1906 his remains were translated to St Edmund's, Ware. He was 'a man of unusual kindness of disposition, with a calmness of judgment and action in keeping with his Scotch descent, while by no means wanting in firmness when occasion demanded' (Ward, 'Catholic London', 64). 


@@@@@


doc= 7944


Doulton, Sir Henry (1820-1897), pottery manufacturer, was born on 25 July 1820 at Vauxhall Walk, London, the second of the eight children of John Doulton (1793-1873), pottery manufacturer, and his wife, Jane Duneau, a widow from Bridgnorth in Shropshire. His father had become a partner in the Vauxhall Walk pottery in 1815, establishing the Doulton name in the industry with functional brown stoneware products. Henry spent two years at University College School in Gower Street, London, where his love of literature was fostered. John Doulton fully expected the most bookish of his sons to take to the cloth or the bar when he left school in 1835 but instead Henry expressed his desire to follow his elder brother, John junior, into the pottery business. Four of Henry's brothers also joined the company, but Frederick Doulton (1824-1872) became MP for Lambeth in 1862 and remained so for six years. 
After a brief apprenticeship, Henry Doulton had learned enough by 1846 to leave home and initiate and control his own branch of the business, making ceramic pipes for the sanitary market. It was the first factory to provide such products, meeting the rising demand for effective sanitation. In 1849 Doulton married Sarah, daughter of John L. Kennaby. They settled at 7 Stockwell Villas, Lambeth, where they had three children: Sarah Lilian, Henry Lewis, and Katherine. 
At the Paris Exhibition of 1867 Doulton presented the first examples of art pottery to be made by the company. Ten years previously John Sparkes, principal of the Lambeth School of Art, had approached Doulton with the idea of producing such ware but while the business of functional pottery was proving so successful there had seemed no need to add any new products. But Sparkes had not been dissuaded and, with the help of Edward Cresy, an engineer and lifelong friend of Henry Doulton, he eventually convinced him to experiment with purely artistic designs. The production of art ware had been fraught with technical problems and it was not until 1870 that they began to be resolved. John Sparkes had already introduced one student of the art school to Doulton, namely the sculptor George Tinworth, who was immediately employed for his modelling skills. Other artists like Hannah Barlow followed, and by 1872 a great variety of work was being produced. These early examples prompted Doulton to enlist a batch of Sparkes's students to decorate his products, providing them with studio facilities and blank pots of soft clay to work on. The resulting richly coloured salt-glazed stoneware with a range of decorative motifs was so distinctive of the company that it became known as Doulton Ware. 
In 1877 Doulton was approached by Shadford Pinder, a potter from Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent, with a proposition to become a partner in the firm of Pinder, Bourne & Co. for an outlay of $12,000. This he agreed to, but the money was unwisely spent and differences of opinion caused such a rift between the two concerns that only arbitration resolved the matter. Indeed Pinder retired from the business and in 1882 the name changed to Doulton & Co., Burslem. It was John Slater, art director at Pinder Bourne, who, after travelling among the European potteries, convinced Doulton to produce china as well as earthenware. Again the marriage of art and industry facilitated some of the finest hand-painted china of the time with artists Percy Curnock and David Dewsberry among others. Such was the success of Doulton's efforts to create a vast array of art wares as well as functional designs at Lambeth and Burslem that in 1885 the Society of Arts, of which he had been a member since 1851 and later served as vice-president (1890-94), awarded him the Albert medal, which was presented by the prince of Wales (later King Edward VII). In 1887 Doulton was knighted by Queen Victoria at Osborne House. A year after his knighthood, in October 1888, Doulton's wife died and after a succession of highly renowned exhibitions Doulton spent most of his remaining years at Woolpit Farm, his home in Ewhurst, Surrey. He died at his London residence, 10 Queen's Gate Gardens, on 17 November 1897 and was buried on 22 November at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 7945


D'Ouvilly, George Gerbier (fl. 1638-1661), playwright and translator, was the eldest son of Sir Balthazar Gerbier (1592-1663/1667), art agent, miniature painter, and architect, and his wife, Deborah Kip ('b'. 1601). Balthazar Gerbier later styled himself Baron d'Ouvilly. Descended from a Huguenot family which had sought refuge in establishing the French church in Middelburg, Zeeland, after the St Bartholomew's day massacre, George showed early educational promise and, while still a youth, 'had all the exercises fitt for a gentleman', possessing the ability to speak 'eight several languages prompt' ('Manifestation', 3-4; Sainsbury, 318). By 1638, however, D'Ouvilly had enlisted as a captain in the regiment of William, Lord Craven, who was financing attempts to restore the Palatinate, held by Ferdinand II, to the former king and queen of Bohemia. In 1637-8 campaigns were fought in the Low Countries, and it is possible that D'Ouvilly was taken prisoner there with Craven and Elizabeth of Bohemia's son, Prince Rupert. D'Ouvilly's military links may have been instrumental in securing a commission from 1662 for his father to design and supervise the rebuilding of Craven's house at Hampstead Marshall, Berkshire. 
D'Ouvilly appears to have been resident in England throughout the period of the protectorate and on 18 March 1651 was ordered by the Committee for Examinations to offer securities that he would not 'do anything to the prejudice of the commonwealth, and to appear before the Council on summons' ('CSP dom.', '1651', 94). 
D'Ouvilly's literary works differed in genre, reputation, and success. In 1657 his tragi-comedy 'The False Favourite Disgrac'd. And the Reward of Virtue' was printed in London, but remained unacted. Set in Florence, the plot revolves around a series of misunderstandings which are ultimately resolved in the closing scene when concord, hierarchy, and true vision are re-established within the court. D'Ouvilly's linguistic talents, however, proved to be more apparent in his translation of a selection of French biographies by Andre Thevet, cosmographer to Henri III. Introduced under the title, 'Prospographia, or, Some select Portraitures and Lives of Antient and Modern Illustrious Personages... newly translated into English by some Learned and Eminent Persons; and generally by Geo: Gerbier, alias D'Ouvilly', the passages form the third part of the stationer William Lee's edition of North's 'Plutarch' (1657). 
D'Ouvilly's final work, 'Il trionfo d'Inghilterra overo racconto et relatione delle solennita fatte & osservate nella... incoronatione... di Carlo Secondo... nel terzo giorno di Maggio, 1661, insieme con la descrittione degl' archi trionfali... e altre... dimostrationi d'allegrezze... nella... Citta di Londra... anco la superba cavalcata fatto... il giorno innanzi... Il tutto transportato nella lingua italiana, per il Capitan Giorgio Gerbieri D'Ouvilly', was printed in Venice in 1661. 


@@@@@


doc= 7946


Dovaston, John Freeman Milward (1782-1854), naturalist and poet, the younger child and only son of John Dovaston (1740-1808) and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Price, was born on 30 December 1782 in the villa known as The Nursery which his father had personally built on a small ancestral estate developed into a prosperous tree nursery near the village of West Felton, between Oswestry and Shrewsbury, Shropshire. To his remarkable father, the self-educated son of a feckless wheelwright, Dovaston was to owe a life of propertied leisure, manual skills, a fondness for natural history, and a love of the classics and of Welsh music and literature. His father had been an intimate of Shenstone and a taste for poetry and its composition in particular extended also to an uncle and a cousin. But it was music that was latterly to claim him pre-eminently, reflected in his ownership of two organs, a grand piano, a set of harmonica glasses, and a cello. 
After successively attending Oswestry grammar school and, more briefly, Shrewsbury School, Dovaston went up in 1800 to Christ Church, Oxford, on a Careswell exhibition. After graduating in 1804 he read for the bar, augmenting his then slender means by acting as drama critic for a newspaper. Called in June 1807, he practised, however, only for a year or two before the death of his father enabled him to abandon a profession he found uncongenial and spend the rest of his life in rural retirement. 
At least since undergraduate days Dovaston had been composing poems and in 1812 a volume of these was published locally under the title 'Fitz-Gwarine, a ballad of the Welsh border, with other rhymes, legendary, incidental and humorous'. The main piece was an evident imitation of Scott's 'Marmion' of four years earlier. This made him sufficient of a celebrity locally for the freedom of the borough of Oswestry to be conferred on him in 1814. It also won him a national publisher for an enlarged edition (in 1816), followed in 1817 by a collection of songs, 'British Melodies', set to music by Clementi, further poems in 1822, and finally a volume of his collected work in 1825. Though he himself doubtless set much store by this 'oeuvre', its overall impact seems to have been slight. 
It is rather for his pioneer experiments in ornithology and his friendship with Thomas Bewick that Dovaston is principally notable. So trifling by comparison with his literary work did he regard the former, however, that details of them were divulged almost apologetically and published so obscurely that their impressively innovatory character lay overlooked for a century and a half. Though the most important of his discoveries saw print in Loudon's widely read 'Magazine of Natural History', it was communicated in the guise of a mock Socratic dialogue, his authorship semi-concealed behind an anagram of his name. The choice of Von Osdat was accidentally appropriate, though, for while several others had long anticipated him in noting that robins have individual territories, the only one to have appreciated the biological significance of this was an Austrian counterpart, Baron Von Pernau. Until the 1920s, however, no one but Dovaston seems to have pursued matters to the point of trapping and marking birds and, albeit unsystematically, discriminating territories. This work was a by-product of his no less pioneer use of a feeding device for wild birds, punningly termed by him an 'ornithotrophe'. Similarly advanced were his regular resort to a spyglass for watching birds, when almost everyone else relied still on a gun, and his creation on his estate of artificial nesting holes and boxes. He even did some rudimentary ringing of migrants, utilizing his cello wire for the purpose, and made abortive attempts to translate bird songs into musical notation. Nor were birds the only focus of his thoughtful curiosity: he also succeeded in growing mistletoe on over a score of different tree species. 
Regrettably, Dovaston was content to be a dilettante and through diffidence or inertia was disinclined to trawl for converts or penetrate further in his experiments. His most substantial publication in natural history was a mere list of local birds contributed to W. A. Leighton's 'Guide to Shrewsbury' in 1850, following many plant records supplied to the same author's 'Flora of Shropshire' of 1841. But a mass of notes dating from boyhood onwards which he sent to Bewick for the sixth edition of his 'History of British Birds' was little drawn on, to his chagrin. A great admirer of Bewick's work, Dovaston had called on him in Newcastle while on a walking tour in 1823 and the two remained in touch until Bewick's death five years later. Dovaston procured orders for Bewick's works among his friends, passed on specimens and notes from his naturalist neighbours, and drafted the preface for the last edition of the 'History'. The account of Bewick he subsequently published in the 'Magazine of Natural History' has ever since been the main source for the artist's biographers. 
As well as an unpublished account of a tour through Scotland as far as the Hebrides that he made with his friend J. E. Bowman in 1825, which characteristically includes valuable observations on the bagpipe and its music, much of Dovaston's correspondence has survived. Forthright and decided in his views, he reveals in this a coolness towards the church and a whig stance politically which none the less failed to alienate the many devoted friends won by his liveliness, warmth, and humour. 
After several serious illnesses from digestive disorders Dovaston's health finally failed in 1847, leaving him permanently bedridden. He died at home on 8 August 1854 and was buried in the churchyard at West Felton. A lifelong bachelor, he left his estate to a nephew, but his library of over 3000 volumes was dispersed by auction in 1910. He is commemorated in the Dovaston Yew, 'Taxus baccata' var. 'dovastonii', a pendulous variety derived from a bush found by his father in a local hedge. 


@@@@@


doc= 7947


Dove, Henry (bap. 1641, d. 1695), Church of England clergyman, was baptized at Ilsington, Devon, on 2 November 1641, the son of Robert Dove (died 1645) and his wife, Elizabeth. His father, rector of Ilsington and of Elm and Emneth in the fens, was sequestered from his East Anglian parishes for deserting his cure for the royal army, and proceedings were in train to deprive him from Ilsington when he died there in September 1645. Educated at Westminster School, where he was a boarder from 1656, Henry Dove was elected to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1658. He graduated BA in 1661 and MA in 1665, was incorporated MA at Oxford on 6 May 1669, and proceeded DD in 1677. Ordained deacon at Ely in March 1665, he became vicar of St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, on 12 January 1673 and on 3 December 1678 was collated to the archdeaconry of Richmond. He was chaplain to his uncle John Pearson, bishop of Chester, who recommended him to the king for the mastership of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1683. He was also chaplain successively to Charles II, James II, and William and Mary. 
Although Dove was married twice no record can be found of his first marriage, which produced a daughter, Susan. In 1680 he married his second wife, Rebecca Holworthy ('bap'. 1657), who was described in the marriage licence of 2 July as 'of St. Margaret, Westminster, spinster, aged 23' (Chester, 414). 
Described as 'an able preacher' ('Old Westminster', 1.279), Dove published several sermons. In 1680 he published 'A Sermon Preached before the Honourable House of Commons... Nov. 5, 1680' which commented on the furious political debate surrounding Titus Oates's Popish Plot revelations in 1678 and the subsequent parliamentary attempts to exclude Charles II's brother, James, from succeeding the throne. Thanking God for his 'deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the bloody designs of Popish Traytors', Dove nevertheless railed against 'all Sedition... Heresie and Schism' and encouraged a 'hearty Loyalty and Fidelity to our King', thus declaring his support for Charles and all those who opposed the whig attempts to pass bills of exclusion. 
Narcissus Luttrell refers to Dove preaching a sermon 'exhorting to unity and loyalty', which was later published as 'A Sermon Preached before the Right Honourable Lord Mayor... on the Feast of St. Michael, 1682' (Luttrell, 1.225), while John Evelyn mentions Dove's 'A Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall, January 25, 1685'. Dove also published 'A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall, February the Fifteenth, 1691' and 'Albania: a Poem Humbly Offered', in memory of Queen Mary in 1695. His relationship to the queen, rightful heir in the absence of James and the model of Anglican piety, suggests how Dove's loyalist churchmanship could accommodate itself to the revolution of 1688. A further pointer to his continuing religious sensibilities is provided by his presence among those who witnessed the will of Francis Atterbury. 
Dove died on 11 March 1695, leaving his second wife and his daughter, Susan. His will detailed a gift of $5 for the poor of his parish, 40 shillings for each of his servants and $400 for his daughter, to be received on her twenty-first birthday or her marriage, if earlier. Susan also received copyhold lands in Sutton, Lincolnshire, left him by his first wife. His second wife, Rebecca, inherited the remainder of his goods and estate. He was buried in St Bride's Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 7948


Dove, John (1561-1618), Church of England clergyman, a Surrey man, was a scholar of St Peter's College, Westminster, from which he was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1580. He graduated BA on 5 February 1584 and proceeded MA on 16 March 1587, BD on 22 November 1593, and DD on 1 July 1596. He was presented to the rectory of Tidworth, Wiltshire, in 1596 by Lord Chancellor Thomas Egerton and collated by Archbishop Whitgift on 5 November of that year to the rectory of St Mary Aldermary, London, which he held for the rest of his life. In 1597, however, he received a licence from the privy council to travel abroad for three years. 
Aside from his pastoral duties Dove was an author of some repute, publishing seven tracts between 1594 and 1613 in which he revealed himself to be a capable and a loyal defender of the Church of England as established by law. In a 1594 tract containing a sermon originally preached at Paul's Cross he identified the Roman Antichrist as that Antichrist spoken of in scripture, and, following on from the theological controversies at Cambridge University in 1595-6, he published another sermon (again previously preached at Paul's Cross) in which he advocated the Calvinist interpretation of the doctrine of divine predestination. In 1601 he published a sermon upon the legality of divorce, arguing that the word of God did not allow a man to divorce his wife and marry another, even if his wife had previously committed adultery. In 'A Perswasion to the English Recusants, to Reconcile themselves to the Church of England' (1603), dedicated to James I, he appealed to the recusant population to frequent holy communion as celebrated by the Church of England; he played down the differences between the two churches, although he was careful to add a section addressed 'to the protestant reader' which laid out his impeccable protestant credentials. A tract confuting atheism in the realm (1605) was followed in 1606 by 'A Defence of Church Government', in which he defended against puritan criticism both the use of episcopacy by the church and the employment of the sign of the cross in the baptismal rubric of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Dove died in April 1618. 


@@@@@


doc= 7949


Dove, John (d. 1664/5), politician, was the son of Henry Dove (died 1616), mayor of Salisbury at the time of his death. John Dove was married with four children, but little else is known of his family. Perhaps a brewer by trade, he was an alderman of Salisbury and served as mayor in 1635. A zealous parliamentarian, he was elected MP for Salisbury in 1645 in place of the town recorder, Robert Hyde, an ejected royalist who was also a personal enemy. With his brother Francis (mayor in 1645 and 1650), Dove served on the Wiltshire county committee and most subsequent militia and assessment commissions. As an MP he was nominated to several parliamentary committees but took no part in the king's trial beyond attending when the sentence was agreed, on 26 January 1649. He also amassed considerable wealth, purchasing the manors of Fountell in Hampshire, Blewbury, Berkshire, and Winterbourne Earls, Wiltshire, from the sales of bishops' lands, plus other lands in Wiltshire. He was named colonel of foot in the Wiltshire militia on 10 August 1650. On 25 August 1651 the council of state commended him for his zeal in raising the militia against Charles II. 
Dove was chosen high sheriff of the county in 1655, the year of the abortive royalist rising. On 14 March, Sir Joseph Wagstaffe, Colonel John Penruddock, and some 150 men entered Salisbury early in the morning, and seized Dove, Chief Justice Rolle, and Lord Nicholas, who were there for the county assizes. After the royal proclamation had been read Wagstaffe proposed hanging both judges and the sheriff on the spot. This violent proposal was overruled by the local gentry but Dove, for refusing to read the proclamation, was reserved for future punishment. He was carried to Yeovil, but after two days was allowed to return on parole to Salisbury, where he found that Major Boteler had freed the city. Dove's actions immediately afterwards graphically illustrated his vindictive and grasping nature. On 29 March he asked Thurloe that only those of the 'honest and well-affected party' be allowed to serve on juries to try the rebels (Thurloe, 'State papers', 3.319). Later, sixty-three citizens of Salisbury petitioned for clemency for a condemned rebel, John Lucas, who had intervened to save Dove's life. Lambert, Disbrowe, and Rous were sent to discuss this with Dove, but Lucas was duly hanged. When another rebel, Hugh Grove, was beheaded at Exeter on 14 May, he called from the scaffold for God to forgive, among others, 'Mr Dove and the rest for so falsely and maliciously swearing against me' (Hoare, 17-18); perhaps significantly, Dove had been granted Grove's sequestered estate at Chisenbury Priors in 1650. 
In September 1656 both Doves were listed among the aldermen and assistants to be removed from the corporation when the new charter reduced the numbers, their presbyterian faction having been outflanked by radicals. He took his seat in the restored Rump in 1659, while the recent borough charter was replaced by the old one in August of that year. At the Restoration Dove made an abject submission and was allowed to depart unpunished. He and his brother were still aldermen in 1662, when the 'Act for the Well Governing and Regulating of Corporations' removed them. He retired to his estate at Ivy Church, Alderbury, Wiltshire, where he died between October 1664, when his will was made, and March 1665 when it was proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 7950


Dove, Nathaniel (1711-1754), writing master, trained in London under Philip Pickering, a writing master in Paternoster Row. Almost nothing is known of his life, except that he described himself as 'Master of the Academy at Hoxton' (Heal, 46) and was one of the schoolmasters recommended in T. Dilworth's 'A New Guide to the English Tongue'. He is chiefly known for his book 'The Progress of Time' (1740), where verses on the seasons and months are composed in a mixture of calligraphic styles, including 'German' text and 'Gothic' hands. Dove's designs for these plates were engraved by Thomas Gardener and the work was dedicated to Prince George, the eldest son of the prince of Wales. Between 1738 and 1740 Dove also contributed twenty designs to George Bickham's luxury engraved copybook 'The Universal Penman' (1733-41), and a survey of these shows his facility in a variety of hands, including the businesslike round hand and the more ornamental square and German texts. Although he was evidently fond of decorating his texts with flourishes, the greater part of his work in 'The Universal Penman' was of a more practical orientation, providing exemplary formats for tradesmen's bills and accounts. According to William Massey's conclusion, in his 'The Origins & Progress of Letters' (1763), these performances must have recommended Dove to his final lucrative position as a clerk in the 'Victualling-office, on Tower-hill' (Massey, 2.76). It was while in this employment that he died in 1754. 


@@@@@


doc= 7951


Dove, Patrick Edward (1815-1873), political theorist, son of Henry Dove, naval officer, and his wife, Christiana Paterson, was born at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, on 31 July 1815. Thomas Dove, bishop of Peterborough, was an ancestor. His family, originally from Surrey, had been connected for many generations with the navy. They lived in Devon after 1716, when Francis Dove RN was appointed 'commissioner of the navy' at Plymouth. Henry Dove had retired from active service in 1815 at the end of the Napoleonic wars, and held an appointment at Deal connected with the Cinque Ports. 
Dove had a desultory education in England and France, until he had to leave school for heading a rebellion against the headmaster. His father would not allow him to follow his own strong desire for naval service. He was sent in 1830 to learn farming in Scotland. He afterwards spent some time in Paris, in Spain, and finally in London, where he became a close friend of Seymour Haden, who was impressed by his 'enormous energy, physical and moral'. In 1841 he took the estate of the Craig, near Ballantrae, Ayrshire, where he lived as a quiet country gentleman. A man of great physical power, he was a first-rate rider, a splendid shot with gun and rifle, an expert fly-fisher, a skilful sailor, and an excellent mechanic. Dove wrote the article on gunmaking for the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He was the agricultural adviser of the neighbouring farmers, and, objecting on principle to the game laws, refused to employ a gamekeeper. In the potato famine of the 1840s he did a great deal to provide work for his starving neighbours. 
In 1848 Dove lost most of his fortune by an unlucky investment. In 1849 he married Anne, daughter of George Forrester, an Edinburgh solicitor. He spent the next year at Darmstadt, Germany, pursuing the philosophical studies to which he had long been devoted. The first result was a book published while he was still in Germany, 'The Theory of Human Progression, and Natural Probability of a Reign of Justice' (1850), the first part of a projected treatise on the 'science of politics'. It was praised by Sir William Hamilton and Thomas Carlyle; Charles Sumner had it stereotyped in America, and at Sumner's request Dove wrote an article on slavery called 'The elder and younger brother', which appeared in the 'Boston Commonwealth' (21 September 1853). The main principle of the book is that liberty and equality could be reconciled only if rent income were socialized, either as a surrogate for the nationalization of land or as a complement to it. That principle, arrived at independently by Dove, is familiarly associated with more illustrious writers on the 'land question', especially with Herbert Spencer, at least in the first edition of his 'Social Statics' (1851), and with Henry George, notably in his 'Progress and Poverty' (1880). Dove was praised by George at a public meeting in Glasgow ('Daily Mail', 19 Dec 1884). However, Dove's theories are closer to Spencer than to George, who saw the socialization of rent as a surrogate for the nationalization of land, not as a complement. 
After leaving Germany Dove settled in Edinburgh. He lectured at the philosophical institution in 1853 on 'Heroes of the Commonwealth', in 1854 on 'The wild sports of Scotland', and in 1855 on 'The crusades'. He took a special interest in volunteer militias. In April 1853 he was captain of the Midlothian rifle club. For six months in 1854 he edited 'The Witness' during the illness of his friend Hugh Miller, and in the same year he published the second part of his work on politics, called 'Elements of Political Science'. It included 'An account of Andrew Yarranton, the founder of English political economy' (also published separately). In the 'Elements', Dove developed his arguments on the ownership of land and on its taxation. This was a continuation of his theoretical ambition of devising a property system that would secure for individuals entitlements not only to the produce of their labour, but also to those natural resources which were distinctively not the product of (human) labour. The third and concluding part was written, but never published, and the manuscript was lost. In 1855 he published 'Romanism, Rationalism, and Protestantism', a defence of orthodox protestantism. In 1856 Dove stood unsuccessfully for the chair of logic and metaphysics at Edinburgh University vacated by the death of Sir William Hamilton, but he impressed his successful rival, Alexander Campbell Fraser, as a man who powerfully combined determined practicality with speculative insight. J. S. Blackie, who knew Dove well, spoke of him in similar terms. In the same year Dove published 'The Logic of the Christian Faith'. In 1858 he published a small book on 'The Revolver', with hints on rifle clubs and on the defence of the country, lamenting the depopulation of the highlands. In 1858 Dove moved to Glasgow, where he edited 'The Commonwealth' newspaper, and was general editor of the 'Imperial Dictionary of Biography' for its first twenty issues. He also edited with Professor Macquorn Rankine the 'Imperial Journal of the Arts and Sciences', and wrote the article 'Government' for the 1860 edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He had now developed a rifled cannon with 'ratchet grooves'. It was tested by the eminent shipbuilder J. R. Napier, and shown to have great range and accuracy. The ordnance committee before whom it was brought refused to test it further unless the inventor would pay the expenses, which he could not at the time afford. 
In 1859 Dove accepted the command of the newly formed 91st Lanarkshire rifle volunteers, and in 1860 he took part in the first meeting of the National Rifle Association at Wimbledon, and won several prizes. He soon afterwards suffered what appears to have been a stroke, which left him partially paralysed. He went to Natal in May 1862 for a change of climate, but returned in April 1863. He died in Edinburgh on 28 April 1873, leaving a widow, two daughters, and a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 7952


Dove, Thomas (1555-1630), bishop of Peterborough, was born in London, the son of William Dove. He was a scholar at Merchant Taylors' School between 1564 and 1571, whence he proceeded to Pembroke College, Cambridge, as a Watts scholar, graduating BA in 1575 and MA in 1578. In 1575 he was nominated one of the first scholars at Jesus College, Oxford, but preferred to remain at Pembroke as 'tanquam socius' (equivalent to a fellow), having come second in the competition for the sole vacant fellowship to his illustrious contemporary at Merchant Taylors' and Pembroke Lancelot Andrewes. Dove was ordained deacon and priest by Bishop Cox of Ely on 21 December 1578, and became vicar of Saffron Walden, Essex, in 1580 on the presentation of the crown; he was rector of the college living of Framlingham from 1584 until his death, and briefly vicar of Heydon in Essex (1586-8). About this time he married Margaret, daughter of Oliver Warner of Eversden, Cambridgeshire; they had three daughters and two sons, the older being William, later knighted, and the younger Thomas, baptized in 1587, who later became archdeacon of Northampton and predeceased his father. 
Dove's further preferment owed much to his preaching, which so impressed Elizabeth I that she remarked after first hearing him that 'she thought the Holy Ghost was discended againe in this Dove' (Harington, 147-8). He became a royal chaplain, preaching three times before the queen in Lent 1586, and occupying the Good Friday slot from 1590 to 1601. In 1589 he became dean of Norwich, being installed on 16 June. Here he worked with local gentry against patentees for concealed lands, which resulted in 1593 in the statutory confirmation of the possessions of the dean and chapter; his appointment as a JP in 1591 was one mark of his local standing, and another followed in 1602, when seven local gentlemen wrote to Sir Robert Cecil requesting that Dove fill the vacant bishopric of Norwich. By this time Dove had left East Anglia, however, having been consecrated bishop of Peterborough on 26 April 1601. He was to remain at Peterborough for the rest of his life, despite lobbying the earls of Suffolk and Northampton for promotion to Lincoln in 1608. Also in 1601, he received the local living of Polebrooke to augment his slender income. 
The accession of James I was probably the major reason why Dove rose no higher. He was one of nine bishops to attend the Hampton Court conference in January 1604, but his only recorded contribution, on lay baptism, provoked the king's scorn. When Dove cited a patristic source that in case of necessity sand might be used instead of water, James retorted with 'a turd for the argument, he might as well have pissed on them' (Usher, 2.342). In the winter of 1604-5, as James enforced conformity on puritan clergy, Dove misread the signals and deprived sixteen ministers, more than any other diocesan, and had to defend his conduct to the privy council, pleading that his diocese was 'the nest and nursery of factious ministers' and that those he had ejected were of 'such invincible obstinacy, as never any bishop met with' ('Salisbury MSS', 17.46-7, 58-9). He then faced the embarrassment of a petition from forty-five Northamptonshire gentry to the king against the deprivations. Dove's vigour against nonconformists also betrayed his anti-puritanism, and in his early years at Peterborough he assembled a team of proto-Arminian officials, among them Richard Butler, John Buckeridge, and John Lambe, his chancellor in 1615-16 and later Archbishop William Laud's dean of the arches. 
Dove had learned caution from the events of 1604-5, however, and in any case he had to co-operate with the puritan gentry in the workings of local government. In 1611 and 1614 he was rebuked by Archbishop George Abbot, acting on royal orders, for his indulgence to intransigent nonconformists; earlier, in 1611, Dove also had to assure the privy council that he had not been negligent in tendering the oath of allegiance to Roman Catholics. This impression of a somewhat slack administration in the years after 1605 is no doubt heightened by the chance survival of such letters in Lambe's archive among the state papers, but independent evidence, such as Dove's rather casual practices at ordination (a significant number of his ordinands were later ejected for nonconformity), points in the same direction. Nevertheless Dove was active in diocesan affairs, regularly leading his triennial visitations and preaching to his clergy, and until about 1616 hearing disciplinary cases in his consistory or audience court. No fewer than nine different sets of his visitation articles are extant, and are remarkable for the regular revisions that he or his chancellor made to them. 
Dove resided at Peterborough Palace, making occasional forays to the Jacobean court in order to preach, again with some applause -- a sermon delivered in August 1605 won praise from many, including Queen Anne. He played some part in secular affairs too, attending the commission of sewers, especially in 1618-21, a time of controversial projects to drain the fens. But as the 1620s progressed he took less part in local affairs, delegated his visitations of 1626 and 1629, and missed the parliaments of 1624, 1625, 1626, and 1628-9. Dove composed his will in August 1626, leaving bequests to his large family, including $500 for the education of five grandchildren, and appointing his son Sir William Dove of Upton, Northamptonshire, as his executor. His wife had predeceased him. He died on 30 August 1630 and was buried in Peterborough Cathedral, where a monument, demolished in 1643, was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 7953


Dover, John (1644-1725), lawyer and playwright, was born in October 1644 at Shirley Farm, Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire, and baptized on 28 October, the second son of Captain John Dover ('bap'. 1614, died 1696) and his wife, Elizabeth Vade (died 1700). The physician and privateer Thomas Dover (bap. 1662, d. 1742) was a younger brother. In 1661 he was admitted as a foundation scholar of Magdalen College, Oxford, matriculating on 12 July, and left the university in 1665 without taking a degree. He entered Gray's Inn on 19 May 1664 and was called to the bar on 21 June 1672. 
In 1667 Dover's play, 'The Roman Generalls, or, The Distressed Ladies', an unacted tragedy in heroic verse, was published. In his dedication to his patron, Robert, Lord Brook, he declared that he had written the play to lessen the severity of his legal studies, 'for after I had read a sect or two in Littleton, I then to divert my self took Caesar's Commentaries, or read the Lives of my Roman Generalls out of Plutarch' (dedication). Dover practised law at Banbury, Oxfordshire. Wood stated that he wrote 'one or two more plays' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.597), one of which may have been the comedy 'The Mall, or, The Modish Lovers' (1674). In 1680 'The White Rose, or, A Word for the House of York, Vindicating the Right of Succession: in a Letter from Scotland, 9 March 1679' was published. On 30 August 1682, at the herald's visitation of Warwickshire, Dover made an unsuccessful attempt to claim that his grandfather Robert Dover (1581/2-1652) had been granted supporters and augmentations to a Dover coat of arms by James I because of his Cotswold Olimpick Games. He provided Wood with information about Robert Dover for his 'Athenae Oxonienses' (1691) (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.222). 
About 1684 Dover took holy orders and from 1688 was rector of Drayton near Banbury, where, to quote Wood, he was 'resorted to by fanatical people' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.597), probably Anabaptists. He died unmarried at his Drayton rectory on 3 November 1725, aged eighty-one, and was buried on 6 November in the chancel of the church where there is an inscription to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7954


Dover, Robert (1581/2-1652), organizer of the Cotswold Olimpick games, was born in Great Ellingham, Norfolk, the second son of John Dover, gentleman. He went to Queens' College, Cambridge, as a sizar, matriculating on 15 June 1595, but left without taking a degree. In 1599, at the age of seventeen, he was examined at Wisbech Castle as a gentleman's son, sent by his father to serve one of the priests held captive there. On 27 February 1605 he was admitted to Gray's Inn and was called to the bar probably six years later. On 23 May 1623 he was further called to be of the Grand Company of Ancients of Gray's Inn. By 1611 he had followed his sister Anne and his brother Richard to the Vale of Evesham, Worcestershire, settling initially at Saintbury, Gloucestershire. Some time before he had married Sibilla Sanford (died 1653), daughter of William Cole, dean of Lincoln and at one time president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and widow of John Sanford, a Bristol merchant. They had four children, Abigail ('b'. 1611), Sibella ('b'. 1612), John (1614-1696), and Robert ('b'. 1616), who died soon after his birth. 
Dover lived and undertook legal work in the Cotswolds or the Vale of Evesham for almost the rest of his life, residing at Saintbury and Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, and from 1628 at Childswickham, Worcestershire. In 1612 he became involved in organizing the games held on the hillside above Chipping Campden which subsequently became known as Robert Dover's Cotswold Olimpick games. Although many of his contemporaries considered that Dover had founded the games, it seems more likely that he became involved with a traditional Cotswold Whit festivity and revitalized it with his own distinctive form of entertainment. Dover's games were held on the Thursday and Friday of Whitsun week near the site of the stone that marked Kiftsgate hundred. Shakespeare may have attended them. 
The most detailed contemporary accounts of the games are to be found in 'Annalia Dubrensia: upon the yeerely celebration of Mr. Robert Dover's Olimpick games upon the Cotswold Hills', published in London on 11 January 1636 by Matthew Walbancke. This work included thirty-three poems by such recognized poets as Michael Drayton, Ben Jonson, Thomas Randolph, Shackerley Marmion, Owen Feltham, William Basse, Sir John Mennes, and Thomas Heywood, with a response from Robert Dover. Many of the contributors had clearly attended the games, and all were enthusiastic about Dover's character, referring to him as jovial, generous, mirth-making, heroic, and noble-minded. He had a reputation for being fair in legal dealings, trying to settle differences out of court. The frontispiece depicted the games in progress, with Robert Dover as master of ceremonies. He is portrayed as an impressive figure, dressed ceremonially in clothes, including hat, feather, and ruff, which originally belonged to James I, from whom he had authority to organize the event. The games offered activities for all levels of society -- horse-racing, coursing, backswords, wrestling, jumping, tumbling, spurning the bar, throwing the sledge-hammer, and pike exercises -- with dancing for ladies as well as feasting in tents on the hillside. A castle was erected from which guns were fired to introduce events. Competitors and spectators came from more than 60 miles around, and prizes included Dover's yellow favours which as many as 500 gained in any year. 
Dover was probably supported initially by Sir Baptist Hicks, the city merchant who was building the almshouses and the market hall in Chipping Campden, and he later certainly had the support of Endymion Porter, groom of the bedchamber to Charles I, who acquired the royal clothes and whose home was nearby at Aston-sub-Edge. Prince Rupert attended the games in 1636. For many the games conveyed the ideals of the original Greek Olympic games; Michael Drayton's poem in particular, written by 1630, made detailed comparisons. In addition Dover, in referring to his sports as honest and harmless, criticized puritan views of games and showed his support for the 'Book of Sports', first published by James I in 1618 and reissued by Charles I in 1633. 
The games overseen by Dover continued until 1644 when they were cancelled by William Bartholomew, vicar of St James's, Chipping Campden. He remained at Childswickham until 1650, serving as steward for the court of Wickhamford, and then went to live with his son, John, at Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire. He died there, at Shirley Farm, and was buried at St Lawrence's Church, Barton, on 24 July 1652; his wife died fifteen months later. Dover's games were revived after the Restoration and continued annually, their location becoming known as Dover's Hill. They were described by William Somervile (Somerville) in his poem 'Hobbinol', first drafted as 'The Wicker Chair' in 1708. They were the setting for a humorous scene in Richard Graves's 'The Spiritual Quixote' (1775), first drafted by 1758. Posters for the 1812 and 1849 games, where they continue to be described as 'Olimpick', advertise horse-racing, wrestling, backsword fighting, jingling, dancing, leaping, and running in sacks. They continued until 1852 when they were brought to an end, largely owing to the pressure exerted by Canon G. D. Bourne, JP and rector of Weston, and his supporters, who were concerned about the rowdyism the games brought to the area. The parish of Weston-sub-Edge was enclosed, and Dover's Hill became private property, to be bought by the National Trust in 1928. The games were revived for the Festival of Britain in 1951, and have been an annual event on Dover's Hill since 1966 on the Friday after the spring bank holiday. Initially known as Dover's meeting or the Dover's Hill games, the competition once more became the 'Olympicks' in the 1970s and, in the following decade, was recognized by the British Olympic Association for its contribution to Britain's Olympic heritage. 


@@@@@


doc= 7955


Dover, Thomas (bap. 1662, d. 1742), physician and privateer, was baptized on 6 May 1662 at Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire, the third son of John Dover ('bap'. 1614, died 1696), gentleman, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Vade. Thomas was grandson of Robert Dover (1581/2-1652), lawyer and reviver of the Cotswold games, with whom he has occasionally been confused, and the brother of the dramatist John Dover. Thomas followed John to Oxford, matriculating on 1 December 1680 at Magdalen Hall. He took his BA on 1 July 1684 and moved to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in November 1686, graduating MB the following year. Dover subsequently went to live and study in Westminster at the house of Thomas Sydenham. While there, Dover contracted smallpox and was treated by his mentor. After being bled and purged: 'I went abroad, by his Direction, till I was blind, and then took to my Bed. I had no Fire allowed in my Room; my Windows were constantly open, my Bed-Clothes were order'd to be laid no higher than my Waist. He made me take twelve Bottles of Small-Beer, acidulated with Spirits of Vitriol, every Twenty-four Hours. (Dover, 119-20)' Dover was cured and retained a lifelong affection for Sydenham, urging the public to '[r]ead the Man whose Reason was much superior to mine, the honest and good Dr. 'Sydenham'' (Dover, 103). Some time during this period Dover married Joanna (died 1727); they had twin daughters, Magdalen and Elizabeth, baptized on 27 April 1688, who died within weeks. A third daughter, Sibilla, born in 1693, later married John Hunt, and a fourth, Elizabeth, married John Opie. 
By 1695 Dover had moved to Bristol, where he set up practice. He later reports that at this time spotted fever 'raged much... so that I visited from twenty-five to thirty Patients, a Day... besides their poor Children taken into their Workhouse, where I engaged... to find them Physick, and give them Advice at my own Expence and Trouble, for the two first Years' (Dover, 107-8). That such a practice was unusual at the time is suggested by the reaction of one of Dover's detractors, H. Bradley, who labels it '[t]he first laudable action I have yet met with from this practitioner' (Strong, 161). On 9 December 1697 Dover 'offered himself to be Phisitian to the New Workhouse gratis' (ibid., 71). Before 1708 Dover had travelled to the West Indies, perhaps aboard a Bristol slaver; he subsequently states that he cured the surgeon Jonathan Keate of diabetes in Port Royal 'more than forty Years since' (Dover, 28). Dover was subsequently described as someone 'who hath been a sea captain for many years, and who pretends to have learnt the method of cure in the West Indies where no one is known to die of the small-pox' (Dewhurst, 54). Whether owing to an inheritance, success in his practice or in the slave trade, or a combination of these, Dover was in a position to invest heavily in the Bristol syndicate backing Woodes Rogers's 1708 privateering venture to the south seas. This was not unique for the time: the physician John Radcliffe himself speculated in a vessel bound for the West Indies, which was captured by the French. 
Rogers's expedition was, however, responsible for much of Dover's fame and not a little of his notoriety, causing Sir William Osler subsequently to stigmatize him as 'Dover, the Buccaneer' (Osler, 19). Owing to his stake Dover was appointed second captain of the 'Duke' under Rogers, captain of the marines and president of the council, having two votes. His reason for personally participating in the venture is unknown, but may be reflected in his subsequent revision of advice offered by Dr Radcliffe to would-be practitioners: 'Perhaps he had done better, if he had obliged those Gentlemen to practice Physick at least ten Years, before their setting out for foreign Parts: They would then have been much more capable of making such Observations, as might be of singular Use to them; and 'tis further my Opinion, that if he had ordered them to visit the most intemperate Climates, where all acute Diseases are the most violent, they would have returned Masters of greater Knowledge and Experience. (Dover, 7)' Dover modestly added that '[i]f Traveling be necessary to make an accomplished Physician, I am very sure that I have travelled more than all the Physicians in 'Great Britain' put together' (Dover, 7-8). Prior voyages may well have provided the contacts or inclinations leading to Dover's involvement with Woodes Rogers. 
The privateering expedition sailed on 1 August 1708. Before sighting Tenerife, Dover helped quell a mutiny on the 'Duke' when Rogers had gone aboard a Swedish vessel to examine her cargo, and he also commanded the first expedition boat to land at Juan Fernandez on February 1709, where Alexander Selkirk, Defoe's Robinson Crusoe, was rescued. The ships revictualled here, and Woodes Rogers recalls the island's 'green piemento trees, which cast a refreshing smell. Our house being made by putting a sail round four of 'em, and covering it a top with another; so that Capt. Dover and I both thought it a very agreable seat, the weather being neither too hot nor too cold. ('Life Aboard a British Privateer', 66-7)' Unfortunately, this appears to be the last time Rogers and the doctor agreed on anything during the cruise; Rogers's 'Cruising Voyage' is generally silent about Dover, although, probably significantly, it omits him from its dedication 'To the worthy Gentlemen my surviving owners' ('Life Aboard a British Privateer', 4). The breach presumably stemmed from disputes over precedence and tactics, particularly the successful April attack on Guayaquil which Dover insisted on leading, although once ashore he was prominent in urging caution. Dover later transmutes this: 'I took by Storm the two cities of 'Guciaquil'' (Dover, 100) -- although, again significantly, this statement in his 'Ancient Physician' appeared the year of Rogers's death. Against doctors' traditional adversary, disease, Dover was more in his element. Sleeping in Guayaquil's churches, where 'We were very much annoy'd with the Smell of dead Bodies' (Dover, 100), some one hundred and eighty privateers came down with the plague. Dover administered physic to all, and lost only seven or eight owing 'to the strong Liquers which their Mess-Mates procured for them' (Dover, 102). Rogers mentions the illness without ascribing its cure to Dover. Dover does not note that one of the deceased was his brother-in-law, Samuel Hopkins. By October, Dover had transferred from the 'Duke' to the 'Dutchess', and his claim to captain the captured Manila ship 'Nostra Signora de la Incarnacia del Singana' was met with the protest that he was 'utterly incapable of the office' (Powell, 128). (In a compromise, he was made the equivalent of a 'social captain'.) The expedition successfully returned to England via the East Indies, where Dover appears to have made at least some medical enquiries. His return of $6689 more than doubled his initial outlay and temporarily made the doctor a wealthy man before he lost much of this through investments in the South Sea Company. 
By 1717 Dover had settled in London, being admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1721. Despite some early success Dover fell foul of his fellows, and was admonished by the committee of censors in 1722 on a complaint by Dr Wagstaffe over interference with his treatment of a case. Plagued by South Sea debts, Dover sold his property at Barton on the Heath in July 1727 after the death of his wife. He spent three years in Gloucestershire, where he cured several individuals during the epidemic of 1728-9 and tried unsuccessfully to set up a practice in Bristol. Dover then returned to the capital, seeing patients daily at the Jerusalem Coffee House. 
It seems clear from his writings that Dover held some beliefs which might be termed holistic: '[n]ature will neither be forced nor driven, and is often very hard to be led; but will do wonders when properly assisted' (Strong, 145). He was unprejudiced in many aspects of his practice: after a surgeon refused to bleed Miss Corbett in one case about 1720, Dover noted that '[c]olours were all the same to the blind' and summoned 'a 'black man' who blooded very well' (Dewhurst, 131). At the same time Dover's attitude toward professionals appears to have been acerbic and confrontational; he had little good to say about apothecaries, whom he believed overcharged, or the College of Physicians, whom he termed a 'clan of prejudiced gentlemen' (Dover, 150), and in criticizing treatments, he was prepared to name names. In 1732 Dover published 'The Ancient Physician's Legacy to his Country', chiefly noted for his touting of mercury as a remedy for many diseases, which inevitably led to his nickname, the Quicksilver Doctor. 
There followed much published criticism based on Dover's suggested remedies, his attitude toward fellow physicians, and, one suspects, inspired not a little by the doctor's invitation to patients to self-diagnose. H. Bradley referred to Dover's 'ungentlemanlike way of treating mankind, together with his blind zealous boasting of himself', adding, 'I fear our worthy author... has an itch, which all the cold baths in Europe cannot heal, I mean that itch of the tongue which not being well cured in his youth became so inveterate as not to be rooted out' (Strong, 159-60). Daniel Turner noted that 'his conversation, you know, has been much with tars, and he thinks that the most tender constitutions of our citizens will bear the same rough handling' (ibid., 163), while the author of a 'Treatise on Mercury' affirmed 'that some nurses, and even the grave-diggers' were obliged to Dover for his publication (ibid., 161). One of Dover's supporters opined that in writing his opus, 'You must have been under the strong Influence of some very Inauspicuous Planet, not your Friend Mercury', adding that while the doctor's opposers 'swim in Shoals with the Current,... You... labour against the Stream, friendless and unaccompanied, and whoever meets you in his Way, helps to sink you'. Dover's treatise did, however, go through numerous editions (largely unrevised, although he did occasionally 'improve' his testimonials). He was the originator of the formerly well-known 'Dover's powder', whose composition has changed since the publication of 'The Ancient Physician's Legacy'. 
In the 1740s Dover spent time at Stanway House, in Gloucestershire, belonging to his friend Robert Tracy, to whom the 'Ancient Physician' was dedicated. Dover died there in April 1742 and was buried on 20 April in the Tracy family vault in Stanway church. 


@@@@@


doc= 7956


Doveton, Sir John (1768-1847), army officer in the East India Company, was born in St Helena, the youngest of six children (four sons and two daughters) of Jonathan Doveton (1733-1792), a planter and factor on St Helena who returned to England with his family and settled at Richmond, Surrey, and his wife, Mary Harper. His elder brothers included Gabriel Doveton (1760-1824), who became a major-general in the Madras native infantry and was MP for Lancaster, and Richard Doveton (1764-1823), a cavalry officer in India, who was made CB in 1815. 
After joining the forces of the Madras presidency as a cadet in 1782, Doveton entered the 1st Madras light cavalry as a cornet on 5 December 1785. He served all through the three campaigns of Lord Cornwallis against Tipu Sultan, and was promoted lieutenant on 12 June 1792. He also served in the campaign of Lieutenant-General George Harris against Tipu Sultan during the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War of 1799. He specially distinguished himself at the head of part of his regiment in the rapid pursuit of the notorious warlord Dhundia Wagh, under the direction of Colonel Arthur Wellesley. 
Doveton was promoted captain on 8 May 1800, major on 2 September 1801, and lieutenant-colonel on 15 October 1804. In 1808 he was appointed to command the expedition against Bhangarh Khan, whose camp at Amritnair he stormed on 28 December. On 14 June 1813 he was promoted colonel, and in the following year appointed with the rank of brigadier-general to command the Hyderabad contingent, which was officered by Englishmen and kept under the control of the East India Company's government, while paid by the nizam. This force, which comprised nearly 10,000 men, was cantoned round Aurangabad, and was soon brought to a high pitch of efficiency by Doveton. In the Pindari war, conducted by the marquess of Hastings, the Hyderabad contingent played an important part. 
Doveton's most important services were rendered during the Third Anglo-Maratha War of 1817-18. The Bhonsla ruler of Nagpur, Apa Sahib, who had succeeded his cousin after having him strangled, lent a ready support to the peshwa's scheme of assisting the Pindaris to overthrow British power in India. He therefore directed his troops, who were chiefly Arab mercenaries, to attack the British resident, Richard Jenkins. Though the resident's escort, commanded by Colonel Scott, beat off the assailants from the fortified hill of Sitabaldi in November 1817, its position soon became critical. Doveton, on hearing of this, advanced by forced marches on Nagpur, which he reached on 12 December. On the following day Apa Sahib surrendered himself, but his troops refused to surrender likewise. After a fierce battle, in which Doveton lost 141 men killed and wounded, the Arabs were defeated with a loss of 75 guns and 40 elephants. But they still held the city and palace of Nagpur, which Doveton attempted to storm on 24 December. The attack was repulsed, and Doveton lost over three hundred men in the assault. Yet the obstinacy of his attack terrified the Arab soldiers, who soon after agreed to evacuate the city. For his share in these operations, Doveton was made a CB on 14 October 1818 and a KCB on 26 November 1819. 
In April 1819 Doveton commanded the forces which besieged and captured Asirgarh. On 12 August the same year he was promoted major-general. The following year he resigned his command and retired to Madras. He was promoted lieutenant-general and made a GCB on 10 January 1837. He died at his house in Madras on 7 November 1847, aged seventy-nine. He is to be distinguished from his namesake, who was also born in St Helena and pursued a military career in India, Sir John Doveton (1783-1857). 


@@@@@


doc= 7957


Dow, Alexander (1735/6-1779), army officer in the East India Company and author, was born in Perthshire, Scotland. Alexander Dow's father was 'of the customs at Dunbar' and Alexander himself was said to be apprenticed at Eyemouth to be educated for a mercantile career. In 1757, however, he joined the 'King of Prussia', a private ship of war, as a midshipman. One explanation given for this sudden career change was that he was forced to leave Scotland because of a fatal duel. In the course of the following three years he somehow made his way to Bengal, some say via Bencoolen, in Sumatra, where he entered the East India Company's military service as a cadet in 1760. Later that same year he was raised to the rank of ensign. In 1763 he became lieutenant and a year later he raised the 19th battalion of sepoys at Murshidabad. Appointed captain in April 1764, he took part in the assault on the Chunar Fort on 2 December that same year, during which he sustained a skull fracture. In 1766 he participated in the officers' association to protest against Clive's measure to abolish the double field allowance. Probably in consequence of his involvement in this affair, Dow found himself in Britain in 1768. 
In that year Dow published 'Tales Translated from the Persian of Inatulla of Delhi' and the first two volumes of the 'History of Hindostan'. The latter work is a translation of the Persian text by Muhammad Kasim Ferishta, to which Dow added a dissertation on the religion and philosophy of the Brahmans and an appendix containing the last forty years of the history of the Mughal empire. His dissertation on Hindu religion and philosophy did not add much to existing knowledge of Hinduism but reached a wide audience and was extensively reviewed and discussed in Britain. It was therefore of some influence in shaping British views on India and on the religion and philosophy of its people until real advances in knowledge were made by William Jones and his fellow orientalists during the last two decades of the eighteenth century. Dow's treatise also influenced the views of Voltaire, and a French translation of his work appeared in 1769. In London Dow shared his lodgings with James Macpherson, another Scot with literary tastes, who would make a name for himself as the perpetrator of the Ossian hoax. In 1769 Dow published 'Zingis', a tragedy in five acts, which played with some success at Drury Lane. His qualities as a Persian scholar were called into question by John Shore, who supposed that he had had his Persian interpreter read and explain the stories of Inatulla to him, after which he had freely rewritten the substance of them in English. Shore considered Dow's translation of Ferishta's work, however, to be more correct, and in some places even exact in its translation. In his memoirs John Macdonald, in those days Dow's personal servant, wrote that his master spent so much money on women that he was tired of waiting on them. But Macdonald also recognized that Dow was a generous employer and when the latter set out for Bombay in April 1769, the footman agreed to accompany him. 
During the voyage Dow worked on the third volume of his 'History of Hindostan'. From Macdonald we learn that Dow spoke to inland princes in their own language and felt much at ease in their company as he 'knew their ways'. From this we may conclude that Dow's acquaintance with the Persian language went beyond his having a capable interpreter. Once arrived in India, his servant said that as his 'master made his fortune in Bengal and was a single man, he did not mind money' and 'kept the best house in Bombay' ('John Macdonald: Memoirs', 117). But Bombay did not agree with Dow, and when, early in 1771, Eyre Coote passed through the settlement on his way overland to Britain, Dow asked Lieutenant-Governor Hodges for leave to accompany him. During the voyage they met with various 'fatiguing, dangerous and disagreeable accidents of detention' (Dow to Philip Francis, 8 Nov 1777, BL OIOC, MS Eur. F/5, fols. 329-31) which seem to have called forth Coote's notoriously quick temper. 
Back in Britain in 1772 Dow considerably added to the public clamour raised against the East India Company in that year by publishing the third volume of his 'History of Hindostan', to which he prefixed two essays: 'A dissertation on the origin and nature of despotism in Hindostan', and 'An enquiry into the state of Bengal, with a plan for restoring that Kingdom to its former prosperity and splendour'. The essays, like the writings published earlier that year by William Bolts, were openly critical of Clive, but Dow, unlike Bolts, expressed himself more charitably about Clive's successor, Harry Verelst, whom he qualified as a man of 'probity and honour'. But even his friendship for Verelst did not prevent Dow from criticizing him for failing to implement many obviously necessary regulations. Dow's ideas on improvement centred around the introduction of paper money to relieve Bengal commerce from the stranglehold caused by a lack of specie, the introduction of property rights in Bengal, the establishment of a board of revenue, and the introduction of a proper judicial system under a supreme court with jurisdiction over all of the Bengal territory. Dow's plan for property rights in Bengal was an early expression of the ideal of the permanent settlement. He expected that the enhanced security such a measure would provide would induce the new owners to improve the cultivation of their lands while at the same time strengthening their loyalty to the British. However, he saw the introduction of property rights not as an aim in itself but as a measure that would revive commerce by an increased agricultural output. His ideas were essentially mercantilist. In 1774, while Dow himself was in India, his new verse tragedy was published in London under the title 'Sethona'. It was staged by Garrick at Drury Lane but was acted only for nine nights. 
In March 1772 the directors, having already cleaned the slates of many other officers involved in the officers' association of 1766, decided to restore Dow to the rank he would have held in Bengal had he never participated in that transaction. Dow now ranked as a lieutenant-colonel but was to receive the pay of a captain until a lieutenant-colonelcy became available in Bengal. A year later he took his passage on the 'Stormont' via Madras. In 1775 he was appointed commissary-general, an administrative post taking care of the military stores of all the factories and stations of the company's Bengal establishment. While executing his function diligently and to his employers' satisfaction, he grew impatient about being kept occupied 'in the detail of Brigade duty on the scanty pittance of 240 Rupees per month', obliging him 'to expend the greater part of a small independent fortune' he possessed (Dow to Francis, 11 Oct 1777, BL OIOC, MS Eur. F/5). Finally, he was rewarded for his services by an appointment as commander of the fort at Chunar for the limited duration of two years. But after one year he received notice that Lieutenant-Colonel Upton was appointed to succeed him. By such setbacks Dow was driven into the camp of Philip Francis, the opponent of Warren Hastings, hoping to receive more favourable treatment should Francis succeed Hastings as governor-general. Dow was now stationed at Barrackpore and, after notice of the war with France was received in Bengal, Hastings, despite Dow's allegiance to his great opponent, entrusted him with the task of investing the French settlement at Chandernagore. Dow executed this order at daybreak on 10 July 1778. 
Towards the end of that year Dow felt his constitution deteriorating. He left Calcutta to try to retrieve his health. On 18 July 1779 he wrote to Francis from Murshidabad: 'From some remaining obstruction in my liver I have been necessitated to recommence, or rather to prolong my course of mercury, which prevents so sudden a restoration of strength as I had once reason to expect' (BL OIOC, MS Eur. E/17). Thirteen days later, on 31 July 1779, Dow died at Bhagalpur, aged forty-three. Two years later an inventory was made up of his possessions in Bengal. From his papers it appeared that they amounted to Re146,720 (about $18,000), but his administrators had by that time only been able to recover half of that sum. 


@@@@@


doc= 7958


Dowdall, George (1487-1558), archbishop of Armagh, according to the Dowdall pedigrees, was the son of Edward Dowdall and grandson of Henry and Jeneta Dowdall of Newtown Termonfeckin, co. Louth. His family were probably landowners. Sir Thomas Cusack, later lord chancellor of Ireland, was his cousin. On 8 July 1518 Dowdall, described as a cleric, was not yet a fully professed member of the community of crutched friars at Ardee, co. Louth. He was employed as a proctor in a number of suits in Armagh's consistory court, suggesting a training in canon law. By 1522 he was being styled 'magister', a title normally reserved for university graduates, although no record of his graduation has been preserved. By June 1524 Dowdall had become the prior of the hospital of the crutched friars at Ardee. 
It is not known whether Dowdall joined Archbishop George Cromer in the Kildare revolt of 1534-5, though Sir Thomas Cusack described him as 'such a papistical fellow, being able to corrupt a whole country' (Bradshaw, 126). His hospital was dissolved in 1539 and he became Armagh's official principal. Despite his commitment to Catholic doctrines Dowdall acquiesced in Henry VIII's royal supremacy. By 1540 Cromer was terminally ill and Dowdall was increasingly responsible for the administration of the archdiocese. He visited the English royal court in 1542 in the company of the lord deputy, St Leger, and was promised that he would be the next archbishop of Armagh. 
Dowdall was appointed as archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland by Henry VIII on 29 April 1543. His career as archbishop may be traced by means of Dowdall's register, the last in the series of volumes of medieval records which survive for Armagh. His administration may be characterized as conservatively reformist (that is, accepting of the royal supremacy) rather than pro-reformation. None of his actions had a distinctly protestant character. Indeed, Dowdall resisted the extension of protestantism into his diocese during Edward VI's reign. By the summer of 1551, however, faced with imminent imprisonment, he left Ireland precipitately, declaring that he would 'never be bishop where the holy Mass was abolished' (Shirley, 54-60). He was subsequently removed from office. He spent some time with the abbot of Centre, in the Netherlands, and is supposed to have translated a 'History of Ireland' from a manuscript belonging to Conn Bacach O'Neill at Armagh in 1551 (Lambeth MS 623). He was reconciled with the Roman Catholic church and received a papal provision on 1 March 1553. Mary restored him as the crown acknowledged archbishop of Armagh in October 1553, and he was also a member of her council of Ireland. The title of 'primate of all Ireland', granted to the archbishop of Dublin, George Browne, in 1551, was restored to Dowdall on 12 March 1554. 
Following his return, Dowdall convened a major synod to restore and revitalize the Catholic religion throughout the ecclesiastical province of Armagh. Several of its decrees reimposed long-standing obligations. Other decrees on the exaction of burial fees from widows and orphans, and on fees for the administration of sacraments, show that Archbishop Dowdall tried to defuse sources of tension between the laity and its priests. The synod also authorized the appointment of inquisitors to identify and prosecute persons expressing heretical opinions. Heretical books were ordered to be burnt. Within the archdiocese of Armagh the work of restoration was quickly carried out. The decrees issued in the annual diocesan synods in Mary's reign were wholly traditional. Protestantism, clerical negligence, or immorality in Armagh 'inter Anglicos' presented no problem in the primate's eyes. His provincial synod of 1556 did no more than confirm a number of feast days as holy days of obligation, though agricultural labourers were not forbidden to work on those days. 
Dowdall was a member of a royal commission established in April 1554 to remove all married clergymen in Ireland from office, the counterpart of similar commissions established in England and Wales. Several Henrician and Edwardian bishops were deprived of office as a result, together with some lesser clergymen, though it seems that there were very few married priests in Ireland. Dowdall was appointed to another commission in December 1557 to inquire into the location of all chalices and ornaments, bells, houses, and lands belonging to parish churches and chapels in co. Louth, with the aim of restoring to the use of the church any such items which had been confiscated. There seems, however, to have been no need in Ireland for the herculean efforts required in England to reconstruct the ritual and sacramental framework of traditional religion following Edward's reign. 
With the married bishops deprived, the way was clear for Cardinal Pole to promote two local men, William Walsh, one of his chaplains, and Thomas Leverous, whom he met in Rome, to Meath and Kildare respectively, two important dioceses which encompassed significant portions of the pale. Pole relied on Walsh and Leverous, as well as Dowdall, to spearhead the Marian restoration in Ireland. Following the revocation of the Henrician and Edwardian ecclesiastical legislation by the English parliament in January 1555 the Marian restoration gathered pace. St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, was restored on 25 March 1555, a powerful centre of Catholic piety and preaching at the heart of the English lordship in Ireland. Dowdall was appointed as a prebendary of the cathedral, giving him a residence in the capital whenever he had to attend the council of Ireland. 
Mary's Irish parliament of 1557 repealed all statutes and proclamations made against the papacy in Ireland since 1534. Statutes for the suppression of heresy were revived but no persecution of protestants ensued. The crown renounced its claim to the first fruits and twentieths, tithes, glebes, and advowsons which, as in England, Cardinal Pole hoped to use for a concerted assault on clerical poverty. Pole also hoped to establish diocesan seminaries to enhance the training of priests. George Dowdall doubtless approved of Pole's strategy. Yet it seems significant that he intended to found a chantry near his archiepiscopal residence at Termonfeckin, rather than a school or seminary, shortly before he died in London on 15 August 1558. In the event his intention, like Pole's plans, came to naught on Mary's death. One study has concluded that Dowdall 'was one of the finest figures of the late medieval Irish Church' and that, while he did not anticipate the Counter-Reformation in Ireland, he had 'laid foundations which helped to ensure that the counter-reformation would find receptive congregations during Elizabeth's reign' (Jefferies, 'Priests', 170). 


@@@@@


doc= 7959


Dowdeswell, William (1721-1775), politician, was born on 12 March 1721, the first surviving son of William Dowdeswell (1682-1728), landowner and politician, and his second wife, Amy Hammond (died in or after 1728), daughter of Anthony Hammond of Somersham, Huntingdonshire. The Dowdeswell family had been settled at Bushley, near Tewkesbury, on the Gloucestershire and Worcestershire border, since Elizabethan times and purchased Pull Court in 1628. They amassed considerable property locally, giving them an important electoral interest in Tewkesbury, for which no fewer than nine Dowdeswells had sat since 1660, including William's father and grandfather. William inherited while a minor, following his father's early death on 5 September 1728. 
In 1730 Dowdeswell was sent to Westminster School, for which he developed a lasting affection that culminated in his position as a Busby trustee (1769-75). He proceeded in 1737 to Christ Church, Oxford, where he contributed a set of Latin verses to the university collection of poems on the death of Queen Caroline in the following year. He does not appear to have taken an Oxford degree but in 1745 he went to the University of Leiden, where he associated, among others, with Charles Townshend, John Wilkes, Anthony Askew, and Alexander Carlyle. From the Netherlands he toured Italy, travelling through Sicily and Greece and returning to England by 1747. On 6 November 1747 he married Bridget (died 1818), fifth and youngest daughter of Sir William Codrington, first baronet (died 1738), of Dodington, Gloucestershire, and Elizabeth Bethell (died 1761), and sister of Sir William Codrington, second baronet (1719-1792). The couple had six sons, including William Dowdeswell, army officer and art collector, and seven daughters, several of whom died young. 
In 1747 Dowdeswell was returned as MP for Tewkesbury but he declined to stand for re-election in 1754, when certain constituents made their support conditional on a contribution of $1500 towards the local roads. He resumed his parliamentary career in 1761 as MP for Worcestershire, which he represented until his death, and enjoyed great popularity as MP. In his early career he was often mistaken for a tory because he supported continued commemoration of Charles I's execution, but his politics were more complex. As a typical country gentleman he opposed government expenditure levels but he upset the tories with his comments during the proceedings on the Westminster election in 1751 and with his dislike of the militia. In December 1762 he voted against the peace preliminaries. 
Dowdeswell was catapulted to prominence by the cider tax controversy of 1763. Considerable resentment was provoked in the western counties when Sir Francis Dashwood's budget extended the excise duties to domestic cider in March 1763. James Harris, the parliamentary diarist, noted between 9 and 14 March that Dowdeswell 'was the chief opponent and had taken great pains', making 'by far the best figure on that side' (Harris) and unsuccessfully pressing a series of amendments. In the summer of 1763 Dowdeswell sought further support by composing 'An Address to such of the Electors of Great Britain as are not Makers of Cyder and Perry', in which he contended that this widening of an 'arbitrary' excise system foreshadowed the eventual subjection of all freeborn Englishmen in a sinister Machiavellian 'plan for 'power' not for revenue' (p. 8). He also supported the extra-parliamentary campaign to petition the legislature, instruct local MPs, and collect examples of excise grievances; he attended the Worcestershire county meeting on 29 August and guided discussions in the Tewkesbury common council on 13 September. On 18 November George Grenville, the new first lord of the Treasury, sought a compromise solution in discussions with Dowdeswell and other interested MPs but his apparent prevarication led Dowdeswell to conclude that the western members should seek a full repeal through their own efforts. On 24 January 1764, Harris records, Dowdeswell moved for a committee in a 'decent, temperate, and reasonable' speech. On 31 January he: 'entered into a detail of the grievances of the excise laws upon ignorant countrymen, the enormity of the penalties, the trials without juries, the partiality of what he called revenue injustices, the dreaded consequences that were these laws extended commissioners of excise might nominate Members for the cider counties. (Harris)' On 10 February he seconded an unsuccessful repeal motion, following which Grenville pushed through conciliatory modifications. Dowdeswell also voted against Grenville on Wilkes and general warrants but he supported the 'Regency Bill'. He criticized Grenville's spending plans in the budget debate on 27 March and was almost alone that day in warning prophetically against provoking the American colonies by new taxation. 
When Rockingham took office in July 1765 both Sir William Baker and Henry Seymour Conway declined the chancellorship of the exchequer. Rockingham therefore turned to Dowdeswell, who was sworn of the privy council on 10 July and accepted the exchequer three days later. The appointment surprised many contemporaries, since Dowdeswell had never sided unequivocally with the opposition, or belonged to the opposition Wildman's Club. However, his Commons performances had highlighted his self-made expertise on financial matters, his honest integrity, and his ability to deliver solid argument based on a clear command of the issues. Rockingham's desire to court popularity 'out of doors' neatly complemented Dowdeswell's hostility towards the cider excise. Dowdeswell himself was under few illusions: 'I am called to the office I hold', he observed on 24 July: 'only because I am supposed to have some talents in the execution of it. In the business of that office I shall set myself down. If either inability, or the disposition of the times shall put me out of power to do good, I know what I then have to do. (Buccleuch MSS)' On 17 September he still adhered to the outdated 'country' belief that 'every man in office or out of it may vote with his opinion' (Dowdeswell MSS). By 12 October George Onslow was enthusiastically forecasting that 'he will be our great stay' on the Treasury bench (West MSS), and he was soon playing a major and respected role in all government business, particularly commercial affairs. 
Though not formally a member of cabinet Dowdeswell was in regular attendance and Rockingham, who soon recognized the value of consulting him, invited him to many of the dinners at which public affairs were discussed. Dowdeswell assisted Conway in conducting the business of the house and, when the latter was taken gravely ill during March and April 1766, he led the government in the Commons. He was present at the crucial meetings on 19 and 21 January 1766 to discuss the 'Stamp Act' repeal. His silence in the great debate of 21-22 February gave Harris the impression that 'he was in his private sentiments rather for a modification than a repeal' (Harris) but on 24 February he spoke in favour of repeal. On 4 March he stressed the need for a declaratory act to prevent any impression that parliament had surrendered the right of taxation. Repeal of the 1763 cider duty was the predictable centrepiece of Dowdeswell's budget on 7 March, the removal of 103,000 private households from the excise administration being trumpeted as a restoration of liberty. The 'Apple Chancellor' ('St James's Chronicle', 8-10 April 1766) now raised the existing retail cider duties by 6's'. per hogshead and tightened legislation against fraud but provoked controversy with a new window tax. Such a record belies Horace Walpole's acid depiction of Dowdeswell as 'a duller version of Mr. Grenville, though without his malignity'. He was allegedly: 'so suited to the drudgery of the office, as far as it depends on arithmetic, that he was fit for nothing else. Heavy, slow, methodical without clearness, a butt for ridicule, unversed in every graceful art, and a stranger to men and courts, he was only esteemed by the few to whom he was personally known. (Walpole, 'Memoirs... George III', 2.219, 139)' Equally cheap was Bishop Warburton's sarcastic observation of a visit from Lord Lyttelton to Dowdeswell: 'there... goes a man who cannot tell that two times two is four going to dine with a man who knows nothing else' (H. Thrale, 'Thraliana', ed. K. C. Balderston, 2 vols., 1942, 1.2). 
When Chatham's administration was being formed in July 1766 Grafton, the new first lord of the Treasury, felt inclined to retain Dowdeswell at the exchequer 'for the general good, and very likely for my own private ease of mind' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 2.460). These prospects were ruined when Chatham learned from George III 'that Lord Rockingham's being quiet would much depend' on such an arrangement and insisted on Dowdeswell's immediate dismissal ('Correspondence of George III', 1.380). Compensatory offers of a place as joint paymaster-general or first lord of trade followed but Dowdeswell refused them, to the surprise of many political commentators who were aware of his straitened financial circumstances. Burke later portrayed Dowdeswell's stance in terms of highly principled loyalty, in contrast to those careerists who abandoned Rockingham in order to remain in office, but the truth was more prosaic. In his last audience with the king, on 29 July 1766, Dowdeswell stressed his belief that he had discharged his office both to the royal satisfaction and 'with no small degree of public approbation', adding: 'It might be a misfortune sometimes to have been raised too high. Men could not after being much exalted stoop to certain offices, which they might have at first accepted' (Dowdeswell MSS). On 16 September 1766 Lord Harcourt recorded that Dowdeswell had returned to Worcestershire 'very much out of humour and indeed with reason after the treatment he has met with' ('Jenkinson Papers', 430). Thereafter Dowdeswell distrusted Chatham and was drawn irrevocably towards Rockingham in a way that might not otherwise have occurred, becoming his close friend, faithful adviser, and trusted strategist. As the leader of the Rockingham group in the Commons his political life was thereafter essentially 'the history of the Rockingham party' (Brooke, 'Dowdeswell', 335). He was a conspicuous and respected figure in the house, preparing many of the key opposition motions and making some 500 speeches on all manner of subjects. Although these were generally dry, legalistic, and narrow his more flamboyant junior colleague Edmund Burke none the less wrote to Rockingham on 7 January 1773 that he was sure 'we cannot find a leader whom a man of honour and judgment would so soon choose to follow' (Rockingham MSS). 
In February 1767 Dowdeswell sought to rally a confused and demoralized opposition by proposing a reduction in the land tax from 4's'. to 3's'. in the pound, arguing that $1 million of debt could still be repaid. Critics noted that Dowdeswell had not acted in his own budget, but this opportunistic measure had a natural appeal for the independent country gentlemen and ensured successful 'ad hoc' co-operation with the Bedfords and Grenvilles. Dowdeswell triumphantly carried the motion by 206 votes to 188 but Chatham's normal majority was not affected and in subsequent months Dowdeswell failed to exploit the ministry's divisions regarding the affairs of the East India Company. Renewed thoughts of a possible permanent opposition alliance none the less highlighted Dowdeswell's growing importance. On 8 July 1767 Rockingham urgently requested his presence 'because it is a very great ease and satisfaction to my own mind to have the assistance of your calm judgement within reach' (Rockingham MSS). Dowdeswell attended both of Rockingham's discussions with Bedford, on 20 and 21 July, about the outlines of a possible new administration but these reached deadlock over Rockingham's insistence on Conway as leader of the Commons. Bedford suggested Dowdeswell instead but the latter declined 'for many reasons which he then gave, and for many more which he kept in his own breast' (ibid.). Conway now invited the Rockinghams to join Chatham's administration, suggesting Dowdeswell as chancellor of the exchequer. The latter's memorandum of 23 and 24 July advised Rockingham to decline unless 'the King should send for him to give him powers from his own mouth without any of his ministers' (ibid.). 
Dowdeswell's paper is a crucial summary of the principles that were subsequently to guide Rockingham. He attributed the current political instability to the court's malign use of secret influence, and insisted that only a broad and comprehensive ministry, dominated by a single party, could withstand this. Rockingham 'must consider himself as the former of an Administration and answerable for its success, and would therefore preserve in all offices of business a manifest superiority for his own friends' (Rockingham MSS). Gloomily Dowdeswell saw 'no fair prospect' of forming such a grand coalition, in which case the wisest course of action was for the Rockinghams to 'finish with honour', 'to stand still and enjoy the reputation we have, not risk it for something new'; maintaining their 'honour as individuals' took precedence over any weakening as a party (ibid.). This was a principled approach but Dowdeswell's implicit notion that Rockingham should himself make ministerial appointments would have severely curtailed the royal prerogative. The failure of the July 1767 negotiations condemned the Rockinghams to remain in opposition for the next fifteen years, although Dowdeswell's name was periodically mentioned in any speculations about ministerial changes. 
On America, Dowdeswell displayed a pragmatic awareness of the colonies' great importance for British trade and manufactures, and in October 1766 he advised his successor, Charles Townshend, to help the East India Company to sell tea there and thereby reduce smuggling. On 17 May 1767 Dowdeswell none the less criticized the inadequacy of Townshend's proposals for coercive action against a recalcitrant New York and urged the quartering of soldiers in private houses. Despite this he became involved in a full-scale altercation with Grenville in late November 1767, when the latter attacked the apparent weakness of the Rockinghamite approach. On 14 August 1768 Dowdeswell sent Rockingham a lengthy appraisal of the American situation, apportioning blame for the Townshend duties crisis to Chatham's irresponsible 'folly' in encouraging the colonists, their provocation by the 'obstinacy' and 'threatening language' of the Grenvilles, and Townshend's weak imposition of a 'foolish tax' simply so that 'it might be collected in America' (Dowdeswell MSS). American opposition was now essentially to 'the general principle of raising 'any' revenue in America', which constituted a clear challenge to parliamentary sovereignty: 'It must either be admitted, which is timidity, weakness, irresolution, and inconsistency; or it must be resisted, and the arms of this country must be exerted against her colonies' (ibid.). Only two courses of action were available: 'either, to fight to the last, in which case this country will be undone, or to treat with the contending party, depart from your own dignity, weaken your authority, and by giving up in time a part of your rights preserve the rest. (ibid.)' Once British control was restored the offending duties should be repealed on grounds of economic distress to 'add good humour to submission' (ibid.). Parliament's right to taxation was not thereby denied but left in reserve for some future contingency when it might appear to both sides 'equitable as well as necessary to exert' (ibid.). 'Upon the whole', Dowdeswell argued, 'moderate measures are less dangerous, and if we come off at last with a loss those must answer for it who have wantonly and unnecessarily revived the question' (ibid.). His subsequent placatory approach was consistent with this honest and perceptive analysis; he argued on 8 November 1768 that the ministry should have come to the house before threatening to dissolve the colonial assemblies, and supported a call on 7 December for a general inquiry into the ministry's American decisions. 
In 1769 Dowdeswell played a prominent role in debates on the Middlesex election controversy, pressing unsuccessfully on 5 February for a statement of the reasons for Wilkes's expulsion, questioning on 17 March whether it was prudent to have a Middlesex election every month, and seeking on 8 May to define the question as to whether Lutterell was duly elected. In early May he was involved in discussions with leaders in the City of London and attended a dinner at the Thatched House tavern to consider the petitioning movement. Dowdeswell's influence in Worcestershire, Herefordshire, and Gloucestershire was potentially important but he was sensitive to the need to proceed cautiously in a region where the gentry were suspicious of radicalism and repelled by Wilkes's dubious character. Although Dowdeswell subscribed to the eventual Gloucestershire petition and also signed in Wiltshire, his signature does not appear on the Herefordshire or Worcestershire documents and he did not even speak at a great meeting at Worcester Guildhall on 9 August. He composed a pamphlet entitled 'Sentiments of an English Freeholder', in which he argued for effective checks and balances to ensure ministerial accountability and to protect the freeholder's electoral property. He cautiously delayed publication until November 1769, pending scrutiny of the text by the lawyer Alexander Wedderburn. 
The petitions were designed to bolster a renewed attack upon the ministry in January 1770. On 9 January Dowdeswell lamented what he perceived as a ubiquitous discontent, arguing that the petitions 'call loudly for the exertion of public virtue, to strike at the roots of that corruption, by which the State is reduced to the most deplorable conditions both at home and abroad' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16, 1765-71, 680). His subsequent motions were carefully crafted to cause embattled ministers the maximum difficulty. On 25 January his proposition that in election cases the house was bound to judge according to the law of the land was defeated by only 44 votes, by the device of a destructive amendment, and Grafton resigned the next day. On 31 January Dowdeswell's simple premise 'that, by the law of the land and usage of Parliament, no person, eligible by common right, can be incapacitated by vote or resolution of the House, but by Act of Parliament only' (ibid., 800) placed North in danger of immediate defeat but he circumvented it by resorting to a procedural motion to leave the chair. 
As North subsequently proceeded to strengthen his position Dowdeswell experienced endless and increasingly disheartening frustration. On 12 February 1770 his renewed proposal to disenfranchise the lower revenue officers, first attempted two years earlier, was defeated by 263 votes to 188. He also foreshadowed later economical reform by challenging ministers over the civil-list debt. During the following year he supported an abortive motion to repeal the American tea duty, criticized the government's handling of the Falkland Islands crisis, and defended the responsible reporting of parliamentary debates in the printers' case. When the lord mayor, Brass Crosby, and Alderman Richard Oliver were subsequently committed to the Tower Dowdeswell was among the leading whigs who visited them there. On 7 March 1771 his draft bill defining the role of juries in press libel cases was rejected. The vehement condemnation from Chatham, adamant on his own leadership on this issue, shattered any residual opposition unity, making Dowdeswell's task drearier still. On 2 April 1771, now deeply suspicious of any financial innovation, he castigated North's innocent 'Lottery Bill' as 'an iniquitous project' by which the crown might attack the independence of parliament (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 17, 1771-4, 166). In March 1772 he led the opposition to the 'Royal Marriage Bill' but declined to support moves to modify subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. Faced with the futile prospect of a permanent, paralysed opposition Dowdeswell now supported Burke's idea of a partial secession from the Commons. However, during 1773 and 1774 he opposed government proposals concerning the East India Company, criticized both the 'Boston Port Bill' and the 'Massachusetts Bay Regulation Bill', and again urged repeal of the tea duty. In what was to be his last major parliamentary utterance, on 19 April 1774, he accused ministers of 'struggling to obtain a most ridiculous superiority' over the colonists (ibid., 1198). 
Dowdeswell's health now began to deteriorate, apparently from tuberculosis, and he wrote wearily to Rockingham on 8 June 1774: 'Impossibility of doing good in opposition and despair of being able to do it if we were again called into Administration, has long left me hopeless in politics' (Rockingham MSS). Seeking a cure he went to Bath and, later in the summer, he visited Bristol, but he burst a blood vessel. When the physicians recommended a change of climate he went to Nice, in November 1774, but he grew weaker and he died there on 6 February 1775. His body was brought back to England and buried in a vault in Bushley church on 9 April 1775. Shortly afterwards Bridget Dowdeswell asked Burke to compose the monumental inscription to her husband's memory that was erected at Bushley in 1777. Burke replied on 13 June 1775 with glowing affection, noting that in nine years of close political participation: 'we have scarcely ever had a difference in opinion... we never had a momentary coldness of affection; no disgust; no peevishness; no political or personal quarrels; no reconciliations. There never was a soul so remote as his from fraud, duplicity, or fear; so perfectly free from any of those little passions or from any of that capricious unevenness of temper which embitters friendships and perplexes business. (Dowdeswell MSS)' Unsurprisingly Burke's lengthy epitaph was highly eulogistic, praising Dowdeswell's virtuous citizenship, financial knowledge, mastery of parliamentary procedure, and inflexible honesty in refusing all emoluments 'contrary to his engagements with his party' (Nash, 1.183). Dowdeswell's library was sold in 1775. Bridget Dowdeswell died at Sunbury, Middlesex, on 27 March 1818 and was placed in the same vault as her husband. Their sixth son, John Edmund Dowdeswell (1772-1851), MP for Tewkesbury (1812-32), who had a distinguished career as a master in chancery, wrote a manuscript memoir of his father's life, which was printed in John Wright's edition of Sir Henry Cavendish's debates. 


@@@@@


doc= 7960


Dowdeswell, William (1760-1828), army officer and art collector, was born on 27 February 1760, the third son of the Right Hon. William Dowdeswell (1721-1775) of Pull Court, near Upton upon Severn, Worcestershire, and his wife, Bridget (died 1818), youngest daughter of Sir William Codrington, first baronet, of Dodington, Gloucestershire, and aunt of Sir Edward Codrington, the admiral. Educated partly at Westminster School (1770), Dowdeswell entered the army as ensign in the 1st or Grenadier Guards on 6 May 1780 and acted as aide-de-camp to the third duke of Portland, lord lieutenant of Ireland, who had befriended him. In 1782 he was promoted lieutenant and on 4 May 1785 captain. 
Dowdeswell was elected MP for Tewkesbury, about 4 miles from Pull Court, where the Dowdeswells had long possessed much property and parliamentary influence, on 19 March 1792. In 1793 at the close of the session he joined the brigade of guards, under Gerard Lake, at Tournai, and served throughout the 1793 campaign, being present at the affair of Lincelles, the siege of Valenciennes, and the battles before Dunkirk. He returned to England in the winter, and was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel on 8 February 1794, but he did not again go to the Netherlands. Portland procured Dowdeswell's appointment as governor of the Bahamas, so he vacated his parliamentary seat in November 1797, and was succeeded as MP by his cousin, Christopher Bethell Codrington. Dowdeswell was governor of the Bahamas from 1797 to 1801. He was promoted colonel on 25 June 1797, and after acting for a short time as commander of a battalion of the 60th regiment, he went to India in 1802 as private secretary to Portland's son, Lord William Henry Cavendish-Bentinck, governor of Madras. 
On 25 September 1803 Dowdeswell was promoted major-general, and in 1804 he was requested to take command of a division of Lord Lake's army, then engaged in a trying campaign with the Maratha chieftain, Jeswant Rao Holkar. He joined the army on 31 December 1804, and commanded a division during Lake's unsuccessful operations against Bharatpur, and in the field until the start of the hot weather. In October 1805, on the opening of the new campaign, Dowdeswell was detached with a division of 8000 men to protect the Doab; he remained there until Lord Cornwallis made peace with Holkar, and then took command of the Cawnpore division, a position which he held until February 1807, when he temporarily succeeded Lake as commander-in-chief in India. Soon afterwards he was compelled to leave India on account of his health. He received the thanks of the government and of the directors of the East India Company, and was promoted lieutenant-general on 25 July 1810. 
In 1811 Dowdeswell retired from the army (with full rank, but no pay), on inheriting the family estates after the death of his elder brother, Thomas. He then devoted himself to collecting prints, especially by old English engravers, and his collection was sold by auction in 1820, 1821, and 1828; some items were later acquired by the British Museum. He was one of the first collectors to make a speciality of 'grangerizing', and the most important item in the 1820 sale was his copy of Gough's 'British Topography', enlarged by him from two to fourteen volumes by the insertion of more than 4000 views and portraits. In 1821 his unequalled collection of Hollars was sold, realizing $505 16's'. 6died He was promoted general in 1821. 
Dowdeswell died at his residence, Pull Court, on 1 December 1828, and was interred in the family vault at Bushley, Worcestershire, on 8 December. As he never married his Worcestershire estates devolved on his brother, John Edward Dowdeswell (1772-1851), MP and master in chancery, and his Lincolnshire estates on the Revd Dr Edward Christopher Dowdeswell ('c'.1765-1849), canon of Christ Church, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 7961


Dowell, Stephen (1833-1898), legal and historical writer, born at Shorwell in the Isle of Wight on 1 May 1833, was the eldest son of Stephen Wilkinson Dowell (1802-1870), rector of Mottiston and Shorwell, and from 1848 until his death vicar of Gosfield, Essex; his mother was Julia, daughter of Thomas Beasley of Seafield, co. Dublin. 
Dowell was among the first intake to Cheltenham College in 1841 and was afterwards educated at Sherborne and Highgate schools. Proceeding to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, he matriculated on 7 June 1851, graduating BA in 1855 and MA in 1872. In 1855 he was articled to R. Bray, a solicitor of 99 Great Russell Street, London, and on 1 May 1863 he was admitted student of Lincoln's Inn. In the same year Palmerston appointed him assistant solicitor to the Board of Inland Revenue, a post he held until he retired through ill health in August 1896. Dowell died of pneumonia at his home, 46 Clarges Street, London, on 28 March 1898; he was unmarried. 
Besides writing various legal tracts, one of which, entitled 'The Income Tax Laws' (1874), went through nine editions, Dowell made a valuable contribution to historical knowledge with his four-volume 'History of Taxation and Taxes in England from the Earliest Times to the Present Day' which reached a second edition in 1888 and was reprinted in 1965. Though its coverage of remoter periods is sketchy and outdated, its compendious account of more recent centuries meant that it remained a valuable source of reference in the late twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 7962


Dowland, John (1563?-1626), lutenist and composer, was, according to Thomas Fuller ('Worthies', 244), born in Westminster; however, nothing certain is known about Dowland's parentage or place of birth. The dedication of the song 'From Silent Night' in 'A Pilgrimes Solace' (1612), 'To my loving Country-man Mr. John Forster the younger, Merchant of Dublin in Ireland', has been taken to mean that he was Irish (W. H. Grattan Flood, 'GM', 301, 1906, 287-91); but in 'Lamentatio Henrici Noel' (1597) Dowland signs himself as 'infoelice Inglese', and elsewhere he describes himself as an Englishman. 
Nothing is known about the first seventeen or so years of Dowland's life, but he probably received his musical education as an apprentice in the service of one or more of the noblemen and gentlemen to whom he paid tribute in later life, such as Sir Henry Cobham, George Carey, and Henry Noel. In 1580 he went to Paris in the service of Cobham when the latter was appointed ambassador to the French court. In this capacity Dowland must have witnessed many of the masques and other court entertainments that Cobham describes in his letters home, and the airs and dances that were so prominent a feature of them would have been an important part of his own early musical experience. 
The date of Dowland's return to England is not known, but he seems to have been in France for about four years. Although virtually nothing is known about his musical activities in these early years, by 1588 his reputation had spread beyond the immediate environment in which he worked. Anthony Munday specified one of his tunes, identified only as 'Dowlands Galliard', for one of the poems in his 'A Banquet of Daintie Conceits' (1588, but registered in 1584), and John Case, in his 'Apologia musices' (1588), listed Dowland among the most famous musicians of the day. In that year, too, he was admitted to the degree of bachelor of music at Oxford. 
It was probably Dowland's setting of the poem 'My [later 'His'] golden locks time hath to silver turnd' that was performed in November 1590 at the tiltyard in Westminster when Sir Henry Lee resigned as the queen's champion. In 1592 Dowland had a speaking part in the entertainments for the queen at Sudeley Castle, when another song by him, 'My heart and tongue were twinnes', was performed. One of the lines given to 'Do.' in this little scene -- 'I have plaide so long with my fingers, that I have beaten out of play al my good fortune' -- already evokes the air of luckless melancholy that was to become a hallmark of both the man and his music. In the same year he contributed six harmonizations to Thomas East's 'Whole Booke of Psalmes', some of which (such as his setting of the 'Old Hundredth') are still in use in English hymnbooks. 
By this time Dowland was married: his son Robert Dowland was born 'c'.1591, and there were other children, but the date of the marriage is unknown, and nothing whatever is known about his wife. She is mentioned in a few letters in the 1590s, but after 1601 is heard of no more. 
In 1594 Dowland applied for a post as one of queen's lutenists, on the death of John Johnson. The application was rejected, and echoes of this disappointment reverberated through his life for years to come. He decided to seek his fortune abroad, and set out on a journey that took him to the courts of two music-loving princes -- 'miracles of this age for vertue and magnificence', as he later described them -- Heinrich Julius, duke of Brunswick, at Wolfenbuttel, and Moritz, landgrave of Hesse, at Kassel. Thence Dowland proceeded to Italy, visiting Venice (where he met Giovanni Croce), Padua, Genoa, Ferrara, and Florence, where he played before the grand duke of Tuscany, Ferdinando I. In 1595, while in Florence, he became caught up in the intrigues of some English Catholics living abroad and, taking fright, decided to curtail his Italian trip (including a planned visit to Luca Marenzio at Rome) and to return to Kassel. Sensing that he had become compromised, from Nuremberg he wrote a long and emotional letter to Sir Robert Cecil, which not only provides much biographical information, but also sheds light on his troubled mental state. Before going into details about his encounter with English Catholics in Florence, he explains that he was first won over to Catholicism while in France fifteen years earlier. He attributes his failure to secure an appointment at the English court to his reputation as an 'obstinate papist', but says that he has now forsaken this religion and vows his loyalty to the queen, pledging his 'bounden duty and desire of God's preservation of my most dear sovereign Queen and Country: whom I beseech God ever to bless & to confound all their enemies what & whom soever' (letter to Sir Robert Cecil, 10 Nov 1595, Hatfield House, marquess of Salisbury's papers, vol. 172, no. 91). 
It seems that Dowland's Catholicism was in the nature of a youthful enthusiasm, and in the distressed mental state so apparent in the letter he may have exaggerated its impact on his subsequent career. He must have kept quiet about it to obtain his Oxford degree (and by 1597, one from Cambridge as well), and if his loyalty was at all suspect he would hardly have obtained a licence -- signed by Cecil and the earl of Essex -- to travel abroad in 1594, since restrictions were placed on Catholics for that very reason. Nor did his Romish reputation prevent him from enjoying hospitality at the staunchly protestant courts of Brunswick and Hesse. 
In 1596 Dowland was back at Kassel, where he received a letter from his friend and former master, the popular courtier Henry Noel, assuring him that 'her Matie hath wished divers tymes your return'. But any hopes that Noel might help him to obtain a position in the queen's service were dashed when the courtier died on 26 February 1597. Dowland wrote seven pieces as a memorial to him, under the title 'Lamentatio Henrici Noel'. 
In 1596 seven lute solos by Dowland were included in William Barley's 'A New Booke of Tabliture'. But the publication which set the seal upon Dowland's fame was 'The First Booke of Songes or Ayres', published in 1597 and dedicated to Sir George Carey. Many of the twenty-one ayres were already well known as lute pieces, but in decking them out so that they could be sung either as solos to the lute (or similar plucked instrument) or as partsongs for four voices, Dowland ensured that they would appeal to various types of music-lover. 'The First Booke' was the most successful of all Elizabethan music publications, going through four more editions between 1600 and 1613. It also encouraged other composers, like Thomas Campion and Robert Jones, to publish works of similar type, and it established the 'table book' format that was characteristic of the spate of lute songs published between 1597 and 1622. The following year Richard Barnfield invoked Dowland's name to epitomize the art of music in the famous sonnet: '
If music and sweet poetry agree, 

As they must needs (the sister and the brother), 

Then must the love be great 'twixt thee and me, 

Because thou lov'st the one, and I the other. 

Dowland to thee is dear, whose heavenly touch 

Upon the lute doth ravish human sense; 

Spenser to me, whose deep conceit is such 

As, passing all conceit, needs no defence. 

Thou lov'st to hear the sweet melodious sound 

That Phoebus' lute (the queen of music) makes; 

And I in deep delight am chiefly drowned 

Whenas himself in singing he betakes: 

One god is god of both (as poets feign), 

One knight loves both, and both in thee remain. 

' 

In 1598 Dowland was appointed lutenist at the court of Christian IV of Denmark, with a generous salary of 500 daler a year. He retained this appointment until 1606, but he was frequently back in London, sometimes for prolonged periods, and had a house in Fetter Lane. In 1603-4 he was in England for about year, though he explains that 'I have been twice under sayle for Denmarke... but by contrary windes and frost, I was forst backe again, and of necessitie compeld to winter here'. The Danish court records give some intimation of his employer's chagrin at this extended absence, but show that Dowland was paid in full, and often in advance. 
This period saw the consolidation of Dowland's fame with the publication of two more books of ayres (1600 and 1603) and 'Lachrimae, or, Seaven Teares Figured in Seaven Passionate Pavans' (registered 1604). 'The Second Booke of Songs or Ayres', dedicated to Lucy, countess of Bedford, was the cause of a series of lawsuits between the publisher, George Eastland, and the printer, Thomas East, the records of which provide interesting insights into the economics and practices of Elizabethan music publishing -- as well as the last known reference to Dowland's wife. 'Lachrimae, or, Seaven Teares' was dedicated to the new queen, Anne (the sister of his Danish employer), to whom he had 'had accesse' at Winchester in September or October 1603. 
On at least one occasion while in Denmark, Dowland was asked to pass on information that might be of use to the English government. In 1602, following the breakdown of negotiations between England and Denmark over fishing rights, the English diplomat Stephen Lesieur wrote to him: 'I shalbe very glad from tyme to tyme to heere from yow of as muche as may concerne her ma.stie or her subjects, yt shall come to yr knoledge... spare not any reasonable charge to do it for I will see yow repaid. (Copenhagen, Kongelige Bibliotek, MS NKS 1305 in-fol.)' This has led to the suggestion that he may have been acting as a secret agent for the English, or even have been a double agent. At that time it was not unknown for court musicians to be employed in this capacity, but beyond this one request for information, there is no reason to believe that Dowland was employed in such activities. 
Little is known about Dowland's life immediately following his departure from the Danish court early in 1606. In 1609 he published a translation of the 'Micrologus' of Andreas Ornithoparcus. In the following year he contributed three songs to an anthology by his son Robert, 'A Musicall Banquet', as well as some observations on lute playing to Robert's 'Varietie of Lute-Lessons', which appear to be all that was ever completed of a promised treatise on the subject. In 1612 he published his final book of ayres, 'A Pilgrimes Solace', dedicated to Theophilus, Lord Walden, in whose service he was at the time. By now a younger generation of composers was coming to the fore -- men like Alfonso Ferrabosco the younger, Robert Johnson, and Nicholas Lanier -- providing songs and instrumental music for the sumptuous masques presented at the Jacobean court. Dowland might have been excused for feeling that his time had passed, and in the preface to 'A Pilgrimes Solace', after reminding his readers of his fame on the continent, he goes on to say that he has found 'strange entertainment' since his return from Denmark, singling out the 'ignorant' singers and the young 'professors of the lute', who say that 'what I doe is after the old manner'. In the same year his friend Henry Peacham painted this poignant picture of him in 'Minerva Britannica': '
Here Philomel in silence sits alone, 

In depth of winter, on the bared brier, 

Whereas the rose had once her beauty shown, 

Which lords and ladies did so much desire; 

But fruitless now, in winter's frost and snow, 

It doth despis'd and unregarded grow. 




So since (old friend) thy years have made thee white, 

And thou for others hast consumed thy spring, 

How few regard thee, whom thou didst delight, 

And far and near, came once to hear thee sing; 

Ingrateful times, and worthless age of ours, 

That lets us pine, when it hath cropped our flow'rs. 

' In October 1612, at the age of forty-nine or fifty, Dowland was at last appointed one of the king's lutenists, the position that he had so long coveted. It seems that the post was specially created for him, and did not come about as the result of a vacancy. But he was only one of several musicians with this title, and his name appears only occasionally in the records of royal occasions. The last of these was the funeral of James I in 1625. Already, in 1610, Robert Dowland had described his father as 'being now gray, and like the Swan, but singing towards his end', and the only music that came from his pen after 1612 was two pieces for William Leighton's 'Teares or Lamentacions of a Sorrowful Soulle' (1614) and a psalm setting for Thomas Ravenscroft's 'Whole Booke of Psalmes' in 1621. By 1620 he had been awarded a doctorate, presumably from Oxford, since Thomas Lodge's 'Learned Summary' (1621) refers to 'Doctor Dowland, an ornament of Oxford'. Dowland's last payment from the court was on 20 January 1626, and he was buried at St Ann's, Blackfriars, London, on 20 February 1626. 
John Dowland was the most famous English musician of his age, and in the preface to 'A Pilgrimes Solace' he could justly claim that his music had been published 'in eight most famous Cities beyond the Seas'. He was first and foremost a lutenist, and the essential characteristics of his art are to be found in the pieces that he wrote for his instrument -- fantasies, pavans, galliards, almains, jigs, and settings of ballad tunes. Many variant readings are to be found in the sources (most of them manuscript) in which they were circulated, and it is not easy to establish an authoritative text for many of the pieces. No doubt there was an element of improvisation in Dowland's own performances. Nevertheless, there is no hiding his exceptional gift for melody, combined with a warm, vibrant harmonic style, and there is evidence of his imaginative exploration of the technique of the instrument. 
Dowland's outstanding contribution to the repertory of instrumental consort music is the 'Lachrimae' collection of 1604. It is a cycle of meditations on his famous 'Lachrimae' tune, together with other dances, for a five-part consort of viols (or, alternatively, instruments of the violin family) and lute. Although many of the pieces exist also as lute solos, and are considered to have been originally composed as such, there is ample evidence of the care and thought that the composer put into this 'long and troublesome worke' (as he described it in the preface). The titles of the seven pavans suggest some sort of spiritual journey, while the linking of them all by the use of common thematic material is ground-breaking in the evolution of instrumental music. 
In his songs Dowland began by building on the success of his lute music, adding words to pieces such as 'The Earl of Essex Galliard' ('Can she excuse my wrongs'), 'The Frog Galliard' ('Now O now I needs must part'), and the 'Lachrimae pavan' ('Flow my teares'). As is the case with most of the other lute ayres of the time, the authorship of most of the lyrics of Dowland's ayres is unknown, but there is reason to believe that some of them at least were by the composer himself, who elsewhere showed himself capable of writing quite respectable commendatory verse. Certainly, the words as well as the music of 'Flow my teares' and 'Sorrow stay' epitomize the brooding melancholy of the composer who styled himself 'Semper Dowland semper Dolens' ('Ever Dowland, ever doleful'). In his later ayres he shows himself aware of the new declamatory style emanating from Italy, and in the powerful 'In darknesse let mee dwell' he achieves a rare fusion between this and the more traditional English polyphonic idiom within which he normally worked. In his final collection, 'A Pilgrimes Solace', he turns from the familiar concerns of the courtly lover to themes of a penitential nature. 
Although a few of his ayres remained in the popular repertory after Dowland's death, interest in him during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was largely antiquarian, stimulated in many cases by his contemporaneity with Shakespeare. In the early twentieth century the development of historical musicology in England revived interest in his music, thanks in large measure to the pioneering work of E. H. Fellowes and Peter Warlock, later consolidated by Diana Poulton. In the latter half of the century this interest was further stimulated by developments in the performance of early music and the associated attention that this received from the recording industry. Benjamin Britten pays tribute to two of Dowland's pieces in 'Lachrymae: Reflections on a Song of John Dowland' for viola and piano (op. 48, 1950) and 'Nocturnal: Reflections on 'Come, Heavy Sleep'' for guitar (op. 70, 1963). Hans Werner Henze also draws on music by Dowland in his 'Kammermusik 1958'. The composer's alleged Irish origins receive fanciful treatment in a short story by Cathal O'Byrne, 'Will Shakespeare's Friend' in 'Ashes on the Hearth' (1948). 


@@@@@


doc= 7963


Dowland, Robert (c.1591-1641), musician, was the son of John Dowland (1563?-1626), lutenist and composer. The likely year of his birth is indicated by his marriage documents, dated 11 October 1626, which state that he was 'aged about xxxv yeares'. His godfather was Sir Robert Sidney. During his father's absence abroad he received part of his education in the household of Sir Thomas Monson. Between May 1612 and January 1616 he was employed by William Cavendish, earl of Devonshire, and in February 1613 he was one of the lutenists who played in George Chapman's 'Masque of the Inner Temple and Lincoln's Inn' which formed part of the wedding festivities of Princess Elizabeth and Frederick, elector palatine. During the early 1620s Dowland travelled abroad with English actors: his name appears among those who sought permission, on 30 August 1623, to return home from the duke of Wolgast in Pomerania. 
In 1626 Dowland succeeded his father as one of the royal lutenists, and in the same year he married Jane Smalley ('b'. 'c'.1601). The registers of St Anne's, Blackfriars, record the burial of a son, John, in December 1627, and the baptism of a daughter, Mary, in April 1629. 
There are few surviving lute compositions by Robert Dowland, and he is chiefly remembered for two anthologies published in 1610. 'A Varietie of Lute-Lessons', dedicated to Sir Thomas Monson, contains forty-two lute solos, including nine by his father. 'A Musicall Banquet', dedicated to his godfather and namesake Sir Robert Sidney, contains one lute solo by John Dowland and twenty ayres for voice, lute, and bass viol, by English, French, Italian, and Spanish composers. Among the English ayres are three by his father, including the powerful 'In darkness let me dwell', but the collection is also interesting for containing songs by other important English lutenists -- Daniel Batchelar, Robert Hales, Anthony Holborne, and Richard Martin -- who are not generally known as composers of vocal music. Among the foreign pieces is the famous 'Amarilli mia bella' by Giulio Caccini. 
The records of St Andrew's, Holborn, state that 'Robert Doling a man sometyme servant to the king died in his house in the New Buildings in Chancery Lane the 28th buried the 29th November 1641'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7964


Dowley, Richard (bap. 1622, d. 1702), Presbyterian minister, was baptized on 5 February 1622 at Burghfield, Berkshire, the son of John Dowley (died in or after 1662), vicar of Alveston in Warwickshire. He matriculated from All Souls College, Oxford, on 10 October 1639, but in 1640 was admitted demy at Magdalen College, which he remained until 1648, graduating BA on 13 May 1643. At an unknown date he married; he is known to have had a family, but the names of his wife and children are unknown. 
With the advent of civil war Dowley's father sent him to Coventry, where he continued his preparation for the pastoral ministry under the tutelage of John Bryan. While in Coventry he probably became acquainted with Richard Baxter, who had moved to the city in September 1642 after hostilities forced him to flee Kidderminster. Baxter was the designated preacher for the town's parliamentary garrison until he decided to join Edmund Whalley's regiment as a chaplain following the battle of Naseby in June 1645. After spending several years in Coventry Dowley accepted a position as chaplain to Sir Thomas Rous's family at Rous Lench in Worcestershire. On 26 April 1650 he became vicar of Bishampton in the same county. By 1655 he was the minister at Stoke Prior near Bromsgrove in Worcestershire. Baxter writes that 'Mr Dowley of Stoke' was a member of the Worcestershire association and one of those 'meeting weekly at our Lecture, and monthly at our Disputation' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', pt 1, p. 90). 
Although both his father and his uncle Robert Dowley conformed at the Restoration, Dowley refused and was subsequently ejected from Stoke Prior on 24 August 1662. With the reinstatement of the sequestered minister John Toy, under the terms of the 'Act of Uniformity', he moved to Elford in Staffordshire where he is said to have assisted his uncle, who was minister there. He 'liv'd for some Time privately, went to Church, and apply'd himself to Country Business for a Subsistance' ('Calamy rev.', 169). His uncle's will of 3 May 1664 mentions that his 'cosen' Richard was in possession of the 'messuage' at Comberford, Staffordshire (ibid.). 
By the late 1660s Dowley maintained an active preaching ministry in Warwickshire villages such as Newton Regis, Austrey, and Shuttington despite government legislation against nonconformists. After the declaration of indulgence in 1672 he took out a licence as a presbyterian to preach at his house in Orton on the Hill in Leicestershire. About 1680 he moved to London, 'where he taught a school, and preached occasionally, attending on John Howe's ministry when not engaged himself'. On one occasion in 1683 when Howe was holding a service the meeting was raided and Dowley was one of seven members of the congregation who were arrested and imprisoned in Newgate. They were examined by the lord mayor, after which they were indicted for inciting a riot and bound over until the next sessions. Dowley was subsequently fined $10 for attending a conventicle and was forced to give up teaching. He was later arrested a second time. When he was once again brought before the lord mayor he took the Oxford oath rather than suffer imprisonment. 
Following the 'Toleration Act' of 24 May 1689, Dowley lived in London at Bird-in-Hand Alley, Cheapside. He took a position as minister at Godalming, Surrey, for which he received a grant from the Common Fund on 6 June 1692. He returned to London and lived with his children until his death in 1702. 


@@@@@


doc= 7965


Dowling, Alfred Septimus (1805-1868), law reporter, brother of Vincent George Dowling and Sir James Dowling, and fourth son of Vincent Dowling (1756-1825) of Queen's county, Ireland, was probably born in London. Admitted to Gray's Inn in February 1823, he was called to the bar on 18 June 1828, became a special pleader in the common-law courts, and went on the home circuit. 
Already the compiler of two collections of recent statutes (1830-33), Dowling turned to law reporting and his 'Reports of Cases in the King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer' (9 vols.; 1833-8) were continued in association first with his brother Vincent and then with John James Lowndes until 1851. The series, essentially a continuation of Chitty's reports, is usually known as 'Bail court cases'. 
Dowling was admitted a member of Serjeants' Inn on 12 November 1842, and made a judge of county courts for Yorkshire by Lord Chancellor Cottenham on 9 November 1849. He made a good impression at first, was immediately chosen for the county court rule committee, and on 20 August 1853 he became one of the Romilly commission for inquiring into the state and practice of the county courts. Later, however, there were complaints of persistent lateness for his courts and rough and hasty justice. He died of cancer at his residence, 34 Acacia Road, St John's Wood, London, on 3 March 1868. He was survived by his wife, Bertha Eliza, who died on 25 March 1880, aged sixty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 7966


Dowling, Frank Lewis (1823-1867), newspaper editor, son of the journalist Vincent George Dowling (1785-1852), was born, most probably in London, on 18 October 1823, and called to the bar at the Middle Temple on 24 November 1848. He became editor of 'Bell's Life' the leading sporting newspaper of its time, on the illness of his father in 1851. He married, on 29 October 1853, Frances Harriet, fourth daughter of Benjamin Humphrey Smart, of 55 Connaught Terrace, Hyde Park, London. 
Dowling was remarkable for his urbanity, and for the fair manner in which he discharged the duties of arbiter and umpire in numerous cases of disputes connected with the prize-ring. He had the control of the arrangements of the international fight between Tom Sayers and the American John Camel Heenan held at Farnborough, Hampshire, on 17 April 1860, and it was by his advice that the combatants agreed to consider it a drawn battle, and to receive a belt each. He was also widely trusted by competitive pedestrians and 'Bell's Life' was holding $15,000 annually in stake money at the end of his career. He died from consumption at 4 Norfolk Street, the Strand, London, on 10 October 1867. He was survived by a widow, Isabel Dowling, presumably after a second marriage. Dowling also edited and brought out the annual issues of 'Fistiana, or, The Oracle of the Ring' from 1852 to 1864, besides preparing a further edition which did not appear until the year after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 7967


Dowling, Sir James (1787-1844), judge in Australia, was born in London on 25 November 1787, the second son of Vincent Dowling (1756-1825), at various times a journalist, bookseller, and vendor of patent medicines, of Queen's county, Ireland, and London. Alfred Septimus Dowling and Vincent George Dowling were his brothers. 
Dowling was educated at St Paul's School, London, before becoming a parliamentary and general reporter. In 1815 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple through the system, as his son described it, of being able to 'deposit what is known as 'caution money' with the Society... to pay his 'call dues'' (Dowling, 43). He produced, with Archer Ryland QC, the king's bench reports from 1822 to 1831, as well as other well-received legal works. On 3 September 1814 he married Maria (died 1834), the daughter of J. L. Sheen of Kentish Town, London; they had ten children, four of whom died in infancy. Following her death, on 1 September 1835 he married Harriott Mary Ritchie (died 1881), the widowed daughter of the Hon. John Blaxland of Newington, New South Wales. 
Dowling had become a 'protege' (Ward, 85) of Lord Brougham and other influential individuals, and in 1827 he obtained the position of a judge on the supreme court in New South Wales. He arrived in the colony in February the following year. When Chief Justice Forbes retired in 1837, Dowling's claim to succeed to the post, as senior puisine judge, created controversy. He had previously offended, during a case, the influential local politician James Macarthur, who offered the opinion that Dowling's appointment to the position would be 'a public calamity... a man of no ideas' (ibid., 84-5). The retiring chief justice, however, came to the point in his recommendation that 'Dowling's is the stronger claim and... is... backed by Lord Brougham' (ibid., 85). Dowling became chief justice, and was knighted the following year. 
Despite the controversy, in his new position Dowling gained the respect of his colleagues, as they later said of him, for his 'indefatigable industry' in applying himself to his duties, as well as his good humour and 'kindly nature' (Dowling, 49-50). However, as Sir Alfred Stephen expressed it, Dowling's 'painstaking and anxious' approach to his job (Currey, 320) led him to illness through overwork. In May 1841 he applied for extended leave to recover his strength, but this was delayed. In June 1844 he collapsed while sitting on the bench; he was preparing to return to England when he died at his home, Brougham Lodge (named after his benefactor), in Darlinghurst, Sydney, on 27 September 1844. He was buried in the Devonshire Street cemetery, Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 7968


Dowling, John Goulter (1805-1841), Church of England clergyman and schoolmaster, the eldest son of John Dowling, innkeeper of the King's Head, Westgate Street, Gloucester, alderman, and sometime mayor of Gloucester, and his wife, Elizabeth Goulter of Hawkesbury, was born on 18 April 1805 in Gloucester. He was educated at the Crypt Grammar School, Gloucester, and at Wadham College, Oxford (1823-6). In 1827, soon after taking his BA degree, he became headmaster of the Crypt Grammar School, appointed by the governors, the corporation of Gloucester. He was ordained deacon in 1828 and priest in 1829 by Bishop Christopher Bethell, then of Gloucester. In 1834 Lord Chancellor Brougham presented him to the rectory of St Mary-de-Crypt with St Owen, Gloucester. He remained as headmaster of the school, and held both positions until his death. In addition to several sermons, Dowling published 'An Introduction to the Critical Study of Ecclesiastical History' (1838), and 'Notitia scriptorum ss. patrum aliorumque veteris ecclesiae monumentorum' (1839), which was described in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as 'a valuable assistance to all engaged in theological researches'. He died on 9 January 1841 in Gloucester. Held in high esteem, he was commemorated by the stained glass in the east window of his church, placed there by his pupils and the people of Gloucester. 


@@@@@


doc= 7969


Dowling, Thady (1543/4-1628), ecclesiastical administrator and antiquary, was probably a native of Laois, where the O'Dowlins or Dowlings were a landholding sept. Most of what is known of his life is derived from the brief autobiographical memoir (dated 12 March 1602) which was enclosed with his account of the Irish sees. His family, who were 'true husbandmen', sent him to be fostered in Old Leighlin, co. Carlow, the cathedral town of the diocese of Leighlin. After some local education he went on to Dublin, where he studied civil and canon law for four years, attending Patrick Cusack's school, frequenting the consistory and admiralty courts, and learning from the local practitioners, including John Ball, archdeacon of Glendalough and official-principal to the archbishop of Dublin. He became a proficient civil and canon lawyer, although he never attended a university or received a degree. 
Being invited back to Leighlin (as he tells us) by the Church of Ireland bishop and chapter, Dowling was appointed to the treasurership of the cathedral, with the right of reversion to the better endowed chancellorship when it fell vacant. This did not occur until 1591, when he resigned the treasurership. During this period he acted as vicar-general of the diocese, at first jointly with another and then alone, when he combined the post with that of official-general. He also twice acted as keeper of the spiritualities during vacancies of the see (presumably in 1587 and 1597). During the wars of the 1590s, when the archives of the cathedral were destroyed, he was forced to flee and lost all his movable goods. After the war he returned his office and remained chancellor until his death in 1628 at the age of eighty-four. It is not known whether he ever married or had children. 
In his memoir Dowling described himself as having completed two works, one an 'Abstract of histories' and the other a collection of Irish statutes concerning ecclesiastical jurisdiction, with a commentary and citation of cases. The former is presumably the collection of annals which was printed in 1849 from a copy in MS 834 of Trinity College, Dublin. At least three other seventeenth-century copies exist (BL, Add. MSS 4788, 4791; Armagh Public Library, MS Kh II, 1), but the autograph appears to be lost. The annals extend from the fabulous period to 1600, and are largely derived from English printed sources. They show no knowledge of the native annalistic material. At the time of the memoir (1602) Dowling was working on a handbook which would contain an introduction to the Irish language, with a calendar and almanac, and other material in Irish. This, like his legal treatise, appears to be lost, but other historical material by Dowling survives, including succession lists of governors of Ireland and fragments of genealogy and local history. He was also apparently the author of a set of annals from 1534 to 1590 (quite distinct from those mentioned above) which were entered in the now lost register of Duisk Abbey as a continuation of the annals which it contained. As a scholar Dowling seems to have been an industrious collector of local traditions, but lacking in a critical sense, even by the standards of his age. His knowledge of Irish would appear to have been purely colloquial, and he was quite ignorant of the Gaelic learned tradition. The lists of bishops which are included in his account of the Irish sees, often based on records which he tells us were subsequently destroyed, are however of value, and seem to have been largely drawn on by James Ware. 


@@@@@


doc= 7970


Dowling, Vincent George (1785-1852), journalist, was probably born in London. His father was Vincent Dowling (1756-1825) of Queen's county, Ireland, a journalist, bookseller, and patent medicine vendor. Vincent George's brothers included Alfred Septimus Dowling and Sir James Dowling. He received his early education in Ireland. He returned to London with his father early in the new century and occasionally helped him with his work on 'The Times', which Dowling senior had just joined. The younger Dowling then worked for the 'Star', contributed pieces to 'The Observer' from 1804, and went to the 'Day' in 1809. He was clearly building a reputation as an energetic and reliable reporter, a reputation enhanced by his eye-witness account of the assassination of Spencer Perceval in the lobby of the House of Commons on 11 May 1812, and later by his being first to arrive in London with the news that Queen Caroline was to return there from France after the accession of George IV in June 1820. His twelve-hour crossing of the channel in an open boat on a stormy night was evidence of a determined and romantic spirit. But, during the same period, Dowling also worked as a government informer. On 6 December 1816 he reported to government officials on the tone of political conversation in London public houses. He had already been employed by the government to give details of the meeting of radicals at Spa Fields on 2 December 1816, and the following year he gave evidence from that report at the trial of James Watson for treason. 
In August 1824 Dowling was appointed editor of 'Bell's Life in London', by its new proprietor, William Clement, who also owned 'The Observer'. 'Bell's Life' was one of Britain's earliest and most successful sporting newspapers. It first appeared in January 1822, the property of Robert Bell, a London printer and newsvendor. It set out to depict life in London 'as it really was', and police intelligence was more prominent than sport in its early issues. Dowling was to remain editor for twenty-eight years, during which time 'Bell's Life' became Britain's leading sporting newspaper, without which no gentleman's Sunday was quite complete. The verdict on 'Bell's' of T. C. Sanders in 1856 would probably have satisfied Dowling. The paper had little vulgarity in it, 'it judges with a kind of solemn honesty; and it imposes laws really fair and just on a great many who very much need such laws to control them' (Sanders, 275-6). 
In 1824 the circulation of 'Bell's Life' was probably less than 10,000. By the time of Dowling's death in 1852 it had been making profits estimated at $10,000 a year for some time. Dowling made the paper a reliable and respectable commentator on contemporary sport. 'Bell's' could be trusted so much so that it was often the stakeholder for bets and prize fights. It was estimated that between $8000 and $10,000 a year passed through the paper's hands in this way by the 1850s. At a time when the organizational infrastructure of most sports was embryonic, 'Bell's' played an important role in the early development of modern sport. Dowling told the select committee of the House of Lords on gaming in 1844 that the popularity of all sports had increased, and that whereas he had 200 letters a week 'in former times, I have now 1500 or 1600' ('Select committee', q. 236). He was convinced that 'Bell's Life' had been instrumental in this growth of sports, even attributing the expansion of interest in cricket 'to the Paper of which I am the Editor... the Moment the Cricketers found themselves the Object of Attention almost every village had its Cricket Green. The Record of their Prowess in print created a desire still more to extend their Exertions and their Fame' (ibid., question 234). 
Dowling was particularly identified with prize-fighting, which had been proscribed by law since 1750. For him it was the most manly of English sports and a means to maintain 'a love of fairness in single combat, and an abhorrence of the cowardly and murderous use of the knife' ('Bell's Life'). He recognized the need to restrain its excesses, supporting the Pugilistic Club in its attempts at control between 1814 and 1828, and near the end of his life helping to promote the short-lived Pugilistic Benevolent Association. He was much in demand as a referee, although his reputation for fair play did not prevent his being knocked about by 'roughs' after Bendigo's fight with Tom Paddock in 1850. In 1840 Dowling wrote 'Fistiana, or, The Oracle of the Ring', which became a classic work on the noble art, including informative sections on fitness training and sparring. It was a book which was regularly updated and went through fourteen editions before his death. It was continued by his son Frank Lewis Dowling (1823-1867), who also succeeded to the editorship of 'Bell's' on his father's death, which took place at Stanmore Lodge, Kilburn, Middlesex, on 25 October 1852. Dowling had been suffering from a heart condition for two years and it was this, accompanied by paralysis and dropsy, which finally caused death. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7971


Downe, John (1570?-1631), Church of England clergyman, was born at Holdsworthy, Devon, the son of John Downe and his wife, Joan, daughter of John Jewel; his uncle, who exerted a strong influence on Downe, was John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury. Downe was admitted as a pensioner to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 1 July 1586. He proceeded BA in 1590, MA in 1593, and BD in 1600, and was elected a fellow in 1594. In July 1600 he was incorporated at Oxford. He took orders, and was presented by his college to the vicarage of Winsford, Somerset, which he held from 1602 to 1604. In 1604 he was preferred to the living of Instow, in his native county. 
Although Downe was a productive and wide-ranging author on issues of Anglican belief and liturgy, it seems that he published nothing during his lifetime and his writings emerged posthumously, under the auspices of his friend George Hakewill, archdeacon of Surrey. Prefixed to 'Certain Treatises of the Late Reverend and Learned John Downe' (1633) is Hakewill's funeral sermon for Downe, which contains much information about his life. As well as heaping acclamation on his social virtues, in particular his wise and affectionate raising of his family and inexhaustible hospitality, Hakewill dwells long on Downe's erudition, describing him as knowing well the 'Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, and I think Italian' languages ('Certain Treatises', 45). In addition, Downe was so deeply versed in theology and patristics that 'many, and those not unlearned Divines were content, nay glad to draw water from his well, and to light their candles at his torch' (ibid., 46). Such, in fact, was his learning in all fields that he was thought extremely unlucky not to have been granted a doctorate, an honour that Hakewill hints he ought to have received. 
The ten sermons contained within 'Certain Treatises' demonstrate Downe to have been an admirable stylist of English. Lucid and elegant, they also show that, despite being renowned for his piety, he was capable of liberal views. Justifying those who gamble 'moderately, seasonably, and peacefully', he concludes 'A defence of the lawfulness of lots in gaming' by asking 'why should the distemper and irregularity of others prejudice them in the free use of their liberty?' ('Certain Treatises', 51). His 'Prayer to saints and angels neither necessary nor commanded' is a reasoned attack on Catholicism in which he declares 'it is now high time to beat down Popery by all meanes' (ibid., 85). 
The diversity of Downe's accomplishments is best illustrated in a second volume, 'A Treatise of the True Nature and Definition of Justifying Faith' (1635), which contains, as well as several more sermons, some original sacred poems and hymns, translations of the 'Psalms', and a verse rendering of Marcus Antonius Muretus's 'Institution for children'. A letter from Joseph Hall, bishop of Exeter and Norwich, included in 'Certain Treatises' (pp. 55-6) praises his ability in Latin verse, 'in which faculty, I dare boldly say, few if any of our age exceed him'. None of this work, unfortunately, appears to have survived. 
Downe died, still incumbent of the rectory of Instow, in May 1631. He was buried in the chancel of Instow church, where are also the tombstone of his first wife, Rebecca, who was buried on 6 October 1614, and a monument to John, a son born during his second marriage, to Agnes. Bishop Hall's letter sums up the affection in which Downe was held by his contemporaries: 'How much ingenuity, how much learning and worth, how much sweetness of conversation, how much elegance of expression, how much integrity and holiness have we lost in that man?' 


@@@@@


doc= 7972


Downes, Andrew (c.1549-1628), Greek scholar, was born in Shropshire of unknown parentage. He was educated at Shrewsbury School under the first headmaster, Thomas Ashton, who was subsequently tutor to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. He became acquainted with Essex at Cambridge. He was admitted to a Lady Margaret Beaufort scholarship at St John's College, Cambridge, on 7 November 1567, proceeded BA in 1570-71, and was elected a fellow of his college on 6 April 1571. He proceeded MA in 1574, was ordained deacon at Peterborough, Lincolnshire, on 25 June 1575, was admitted a senior fellow of St John's on 30 January 1580, and graduated BD in 1582. 
With his pupil John Bois, Downes was active in the revival of the study of Greek at St John's and in 1585 he was elected regius professor of Greek at Cambridge. In 1586 he was among the signatories of a letter to William Cecil, first Baron Burghley, pressing the case for William Whitaker as master of St John's. He was appointed one of the translators of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' in 1605 and assigned to the company, along with Bois, charged with the 'Apocrypha'. Both also served as members of the company for the review of the whole work. These men earned 30's'. a week, working in London, 'where, meeting (though Mr Downes would not go 'till he was either fetcht or threatened with a Pursuivant) their four Fellow-Labourers, they went dayly to Stationers' Hall, and in three Quarters of a year finished their Task' (Peck, vol. 2, bk 8, p. 48). Shortly after the completion of their work Downes and Bois were both engaged on Sir Henry Savile's edition of the works of John Chrysostom, Bois meeting with slightly more approbation than Downes, who resented it. 
On 1 October 1608 Downes married, at Great St Mary's, Cambridge, Anna Delves and, no doubt on this account, wrote in that year to Robert Cecil, first earl of Salisbury, requesting part of the $160 per annum assigned for the better maintenance of the Lady Margaret professorship, then vacant. In the following year a warrant was issued for payment to him of $50 of James I's free gift. In 1610 he wrote to Dr Samuel Ward wishing to succeed to some of the preferments of Richard Clayton, dean of Peterborough. On 27 October 1613 he was collated to the Bath and Wells prebend of Dinder in Somerset and was duly installed on 18 April 1614. He had, though, resigned it by 17 February 1617. 
The most vivid account of Downes is to be found in the diary of Simonds D'Ewes, who declined to attend his private lectures on account of their expense. However, he changed his mind and attended several in March 1619 on Demosthenes' Greek orations, 'De corona'. He understood that Downes was regarded as 'the ablest Grecian of Christendom, being no native of Greece'. He went on to write: 'When I came to his house near the public Schools, he sent for me up into a chamber, where I found him sitting in a chair with his legs upon a table that stood by him. He neither stirred his hat nor body, but only took me by the hand, and instantly fell into discourse (after a word or two of course had passed between us) touching matters of learning and criticism. He was of personage big and tall, long-faced and ruddy-coloured, and his eyes very lively, although I took him to be at that time at least seventy years old. ('Autobiography', 139)' Apart from his contribution to the Authorized Version, Downes's major publications were directly related to his Cambridge lectures: 'Eratosthenes, hoc est brevis et luculenta defensio Lysiae pro caede Eratosthenis' (1593), of which a copy in Cambridge University Library is annotated, perhaps by one of his auditors; and 'Praelectiones in Philippicam de pace Demosthenis' (1621). He also contributed verses to Sir Francis Nethersole's memorial volume for Henry, prince of Wales, in 1612. His fluency in Greek is witnessed by his Greek letters to Isaac Casaubon, Metrophanes Kritopoulos, and others. 
Downes died at Coton, near Cambridge, whither he had retired having reluctantly resigned his chair in 1625 after almost forty years' tenure, on 2 February 1628, and was buried there on 5 February. He left a book each to Trinity and St John's colleges, $5 to a kinsman, and the residue of his estate to his wife. His monument in the church is illustrated by William Cole. His arms were: azure, a buck lodged, armed or, with a crescent for difference. 


@@@@@


doc= 7973


Downes, John (bap. 1609, d. in or after 1666), regicide, was baptized on 16 July 1609 at Manby, Lincolnshire, the eldest surviving son of Richard Downes (died 1618/19) of Manby and his wife, Elizabeth. Although characterized as having come from a 'mean family' (Noble, 191), the family's fortunes were probably rising. Downes was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1631 and called to the bar on 1 May 1642. By that stage he had married twice; his first marriage was to Joanna, daughter of Richard Mosely of Tunstall in Staffordshire, and his second, by a licence of 11 April 1634, was to Catherine (died before 1653), daughter of Francis Townley of Littleton in Middlesex. 
In October 1633 Downes became one of the two auditors of the duchy of Cornwall, and the contacts made in connection with his employment probably included the patron who secured his return to parliament for Arundel, in a county to which he had no prior connection, in a by-election in December 1641. Downes was returned amid controversy and opposition from the secretary to Thomas Howard, fourteenth earl of Arundel, a Catholic, but was able to take his seat with support from prominent godly MPs. He made little impact in the house before Pride's Purge, and was reported as having said that 'I do not often trouble you with speeches' (Fry, 18). Nevertheless, he became one of the most zealous parliamentarians in Sussex during the civil war, and helped ensure that parliament, rather than the king, secured the income from duchy lands. By 1647 he was aligned with the independents at Westminster, and became more active after the purge. He was involved in suppressing pamphlets by the secluded members, joined the powerful army committee, and was appointed to the high court of justice to try Charles I. He later claimed that his name was inserted in the act late in the day, and that he was pressurized into taking part in the trial, and succumbed 'through weakness and fear' (Downes), although he attended ten of the meetings in the painted chamber. It was in one of these that Downes clashed with another MP, John Fry, whom he accused of blasphemy for his unitarian views. Downes subsequently attacked Fry in the Commons, and was instrumental in securing his suspension from the house. Furthermore, Downes developed reservations about the proceedings against the king, and on 27 January, having attended all four days of the trial, expressed his objections to fellow commissioners. As the sentence was about to be read Downes rose to declare his dissent and demanded an adjournment, in which he said that the king ought to be allowed to speak. Cromwell, who called Downes a 'peevish man', said that 'he would fain save his old master' ('State trials', 5.1213). Downes refused to return to the high court, and although he signed the death warrant he later claimed to have done so only under duress. He also claimed to have hoped that the trial would force a settlement rather than result in Charles's execution. 
Although Downes faced hostility for his actions, including a pamphlet attack by John Fry entitled 'The Accuser Sham'd', he continued to fulfil his duties on committees and in relation to the duchy of Cornwall. He re-emerged in the Commons in July and was awarded $3000 when he resigned his post as auditor, and thereafter government finances and the affairs of the army came to dominate his career. Although he later claimed that he was 'never of any junto or cabal' (Downes), Downes worked closely with the civilian republicans, with whom he shared a religious and social conservatism. A member of the committee for plundered ministers from July 1650, Downes was a religious independent but zealous against sectarians, although he later claimed to have protected a group of presbyterian divines who faced the death penalty for their part in the 'Love plot' during the early 1650s. 
In recognition of his hard work as an administrator Downes was elected to the council of state in November 1651, although his activity was slight, and his career continued to be dominated by his work as chairman of the army committee and in matters regarding the treasury, which eventually resulted in his nomination to the powerful revenue committee in October 1652. He was obviously an important figure during the Anglo-Dutch War, although this perhaps resulted in his removal from the council of state in November 1652. Although he played little part in the political machinations in the dying days of the Rump, he appears to have acquiesced to its dissolution, and continued to fulfil his responsibilities in the weeks which followed. However, during both Barebone's Parliament and the protectorate Downes withdrew from political and administrative affairs, and apparently retired to his estate at Hampstead. Some time before 1653 he married for the third time, although the background of his wife, Hannah, is unknown. 
Downes re-emerged during 1659, and resumed his position of influence in the Commons when the Rump was recalled in May as an ally of the civilian republicans and in relation to financial affairs. He was also named to the council of state, although he withdrew from the house shortly before its sittings were interrupted by the army in October, returning to Westminster in December and to membership of the army committee. He appears to have withdrawn from the Commons in early February 1660, shortly after the arrival of General Monck and shortly before the readmission of the secluded members. Downes faced arrest as a regicide in May 1660, which prompted his publication of a vindication of his career and actions. This failed to prevent his arrest in June or his trial in the following October, at which he 'pleaded ignorance, and acknowledged the guilt, but denied the malice' (Ludlow, 267). He denied being instrumental in the proceedings, and pleaded that he had signed the death warrant only after death threats. He was found guilty, but was reprieved from execution and sent to the Tower. Although considered for release in February 1662, he remained in prison and in poverty. In April 1663 he appealed to John Robinson, the lord mayor, begging to be 'thrust into some hole where he might silently be slain' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/71, fol. 20). The date of Downes's death is unknown, although it was after November 1666, when he was still listed among the prisoners in the Tower. 


@@@@@


doc= 7974


Downes, John (d. 1712?), theatre prompter and historian, is first heard of in June 1661 when he took the part of Haly in the premiere performance of part 1 of Sir William Davenant's 'The Siege of Rhodes' at the opening of the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre in the presence of royalty, and, as he himself reports, was 'spoil'd... for an Actor' by stage-fright (Downes, 1987, 73). According to the lord chamberlain's records, Downes was sworn as a comedian in the Duke of York's Company on 27 June 1664, and as a comedian in the King's Company successively on 12 January 1688, 22 February 1695, and about 20 April 1697. Some time in the 1660s he became prompter to the Duke's Company. Following the merger of the Duke's and the King's companies in 1682 he worked for the United Company until the split of 1694; thereafter he was a member of Betterton's Company at Lincoln's Inn Fields and, from 1705, at the Haymarket, until his retirement in October 1706. 
'[B]eing long Conversant with... Plays and Actors' (Downes, 1987, 2), Downes produced the first substantial work of theatre history in English: 'Roscius Anglicanus, or, An Historical Review of the English Stage' (1708). Usually written by outsiders, earlier publications on the subject had been either scrappy and amateurish in their treatment of Restoration theatre (for example James Wright's 'Historia histrionica', 1699) or chiefly concerned with printed drama (such as Gerard Langbaine's 'Momus triumphans', 1688, and 'An Account of the English Dramatick Poets', 1691). However quirky its chronology, chaotic its narrative, and spotty its coverage of the King's Company, 'Roscius Anglicanus' is the most comprehensive account of repertory, acting personnel, and casting in the Restoration theatre. Much maligned by earlier critics, Downes's accuracy has been vindicated by modern scholars. When approached with a suitable degree of caution -- for instance, the cast lists it provides for stock plays should not be taken to reflect the casting of the earliest performance -- 'Roscius Anglicanus' is a surprisingly reliable source of information about casting, especially of new plays, about actors, their parts and particular strengths and weaknesses, about the commercial success of individual plays, the length of their original runs, and their place in the repertory, and, to a lesser extent, about their authorship. Downes treats plays as scripts for performance, not literary artefacts, and thus is less interested in the artistic quality of the drama. What matters to him is whether the play was profitable to the company (and the playwright) and whether it became a stock offering. He routinely records any major outlay on costumes, scenery, and special effects. For instance, he attributes the success of ''The Tragedy of Macbeth', alter'd by Sir 'William Davenant'' to its 'being drest in all it's Finery, as new Cloath's, new Scenes, Machines, as flyings for the Witches; with all the Singing and Dancing in it'; and he notes the loss incurred by the Duke's Company when the first run of John Dryden's opera 'Albion and Albanius' was interrupted by Monmouth's rebellion, the play 'not Answering half the Charge they were at' (Downes, 1987, 71, 84). 
We know nothing about Downes's marital situation, but he seems to have had a son who aspired to be a musician. A letter of 27 January 1707 addressed to the lord chamberlain by Owen Swiney, the manager of the Haymarket Company, explains that 'young Downes' had been denied employment because of lack of qualifications (LC 7/3, fols. 94-5, quoted in Downes, 1987, xi). However, the letter expresses readiness to grant a pension to Downes 'pere' according to the lord chamberlain's suggestions. Downes may have died in 1712, for according to 'The Registers of St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, London' a John Downes was buried there on 4 June 1712. 


@@@@@


doc= 7975


Downes, Theophilus (1657/8-1726), nonjuror and author, was born at Purslow, Shropshire, between March 1657 and March 1658, the son of John and Knightley Downes. He became a commoner of Balliol College, Oxford, in March 1673, graduating BA on 17 October 1676 and MA on 10 July 1679. He was elected a fellow of Balliol College, but was ejected in 1690 following his refusal to take the oath of allegiance to William III. In support of this view he published several pamphlets, most notably 'An examination of the arguments drawn from scripture and reason, in Dr. Sherlock's case of allegiance, and his vindication of it' (1691), and wrote the introduction to the nonjuring Jacobite volume 'The Hereditary Right of the Crown of England Asserted' by George Harbin (1713). After his ejection he acted at least until 1711 as a travelling tutor on the grand tour in France and Italy, occasionally visiting the exiled Stuart court in France. Among his students were James Scudamore and Thomas Thynne, whose family members continued to support Downes. He also received financial support via a network of well-off nonjurors when staying in London. Having acquired firsthand knowledge of Roman antiquities during his numerous travels, he participated in the famous debate about the antiquity of the iron shield in the possession of John Woodward, rejecting Henry Dodwell's view of its ancient origin. It was only after his death, on 26 July 1726 in the parish of St George the Martyr, London, that his contribution to the dispute was published. He remained a bachelor throughout his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 7976


Downes, William, first Baron Downes (1751-1826), judge, was born at Donnybrook, co. Dublin, the third and youngest son of the six children of Robert (Robin) Downes (1708-1754) of Donnybrook (MP for Kildare, 1735-54), and of Elizabeth (Lily), daughter of Thomas Twigg, also of Donnybrook; he was grandson of Dive Downes, bishop of Cork (died 1709). He was aged only two or three when his father was found dying in the parlour of their home in Dawson Street, Dublin, with a sword run through his body; the circumstances were never explained. 
In 1768 Downes entered Trinity College, Dublin, from which he graduated BA in 1773, the same year that he was admitted to the Middle Temple. He was called to the Irish bar in 1776, and soon acquired a reputation for industry and competence. In 1788 he successfully defended the future Major-General Gillespie, who had been charged with the murder of Sir Jonah Barrington's brother. The Irish government thought sufficiently highly of Downes to arrange in 1790 for his election as an MP for Donegal borough, a seat that lay within its gift. Two years later he was made a puisne judge in the Irish king's bench. Although criminal business constituted but a portion of Downes's judicial work it was here that his performance was most jealously scrutinized. Conservative critics were not always impressed, the presumed pro-defence stance of the judge in a high-profile 1796 trial causing one complainant to label Downes 'a phlegmatic, cowardly heap' (McDowell, 547). 
The rising of the United Irishmen in 1798 and the manner of that rising's suppression had a profound effect on Downes, both as judge and man. He was distressed by the execution after court-martial in June of that year of an old friend, Sir Edward Crosbie. 'The melancholy situation of the country', Downes confided in July, 'has so much heated the minds of most people... that a ready ear is lent to reports which tend to criminate' ('An Accurate and Impartial Narrative of the Appeal, Trial and Execution of Sir E. W. Crosbie, Bart.', 94). In October he remonstrated with Castlereagh, the Irish chief secretary, over an incident that had occurred on the opening day of the assizes at Waterford. As presiding judge Downes had been shocked to learn that that morning six 'rebels' scheduled to be tried before him had been transferred into military custody: 'The law cannot appear to the public to be weak without losing that respect which it ought to have with the people especially if they shall feel only its terrors, and shall believe it is not strong enough to extend benefits to them. ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 3.14)' Downes was promoted to the chief justiceship of king's bench in 1803 to fill the vacancy caused by the murder of Viscount Kilwarden. 'As a judge, lawyer and citizen, Downes... then the senior puisne was by universal admission the fit man' (Ball, 'The Judges in Ireland', 2.244). Three years later he was given an honorary LLD on becoming vice-chancellor of the University of Dublin, a position he held until his death. 
Downes was to fill the office of chief justice for nearly nineteen years. Few specimens of his written judgments survive, but both these and contemporary accolades indicate that he contributed a good deal to such dignity as the immediate post-union Irish bench was able to muster. This praise counted for little in the turbulent years that preceded Catholic emancipation, however, and in 1812, in a deteriorating political atmosphere and in what was a remarkable twist to events, Downes himself was to be sued over the arrest of a prominent Catholic, an arrest that he had personally sanctioned under the terms of the 'Irish Convention Act' of 1793: 'Taaffe v. Downes'. Taaffe's suit failed. Downes's conduct of the trial of John Magee the following year, on a charge of criminal libel, in turn incensed the government. Daniel O'Connell, Magee's defence counsel, had mounted a savage attack on Dublin Castle rule. Peel, as chief secretary, was horrified at Downes's indulgence of O'Connell, and expressed the hope to a correspondent that the chief justice would not 'allow the court to be again insulted and made the vehicle of treason' (Parker, 1.117). O'Connell, for his part, did not reciprocate the indulgence, variously describing Downes as a 'scoundrel' and a 'plausible tool of bigotry' ('Correspondence of Daniel O'Connell', 2.152, 384). 
Downes resigned the office of chief justice in February 1822, on a pension of $3800 a year. On 10 December he was created Baron Downes of Aghanville in King's county, with a special remainder in favour of his cousin Sir Ulysses Burgh. About 1805 Downes had bought Merville, near Stillorgan in co. Dublin, a property then reputed to possess the best garden in Ireland. Downes died at Merville on 3 March 1826 and, like his two elder brothers, died unmarried. At his special request he was buried in the same tomb in the vault of St Ann's Church in Dawson Street, Dublin, as a colleague and fellow king's bench judge, William Tankerville Chamberlain (1751-1802), who had been laid to rest some twenty years earlier. An inscription in the church records: 'Their friendship and union was complete. They had studied together, lived together, sat together on the same bench of justice, and now by the desire of the survivor they lie together in the same tomb.' 


@@@@@


doc= 8037


Elizabeth Draper (1744-1778). Elizabeth had been born in India on 5 April 1744, and had married Daniel Draper at the age of fourteen (28 July 1758). In 1767 she was visiting in London with her children, while her husband, a government official in Bombay, remained abroad. She was twenty-two when she met Sterne near the end of January, and Sterne's letters to her typify the 'language of the heart' that became the idiom of their relationship. Mrs Draper returned to India in early April, a departure that occasioned Sterne's 'Bramine's Journal' (its surviving portion, in a misleading analogy to Swift's 'Journal to Stella', was labelled 'Journal to Eliza' when first fully published in 1904, after having been found in an attic in the middle of the previous century). This journal was written while Sterne was contemplating and then composing 'A Sentimental Journey', and certainly it is an important clue to that work. Part of the journal was sent to Eliza and is now lost, but the surviving portion, headed by Sterne 'Continuation of the Bramine's Journal', faithfully provides entries from mid-April to the end of July. The best text of the 'Journal' is in volume 6 of the 'Florida Edition' of the works of Sterne. 


@@@@@


doc= 8076


John Drummond, first Lord Drummond (d. 1518), restored the family to national prominence, beginning in the 1470s. On 20 March 1474 King James III confirmed the resignation by Maurice Drummond of Concraig of his hereditary right to the offices of steward, coroner, and forester of the earldom of Strathearn in favour of his kinsman John Drummond of Cargill. The Strathearn offices had, however, been occupied since 'c'.1437 by members of the Murray of Tullibardine family who immediately objected to the new grant. By September 1475 James III had reversed his decision and revoked his earlier grant. Although John Drummond was occasionally to be found in royal service thereafter, most notably as one of the men appointed to negotiate a peace treaty and marriage alliance between James III and Richard III of England in 1484, his relationship with James never seems to have recovered from the events of 1474-5. On 29 January 1488, when he was facing intense political opposition, the king made John a lord of parliament with the title of first Lord Drummond. If the creation was designed to secure his loyalty to James's regime, then it was in vain. In the spring of 1488 Drummond joined the rebellion against James III which was nominally led by the latter's own son and heir, the future James IV. James III's death at the battle of Sauchieburn on 11 June paved the way for Prince James's supporters to dominate the new royal establishment, and Drummond immediately displaced Sir William Murray of Tullibardine as steward of Strathearn and organized the removal of Murray's kinsmen from royal lands in the earldom. A fierce feud ensued, culminating in 1490 in the massacre of twenty of Sir William's men in the kirk of Monzievaird by a party of Drummonds led by John's son David. Lord Drummond and Sir William Murray were briefly taken into royal custody in 1491 in an effort to contain the dispute, while David Drummond seems to have been executed by May 1492. Drummond's influence in James IV's administration may have waned briefly as a result of this dispute, but a revival of his fortunes during 1495 saw him appointed as royal justiciar in February (an office he held until 1501) and confirmed in the disputed Strathearn offices in October. His place in the young king's favour was secured by the romantic liaison between James and Drummond's daughter Margaret Drummond who was resident in the royal castle of Stirling by June 1496, and who bore the king an illegitimate daughter in the following year. 
John Drummond appears to have retained the goodwill of James IV (despite the ending of the king's liaison with Margaret in 1498) until the end of the king's reign and life at the battle of Flodden in 1513. One of the few Scottish lords of note to escape unscathed from Flodden, Drummond soon became embroiled in the faction-fighting of the minority of James V. He was identified with the pro-English faction headed by his own grandson Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, and supported Angus's marriage in 1514 to James IV's widow, Margaret. A reaction against Angus's influence saw John, duke of Albany, appointed as regent and tutor to the young James V. When Sir William Cumming, Lyon king of arms, was sent by Albany to summon Angus before the regency council, John Drummond struck him. Drummond was tried before parliament in July 1515 for, among other things, his violent conduct against the royal herald. Found guilty, he was forfeited and imprisoned in Blackness Castle. However, in 1516 he pledged his support to Albany's regime and on 22 November was pardoned and restored to some of his estates. Drummond died shortly thereafter, perhaps on or about 4 August 1518. He was reputedly buried in the kirk of Innerpeffray. 
John Drummond was married before 3 February 1483 to Elizabeth Lindsay, thought to have been the daughter of Alexander Lindsay, fourth earl of Crawford ['see under 'Lindsay family, earls of Crawford]. They had several children. Three of their sons, Malcolm, William, and David, predeceased their father, as did William's eldest son, Walter. John was thus succeeded by his great-grandson David, who became second Lord Drummond. Of their daughters the most famous was Margaret, the mistress of James IV, who seems to have died 'c'.1502. Another, Elizabeth, married George Douglas, master of Angus, as her second husband, and was the mother of the sixth earl of Angus. 


@@@@@


doc= 8200


Agnes Dunbar, countess of Dunbar or of March (d. 1369)], the eldest daughter of Thomas Randolph, first earl of Moray (d. 1332), and Isabel, daughter of Sir John Stewart of Bunkle. According to the chronicler Pitscottie, the countess was popularly called Black Agnes 'be ressone sho was blak skynnit', presumably meaning that she was swarthy in complexion. Pitscottie goes on to add that she was also 'of greater spirit than it became a woman to be' ('CDS', 4.xxi), a remark which the few known facts about her life would seem to corroborate. She was Patrick's cousin, and a papal dispensation was needed before they could marry. She played as prominent a part as her husband in the cause of Scottish independence. 


@@@@@


doc= 8201


Columba Dunbar (c.1386-1435), bishop of Moray, who withdrew to England with the rest of his family in 1400 and was dispensed to hold benefices without cure of souls in that year. Presented to the deanship of the royal free chapel in Bridgnorth in 1403, he studied arts at Oxford. He lost his position at Bridgnorth on returning to Scotland in 1409, but was dean of Dunbar collegiate church by 1412 and was made archdeacon of Lothian in 1419. He had been ordained priest by 3 April 1422, when he was provided to the see of Moray. Little is known of his activities as bishop, but he attended to the restoration of his cathedral, devastated by the earl of Buchan in 1390 -- Dunbar's arms appear on the west gable of the nave. In 1429 he went to Rome as the king's envoy and in 1434 had an English safe conduct to attend the council of Basel, though it seems unlikely that he went. He died at Spynie, near Elgin, in 1435, some time before his successor was recorded as bishop-elect on 7 November. He may be represented by the effigy of a bishop in Elgin Cathedral, where he was probably buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 8364


Sir John [ii] Dymoke (d. 1381), son of John [i] Dymoke and Felicia Harevill. He married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Ludlow, who inherited Scrivelsby from her grandmother Joan, the youngest daughter of Philip Marmion. 
In 1355 Dymoke was pardoned at the request of Edward, the Black Prince, for receiving John Ludlow, indicted for two deaths. A member of John of Gaunt's Lancastrian affinity from at least 1369, he was paid an annuity of 20 marks in 1370-72. Sir John was appointed to peace commissions in 1364, 1368, 1371, 1375, and 1377 and represented Lincolnshire in the parliaments of 1372, 1373, and 1377. Dymoke served on commissions of oyer and terminer, array, and walls and ditches within the county and he (or his father) was briefly escheator for Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, and Rutland from January to November 1341. In 1376 during a two-year term as escheator for Lincolnshire (1375-7) he took legal action through an oyer and terminer commission against those who, he alleged, had assaulted him and tried to prevent him from exercising his duties. 
Sir John asserted the right to act as king's champion before the coronation of Richard II in 1377. A rival claimant, Baldwin Freville, however, alleged the right to perform the same service through his tenure of Tamworth Castle. The respective positions were based on claims initiated at Edward III's coronation in 1327 and devolved from the property ownership of a common ancestor, Philip Marmion (d. 1291). There is no direct evidence, though, that Marmion had performed the service himself or was a descendant of the champions to the dukes of Normandy, nor that Scrivelsby or Tamworth were linked to champion service. Nevertheless, in 1327 Henry Hillary, then tenant of Scrivelsby and second husband of Marmion's youngest daughter, claimed that the manor was held by grand serjeanty directly from the king and that the tenant had the duty on coronation day of providing a well-armed knight on horseback to prove in combat, if necessary, that the king crowned on that day was the true and rightful heir of the kingdom. Hillary's claim was challenged by Alexander Freville, whose wife, one of Marmion's granddaughters, had inherited Tamworth. In the event, Edward III declined both offers, but Hillary, who petitioned that his proffer be recorded and consideration taken of his expenses, was granted his fee. 
The parties' contentions of 1377 were duly placed before the court of claims. On the basis of better records and evidence, the lord steward, the duke of Lancaster, found in favour of Dymoke. Edward III and the Black Prince were also said to have frequently asserted Dymoke's right. Baldwin Freville was given the opportunity of a further hearing if within a time limit set by the court he could provide the necessary evidence. In default of his appearance he would be forever excluded and Dymoke would perform in the right of his wife. Freville failed to appear at the appointed time. The Frevilles resurrected their claim for the coronation of Henry IV, but the court was not convinced. 
Sir John died about April 1381. Margaret presented their son Thomas [i] Dymoke (died 1422) to act as champion in 1399, though Henry IV was supposedly overheard to say, 'If need be, Sir Thomas, I shall personally relieve you of this task' ('Chronicle of Adam Usk', 73). Sir Thomas also performed the service at Henry V's coronation, and his son, Sir Philip Dymoke (died 1455), at that of Henry VI. 



@@@@@


doc= 8365


Sir Robert [i] Dymoke (c.1461-1545), Sir Thomas [ii]'s heir, married Anne, daughter of John Sparrow of London. Robert's eventful minority included in May 1471 an order to arrest him and his mother. The following year his custody and wardship were entrusted to Robert Radcliffe. Dymoke was given licence to inherit his father's lands and those of Robert Waterton in 1482. Account of the former (which in addition to Scrivelsby included the Lincolnshire manors of Coningsby, Thornton, Donington, and Horncastle among others) was to be rendered after an inquiry in 1483 into the possessions of named rebels. In 1485 he requested an exemplification that any act of forfeiture should not extend to Waterton's lands. 
Dymoke was knighted on 5 July 1483 before Richard III's coronation, at which he first performed his duties as king's champion. It is recorded that at the second course of the banquet Dymoke rode into the hall and proclaimed that he would fight anyone who dared to say that Richard was not the lawful king. The whole hall was silent, but Dymoke having thrown down his gauntlet, the company cried out 'King Richard'. This happened three times. Sir Robert was then brought a cup of wine covered and when he had drunk, he cast out the remaining wine and departed with the cup (BL, Add. MS 6113, fol. 22). He later acted as champion at the coronations of Henry VII (1485) and Henry VIII (1509). 
Sir Robert [i] Dymoke was appointed sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1484, 1502, and 1509 and became mayor of Boston in 1520. From 1486 he served on many administrative and judicial commissions within the county including peace commissions for Lindsey (1486-1507, 1520-32, and 1539). He was made a banneret in 1512 and served as treasurer of the rearward in Henry VIII's invasion of France in 1513. Henry appointed him treasurer of the captured city of Tournai, a post he occupied until 1515. In 1522 Dymoke provided the sum of $200 towards the king's expenses for regaining the French crown. For at least eight years (1527-35) he was chancellor to the queen's household, though he is also described as Katherine of Aragon's 'almoner and receiver' and 'queen's chamberlain' under Anne Boleyn. During the Lincolnshire rebellion of 1536 the rebels came to fetch Sir Robert from Scrivelsby together with his sons Edward, the current sheriff, and Arthur. Although a banner depicting the family arms was used at the rebels' head, the family's conduct, like that of the other leading gentry caught up in the revolt, attracted suspicion but no punishment from the king. 
Sir Robert died on 15 April 1545. His will dated 1543 desired his son Edward [i] to appoint two discreet and honest priests and one poor man for five years to say mass daily in the church at Scrivelsby and pray for the souls of Robert, his wife, and his parents. 
Sir Edward [i] Dymoke (died 1567), who married Anne, daughter of George Tailboys, Baron Kyme, was the champion at the coronations of Edward VI, Mary, and Elizabeth. His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 8366


Robert [ii] Dymoke (d. 1580), married Bridget, daughter of Edward Fiennes de Clinton, first earl of Lincoln (1512-1585), and of Elizabeth Blount, and had at least four sons, Edward [ii], Robert [iii], Nicholas, and Tailboys Dymoke. Robert [ii], who suffered from a paralysis in later life, may have died in prison as a result of his unyielding recusancy. He was buried at Scrivelsby on 26 September 1580. 


@@@@@


doc= 8367


Sir Thomas [ii] Dymoke (d. 1470), the son of Sir Philip, married Margaret, daughter and coheir of Leo Welles, Baron Welles (c.1406-1461). Thomas [ii] was knighted at the battle of Northampton on 9 July 1460 and later acted as champion at the coronation of Edward IV. In December 1461 he was granted for the life of Elizabeth, wife of William Tailboys, a third of all the manors and lands of which that rebel was seised. Three months later Dymoke (with John Denham and Thomas Burgh) received a further grant for the life of the same Elizabeth of lands in Lincolnshire and Durham. Sir Thomas [ii] was appointed to the peace commission in Lindsey in 1463 and 1467. During the unsettled period marking the Wars of the Roses, he became embroiled in a competition for local dominance between his brother-in-law, Richard Welles, Lord Welles ['see under 'Welles, Leo], and Thomas Burgh, Edward IV's master of horse. In this private feud Burgh's manor at Gainsborough was attacked and destroyed, causing the king to summon the ringleaders to appear before him at Westminster in March 1470. Dymoke and Welles dutifully obeyed, but were sent on to Huntingdon where Edward had marched as a result of a fresh outbreak of violence. The leader of the new rebellion appeared to be Welles's son, Robert, who was hailed as the 'great captain of the commons of Lincolnshire'. Dymoke and Welles were pardoned on 6 March, but Welles was forced to demand his son's immediate submission to the king's forces under threat that Dymoke and he would be put to death. The exhortation obviously failed as both men were summarily executed at Stamford on 12 March. On 25 April 1470 an order was issued to seize all the lands and possessions of the rebels. If Sir Thomas was identical with the Thomas Dymoke of Horncastle, merchant, to whom a pardon was granted four months later, hopes of remission were dashed when the political tide turned again, for in December 1471 Scrivelsby, Horncastle, and the other Dymoke estates were granted to Richard, duke of Gloucester. 



@@@@@


doc= 8404


Richard Earlom (1743-1822), the son of William Earlom and his wife, Margaret, baptized on 14 May 1743 at St Sepulchre, Holborn, where his father was the vestry clerk. He is said to have been introduced to the painter G. B. Cipriani through a neighbour in Cow Lane, Smithfield, a coach-maker who mended the lord mayor's coach (decorated by the Italian artist). He studied with Cipriani, and at the St Martin's Lane Academy and the duke of Richmond's gallery of casts. From 1757 to 1766 he frequently won premiums and prizes for drawing and for engraving at the Society of Arts, including in 1765 a premium for an original drawing of 'Numa Pompilius Refusing the Roman Sovereignty'. He exhibited his prize-winning drawing of 'The Dancing Faun' with the Free Society of Artists in 1762, and in 1767 exhibited the drawing after West of his 'Story of Pyrrhus' (engraved by John Hall and published by Boydell in 1769). In 1773 he went to Houghton Hall, Norfolk, with George and Joseph Farington and Josiah Boydell to copy works in the collection, published by Boydell as 'The Houghton Gallery' (1774-88). His outstanding achievements for Boydell were the fifty-one plates after Cipriani intended for use by art students and the 300 plates after Claude, published as the 'Liber veritatis' (1777-1819). He was paid the unusually high rate of $420 for the single large engraving he created for the 'Shakspeare Gallery', Fuseli's 'Lear'. Although he worked predominantly for Boydell throughout his career, he also produced prints for the publishers Robert Sayer (notably the mezzotint after Zoffany's 'Royal Academicians', 1773), Laurie and Whittle, and B. B. Evans. He continued to work for Boydell & Co. after John Boydell's death. A son, Thomas, is said to have died in 1789 aged only seventeen. Earlom is estimated to have produced more than 500 engravings, seventy portraits, sixty mezzotints, and many illustrations, including mezzotints to Thornton's 'The Temple of Flora' (1799/1807) and Woodburn's 'Portraits of Characters Illustrated in British History' (1810). He is noted as a considerable technical innovator, combining mezzotint with other techniques with particular delicacy. By 1817 his eyesight was failing, and he had retired from art. He died on 9 October 1822, at Exmouth Street, Clerkenwell, leaving an estate valued at nearly $14,000, largely benefiting his widow and the children of his deceased daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 8509


Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 



@@@@@


doc= 8610


John Elder (1824-1869) was born at Glasgow on 8 March 1824, the third son of David Elder, who was then manager of Robert Napier's Lancefield and Vulcan engine works. He was educated at Glasgow grammar school and subsequently attended classes at the University of Glasgow under Lewis Gordon, newly appointed professor of civil engineering. Elder was a premium apprentice for five years at Robert Napier & Sons in Glasgow, where he was trained by his father. He showed an extraordinary talent as a marine engineer and man of business. He then worked for a year as a pattern maker at Messrs Hick of Bolton-le-Moors, Lancashire, before being appointed draughtsman to Great Grimsby docks. He returned to Glasgow to become Napier's drawing-office manager and chief draughtsman in 1848. While there he assisted his father in the design and construction of six vessels for the Cunard Company. Later the firm became involved in a dispute with the Pacific Steam Navigation Company over a contract for four paddle-steamers, which needed to be modified to meet the specification. When Napier incurred penalties for late delivery, John Elder reputedly decided to leave and accept a partnership with Randolph, Elliot & Co., which was rechristened Randolph, Elder & Co. His real motive in moving was probably because he realized that there was little prospect of his gaining a partnership in Napier's firm when James R. Napier, Robert Napier's son and himself a brilliant engineer, was managing the shipyard. David Elder continued to work for Napier until his death at the age of eighty-two in Glasgow on 31 January 1866. A deeply religious man, he was a member of the Scottish Episcopal church and was well known for his interest in theology. He was a keen musician, and he not only played organs but also built them. 


@@@@@


doc= 8639


Princess Elizabeth (1770-1840), landgravine of Hesse-Homburg, consort of Friedrich VI, born on 22 May 1770. In the next five years Queen Charlotte bore three sons; 


@@@@@


doc= 8755


William Cuthbert Elphinstone-Holloway (1787-1850), was born on 1 May 1787 and, after attending the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, joined the Royal Engineers as a second lieutenant on 1 January 1804. He served with his father at Cork before spending the year of 1808 with the British garrison on Madeira. In 1810, having been employed in the eastern military district in England, he left for the Peninsular War. His conduct as a second captain at the capture of Badajoz, during which he was severely wounded, was mentioned in Wellington's dispatch of 27 March 1812 ('LondG', 1812, 702). He was awarded a wound pension, and after further duties in Britain he was posted to the Cape of Good Hope in 1818, served in the Cape Frontier War of 1819, and conducted military surveys before returning home in 1831. He took from his wife, Amelia (died 12 July 1874), daughter of Captain Thomas Elphinstone RN, the additional surname of Elphinstone in February 1825. He was made a companion of the Bath on 26 September 1831. His subsequent duties in Ireland were followed by promotion to colonel on 23 November 1841 and an appointment as CRE in Canada between 1843 and 1849. He died as CRE western district at Plymouth Citadel, Devon, on 4 September 1850, and was buried in Plymouth cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 8801


Enda mac Conaill (fl. 6th cent.?) on Inismore (Inis Mor), the largest of the Aran Islands. These islands in Galway Bay were ruled by the Eoganacht Ninussa, a minor branch of the great Munster dynastic federation. The islands contain a large number of neolithic and early Christian sites. Many of the latter are associated with Enda, particularly Killeany (Cill Einne), the site of the ancient monastery. Enda is commemorated on 21 March in the martyrologies. He is not mentioned in the annals but probably flourished in the sixth century. Most sources make him the son of Conall mac Daimine (died 609), a member of a royal dynasty of Airgialla (of mid-Ulster), and Aebfind, the daughter of Ainmire, king of Fir Arda Ciannachta (modern co. Louth). Yet, according to the Latin life of the saint, which is twelfth- or thirteenth-century in its present form but contains far earlier material, the Aran Islands were granted to Enda by the fifth-century Munster king Oengus mac Nad Fraich, despite the fact that the saint flourished a century later than the legendary king. One of the earliest references to Enda is contained in the 'Navigatio sancti Brendani'. In the text Brendan visits Enda and receives his blessing before embarking on his voyage. In his life Enda is celebrated as the teacher of Brendan, or Columba (Colum Cille) and of Ciaran of Clonmacnoise, with whom he made a pact, signalling good relations between Aran and Clonmacnoise. 


@@@@@


doc= 8817


Timothy Stansfeld Engleheart (1803-1879), engraver, was probably his father's pupil. In 1818 he was awarded the silver Isis medal of the Society of Arts for an outline drawing of the Farnese Hercules; his address was then Bayham Street, Camden Town. He and his wife, Ann, had two sons, Stansfeld ('bap'. 14 Nov 1833) and Francis James ('bap'. 8 Aug 1834), and one daughter, Lucy Mary ('bap'. 27 April 1837). He worked for annuals such as 'The Casket', 'Forget-me-Not', and the 'Literary Souvenir'. Two plates were done for William Hogarth's 'Works' (1833), and 'The Black Linn of Linklater', after Alexander Chisholm, for G. N. Wright's 'Landscape-Historical Illustrations of Scotland' (1836-8). Engleheart moved to Germany as a portrait engraver and about 1840 engraved 'Ecce homo', after G. Reni, at Darmstadt. Six steel-engravings after German artists were done for 'Rheinisches Taschenbuch', published at Frankfurt by Sauerlander (1842), and in J. J. Sievers's 'A Russian Statesman' his engraved portrait of Prince Besborodko was signed with his name and 'sc. Darmstadt'. His plates were signed 'T. S. Engleheart'. He later returned to London, where he died in 1879 aged seventy-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 8827


Eogan mac Dega (fl. late 6th cent.) of Ardstraw, feast day 23 August, was the saint of the kingdom known after its ruling dynasty as Ui Fhiachrach Arda Sratha (Ard Sratha, 'the Upper Part of the Vale' of the Mourne and Foyle, gave its name to the modern town of Ardstraw, 10 miles south of Strabane in the north-west of co. Tyrone, the site of Eogan's monastery). His church was the episcopal see of the kingdom, but 'c'.700 it also had ambitions to acquire control of churches outside the boundaries of the kingdom. Tirechan says that the community of Ardstraw claimed Assicus, Patrick's smith, buried in the church of Raith Cungi in the south of co. Donegal. Although, therefore, the cult was solidly based in the principal church of a middle-ranking kingdom, it was by no means confined within that kingdom's borders. Eogan is said in his life to have founded Cell na Manach in Cualu (the area stretching southwards from Dublin, along the east side of the Dublin and Wicklow Mountains as far south as Wicklow Town and thus including Glendalough). This accords with his pedigree in the genealogies of the saints which attributes him to Dal Messin Corb, a Leinster group of declining political fortunes which came, by the ninth century, to be settled between Wicklow and Arklow. Although unsuccessful in secular terms, Dal Messin Corb had one outstanding saint in Coemgen (Kevin) of Glendalough ['see under 'Leinster, saints of]; Eogan is said to have been his foster father. The life also gives Eogan, as one of the leading Airgiallan saints, significant connections with other northern patron saints, which even extended east across the River Bann and so into the territory that remained part of Ulster after its early medieval contraction. He was particular closely connected with his neighbour Tigernach of Clones and with Coirpre, bishop and patron of Coleraine; more remote connections included Comgall of Bangor and Cainnech of Aghaboe. 


@@@@@


doc= 8902


AEthelberht I (d. 616?), king of Kent, was the successor of his father, King Eormenric (fl. 550x600) ['see under 'Kent, kings of], and a member of the Kentish royal dynasty, the Oiscingas, said to have been founded by AEsc ['see under 'Kent, kings of], son of Hengist. 
It has generally been assumed that AEthelberht became king in 560 or 561, on the basis of Bede's information that he ruled for fifty-six years and died on 24 February 616. This would have been a reign of quite exceptional length (no other Anglo-Saxon king is known to have ruled for so long), and there has been some suspicion that Bede's figures may not be entirely reliable; for instance, it has been suggested that fifty-six years properly applied to AEthelberht's age at death, and not the length of his reign. Some reliance has been placed on two brief comments by Gregory of Tours in relation to the marriage between AEthelberht and Bertha (b. c.565, d. in or after 601), daughter of the Merovingian Frankish king Charibert, which is unlikely to have taken place before the mid-570s. In the first instance (which occurs in a part of Gregory's 'Libri historiarum' probably written in 581 or before) Gregory says simply that Bertha married a certain Kentishman; in the second (composed 'c'.589) he states that her husband was 'the son of a certain king in Kent' ('History of the Franks', 9.26). The implication would seem to be that AEthelberht was not yet king when he married Bertha (apparently between the mid-570s and 581) and that he may not have succeeded his father until after 589. 
It is difficult to know how much weight to give to Gregory's comments. He was a contemporary, and he was a close associate of Bertha's mother; on the other hand, he clearly had little or no interest in Anglo-Saxon matters and may have been mistaken about AEthelberht's status. The English sources (which may not be entirely independent of Bede) agree in giving AEthelberht a very long reign. One version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' mentions AEthelberht's accession under the year 565 and states that he ruled for fifty-three years ('liii' is conceivably a scribal error for 'lvi'). The annal for 568 in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' mentions an incident in which the West Saxon rulers Ceawlin and Cutha fought against AEthelberht and drove him into Kent. This may have been another man, perhaps a recalcitrant West Saxon princeling; but if it was the more celebrated AEthelberht, then it would appear that already in 568 he was in a position to lead an army into a neighbouring kingdom. A possible explanation for the discrepancy between Gregory and the English sources is that AEthelberht was appointed co-ruler or sub-king during his father's lifetime, but did not have full power until Eormenric's death; but this seems incapable of proof. 
The most important episode in AEthelberht's reign was the arrival in Kent in 597 (or possibly late 596) of a party of missionaries sent from Rome by Pope Gregory the Great ['see also 'Gregorian mission]. The king had already been exposed to Christianity for some years; his marriage to Bertha had been approved only on condition that she was permitted freely to practise her faith, and she had brought with her from her homeland a bishop named Liudhard (and presumably also a Christian retinue). Bede's account of the meeting between AEthelberht and the missionaries stresses the king's suspicion of the new arrivals and indicates that he was still a committed pagan; but it is difficult to believe that the mission would have gone ahead without some kind of prior consent or request from AEthelberht. He may have been bowing to pressure from his Frankish connections; certain letters of Pope Gregory hint at some Merovingian involvement in the decision to attempt the conversion of Kent (and the fact that the Franks had sent a bishop to Kent as Bertha's chaplain rather than a simple priest may indicate that they had already made some plans to evangelize the area). Certainly AEthelberht received Augustine and his companions most graciously and very quickly agreed to be baptized. The exact date of his conversion remains uncertain; Bede at one stage says that it took place twenty-one years before AEthelberht died (which would seem to be 'before' Augustine's arrival in Kent). Certainly there is good reason to suppose that AEthelberht was Christian by the end of 597, for in a letter of July 598 Pope Gregory boasts that up to Christmas of the previous year Augustine had made ten thousand English converts; such mass conversions are unlikely to have taken place until after the king had accepted Christianity. 
Already at the time of Augustine's arrival AEthelberht seems to have been to some degree acknowledged as overlord of all the English kingdoms south of the Humber. According to Bede, he was the third Anglo-Saxon ruler to enjoy such recognition; his predecessors had been AElle of the South Saxons, who probably lived in the fifth century, and Ceawlin of the West Saxons, who died about 593. The exact nature of AEthelberht's overlordship is very unclear (it was probably in the main a question of military leadership), but certain episodes in Bede's narrative do indicate that he had some authority outside the boundaries of Kent. It was apparently with AEthelberht's help that Augustine summoned the bishops of the Britons for a conference at 'Augustine's Oak', which appears to have been located somewhere on the border between the modern counties of Gloucestershire and Wiltshire or Somerset (possibly AEthelberht did no more than provide a safe conduct or an escort). AEthelberht appears to have dominated the kingdom of the East Saxons, ruled in the early seventh century by his nephew Saeberht (d. 616/17), son of his sister Ricule; he superintended the conversion of the East Saxons and built the church of St Paul's in London as an episcopal seat for Mellitus. AEthelberht's relations with Raedwald of East Anglia are more difficult to define. Bede identifies Raedwald as the fourth of the Southumbrian overlords, and adds an obscure comment which has been translated as indicating that Raedwald began to enjoy this position before AEthelberht died; a preferable interpretation may be that during AEthelberht's lifetime Raedwald retained the military leadership of the East Angles, which would normally have devolved upon the Southumbrian overlord. It seems probable that Raedwald was first introduced to Christianity while in attendance at AEthelberht's court. 
In Kent itself AEthelberht was responsible for a number of important innovations. Perhaps as early as 602-3 he compiled with his advisers a written law-code, which gave the fledgeling Kentish church a secure position within the kingdom but which was also concerned with a wide range of secular issues. As far as is known, the use of writing was effectively introduced into England by the Roman missionaries in 597; and so it is interesting that AEthelberht's code was in English rather than Latin, since it implies that an almost immediate effort had been made to transform the native language from an oral to a written form. Presumably the vernacular was chosen for reasons of practicality and in order to stress continuity; AEthelberht's written code was probably an extension of oral pronouncements previously made in assembly by himself and his predecessors. Bede says that AEthelberht was here influenced by Roman example, but the real parallels for his legislation lie in the law-codes issued by the Germanic kings on the continent, including the Franks. 
Another possible innovation on the part of AEthelberht was the creation of a royal capital city at Canterbury. When Augustine arrived in 597 AEthelberht gave him a dwelling-place in the city, which Bede describes as the 'metropolis' or chief city of his realm and elsewhere as a 'royal city'. To grasp the unusual nature of this statement it must be realized that in sixth-century England there is almost no evidence of any continuing urban life in the old Roman cities; virtually the whole population lived on the land, and the kings followed suit, making an itinerant progress from one royal estate to another. Canterbury itself would appear to have been essentially deserted for a long period during the fifth century, and population levels during the sixth are likely to have been very low. The idea that a sixth-century Anglo-Saxon kingdom might have a royal 'capital' is certainly remarkable. 
A third area where AEthelberht seems to have made an important change which reflected on the nature of kingship in Kent is in the establishment of a royal burial church on the outskirts of Canterbury, St Peter and St Paul (which was to develop into St Augustine's Abbey); this was intended to provide a dynastic burial place for the kings of Kent, who were interred in a chapel dedicated to St Martin, and also to cater for the archbishops of Canterbury. This innovation marked a very significant break with the past, and underlined AEthelberht's commitment to the new religion; it also seems to reflect an imitation of the burial practices of the Frankish royal dynasty (the connection is emphasized by the dedication of the royal burial chapel, for the cult of St Martin was closely associated with the Merovingians). It seems likely that in this instance AEthelberht was influenced by the wishes and expectations of his Frankish queen, but there may well be a deeper level of aspiration involved. In accepting Christianity, perhaps establishing a capital, issuing a law-code, and creating a dynastic burial church, AEthelberht was following in the footsteps of the Frankish king Clovis, who had effectively founded the fortunes of the Merovingians. Whether AEthelberht saw himself as the English Clovis it is impossible to say, but it does seem likely that he was very influenced by Frankish ideas of kingship. His marriage to Bertha was not an isolated episode of cross-channel contact. Kent was an important Frankish trading partner, and the sixth-century Kentish cemeteries have yielded a profusion of Frankish and Frankish-style luxury grave-goods. And AEthelberht's marriage may not have been the first alliance between the Merovingians and the Oiscingas; his father Eormenric had a name of distinctively Frankish type. There is a controversial hypothesis that Kent and other kingdoms of southern England were in fact under Merovingian overlordship during parts of the sixth and seventh centuries. Certainly there are hints that the Frankish kings did like to think that they should enjoy some kind of hegemony over their neighbours, but it is debatable whether this was ever translated into reality in southern England. It is particularly hard to credit in the case of AEthelberht, whose power over his own neighbours seems incompatible with subordination to the Merovingians. 
Bede's date for AEthelberht's death (24 February 616) is probably correct, although it has been pointed out that some early annals give an obit in 618 (presumably this is to be connected with the information behind the later annal in text E of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' which gives an accession date in 565 and a reign length of fifty-six years). AEthelberht was buried in the new royal mausoleum at Canterbury; an unofficial cult seems to have developed and from the thirteenth century his name appears in calendars. According to later sources at St Augustine's, Bertha (who appears to have taken the Anglo-Saxon name AEthelburh after her arrival in England) died before her husband, and before the new burial church was consecrated; she was buried outside and later transferred into the royal burial chapel. AEthelberht appears to have married again (at a very venerable age, if the traditional date for his accession is correct) or to have had a concubine, for after his death his son Eadbald (d. 640) married his father's widow (that is, his stepmother), to the consternation of the Roman missionaries. AEthelberht's known offspring are Eadbald, who succeeded him, and a daughter, AEthelburh (also known as Tate), who married King Eadwine of the Northumbrians in 625. Some Kentish sources also credit him with another daughter named Eadburh, said to have been buried in the minster at Lyminge (but there may be confusion here with a later Abbess Eadburh of Minster in Thanet). 
There are five surviving charters in AEthelberht's name, three from St Augustine's and one each from the episcopal archives at St Paul's in London and Rochester. None is authentic, or has any genuine basis. 


@@@@@


doc= 8903


AEthelberht (779/80-794), king of the East Angles, was the son of King AEthelred of the East Angles and was executed in 794 by order of King Offa of Mercia, as a result of which he came to be regarded as a royal martyr. His cult, which probably started life as a focus for resistance to Offa's oppressive rule, flourished in medieval England: sixteen churches were dedicated to him, including Hereford Cathedral, and for a time Hereford was second only to Canterbury as a magnet for English pilgrims. His feast day was 20 March. Beyond this little can be said for certain about one of the more obscure of Anglo-Saxon kings. The only pre-conquest reference to AEthelberht is found in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', whose compiler records that 'Offa, king of the Mercians, had AEthelberht beheaded' ('ASC', s.a. 792). However, the paucity of pre-conquest source material is offset by a relative glut of post-conquest information, which affords the opportunity to reconstruct some kind of context for the assassination. 
Three separate lives of St AEthelberht were written in the twelfth century by authors with connections to Hereford Cathedral (including Gerald of Wales and Osbert de Clare); and in the thirteenth century the story was told by the St Albans monks Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris. It would seem that AEthelberht was the son of King AEthelred and his wife, Queen Leofruna. The history of Offa's dealings with the East Anglian kings before 794 is extremely hazy, but the fact that coins bearing his name were minted in East Anglia in the early 790s suggests that he exercised some sort of overlordship in that region in the time of AEthelred and AEthelberht. They may have been native East Angles whose position as sub-kings was imposed upon them after military defeat by the Mercians, or they may have been Mercian appointees, perhaps even with Mercian royal blood: Matthew Paris and Gerald of Wales both claimed that AEthelberht ruled the East Angles because he was Offa's kinsman. 
The post-conquest sources are agreed that AEthelberht succeeded his father as a young man. In the Hereford version of events he was fourteen years old when he came to the throne, which, given that he seems to have been murdered soon afterwards, gives a date of 779 or 780 for his birth. The compiler of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' does not explain why Offa felt the need to dispose of the young AEthelberht, but it was presumably because he was perceived as some kind of threat. The St Albans view that Offa was blameless and that the crime was perpetrated by his evil consort, Cynethryth (or Cwenthryth), can be written off as special pleading by monastic authors who were not only prejudiced against women, especially those in positions of power, but also eager to clear the name of their founder and benefactor, Offa, who had established and endowed St Albans Abbey in 793. Nevertheless Cynethryth may have had 'some' involvement in the affair. The Hereford lives make her co-conspirator with Offa, which is by no means unlikely, as there is evidence that she was an important political figure in her own right, upon whom Offa relied for counsel. There are signs that AEthelberht stood in some way for East Anglian independence from Mercia, for he began to issue coins bearing his own name, a luxury which Offa allowed to none of his dependent kings. It is feasible, therefore, that his execution represents an attempt by Offa to stop an incipient rebellion in its tracks by depriving the East Angles of their figurehead, who died heirless. Alternatively, if Mercian royal blood flowed in AEthelberht's veins, then this would have weighed heavily against him, for Offa was eager to secure the uncontested succession of his son Ecgfrith as king of Mercia, and, as his contemporary Alcuin observed, he pursued a ruthless policy of eliminating possible rivals, chief among whom would have been a sub-king with Mercian royal blood. 
The sources differ widely on the method of AEthelberht's assassination. In Matthew Paris's version he sits on a booby-trapped chair which falls down into a pit, where he is smothered with drapes and then beheaded; while Gerald of Wales describes how he was ambushed and decapitated by an assassin named Gwinbert, who delivered his head to Offa. The fact that AEthelberht lost his head in all versions of the story strengthens the possibility that he was perceived by Offa as an obstacle to Ecgfrith's succession, since decapitation was the traditional punishment in literature and in fact for usurpers or would-be usurpers. There is also consensus among the post-conquest sources that the occasion of AEthelberht's murder was a visit to Offa's court to receive the hand of his daughter, who is named by various authors as AElfthryth, AElfrida, Etheldritha, and AElfflaeda. Thus it would seem that Offa used his daughter as bait with which to draw AEthelberht out of East Anglia so that he could be disposed of more easily. The Hereford branch of the tradition maintained that when AEthelberht came to visit him Offa was holding court near Hereford, at the royal estate of Sutton, and there is the same implication in the pages of the St Albans writers, who agree that the martyr's relics were conveyed to Hereford Cathedral after his murder, where they worked various miracles in later times. 


@@@@@


doc= 8904


AEthelberht (d. 865), king of the West Saxons, was the third of the five sons of AEthelwulf (d. 858), king of the West Saxons, and his first wife, Osburh (fl. 839), herself descended from the West Saxon royal line. Shortly before AEthelwulf went to Rome in 855, AEthelberht was appointed sub-king of Kent (really modern Kent with Essex, Surrey, and Sussex), a position he kept until 860. On AEthelwulf's return in 856, the eldest surviving son, AEthelbald, was able to rule the western part of Wessex and AEthelwulf himself took the eastern part; AEthelberht was allowed to retain his position in Kent. AEthelwulf seems to have intended AEthelberht to establish a cadet branch of West Saxon kings in Kent. However, when AEthelbald died in 860 the kingship of the West Saxons passed to AEthelberht, presumably because his brothers AEthelred and Alfred were considered too young to lead a country facing viking attacks (Alfred was only eleven). 
It was under AEthelberht that Wessex and its south-eastern extension became a united kingdom. Unlike his predecessors, AEthelberht did not appoint another member of his family as sub-king of Kent. Further, a charter ('AS chart.', S 327) issued in the first year of AEthelberht's reign reflects an extraordinary new kind of assembly: it was the first charter of a West Saxon king to include a full complement both of West Saxon and of Kentish witnesses. 
The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' describes AEthelberht's reign as one of good harmony and great peace. Although this was true of internal affairs, the vikings remained a threat, unsuccessfully storming Winchester and ravaging all eastern Kent. AEthelberht died in the autumn of 865 and was buried at Sherborne beside his brother AEthelbald. 


@@@@@


doc= 8905


AEthelburh (fl. 664), abbess of Barking, was the sister of Earconwald (d. 693), abbot of Chertsey and bishop of London. Nothing certain is known of her family background, though she may have originated among the Kentish aristocracy: AEthelburh shares her name with the Kentish princess who became queen of the Northumbrians and a saint, and her brother's name contains the same Earcon- prefix as members of the Kentish royal dynasty (for example, Earconberht). Probably at some point between about 664 and 675, Earconwald founded a monastery at Barking, Essex, for his sister. It was a double community, housing both monks and nuns, of a type familiar in seventh-century Francia. Bede's source for his description of it in his 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum' may have been modelled on an account of the abbey of Faremoutiers-en-Brie, which was led for a time by another AEthelburh, one of the daughters of Anna, king of the East Angles (died 654), with whom Barking's AEthelburh should not be confused. Bede had at his disposal a 'libellus' (a 'little book') of the miracles of AEthelburh, now lost, probably composed at Barking, and perhaps conveyed to him by his friend, the London priest (and future archbishop of Canterbury) Nothhelm. From this source Bede drew the report that the plague of 664-5 wrought heavy casualties in the monastery, so that a new cemetery had to be laid out. Among other miracles, Bede recounts that AEthelburh's imminent death was revealed in a vision to one of the nuns, whose own death was later foretold by an apparition of the abbess. 
Barking seems quickly to have acquired extensive property. AEthelburh was the recipient of a charter, of which an authentic copy survives, issued by one Hodilred (AEthelred), a kinsman of the East Saxon king, which enlarges the abbey's estates; this serves partially to validate otherwise questionable documents in which Earconwald himself reviews Barking's endowment by a series of East Saxon, West Saxon, and Mercian kings, and claims that he had received papal protection for the whole on his visit to Rome in 677 or 678 (though extant papal charters for Earconwald's minsters of St Paul's and Chertsey are certainly bogus). 
The twelfth-century chronicle of John of Worcester records that AEthelburh's death took place in 664 and, under 675, that she was succeeded by Hildelith. Neither year is likely to be accurate, though the day given for her death, 11 October, is also that under which she is commemorated in six pre-conquest calendars. Her burial at Barking is attested by an early eleventh-century list of saints' resting-places. Barking later celebrated translation feasts on 7 March, 4 May, and 23 September. 
The translation of Earconwald in 1148 prompted the writing of his life and an account of his miracles, which formed the basis of accounts of the saint by John Tynemouth ('fl'. 1350; now printed in the 'Nova legenda Anglie') and by the Bollandists. It is these sources that offer the fictional information that AEthelburh and her brother were born at 'Stallington' in Lindsey; that they were the children of the local king, Offa; that AEthelburh converted her father but left home to avoid marriage; and that Earconwald brought Hildelith from 'across the sea' to instruct AEthelburh in the monastic life. 


@@@@@


doc= 8906


AEthelthryth (d. 679), queen in Northumbria, consort of King Ecgfrith, and abbess of Ely, was the daughter of Anna, king of the East Angles (d. 654?). Her immediate kindred was dominated by women in religion, later venerated as saints, including three sisters, Seaxburh, AEthelburh, and Wihtburh, a half-sister, Saethryth, and two nieces, Eormenhild and Eorcongota. Two of these were abbesses and one was a nun at the important Frankish monastery of Faremoutiers-en-Brie, a connection that was to prove significant for AEthelthryth's own reputation as a saint. 
According to a local twelfth-century source, the 'Liber Eliensis', AEthelthryth was born in Exning, in west Suffolk. In 652, probably while still very young, she married Tondberht, ealdorman or prince of the Middle Anglian province of the South Gyrwe. The 'Liber Eliensis', following a lost text, alleged that Tondberht thereupon gave her the Isle of Ely as dower ('dos'), a statement which conflicts with the evidence of AEthelthryth's near contemporary, Bede, who believed that the great estate ('regio') of Ely, assessed at 600 hides, had come to her from the East Angles. There are some indications that Bede was right. If, as an early source suggests, the whole of Tondberht's own territory of the South Gyrwe was assessed at only 600 hides, he can scarcely have offered land of exactly that value as dower. AEthelthryth's probable birth on a royal estate nearby and the continuing association of Ely itself with Anna's kin also suggest that the area was East Anglian royal land. Whether, however, that land was bestowed upon AEthelthryth at her first marriage, or granted to her later after the collapse of her second must remain uncertain. 
Tondberht died after three years of wedlock, his wife, it seems, still a virgin. AEthelthryth continued a widow for a further five years before marrying Ecgfrith (645/6-685), son of King Oswiu of Northumbria, in 660. It is unclear how far she herself had any say in this second union. If, however, she was as devoted to her virgin status as contemporaries came to believe, she is unlikely actively to have sought it out. More probably, recent upheavals in local Middle Anglian politics provided the immediate stimulus. Oswiu's expulsion from Mercia in 658, after three years of direct rule, seems to have left the kingdom's eastern border, including the province of the South Gyrwe, increasingly under the influence of AEthelthryth's paternal uncle, the East Anglian king. He may well have had diplomatic reasons for putting pressure upon his niece to contract the union with Ecgfrith. The East Anglian royal house already had strong dynastic links with that of Northumbria, through the marriage of another of AEthelthryth's paternal uncles with the Deiran princess Hereswith. Hereswith, the mother of Aldwulf, soon ('c'.664) to succeed his uncle as king of the East Angles, was the cousin of Oswiu's queen, Eanflaed, and sister of Hild, by the late 650s abbess of Whitby and an influential figure in Northumbria. 
AEthelthryth's relationship with her new husband, who in 660 was about fifteen -- somewhat younger than she -- was not very successful. By 670, when Ecgfrith succeeded his father as king of Northumbria, he and his wife had fallen under the influence of the kingdom's forceful and ambitious bishop, Wilfrid, whom Ecgfrith may well have known since the late 650s. Wilfrid, who obtained his see in controversial circumstances in 668, was then at the height of his career. As he himself told Bede, despite all Ecgfrith's blandishments, he used his influence with the queen at that time to strengthen her resolve to remain a virgin. Thereafter events developed rapidly. About 672, after twelve years as Ecgfrith's wife, AEthelthryth was consecrated a nun by Wilfrid and entered the ill-fated monastery of Coldingham, where her husband's aunt AEbbe was abbess. A year later she left Northumbria to found a monastery on her great estate at Ely. By 678, Ecgfrith had divorced her and Iurminburg had replaced her as his consort. Before that date, while already a nun and still queen, she had taken the momentous step of giving to Wilfrid the large estate on which he founded his great new monastery of Hexham. 
Little is known of AEthelthryth's household while she was in Northumbria. In her early years, it was presided over by the East Anglian Owine, who came north with her in 660, but later became a monk at Ceadda's monastery of Lastingham and by 672 was a member of the bishop's community at Lichfield. Of her other dependants, only the Northumbrian thegn Imma is known; he had entered the service of Ecgfrith's brother AElfwine before 679, but seems to have retained links with AEthelthryth's kindred. Captured and enslaved in London after AElfwine's death at the battle of Trent in 679, he successfully appealed to the queen's nephew, King Hlothere of Kent, to ransom him. 
AEthelthryth ruled her new foundation at Ely for some seven years before dying of plague on 23 June 679. Bede described her way of life there in terms intended to indicate that she strictly espoused monastic values, as promoted by Pope Gregory the Great. AEthelthryth, he claimed, wore only woollen garments, seldom bathed except before the greater feasts, ate generally once a day, and was assiduous in the office and in prayer. Her monastic humility was apparent in the simple arrangements she decreed for her burial: she was to be interred in a wooden coffin amid her departed nuns. Some alleged that she showed powers of prophecy before her death. 
AEthelthryth was clearly a remarkable woman, with sufficient force of character to preserve her virginity through two marriages, to abandon the second of these despite her royal husband's opposition, and to set up, apparently on her own initiative, a successful dynastic community, which she handed on to her sister Seaxburh. The crucial factor in the establishment of her reputation, however, was a major posthumous miracle: at the translation organized by Abbess Seaxburh to seal her sister's status as a saint sixteen years after her death, in 695, her body was found incorrupt. At this carefully orchestrated ceremony, attended by Bishop Wilfrid, a tent was erected over the grave in the outdoor cemetery of the nuns, and AEthelthryth's body, still fresh and undecayed, was lifted from its resting place, washed, and clothed in new robes. It was then brought within the abbatial church and placed in a marble sarcophagus, almost certainly situated next to the principal altar, the position it still occupied in the late tenth century. The occasion was marked by further wonders and was clearly shaped by similar translations of AEthelthryth's and Seaxburh's relatives at Faremoutiers-en-Brie, which had also been marked by the great sign of incorruption. 
Incorruption had featured in one of Ambrose's translations in late fourth-century Milan and in several such ceremonies in sixth-century Gaul. In England, while Oswald's arm preserved at Bamburgh was already held to be imperishable, AEthelthryth's was the first instance of an entire body (her example was to be followed shortly by that of Cuthbert in 698). The impact of the miracle on the clerical elite was immense. Both Bede and Wilfrid's biographer Stephen of Ripon expressly mention it as incontrovertible evidence that AEthelthryth had died a virgin. The impression made upon Bede in particular is evidenced by his poem in praise of AEthelthryth's virginity, published in the 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum'; by her commemoration, together with Cuthbert, in the world chronicle which he attached to his great treatise on time published in 725; and by the fact that, uniquely among English saints, she received a full historical notice in his martyrology. 
AEthelthryth's cult was fostered in eighth-century Ely, where in addition to the imperishable body, the original grave clothes and coffin also worked wonders. The monastery seems to have been drawn firmly into the orbit of Mercia by the end of the seventh century, when Seaxburh's daughter, Eormenhild, who had married the Mercian king Wulfhere, in widowhood succeeded her mother at Ely. It was probably during this period that AEthelthryth's cult was first promoted in the ancient province of Lindsey, where the 'Liber Eliensis' associates it with the foundation of two churches and where indeed there are two churches with early dedications to the saint. Possibly Eormenhild's daughter, Werburh (died 709), who in later tradition is said to have been given charge of Mercian monasteries by her uncle King AEthelred and who is strongly associated with both Ely and with monastic foundations in Lindsey, may have fostered the cult in the area. 
AEthelthryth features in Alcuin's late eighth-century poem on York and in the ninth-century Old English martyrology, although neither account adds anything to that of Bede. At Ely, her community apparently enjoyed some form of continuous existence for about two centuries after its foundation. According to a narrative compiled in the later tenth century by one of its former members, the priest AElfhelm, it still comprised a mixed community of priests and nuns when the Danes attacked and dispersed it in the late ninth century. Despite the reported violence, the Danish attack made little impact on the cult. Members of the community seem soon to have returned to Ely, and the shrine itself evidently survived the Danes' attempts to loot it. By the 940s a community of married priests was again actively promoting AEthelthryth. 
Bishop AEthelwold of Winchester's refoundation of Ely 'c'.970 involved a fresh sponsorship of AEthelthryth's cult, part of his enlisting of the seventh-century church, as idealized by Bede, in the service of reform. The existing guardians, excoriated for their unchastity, were replaced by Benedictine monks, who recorded the saint's recent miracles, above all her punishment of their polluted predecessors. Under AEthelwold's guidance they gave due honour to AEthelthryth's shrine beside the high altar, placing next to it the newly translated remains of the saint's sister Seaxburh and niece Eormenhild, together with those of another sister, Wihtburh, forcibly removed from Dereham in Norfolk. Images of all four saints stood on either side of the high altar. These activities publicized the cult very effectively. St AEthelthryth was widely commemorated in later Anglo-Saxon calendars not only on the day of her deposition (23 June) but also -- especially in communities in East Anglia or under the influence of Winchester -- on the day of her translation (17 October). About 1000 AElfric included an account of her, derived wholly from Bede, in his lives of the saints. 
The continuing vitality of her cult is demonstrated by the role assigned to AEthelthryth in the English revolt against the Normans of 1070-71, in which her community was heavily involved. She was viewed as the special patron and protectress of the rebels, who swore an oath of loyalty on her relics. Despite these affiliations, the Norman abbots continued to promote St AEthelthryth, and the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries saw the production of a considerable amount of new material relating to the cult. Goscelin of Canterbury allegedly produced a text termed a 'prosa', no longer identifiable, and new miracles were recorded. In 1106 the relics of St AEthelthryth, together with those of Sts Seaxburh, Wihtburh, and Eormenhild were translated to new shrines in the reconstructed choir of the abbey church, AEthelthryth being placed in the position of honour east of the high altar. New lives in prose and verse, including fresh miracles, were produced thereafter, in the time of the first bishop, Hervey (1109-31). 
St AEthelthryth's cult, from the thirteenth century magnificently accommodated in Bishop Northwold's extension of the choir, continued to be promoted at Ely throughout the middle ages. The fair held there in association with her feast day (23 June) was a major event at which ribbons that had touched the shrine were in great demand; the quality of the items sold there was, however, such that it gave rise to the adjective 'tawdry', derived from St Audrey, the name by which the saint was then known. Besides Ely, some dozen medieval churches were dedicated to the saint. By the later middle ages her relics were widely distributed among English churches, including Glastonbury, St Albans, Salisbury, Thetford, and Waltham. Durham claimed to possess a stole she had given to St Wilfrid and in 1536 an East Anglian religious foundation allegedly held various personal items including a wimple and a comb. The shrine itself, in the cathedral monastery, was destroyed at the dissolution, but since the late nineteenth century the cult has been promoted at St Etheldreda's, Ely Place, the former chapel of the London palace of the bishops of Ely, returned to Catholic worship in 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 8907


AEthelflaed (d. 918), ruler of the Mercians, was the daughter and first-born child of Alfred (d. 899), king of the West Saxons and later of the Anglo-Saxons, and his wife, Ealhswith (d. 902), daughter of AEthelred, ealdorman of the 'Gaini', and Eadburh who, according to Alfred's biographer Asser, was a member of the Mercian royal house. AEthelflaed was born probably in the early 870s. By the time Asser had begun writing his life of Alfred in 893, and perhaps as early as 887, she had married the Mercian ealdorman and ruler AEthelred, who was certainly older, perhaps much older, than her. In the two or three years after the disappearance from the scene of Ceolwulf II in 879, AEthelred had come to rule over the English half of the Mercian kingdom that had been dismembered by the vikings, submitting to Alfred's overlordship. His marriage to AEthelflaed cemented a close bond, which renewed viking attacks in the 890s only strengthened. After AEthelred fell ill at some time in the decade 899-909 the sources accord leadership of the Mercians to Edward the Elder or to his sister AEthelflaed. The West Saxon version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records Edward sending a Mercian army against the vikings in 909 and 910. In the latter year AEthelflaed is credited with the building of a fortification at 'Bremesburh' (the location of which is now unknown), by the so-called Mercian register (embedded in texts B, C, and D of the chronicle). It may be this chronicle that is referred to by an early twelfth-century Durham catalogue as 'Elfledes Boc' (perhaps 'AEthelflaed's book'). She also seems to have had a particular association with Gloucester. The royal hall just outside the town at Kingsholm was used for a great council in 896, the mint was striking coins in the name of Alfred at the end of the ninth century, and the street pattern is strikingly similar to that of some of Alfred's 'burhs' in Wessex. AEthelflaed was responsible for the foundation of a new minster at Gloucester, originally dedicated to St Peter (and not to be confused with the old minster of St Peter, on the site of the modern cathedral). The church was a variation on an insular theme: a rectangular structure with a western apse, an unusual feature in England that must have owed something to Carolingian architecture. 
On AEthelred's death in 911, AEthelflaed was accepted as ruler by the Mercians: thereafter, the Mercian register describes her as 'Myrcna hloefdige', 'Lady of the Mercians', the precise equivalent of AEthelred's habitual title of 'Myrcna hlaford', 'Lord of the Mercians'. AEthelflaed's direct replacement of her husband seems to have encouraged her brother Edward to attempt to establish his family's control of Mercia. He had already sent his son AEthelstan to be brought up by his sister and her husband. On the latter's death he assumed direct jurisdiction over London and Oxford, two towns which Alfred had earlier put under AEthelred's control and which were vital to the make-up of the kingdom of the Anglo-Saxons. 
As the Mercian register makes clear, AEthelflaed shared in her brother's effort to reconquer the Danelaw. The first attack came in 909, when the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records that Edward sent a combined army of West Saxons and Mercians into the territory of the northern Danish army. It must have been this force that brought back to English Mercia the relics of the seventh-century Northumbrian royal saint Oswald from their resting-place at Bardney in Lincolnshire. AEthelflaed had them translated to her new minster at Gloucester, which afterwards took that saint's name. The essential precursor to systematic reconquest was the extension into Mercia of the system of fortified sites -- 'burhs' -- which Alfred had begun to construct in Wessex. These served the dual purpose of consolidating the defence of English territory and providing bases for attacks on viking-occupied areas. Sometimes two were built in one location, to dominate both banks of a river. While AEthelred was still alive, in addition to 'Bremesburh', Worcester (between 887 and 899) and Chester (907) had been fortified. Thereafter, brother and sister seem to have co-ordinated their construction programme. In 1912, at Bridgnorth and perhaps at the unlocated 'Scergeat', AEthelflaed had 'burhs' built to prevent crossings of the Severn, which viking armies had accomplished twice in living memory. Edward constructed two at Hertford to defend the southern part of Mercia which he controlled and, having moved into Essex, one at Witham. In 913 AEthelflaed responded to viking raids into Edward's territory by fortifying Tamworth and Stafford. The gap between Tamworth and Hertford was plugged in 914, when Edward had two 'burhs' built at Buckingham, and AEthelflaed one at Warwick, while she also strengthened her northern defences with a 'burh' at Eddisbury and, in 915, those of the Wirral with one at Runcorn. The 'burh' at Chirbury, and perhaps that at the unlocated 'Weardburh', shored up the frontier with Wales in the same year, and Edward fortified Bedford, having received the submission of its viking army. In 916 he protected Essex from seaborne attack with a 'burh' at Maldon. AEthelflaed must also have rebuilt the defences of Gloucester and Hereford during this period. 
This activity provided the bases for the successes of 917. In that year, after Edward had ordered the occupation and fortification of Towcester, three separate viking forces attacked English territory, but were rolled back. Before the end of the year, all the Scandinavian armies of East Anglia had submitted to Edward and offered him their allegiance. In the meantime AEthelflaed sent an army that attacked and captured Derby and the area of which it was the centre, the first of the viking 'Five Boroughs' of the north-east midlands to fall. She lost 'four of her thegns, who were dear to her' there ('ASC', s.a. 912, 'recte' 917). In the following year, a co-ordinated campaign to capture the remaining four viking strongholds took Edward to Stamford, while AEthelflaed entered Leicester without opposition. She died, however, at Tamworth on 12 June 918, not sharing with her brother the completion of the reconquest of the southern Danelaw. 
In the period of these campaigns, AEthelflaed also had other concerns that she seems to have tackled independently from Edward. There may be a kernel of truth behind the report of the Irish 'fragmentary annals' -- a late source, heavily embroidered with legendary accretions -- that she led a combined army against the viking Ragnall (died 920/21) at the second battle of Corbridge in 918: she may at least have sent a Mercian force to bolster that of Ragnall's northern opponents. She may even, as the 'fragmentary annals' go on to suggest, have made an agreement with the Picts and the Scots for co-ordinated action against recently arrived Norse aggressors in Northumbria. Her prominence in the north is indicated by the Mercian register, which states that in 918 the men of York offered her their submission and allegiance. She can therefore be seen as laying the foundations for Edward's (temporary) pacification of the north in 920. Relations with the Welsh are harder to fathom, the only recorded event being an expedition in 916 which captured the wife of the king of Brycheiniog as punishment for the murder of the Mercian abbot Ecgberht and his companions. 
AEthelflaed was buried alongside her husband in the east 'porticus' of her minster at Gloucester. Following her death, Edward initially allowed her daughter AElfwynn, who must have been nearly thirty but was still unmarried, to hold a nominal rulership over the Mercians. After six months, however, she was 'deprived of all authority in Mercia' and carried off to Wessex ('ASC', s.a. 919, texts B, C, D). At about the same time, the West Saxon version of the chronicle reports that all the people of Mercia, Danes and English, submitted to Edward. This act may have been premeditated: Edward's dispatch of his eldest son, AEthelstan, to be brought up among the Mercian aristocracy suggests as much. The bringing together of two (or, with the Danes, three) peoples under one rule did not amount to the creation of a single state, at least initially, but it does seem to have provoked some resentment among the Mercians, which lay behind a rebellion at Chester in 924. It is not known whether AEthelflaed herself approved of her brother's moves towards single rulership. In this context it is notable that her career emerges largely from the Mercian register, while the West Saxon version of the chronicle (text A), written within a few years, minimizes her significance. The latter text does not, however, obscure AEthelflaed's achievement, by dint of her high birth, her marriage, the political situation, and, it seems sure, her own ability, of a distinctively prominent role for a woman of her era. It made an impression on later generations. Writing 'c'.1130, Henry of Huntingdon declared her 'to have been so powerful that in praise and exaltation of her wonderful gifts, some call her not only lady, or queen, but even king' and follows this with a poem describing her as 'worthy of a man's name' and 'more illustrious than Caesar' (Henry, Archdeacon of Huntingdon, 309). Behind this twelfth-century rhetorical gloss lies recognition of the vital role that AEthelflaed played in the creation of the English kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 8908


AEthelfrith (d. c.616), king of Northumbria, was the son of AEthelric. He succeeded to the throne of Bernicia in 592, and in 604 to the joint Northumbrian kingdom of Deira and Bernicia which he ruled until 616. His first wife was Bebba, who is traditionally said to have given her name to the royal site of Bebbanburh, or Bamburgh. But it was his marriage to his second wife, Acha, princess of Deira, which cemented AEthelfrith's claim to Deira. He is the first historically attested ruler of Northumbria, and, in his relatively long reign, established that kingdom as a major political force in Britain. 
AEthelfrith is described by Bede in the early eighth century as a heroic war leader almost in the terms of epic poetry: 'a very brave king and most eager for glory. He ravaged the Britons more extensively than any other English ruler.... For no ruler or king had subjected more land to the English race or settled it, having first either exterminated or conquered the natives. (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 1.34)' This land taking and settlement can perhaps be seen reflected in the scattered late sixth-century pagan burial-grounds of co. Durham and Northumberland, and certainly his name was well known in British sources where he was called Flesaur -- the Artful. By 'c'.602 AEthelfrith's conquests threatened the Irish immigrants living in Dalriada (modern Argyll) and their formidable king, Aedan, son of Gabran, marched against him with a very strong army. At a place known as Degsastan (plausibly Addinston, Berwickshire), AEthelfrith defeated him, so that Aedan's army was 'cut to pieces' and he fled with a handful of survivors (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 1.34). After this defeat, according to Bede, the Irish in Britain were discouraged from warring against the English until his day. 
Having made safe his northern frontiers, AEthelfrith turned his attention to the Britons of Wales in an attempt to secure territory in the west and to cut off the Welsh from the British peoples in the north. He assembled a great army and attacked the Britons, led by the king of Powys, Selyf Sarffgadau, at Chester, some time between 613 and 616. AEthelfrith, who was a heathen, observed a large group of clerics standing apart from the British army, surrounded by guards, and asked who they were and for what purpose they had gathered there. On hearing that they were monks from the monastery of Bangor Is-coed who had come to pray for the British troops, he ruthlessly said, 'If they are praying to their God against us, even if they do not bear arms, they are fighting against us, assailing us as they do with prayers for our defeat' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.2). So he ordered them to be attacked first, killing, according to Bede, 1200 of them. He then won the battle, although not without heavy losses. 
By that time AEthelfrith was the dominant ruler in north Britain, while south of the Humber the most powerful ruler was Raedwald, king of the East Angles, at whose court Eadwine, the exiled heir of the Deiran throne, had taken refuge. AEthelfrith sent messengers with large sums of money demanding that Eadwine should be killed, and later, further messengers with larger bribes threatening to make war on Raedwald if he did not kill or surrender Eadwine. The East Anglian king was almost ready to give in to the demands, but his wife persuaded him that no honourable man would betray his guest for bribes; no doubt Raedwald also felt that to surrender to AEthelfrith's threats would be to give up his own pre-eminent position in southern England. As soon as the messengers had gone, Raedwald gathered a large army and marched against AEthelfrith, who did not have time to assemble a comparable force. At a battle by the River Idle, on the border between Mercia and Northumbria, 'c'.616, AEthelfrith was defeated and killed, and the victorious Raedwald established Eadwine as king of Northumbria. 
AEthelfrith's seven sons and many of his young nobles fled into exile among the Dalriadan Irish and the Picts. The northern recension of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' preserves the names of his sons as Eanfrith, Oswald, Oswiu, Oslac, Oswudu, Oslaf, and Offa. In the longer term, it was AEthelfrith's lineage which prevailed in Northumbria and three of his sons, Eanfrith, Oswald, and Oswiu, succeeded Eadwine, followed by his grandson Ecgfrith. 


@@@@@


doc= 8909


AEthelgar (d. 990), archbishop of Canterbury, was a monk of Glastonbury under Dunstan (later archbishop of Canterbury) and of Abingdon under AEthelwold (later bishop of Winchester). In 964 Bishop AEthelwold expelled the secular clergy from New Minster, Winchester, in favour of monks and he appointed AEthelgar as abbot. According to New Minster tradition, AEthelgar was a generous benefactor, enlarging the abbey and enhancing its prestige through the translation of the relics of St Swithun. On 2 May 980 he was consecrated bishop of Selsey, the South Saxon see, but he did not dispossess the canons of this church. He appears to have retained the abbacy of New Minster throughout his episcopate. AEthelgar succeeded Dunstan as archbishop of Canterbury about the middle of 988, apparently relinquishing control of New Minster, and went to Rome for his pallium in that or the next year. He visited the abbey of St Bertin, near St Omer, on his way both to and from Rome, and his gifts to this monastery were so large that the abbot considered him its patron, and attributed its restoration to him. AEthelgar died on 13 February 990, after a pontificate of one year and three months. 


@@@@@


doc= 8910


AEthelheard (d. 805), archbishop of Canterbury, was abbot of Louth in Lindsey before his elevation to the archbishopric of Canterbury on the death of Jaenberht on 12 August 792. Nothing is known of his antecedents, but he can be assumed to be of Mercian extraction. He certainly owed his appointment to Offa, king of the Mercians, who had previously persuaded the papacy to divide Jaenberht's province of Canterbury and elevate the Mercian see of Lichfield to an archbishopric. AEthelheard thus received only the Kentish, West Saxon, and South Saxon bishoprics, while those of the Mercians and East Angles remained in the hands of Hygeberht of Lichfield. AEthelheard was consecrated by Hygeberht on 21 July 793, and during the lifetime of Offa (and for a while afterwards) attested royal charters in a subordinate position to him, following the custom of distinguishing seniority between equals in rank by the date of consecration. 
On Offa's death in 796, the Kentishmen rose in rebellion against Mercian dominance. They were led by Eadberht Praen, an exile in Offa's reign, who now became king. AEthelheard, as a Mercian and an adherent of Offa, was presumably unacceptable to the new regime, and fled to the protection of Offa's son and successor, Ecgfrith, who gave him a minster at 'Pectanege' (possibly Patney, Wiltshire) as a residence ('AS chart.', S 1258). In 797 Alcuin wrote to the Kentish people, urging them to recall their archbishop and warning against any attempt to replace him. He also wrote to AEthelheard personally, censuring him for abandoning his see, but recognizing that it was the archbishop's own clergy who counselled flight. Whether AEthelheard felt physically threatened by the new Kentish regime is uncertain, but it is possible that the episcopal church was attacked and damaged during his absence; no archives have survived from the period before 798, though there is plentiful documentation thereafter. 
Ecgfrith himself died on 16 December 796, to be succeeded by a distant kinsman, Cenwulf. The new king opened negotiations with the papacy for the reunification of the southern province, but the difficulties were multiplied by the continuing hostility of the Kentishmen to Mercian overlordship. It was perhaps to counter this that Cenwulf attempted to have the archiepiscopal see moved from Canterbury to London, then a Mercian city; the see was vacant after the departure of Bishop Eadbald, who had fled abroad, for reasons which are now irrecoverable, in 796. Two missions were sent to Pope Leo III, one in 797, which miscarried, and another in 798. Pope Leo refused to countenance the removal of the archiepiscopal see from Canterbury, but did excommunicate Eadberht Praen, and within the year Cenwulf's forces overran Kent, captured and mutilated Eadberht, and restored AEthelheard to Canterbury. 
The problem of the archbishopric of Lichfield remained. The objection had always been to the division of the southern province, not to Hygeberht personally. Alcuin, in his letter to AEthelheard cited above, urged restoration of 'the unity of the Church', but recommended that Hygeberht should retain his pallium for life as a personal dignity, while relinquishing the right to ordain bishops. This compromise seems to have been implemented in the late 790s; Hygeberht retained his archiepiscopal title until at least 799 ('AS chart.', S 155) but it was AEthelheard who received professions of obedience from Eadwulf of Lindsey and Tidferth of 'Domnoc' in 799, Deneberht of Worcester between 798 and 800, and Wulfheard of Hereford in 801. 
In 801 AEthelheard himself journeyed to Rome, accompanied by Cyneberht, bishop of Winchester, and two laymen, the Mercian thegn Ceolmund, formerly in the service of King Offa, and the Northumbrian Torhtmund, who had served the murdered King AEthelred. He was helped on his way by Alcuin, who sent him a saddle horse and wrote to Charlemagne on his behalf. AEthelheard delivered further letters from his king to the pope, and, on 18 January 802, received a papal letter permitting the restoration of the southern province. The separation was ended at the Council of 'Clofesho' on 12 October 803 ('AS chart.', S 1431a). Hygeberht had already resigned both his title and his see: Ealdwulf, his successor as bishop of Lichfield, was already in office in 800 or 801 ('AS chart.', S 106, 158) and Hygeberht attests the 'Clofesho' decrees as a simple abbot, in the following of Bishop Ealdwulf ('AS chart.', S 1431b). 
Despite the problems he faced, AEthelheard's episcopate saw a greater frequency of synodal councils than those of his immediate predecessors. At least eleven synods are recorded for his time: at 'Clofesho' in 792, at Chelsea in 793, at 'Clofesho' again in 794, at London in 795, at Chelsea again in 796, at 'Clofesho' in 798, at Tamworth in 799, at Chelsea yet again in 800 and 801, at 'Clofesho' in 803, and at 'Aclea' in 804. In addition to these, there may have been a synod at Bath in 796. In the earlier synods, Hygeberht and AEthelheard seem to have presided jointly ('AS chart.', S 136, 137, 139). It is possible that AEthelheard presided alone at London in 795 and Chelsea in 796, but the texts of the diplomas which record these meetings are later and may have been emended after the abolition of the archbishopric of Lichfield ('AS chart.', S 132, 150, 151). Both archbishops were present at 'Clofesho' in 798 and at Tamworth in 799 ('AS chart.', S 153, 155); the charter recording the latter is Hygeberht's last attestation as archbishop. Both men attest a charter from the Synod of Chelsea in 801 ('AS chart.', S 158), but Hygeberht, though his name appears first, is styled only 'bishop' ('episcopus'). The frequency of synodal meetings is presumably connected with the contemporary movement for reform of the church; that of 792 saw the issue of Offa's privilege to the Kentish churches ('AS chart.', S 134), while the council of 803 prohibited the election of laymen or seculars as lords of monasteries ('AS chart.', S 1431b). 
AEthelheard's closeness to Offa is demonstrated by the letter from Charlemagne addressed to him and to Bishop Ceolwulf of Lindsey, asking them to intercede with the Mercian king on behalf of some Mercian exiles in Francia who wished to return home. The king's favour did not, however, extend to returning the minster of Cookham, in what is now Berkshire, given to Christ Church by Offa's predecessor, King AEthelbald, but seized first by Cynewulf of Wessex and subsequently by Offa himself ('AS chart.', S 1258). It was not until the synod at 'Clofesho' in 798 that AEthelheard finally came to an agreement with Offa's widow, Cynethryth: she kept Cookham, and received in addition the minster at 'Pectanege' given to AEthelheard by her son Ecgfrith, but in return she granted the archbishop 110 hides (sulungs) of land in Kent, at North Fleet, Teynham, and 'the source of the Cray'. In 799 AEthelheard made an even better deal with King Cenwulf ('AS chart.', S 155, 1259), recovering the church's estates at Charing, Great Chart, and Bishopsbourne, jointly assessed at 44 sulungs of land, for no more than 100 mancuses ($12 10's'.). In all, AEthelheard appears as an effective and energetic archbishop, concerned both to preserve the integrity and endowment of his see and to ensure the health and discipline of the English church. He died on 12 May 805 and was buried at Christ Church, Canterbury; his successor was his archdeacon Wulfred. 


@@@@@


doc= 8911


Elmer (d. 1137), prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, and theologian, may have come to England from Bec but certainly became a monk at the Benedictine monastery of Christ Church, Canterbury. The first abbot of Bec was called Herluin, and Elmer's use of this name may support the view that he spent some time at Bec. But his baptismal name, which is Old English in origin, may indicate that he was English by birth. He was one of the younger monks at Christ Church in the time of Archbishop Anselm (died 1109), who greeted him in a letter while he was himself still at Bec and Elmer was already at Canterbury. 
Elmer became prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, at a date between 1128 and 1130. He was in office at the dedication of the cathedral church on 4 May 1130. Gervase of Canterbury records that in 1136 there was a dispute between the cathedral priory monks and Archbishop William de Corbeil, who died in November of that year, about the church of St Martin at Dover, in which Elmer seems to have felt that honour required him to side with William. He attested a charter of Archbishop William between 1128 and 1136 and, with his monks, confirmed that they had witnessed a charter of Archbishop William between 1130 and 1136. Elmer died on 11 May 1137, according to his obit in BL, Arundel MS 68, folio 27. 
In writing his own letters and meditations Elmer achieved a style not wholly unworthy of a pupil of Anselm of Canterbury, although he is master of a monastic spirituality rather than a theologian. Gervase of Canterbury calls him 'a man of great simplicity and excellent religion' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.98). He is the author of more than a dozen letters, several meditations, and a sermon, on whose subject matter and approach the Anselmian stamp is clear. One letter survives in Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS Digby 30, folios 99-100. Letter S is also in Oxford, Magdalen College, MS 60, folios 222-6. BL, Cotton MS Otho A.xii, contained fifteen letters; this was burnt in the fire of 1731 and only fragments survive, but there is a seventeenth- or eighteenth-century copy, probably of this manuscript, now Cambridge, Trinity College, MS 1468 (0.10.16), 410-16, containing mainly letter collections, among them letters of Elmer to an abbot called Andrew, to Henry, to Nicholas of Gloucester, to Willermus, and to seven others. The Cambridge manuscript has meditations 'De cordis munditia' ('Of pureness of heart'), 'De bono vitae claustralis' ('Of the good of the monastic life'), and 'Excitatio mentis in inquisitionem Dei' ('The arousal of the mind in the search for God'), along with a 'Sermo Elmeri' ('Beatus venter'; 'Blessed is the womb'), and a sermon on the gospel proper to masses of the Blessed Virgin Mary. The first of the meditations ('Excitatio mentis') was edited by Gerberon among the 'Meditationes Anselmi'. A third is found with the second ('Querimonia de absentia vultus Dei'; 'Complaint of the absence of God's countenance') in various collections of Anselm's meditations, but it is not found in the Cambridge manuscript. The meditations are mentioned in letter 6 to Nicholas, a monk of St Peter's Abbey, Gloucester, and they follow it in the manuscript. The letters themselves include elements of 'spiritual writing', notably in the meditative material 'De cordis munditia' which Elmer included in letter 3 to Abbot Turstanus (Thurstan). 


@@@@@


doc= 8912


AEthelnoth (d. 1038), archbishop of Canterbury, was a son of AEthelmaer, ealdorman of the western shires, and grandson of Ealdorman AEthelweard, the chronicler. A Glastonbury story relates that, at his baptism by Dunstan, the infant held up his hand in the manner of a bishop blessing the people, whereupon Dunstan prophesied that he would become an archbishop. AEthelnoth became a monk of Glastonbury, and in later years, besides enlisting Cnut's support for Glastonbury, he donated to it a copy of Hrabanus Maurus's 'De laudibus sanctae crucis', and also a prayer book illuminated in gold. According to Osbern, AEthelnoth enjoyed Cnut's favour because he had given holy chrism to the king, implying his participation either in a ceremony of confirmation at Southampton in 1016, or else in Cnut's coronation by Archbishop Lyfing in 1017. AEthelnoth's brother AEthelweard was executed by Cnut in 1017, while a brother-in-law, also called AEthelweard, was banished in 1020. 
AEthelnoth was dean of Christ Church, Canterbury, when, in 1020, he was elected archbishop, an elevation which may denote a reconciliation between the king and the survivors of AEthelmaer's family. Archbishop Wulfstan of York notified King Cnut and Queen Emma that he had consecrated AEthelnoth according to the king's mandate, and urged that AEthelnoth should be entitled to the same rights and honours as Dunstan and his other predecessors in office. The consecration took place on 13 November 1020. In 1022, AEthelnoth travelled to Rome and received his pallium from Pope Benedict VIII, who is said, in three versions of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', to have consecrated and blessed him with great solemnity on 7 October. On the pope's instructions, AEthelnoth immediately celebrated mass, wearing the pallium, and afterwards they dined together in state. The D text of the chronicle adds that AEthelnoth afterwards took a pallium from the altar before leaving Rome. The archbishop returned to England with an arm of St Augustine of Hippo in an ornate reliquary, which he gave to Coventry; it cost him 100 talents of silver and one of gold. 
In 1023 King Cnut gave permission for the translation of the remains of the murdered Archbishop AElfheah (Alphege) to Canterbury. The cortege set out on 8 June, and the account in the chronicle (text D) indicates the dignified and public nature of the journey. Osbern, however, reports that the relics were strongly guarded and followed by AEthelnoth with a rearguard, in order to thwart any intervention by hostile citizens of London. The procession entered Christ Church, Canterbury, on 11 June, and four days later AEthelnoth, together with Bishop AElfsige of Winchester and Bishop Brihtwine of Wells, reinterred AElfheah's body. The archbishop encouraged Cnut to send money to foreign churches, including Chartres, and restrained him when he spoke disparagingly of St Edith while visiting Wilton. AEthelnoth was politically useful to Cnut in consecrating Bishop Gerbrand of Roskilde, and in acting with Cnut to strengthen the position of Bishop Joseph of Llandaff; he was also a co-recipient of the letter sent by Cnut to his English subjects following his visit to Rome. Cnut issued several writs in favour of the archbishop and his church. The 'Encomium Emmae Reginae' relates that, following Cnut's death, his son Harold Harefoot summoned AEthelnoth, 'a man endowed with great courage and wisdom', requiring the archbishop to consecrate him king, and to hand over the crown and sceptre, but the archbishop refused to consecrate anyone other than a son of Emma, and forbade all the bishops from participating in a consecration. The implied date of this story is 1036, at which time there was a possibility that Harthacnut would return to England. Harold was elected king in 1037, and Gervase reports that AEthelnoth crowned him in London. In AEthelnoth's last years, some of his duties were taken over by the royal priest Eadsige. AEthelnoth 'the Good' (as the chronicle calls him) died on 28 or 29 October, or else on 1 November, 1038, and was buried in Christ Church, Canterbury. AEthelric, bishop of Sussex, is said to have prayed that he would not long survive 'his dearly beloved father' AEthelnoth, and he himself duly died a week later. 


@@@@@


doc= 8913


AEthelred I (d. 871), king of the West Saxons, was the fourth of the five sons of AEthelwulf (d. 858), king of the West Saxons, and his first wife, Osburh (fl. 839), herself descended from the West Saxon royal line. AEthelred first attested his father's charters in 854 as a king's son, a title he retained through the reigns of his brothers AEthelbald and AEthelberht, until he himself became king in 865. 
The elevation of AEthelred, and even more so the elevation of his younger brother, Alfred, would have seemed unlikely in the 850s. In the arrangements AEthelwulf made after his return from Rome in 856, Wessex and its south-eastern extensions were divided between AEthelred's elder brothers AEthelbald and AEthelberht. On AEthelwulf's death in 858, AEthelbald took over Wessex, married Judith ['see under 'AEthelwulf], his stepmother and an anointed queen of the Frankish royal line, and doubtless expected to produce heirs. 
After AEthelbald's childless death in 860, AEthelberht joined Wessex to his existing kingship of Kent. It seems likely that AEthelred would have been expected to gain Wessex: a note in the historical preamble to King Alfred's will that part of AEthelwulf's inheritance was meant to descend among AEthelbald, AEthelred, and Alfred suggests that AEthelberht was expected to set up his own cadet branch of the family in Kent, and so no longer to need estates in Wessex. However, on AEthelbald's death AEthelred and Alfred gave up their part of that inheritance to AEthelberht, on condition that he return it to them on his death. The likeliest explanation is that AEthelberht received the kingship of Wessex, and also the inheritance intended to descend to AEthelred and Alfred, because his younger brothers were considered too young to lead a country facing viking attack in 860: Alfred was only eleven, AEthelred perhaps a year or so older. This explanation would accord with the fact that twice, in 862 and 863 (and presumably once he had come of age), AEthelred issued charters as king of the West Saxons ('AS chart.', S 335 and 336). He must have done so as AEthelberht's deputy or in his absence, as there is no record of conflict between the brothers and AEthelred continued witnessing AEthelberht's charters as a king's son in 864. 
After AEthelberht's death in 865, AEthelred became sole king of the West Saxons. In the same year, what the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' calls the 'great heathen army' arrived in England and completely changed the scale of the viking attacks: within five years, these vikings had conquered and installed their own rulers over Northumbria and East Anglia. In 868, when they took Nottingham in Mercia, the Mercian king Burgred, AEthelred's brother-in-law, asked for West Saxon help. AEthelred and Alfred led the West Saxons to Nottingham and besieged the vikings: there was no decisive battle, but the Mercians were able to make peace with (presumably buy off) the vikings, who returned to York. 
The vikings turned their attention to Wessex late in 870, setting up base at Reading. AEthelred and Alfred led the West Saxons against the vikings there, resulting in a large battle with great slaughter which the West Saxons lost. Four days later AEthelred and Alfred again fought against the vikings, at Ashdown (in what are now called the Berkshire Downs), and this time were victorious. A fortnight later they were defeated by the vikings at Basing and two months afterwards, at 'Meretun', they again fought and again lost; to make matters worse, after this battle another viking army (the 'great summer army') sailed up the Thames and landed at Reading. 
AEthelred died shortly after Easter in 871 and was buried at Wimborne Minster. He had two sons, AEthelhelm and AEthelwald. The latter rebelled against Alfred's son Edward in 899 and was killed at the battle of the Holme in 902. The only other known descendant of AEthelred is AEthelweard, ealdorman of the western provinces in the late tenth century, who notes his descent from AEthelred in his chronicle. 


@@@@@


doc= 8914


AEthelred (d. 888), archbishop of Canterbury, was archbishop from 870 until his death on 30 June 888, during the height of the viking wars. The statement in the F version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' that he was the bishop of Wiltshire before his translation to Canterbury in 870 was derived from the life of Archbishop AElfric a century later, and cannot be accepted. Pope John VIII instructed AEthelred to encourage English churchmen to give up their short-cut tunics and to follow continental practice in wearing full ankle-length habits, but the archbishop's main concern was dealing with the viking threat. Evidence from a coin hoard, which suggests that a viking force may have occupied the great archiepiscopal manor of Croydon in Surrey at some time between 869 and 872, or soon after this, helps to indicate the seriousness of this threat. The manor was assessed at 80 hides in 1066, so its loss deprived either the archbishopric or its lessee of valuable revenues. There was also a deterioration in the literacy of the cathedral community at Canterbury, reaching such a stage that its scribes could not translate documents from Latin into English. In addition there was a disagreement between Archbishop AEthelred and King Alfred as to the extent of the royal lordship over ecclesiastics, and it is possible that authority over the Kentish monasteries was in dispute. During AEthelred's period as archbishop there was, however, one important gain for the see. The 'golden gospels' were donated to Canterbury by Ealdorman Alfred who had bought them from a heathen army for a sum of pure gold. AEthelred made attempts to overcome the threats posed by the vikings and the West Saxon monarchy and he established important links with a wealthy patron, but during his pontificate, as a result of its scribes' poor literacy, Canterbury was no longer able to fulfil its metropolitan role in providing bishops-elect with professions of faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 8915


AEthelred II (c.966x8-1016), king of England, was the younger son of King Edgar ('r'. 959-75) and his wife, AElfthryth (d. 999x1001), daughter of Ealdorman Ordgar. The separate elements of his name ('AEthel-raed') mean 'noble' and 'counsel'; and although the name was in common usage, contemporaries might well have been more than usually conscious of its literal significance when applied to a king. AEthelred's record was, however, such that already in the twelfth century (if not before) his name was associated by wits and critics with the noun 'un-raed', denoting an ill-advised course of action and implying criticism of his conduct of the warfare against the Danes. The noun 'unraed' was later transformed into the adjective 'unredi', with a very different kind of pejorative import, and it was as the outcome of this process that the king came to be known to posterity as AEthelred 'the Unready'. AEthelred's posthumous reputation has rendered him synonymous with bad rulership and left him a figure of fun; yet while there is no mistaking the ultimate defeat of the English, a rather different impression of the king emerges when the attempt is made to understand the course of the viking invasions in relation to all other aspects of his long and complex reign. 
AEthelred had an elder half-brother Edward, born 'c'.962, and an elder half-sister Edith (St Edith of Wilton), born between 961 and 964. King Edgar married AElfthryth in 964; their eldest son, Edmund, was born 'c'.965, and AEthelred himself was probably born not earlier than 966 and not later, or much later, than 968. The paternity of AEthelred's half-siblings is not in question, but there seems to have been some confusion about the identity of Edward's mother and some doubt about the legitimacy of Edith's birth. Edward was described by Osbern of Canterbury as Edgar's son from an illicit union with a nun of Wilton Abbey, and by Eadmer of Canterbury (and John of Worcester) as born to Edgar's first wife, AEthelflaed the Fair; Edith is said to have been Edgar's daughter from an illicit union with Wulfthryth, who later became abbess of Wilton. It is possible, against this background, that the marriage of Edgar and AElfthryth in 964 was intended not least to resolve a situation which had given cause in high places for some embarrassment and concern; and it may well have been regarded, at the time, as a significant moment in Edgar's reign. Interestingly, it was in 964 that King Edgar took decisive action in driving clerks from the old and the new minsters at Winchester, and replacing them with monks from Abingdon. In a charter issued just two years after the king's marriage, in 966, Edmund was accorded precedence over his elder half-brother, Edward, and was perhaps pointedly styled 'clito legitimus' ('legitimate prince'); no less pointedly, Edmund's mother, AElfthryth, was styled 'legitima coniunx' ('legitimate wife'). The charter in question, which is extant in its original form ('AS chart.', S 745), was drafted by none other than AEthelwold, bishop of Winchester, and symbolized the king's confirmation of privileges to the New Minster, which had been reformed two years before. It was patently not a product of the royal writing office, and may not in that sense have represented an 'official' point of view; but it lay on the high altar of the New Minster at Winchester for the rest of King Edgar's reign, within reach of the community and in full sight of God. 
It is not known where AEthelred was born, and it is only possible to guess how he might have spent the earliest years of his life. The prevailing impression of the 960s, and especially the later 960s, is of a period when Edgar was engaged in the consolidation of a realm reunited in 959, and when his enthusiastic support for the monastic reform movement was beginning to make a significant impression on the course of affairs. The atheling Edmund died in 971, and it seems likely that whatever recognition he had enjoyed as King Edgar's legitimate heir was accorded henceforth to his younger brother. Yet it was beyond anyone's power effectively to determine the succession in advance; and when Edgar died, on 8 July 975, those left in positions of power would have had to make their choice between the king's eldest surviving son, Edward (aged about thirteen), and his youngest son, AEthelred (aged at most about nine and perhaps only six or seven). Queen AElfthryth would naturally have promoted the cause of her son AEthelred, and might in this respect have enjoyed the support of Bishop AEthelwold; others would no less naturally have preferred Edward, as the elder son, and would presumably have been prepared to set aside any lingering doubts about his parentage. 
In the event, Edward was 'elected' king, on 17 July 975; AEthelred, perhaps by way of compensation, was assigned the use of those estates which pertained to kings' sons. The evidence of charters and coinage suggests that the business of royal government continued as usual, yet there seem to have been many who tried to take advantage of the situation, in their own interests, by seeking to undo whatever had been done during Edgar's reign. Three estates (Bedwyn and Burbage, in Wiltshire, and Hurstbourne, in Hampshire) which King Edgar had previously given to Abingdon Abbey, even though they properly belonged to kings' sons, were withdrawn from the abbey and reassigned to AEthelred 'by the decree and order of all the leading men' ('AS chart.', S 937; 'English Historical Documents', 1, no. 123); so it would appear that King Edward's councillors were concerned to ensure that AEthelred's interests were respected. AEthelred is said to have visited Ely Abbey during Edward's reign, perhaps significantly in the company of Bishop AEthelwold; but little else is known of his activities at this time. 
Less than three years after his accession, King Edward fell foul of an opposing faction among the secular nobility. On 18 March 978 he came to visit his 'much-loved brother' AEthelred, who was staying with his mother, Queen AElfthryth, at Corfe in Dorset; and although Edward is said to have been intent upon 'the consolation of brotherly love', he was soon surrounded by AEthelred's thegns and treacherously killed (Byrhtferth, 4.18). AEthelred and AElfthryth benefited most directly from Edward's death, but there is no need to presume that they had organized it themselves. Edward was probably murdered by men acting on their own initiative and in their own interests, who hoped they would prosper under AEthelred; however, it was Queen AElfthryth who as the wicked stepmother later attracted the blame and who is said (by William of Malmesbury) to have founded religious houses at Amesbury and at Wherwell in expiation for her part in the crime. 
It must be assumed that soon after King Edward's death a meeting was convened at which the atheling AEthelred was chosen as king in his place. AEthelred was at most about twelve and perhaps only nine or ten years old. The conduct of the kingdom's affairs would at this stage have been in the hands of a group of the king's councillors, presumably including Queen AElfthryth herself, as well as Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, AEthelwold, bishop of Winchester, and AElfhere, ealdorman of Mercia. The most pressing issue in the opening months of the new reign was doubtless the identification and punishment of those responsible for Edward's murder (an obscure and contentious issue), and appropriate obsequies for the late king's body would also need to be performed for the matter ever to be allowed to rest. Almost a year elapsed before the discovery of Edward's supposed remains, their burial at Wareham on 13 February 979, and their ceremonial translation from Wareham to Shaftesbury five days later. Within three months of the ceremony at Shaftesbury, AEthelred was anointed king at Kingston, Surrey, on 4 May 979. According to one chronicler, the event took place 'with much rejoicing by the councillors of the English people' ('ASC', texts D, E). Byrhtferth of Ramsey states similarly that when AEthelred was consecrated king, by Archbishop Dunstan and Archbishop Oswald, 'there was great joy at his consecration', and describes the king in this connection as 'a young man in respect of years, elegant in his manners, with an attractive face and handsome appearance' (Byrhtferth, 5.4). Another important event was the completion of Bishop AEthelwold's building works at the Old Minster, Winchester, marked by the rededication of the church of St Peter, in the presence of the king, on 20 October 980. Bishop AEthelwold brought a great throng of bishops, abbots, ealdormen, and thegns to Winchester, from a meeting of the king and his councillors at Andover, and entertained them lavishly; and 'all who had previously seemed his enemies, standing in God's path, were suddenly made, as it were, sheep instead of wolves' (Wulfstan of Winchester, 'Life of St AEthelwold', chap. 40). 
Viking raids on England resumed in 980, after a lull of nearly a hundred years. Initially, the raids were sporadic, and probably amounted to little more than local irritation: Southampton, Thanet in Kent, and Cheshire were ravaged in 980; St Petroc's Monastery, at Padstow, Cornwall, was sacked in 981, and great damage was done along the coast in the south-west; three ships of vikings ravaged Portland, Dorset, in 982; Watchet, in Somerset, was ravaged in 988, and Goda, 'the Devonshire thegn', was killed. The more significant factors at play in the 980s were probably personal and domestic, as the king, now in his teens, broke free from the influence of those who had controlled events in his boyhood. It might be supposed that there was a formal occasion when AEthelred came of age, at which stage he would have gained greater independence of action; but while distinctions between infancy, boyhood, adolescence, manhood, and old age are commonplace in the literature, there is no clear indication that the passage from boyhood ('pueritia') into adolescence ('adolescentia'), at the age of fourteen, need have made much difference in itself. 
The significant turning point at this stage in AEthelred's reign seems to have been the death of AEthelwold, bishop of Winchester, on 1 August 984. By this date the king would have been at most about eighteen years old and perhaps only fifteen or sixteen, but in either case fully capable of making his own way in the world. The immediate consequences of AEthelwold's death are indicated in a charter drawn up in summer 993 ('AS chart.', S 876), whereby the king restored privileges to Abingdon Abbey. The event had deprived the country of one 'whose industry and pastoral care administered not only to my interest but also to that of all inhabitants of the country', and had ushered in a period of wrongdoing, when the king was under the influence of councillors who in their greed had led him astray. The wrongdoing would appear to have involved the abuse of church privileges, though not all of the king's men were implicated, and the wrongdoing was not necessarily widespread. Following the death of AElfhere, ealdorman of Mercia, on 22 October 983, the principal ealdormen during the 980s were AEthelwine of East Anglia, Byrhtnoth of the East Saxons, and AEthelweard of the western provinces. AEthelwine and Byrhtnoth were committed to the protection and promotion of the interests of religious houses at (respectively) Ramsey and Ely, and the credentials of AEthelweard, the chronicler, are equally impeccable. Yet not all religious houses could rely upon the same level of support in high places. Abingdon Abbey, which had done so well in the 960s and early 970s, was a case in point. There the death of Abbot Osgar in May 984, compounded by Bishop AEthelwold's death soon afterwards, exposed the abbey to the danger of exploitation by unscrupulous men. The king was persuaded to reduce the abbey to servitude by Wulfgar, bishop of Ramsbury and a certain Ealdorman AElfric. The latter was almost certainly the ealdorman of Hampshire, eager to take advantage of an opportunity for advancing the career of his brother Eadwine, for whom he was able to purchase the abbacy. A different kind of local difficulty arose at Rochester. A bald statement in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', to the effect that in 986 'the king laid waste the diocese of Rochester' ('ASC', texts C, D, E), seems at one level to exemplify the king's supposed violent streak, but analysis of the king's charters reveals that it represents the expression of more deep-rooted factors. AEthelred had fallen out with AElfstan, bishop of Rochester, in 984, and had then been persuaded by AEthelsige, a royal household thegn, into giving him some of the church's land. In short, it looks as if in 984 unscrupulous men took advantage of the loss of firm direction in order to advance their own interests, just as others had done in 975, following the death of King Edgar. The development was one of which AEthelred came to be ashamed, and to regret. 
It must have been during this period ('c'.985) that AEthelred married for the first time. According to material compiled 'c'.1100 at Worcester, his first wife was called AElfgifu, daughter of a nobleman ('comes') called AEthelberht, who is otherwise unknown; William of Malmesbury does not give her name, and seems to have presumed that she was a woman of low birth; while the north-country monk Ailred of Rievaulx, writing in the early 1150s, identifies her (without naming her) as the daughter of a 'comes' called Thored (Thorth). In his youth Ailred had served as chief steward in the household of David I, king of Scots ('r'. 1124-53), who through his mother, Margaret, was a great-great-grandson of King AEthelred and his first wife; Ailred was thus in a good position to know about David's maternal forebears. Combining his evidence with that from Worcester makes it possible to say that AEthelred's first wife, AElfgifu, was the daughter of Thored who held office as earl of Northumbria from 'c'.975 to 'c'.992, attesting AEthelred's charters quite regularly in the 980s; he also gave land in Yorkshire to the church of St Cuthbert at Chester-le-Street ('AS chart.', S 1660). The marriage must have served to strengthen AEthelred's position in a region where a king of the West Saxon line always needed friends; and although the names chosen for their sons (AEthelstan, Ecgberht, Edmund, Eadred, Eadwig, and Edgar) suggest that AEthelred and AElfgifu had decided from the outset to commemorate the king's own predecessors, it is important to bear in mind that the sons had some natural affinity, through their mother, with the nobility of the northern Danelaw. AEthelred also had at least three daughters from his first marriage, called Edith, AElfgifu, and Wulfhild. It is striking, however, that Queen AElfgifu left no trace of her own position in the king's household or at court. She did not attest any of her husband's charters in the later 980s or 990s; and there is reason to believe that at least some of her children (including AEthelstan) were brought up by a foster-mother and by their paternal grandmother, Queen AElfthryth. 
There is evidence that King AEthelred was engaged in at least some diplomatic activity in the late 980s. In 990 Pope John XV ('r'. 985-96) dispatched Leo, bishop of Trevi, to England, in an attempt to make peace between AEthelred, 'king of the West Saxons', and Richard 'the marquis' (count of Rouen). Nothing is known of the cause of the dispute, though it is a reasonable presumption that it had to do with Norman readiness to give shelter and sustenance to viking raiders. AEthelred sent his own envoys to Normandy, and on 1 March 991 Leo issued a letter at Rouen on the pope's behalf addressed 'to all the faithful', declaring that peace between the king and the marquis 'should remain ever unshaken' ('English Historical Documents', 1, no. 230). Unfortunately for all concerned, the effectiveness of the treaty depended largely upon the quiescence of those who were not themselves party to it. 
The direction of events in AEthelred's reign was affected in the 990s by a dramatic increase in the scale and incidence of viking activity. The circumstances of this development are hard to elucidate. The raiders of the 980s had doubtless told tempting tales of rich pickings in England, and might well have represented the English as vulnerable to attack; but it seems unlikely that such reports reflected on the competence or otherwise of the government carried on in AEthelred's name. For the viking leaders of the 990s, the furtherance of their ambitions back home was probably their chief purpose, with the acquisition of English gold and silver, rather than the conquest of territory, their prime objective. Understanding of their impact on the English in these years depends largely upon the answer to a simple question: were the English faced with a succession of separate raiding armies, which returned home for the winter only to come back the following summer, or were they dealing with a single force which after its first arrival maintained a threatening presence in England for well over a decade? Although the question will always remain open to discussion, a close reading of the annals in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' suggests that the bulk of the viking force was based in England throughout the years 991 to 1005. 
In late summer 991 a large viking fleet arrived off Folkestone, in Kent, and made its way around the south-east coast and up the Blackwater estuary. The viking force was opposed at Northey Island, near Maldon, by an English army led by Ealdorman Byrhtnoth, as told in the famous Old English poem, 'The Battle of Maldon'. It was decided in the aftermath of Ealdorman Byrhtnoth's death, and the defeat of his army, that 'tribute' ('gafol') should be paid to the vikings, 'because of the great terror they were causing along the coast' ('ASC', texts C, D, E); and on this first occasion, the payment was of 10,000 pounds. There is no indication that the victorious viking fleet returned whence it came; indeed, it would appear that the fleet was active along the east coast in 992 (when the king's father-in-law, Earl Thored, was one of those entrusted with the leadership of the English fleet) and again in 993 (when 'a very large English army' was collected, the leaders of which 'first started the flight' ('ASC', texts C, D, E), and that it was essentially the same fleet, now led by Olaf Tryggvason and Swein Forkbeard, which came up the Thames estuary, towards London, in 994. 
At this point the king and his councillors came to terms with the vikings. The army received another payment of 'gafol', said to be '16,000 pounds in money' according to the chronicler ('ASC', texts C, D, E), or '22,000 pounds in gold and silver' according to a treaty drawn up at about this time (II AEthelred, chap. 7.2). The leaders of the viking force are identified in the treaty as Olaf, Jostein, and Guthmund, son of Steita, without mention of Swein Forkbeard; so it may be that Swein had gone his own way -- he is reported to have been active in the Irish Sea in 995 before leaving to reassert his position as king of Denmark. Olaf Tryggvason, on the other hand, was in 994 received into the Christian faith in a ceremony at Andover, with King AEthelred standing sponsor to him; he received gifts from the king, promised 'that he would never come back to England in hostility' ('ASC', texts C, D, E), and seems then to have returned to Norway, where he set about establishing himself as king in his own land. Other component parts of the viking force appear to have decided to stay in England, for it is apparent from the treaty that some had chosen to enter into King AEthelred's service as mercenaries, based presumably on the Isle of Wight. 
For some three years following (994-7) the mercenary force seems to have had little to do, and to have remained at peace; but although the circumstances are unrecorded, the vikings eventually resumed hostile activities. In 997 'the Danish army went round Devon into the mouth of the Severn', ravaging extensively in Wales and the south-west; in 998, 'the army turned back east', ravaging first in Dorset and operating thereafter from the Isle of Wight; and in 999 'the army came again round into the Thames', ravaging in Kent ('ASC', texts C, D, E). There is no suggestion that this was a new fleet or army, and presumably the mercenary force created in 994 from the residue of the raiding army of 991 had turned on those whom it had been hired to protect. Nor is it suggested that these 'Danes' received 'gafol' during the years 997-1000, and it may have been in despair or desperation that in the summer of 1000 the viking fleet went to Normandy; if it received shelter there from Duke Richard II, any pact which had hitherto existed between England and Normandy must have been broken. 
It was probably much the same force which returned to England in May 1001, ravaging first in Hampshire and then further west in Devon, before returning to its base on the Isle of Wight. The king and his councillors determined to make 'peace' ('frith') with the fleet 'on condition that they should cease their evil-doing', and in the opening months of 1002 the vikings received a payment of 24,000 pounds ('ASC', texts C, D, E). In 1003 the Danish army was active in the west country, and it emerges from the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' that the army was now under the command of Swein Forkbeard, suggesting that he had decided to resume operations in England. It is doubtless significant that in the coinage introduced at about this time the king was portrayed neither crowned nor bareheaded but wearing a helmet, capturing the spirit of a kingdom under sustained attack from a foreign power. In 1004 Swein and his fleet were in East Anglia, where they met fierce opposition from Ulfcytel. But although there does not appear to have been any further payment of 'gafol', in the end it was not a feat of arms which drove the Danes from England but an act of God. The effects of the great famine of 1005 were felt widely on the continent, and in the British Isles. The Anglo-Saxon chronicler, enjoying the inestimable advantage of hindsight, comments wryly that the army 'let little time elapse before it came back' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). 
It is within this context that AEthelred's response to the viking threat in the 990s and early 1000s must be assessed, and the impact of the viking raids on the course of his reign judged. The king himself has acquired particular notoriety for his policy of paying large sums of gold and silver to the vikings, in the hope thereby of inducing them to go away; but this policy must take its place as just one among a number of measures adopted in the 990s for the defence of the kingdom. Present knowledge of the military response -- and indeed of such matters as the quality of leadership displayed by the king and his commanders in the field, and of the degree of loyalty shown by others towards the king -- depends largely upon the word of an anonymous chronicler conducting the nation's post-mortem soon after its conquest by a foreign power. It is almost impossible not to be affected by his compelling account of disaster precipitated by treachery, compounded by incompetence, and relieved only by defeat, though by no means does he tell the whole story. The payments of 'gafol' appear at first sight to be a poor substitute for military action, and hardly seem calculated to achieve any purpose other than to encourage the raiders to come back for more. Yet the policy had been adopted in the past by Alfred the Great, Charles the Bald, and many others, and in certain circumstances may have seemed the best available way of protecting the people against loss of life, shelter, livestock, and crops. Though undeniably burdensome, it constituted a measure for which the king could rely on widespread support. It is an irony of AEthelred's reign, however, that the coinage thus accumulated by those whose business was terrorism and extortion, and carried back to Scandinavia by them, now supplies the bulk of the evidence for the effective operation of the monetary system of England in the late tenth and early eleventh centuries. 
The English response to viking raids gained an additional dimension in 994, when for the first time the king was able to deal directly with their leaders. Olaf Tryggvason had not been defeated in battle; but by receiving him 'at the bishop's hands', AEthelred took advantage of the power of the Christian faith to bind sponsor and subject together, and at the same time to bring the subject into a new political order, just as Alfred and many others had done before him. No less significant is the inception, at least in the context of AEthelred's reign, of the decision to employ vikings as mercenaries, charged with defending the kingdom against other viking raiders. The policy appears to have had some effect in 994-7, but the arrangement seems then to have been abandoned, to be followed by the renewed outbreak of hostilities in 997-1001, and the further payment of 'gafol' in 1002. The so-called massacre of St Brice's day, when AEthelred ordered the killing of 'all the Danish men who were in England' ('ASC', texts C, D, E), implemented on 13 November 1002, is another of the king's counter-measures which has attracted strong disapproval; yet judged in its immediate context, and shorn of later accretions, the 'massacre' should be seen as the reaction of people exasperated by the behaviour of the vikings in their midst, after a decade of slaughter, pillage, and extortion, directed not at the inhabitants of the Danelaw but at precisely those 'Danes' who had so recently been employed as mercenaries and then turned against their employers. 
Another counter-measure, adopted in 1000-01, in the immediate aftermath of the sheltering of the viking army in Normandy, was the renewal of the Anglo-Norman alliance. This probably came immediately after AEthelred's dispatching of a fleet to Normandy, for the express, but in the event frustrated, purpose of conquering the duchy and capturing Duke Richard; unsurprisingly, the story, as told by the Norman chronicler William of Jumieges, does not redound to the king's credit. It was at about the same time ('c'.1000) that AEthelred's first wife died, and, perhaps no less significantly, that his mother, Queen AElfthryth, died. The king entered into negotiations with Richard II, and as a result secured the hand of his sister Emma (d. 1052), daughter of Richard I, who in the spring of 1002 came to England and on her marriage to the king was accorded a new name (AElfgifu) and full dignity at the king's court. 
To judge from the witness lists in the king's charters, AEthelred's sons from his first marriage had from 993 onwards been accorded a place of honour at court, and it is significant that they retained this status after their mother's death and after their father's marriage to Emma. AEthelred and his new wife soon had a family of their own. The eldest son Edward (King Edward the Confessor), was born between 1003 and 1005, followed by at least two further children, Gode and Alfred. A later commentator, blessed with the advantage of hindsight, stated that just before Edward's birth all the men of the country took an oath that if a boy should come forth he would rule over them (Barlow, i.1), and a Norman source states that in his youth Edward was 'anointed and consecrated as king' ('Inventio et miracula S. Wulfrani', chap. 18). The truth is likely to have been different. His parents are said to have been at Ely 'c'.1005, when they presented their eldest son, Edward, at the holy altar, and entrusted him to the community for upbringing with the boys there. AEthelstan, eldest son of the king's first marriage, evidently remained the prospective heir, and the charters show that Edward had to take his place behind his elder half-brothers. 
The arrival of the viking army in England in 991, and its threatening presence thenceforth until its departure in 1005, no doubt significantly affected domestic affairs in the kingdom throughout this extended period. The invasion of 991 would have been regarded, in accordance with a rationale reaching back through Alfred to Alcuin, and ultimately to the 'Old Testament', as divine punishment for the sins of the English people, prompting many to reflect on whatever might have been the underlying cause. So, in addition to the various forms of response directed at the vikings themselves, other forms of response are encountered, aimed, in effect, at appeasing the Almighty. 
By summer 993, when the viking force was active north and south of the Humber estuary, AEthelred had seen the errors of his ways and was beginning to break free from the influence of the men who had led him astray in the later 980s. A different group of councillors now had the king's ear, and a period of wrongdoing gave way to one of reflection and reform. The great triumvirate of monastic reformers -- Bishop AEthelwold and archbishops Dunstan and Oswald -- had been succeeded in court circles by those trained during the golden age of Edgar's reign, including Sigeric and AElfric, successive archbishops of Canterbury from 990 to 1005, AElfheah, bishop of Winchester, Wulfstan, bishop of London, AElfweard, abbot of Glastonbury, Wulfgar, abbot of Abingdon, and AElfsige, abbot of the New Minster, Winchester. Prominent among the king's lay advisers during this period were his kinsman Ealdorman AEthelweard, his maternal uncle Ordwulf, and AEthelweard's son AEthelmaer. Yet the witness lists in the king's charters which allow detection of these changes in the composition of the king's council suggest that by the end of this period some of those in high places had had enough. AEthelmaer founded a monastery at Eynsham, in Oxfordshire, and to judge from the charter confirming its foundation, issued in 1005 ('AS chart.', S 911), chose this moment to retire from the secular life. Ordwulf also disappears from the witness lists in 1005, and seems to have withdrawn to the monastery which he had founded at Tavistock, in Devon. Perhaps the departure of the viking force in 1005 encouraged AEthelmaer and Ordwulf to think that the time had come for them to seek a quieter life; if so, their optimism proved sadly mistaken. 
It is difficult to detect particular instances where these men influenced the course of affairs in the 990s, though Archbishop Sigeric is credited with devising the policy of paying 'gafol', and Abbot AElfsige and the thegns AEthelmaer and Ordwulf are specifically mentioned in an important charter of 993 in favour of Abingdon Abbey ('AS chart.', S 876), and may be presumed, with Abbot Wulfgar, to have persuaded the king to set off in a new direction. Yet what is so striking about the years from 991 to 1005, when the vikings were at large and men such as these were in control of the nation's affairs, is that the period witnessed some of the most intense activity in the proper ordering of Christian society among the English. Whether it was fear of the impending millennium which concentrated the collective mind, or simply fear of the vikings, is a moot point; but the evidence of all this activity does much to compensate for the very incomplete record of events in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. 
The king's charters reveal that several estates which had been taken from churches in the later 980s were in the mid- and later 990s restored to their rightful owners. Yet there was far more to it than that. This was a period for church building, for recruitment into the religious life, and for the furnishing of churches with relics, privileges, books, treasures, and estates, and so for the increase of their revenues. The dedication of Bishop AEthelgar's multi-storeyed tower at the New Minster, Winchester, in the mid-980s, was matched by Bishop AElfheah's further building works at the Old Minster, including additional crypts (each with its own altar and relics), a more powerful organ, and a new tower (surmounted by a golden weathercock) dedicated some time between summer 993 and late October 994. Between 995 and 1002 there seems to have been a veritable outburst of enthusiasm for the translation of the relics of saints from one resting-place to another, suggestive of a determination to secure their intercession as well as to ensure the safety of their remains: Cuthbert at Durham in 995; AEthelwold at Winchester on 10 September 996; Edith at Wilton on 3 November 997; Edward at Shaftesbury on 20 June 1001; Oswald at Worcester on 15 April 1002; Ivo at Ramsey on 10 June 1002; and several others who appear to have been translated at about the same time. 
Following his charter of 993 for Abingdon, in 994 AEthelred confirmed Ealdred, bishop of St Germans (in the exposed south-eastern corner of Cornwall), in his control of St Petroc's Minster, Bodmin, which lay inland and further west ('AS chart.', S 880). A monastery at Cholsey in Berkshire was founded 'c'.994 in honour of AEthelred's half-brother Edward. In 998 the king authorized Wulfsige, bishop of Sherborne, to convert his community to the Benedictine rule (S 895). The relics of Edward had been translated at Shaftesbury in the midst of intense viking activity in Wessex, and later in the same year AEthelred granted the minster of Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, to the nuns of Shaftesbury, for use as a refuge 'against the inroads of the barbarians' ('adversus barbarorum insidias'), by a charter which shows that the abbey had become the centre of a flourishing cult (S 899). Other religious houses to benefit from royal support during this period include Wherwell, Hampshire, which received a charter in 1002 (S 904), Burton, Staffordshire, which received a charter in 1004 (S 906), and Eynsham, Oxfordshire, which received its charter in 1005 (S 911). 
It is the concentration of all this activity in a relatively short period of time that makes it so impressive, and creates a context for intense productivity of other kinds. The fine arts, represented by sculpture, manuscript decoration, and metalwork, would appear to have flourished. The need for books, extending from essential service books to works of learning and literature, was matched by the availability of the resources and expertise necessary to produce them. Scholars of the calibre of Wulfstan of Winchester, Byrhtferth of Ramsey, and AElfric of Cerne (later of Eynsham) produced a remarkable variety of works, in Latin and in the vernacular. Wulfstan followed his 'Narratio metrica de S. Swithuno', composed in the mid-990s, with his life of St AEthelwold, composed 'c'.1000. Byrhtferth's life of St Oswald was composed at about the same time. A person known only by his initial B produced a life of St Dunstan, also 'c'.1000. The greater part of AElfric's output was generated within this period, and reflects his own response to the worsening events. When AElfric had completed his 'First series' of homilies 'c'.990, followed by his 'Second series' 'c'.992, he was still based at Cerne, in Dorset, some distance removed from the dangers which at that time afflicted the people of the south-east, London, and East Anglia; so it is not surprising that the viking raids did not at that stage loom large in his consciousness. By the mid-990s, when he was writing his 'Lives of Saints' on behalf of Ealdorman AEthelweard and his son AEthelmaer, the need for prayer against the heathen was made more explicit. He subsequently translated the book of 'Judith' into English, expressly for the instruction of laymen charged with the defence of their land 'against the invading army' (Crawford, 48). Perhaps it is paradoxical that so much activity could take place when the country was under viking attack, or perhaps the reign of Alfred shows that this is precisely what should be expected. At all events, there is no mistaking the determination of the English to have God on their side. 
The measures taken in direct response to the viking raids, and the other activities of a kind intended to be pleasing in the sight of God, were matched by administrative reforms which reflect some credit on the institutions and practices of royal government at a time of great stress. The two law-codes known to modern scholarship as 'I AEthelred' and 'III AEthelred' appear to have been intended to complement each other. The former, promulgated at Woodstock in Oxfordshire, was 'for the promotion of peace ['frith'] for all the people', in accordance with English law; the latter, promulgated at Wantage in Berkshire, was similarly 'for the promotion of peace ['frith']', but was directed towards the five boroughs of the Danelaw. The codes are not dated, but were produced probably in the mid-990s, perhaps in 997, when a meeting was convened at Wantage 'for dealing with matters of various kinds' ('AS chart.', S 891); and together they represent an attempt to codify aspects of the different practices which had arisen in different parts of AEthelred's kingdom. Like other kings before and after him, AEthelred did not find it easy to deal effectively with the entrenched power of his ealdormen, though by building on administrative arrangements established earlier in the tenth century he encouraged the emergence of the shire-reeve (sheriff) as the king's representative in the localities. There is otherwise every indication that the business of royal government continued to be conducted in the normal way, at periodic meetings of the king's council held on royal estates at various places in southern England, and no doubt also in darker corners as the king and his household moved from one place to another. 
It is AEthelred's misfortune, however, that he has come to be judged, not altogether unreasonably, on the basis of the last decade of his reign, when matters went progressively from bad to worse to calamitous. The period from 1006 to 1012 witnessed two of the most devastating of all viking raids on England, which had the cumulative effect of undermining the ability of the English to resist any further attack. It is no coincidence that these years also witnessed the meteoric rise of Eadric Streona, ealdorman of the Mercians, who in 1015-16 came to play a major role in the downfall of the English, while in the same period Archbishop Wulfstan of York came to the fore as one of the king's leading statesmen, writing law-codes and homilies which reflect not so much the inability of an enfeebled government to respond in a crisis, as the desperation of a battered people praying for deliverance from their enemies. 
The annal in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' for 1006 reports dissension among the king's councillors in its usual inscrutable way: 'In the same year Wulfgeat was deprived of all his property, and Wulfheah and Ufegeat were blinded and Ealdorman AElfhelm killed' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). But what at first sight reads like a series of punishments inflicted on certain laymen for their respective misdemeanours, proves when taken together with charter and other evidence to represent nothing less than a palace revolution, as remaining members of the old guard, now without the protection of the king's kinsmen AEthelmaer and Ordwulf, succumbed to a plot engineered by Eadric Streona. Wulfgeat was a prominent thegn and leading member of the king's household; so his forfeiture, for unspecified reasons, has all the makings of political intrigue. AElfhelm, ealdorman of Northumbria, was a member of a prominent Mercian family, while Wulfheah and Ufegeat were his sons. The evidence implicating Eadric Streona is relatively late, but charter witness-lists suggest that he and his brothers were conspicuous at court in 1005-6, and were at the core of the party which benefited most noticeably from the passing of the old order. It so happened that Malcolm II, king of Scots ('r'. 1005-34), penetrated deep into Northumbria in 1006, until repulsed at Durham by Uhtred, son of Earl Waltheof, who as a reward for his good services received the earldom of the whole of Northumbria. Malcolm may have been taking advantage of trouble in the south, or acting on his own initiative at the outset of his reign; in any event, the fact that Malcolm's attack is not registered in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' is a salutary reminder that the horizons of a chronicler writing in southern England were somewhat restricted. 
Some time after midsummer in 1006, continues the chronicler, a force described as 'the great fleet' arrived at Sandwich, 'and did just as they were accustomed, ravaged, burnt, and slew as they went'. That the leader of the viking force was probably a certain Tostig was of no consequence to the annalist, who simply reports the devastating impact of the vikings as they passed through Hampshire and Berkshire and back to their base on the Isle of Wight, leaving their mark 'on every shire of Wessex'. The king and his councillors were driven against their inclinations to make another payment of 'gafol' to the viking army. The sum of 36,000 pounds was collected and paid over to the vikings in 1007, whereupon the 'great fleet' presumably returned to Scandinavia. The only other recorded event in 1007 seems in an unexplained way to have arisen from the agonies of the previous year, and marks the next stage in the rise of Eadric Streona -- he was now made ealdorman of Mercia. At least the payment of 'gafol' brought temporary respite for the English, who used the time well. In 1008 'the king ordered that ships should be built unremittingly over all England, namely a warship from 310 hides, and a helmet and corselet from eight hides' ('ASC', texts C, D, E); and in the same year, at Pentecost (16 May), a meeting was convened at (King's) Enham in Hampshire, at which Archbishop Wulfstan produced the first of the codes of law (represented by the texts known as V and 'VI AEthelred') in which he set out to reform English society in ways calculated to earn God's support in the struggle against the vikings. In 1009 the newly built ships were brought to Sandwich, 'and were to stay there and protect this country from every invading army'. Unfortunately, the ambitious Brihtric, brother of Eadric Streona, chose this moment to make an accusation against Wulfnoth 'the South Saxon' (probably the father of Godwine, later earl of Wessex), leading to the destruction of many of the ships and the dispersal of the ship-levy; 'and no better than this was the victory which all the English people had expected' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). 
The immediate sequel must have seemed inevitable. The chronicler continues, 'When this ship-levy had ended thus, there came at once after Lammas [1 August] the immense raiding army, which we called Thorkell's army, to Sandwich'. The king and his councillors were at Bath, and their immediate response was the promulgation of a law-code ('VII AEthelred') which laid down an elaborate programme of public prayer to be implemented on the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday preceding Michaelmas, which in 1009 fell on Thursday 29 September. On these three days, all the nation was enjoined to fast on bread and herbs and water; priests were instructed to lead their people barefoot to church, carrying relics and invoking Christ; religious communities were to sing their psalters; and mass-priests were to say mass 'for our lord and for all his people'. Among other measures, one penny (or the value of a penny) was to be paid from each hide of land, and brought to church, where all the money would be divided up into three and distributed 'for God's sake'. Perhaps it was in specific connection with the programme of prayer that the authorities decided to issue a special type of silver penny, without parallel before or after, bearing on one side not a stylized image of the king but an image of the Lamb of God, and on the other side not a standard cruciform device but an image of the dove, symbol of the Holy Spirit. The extraordinarily distinctive and highly charged 'Agnus Dei' coinage was current for only a short period, in the autumn of 1009; and it may be significant that the design which had presumably been chosen in 1009 to serve as the next substantive issue, after 'Helmet', was a reversion to the 'Small Cross' type introduced by and perhaps therefore associated with King Edgar, at his moment of glory in 973. 
Some impression of the course and impact of 'Thorkell's army', as it ravaged large parts of southern England in 1009 and 1010, can be gained from reading the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' for those years; it explains how, when AEthelred and his councillors sued for peace in 1011, they were clearly a broken regime. 'All those disasters befell us through bad policy ['unraedas'], in that they were never offered tribute ['gafol'] in time nor fought against; but when they had done most to our injury, peace and truce were made with them; and for all this truce and tribute ['gafol'] they journeyed none the less in bands everywhere, and harried our wretched people, and plundered and killed them' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). The final outrage took place after the 'peace and truce' had been agreed. Some time between 8 and 29 September 1011 the vikings besieged Canterbury, captured Archbishop AElfheah and several others, ransacked the whole borough, and then took the archbishop back with them to their ships. The chronicler goes on to record how in early April 1012, 'Ealdorman Eadric and all the chief councillors of England' were at London, apparently in order to supervise the payment of 'gafol', amounting to 48,000 pounds. The payment was made soon after Easter (13 April), and at Greenwich, on the following Saturday (19 April), the vikings, in a drunken stupor, pelted the defiant archbishop with bones and ox-heads, until one of their number struck him down with the back of an axe and killed him. The viking army then dispersed 'as widely as it had been collected'. 
The failure of the English to withstand the onslaught of the viking army in 1009-10 testifies to the success of Thorkell's own tactics, always on the move and creating terror wherever he went, as much as it proclaims the incompetence and irresolution of those responsible for organizing the kingdom's defence. A charter of AEthelred's granting land in Derbyshire to his thegn Morcar, issued in late December 1009 ('AS chart.', S 922), is enough to show that business was then continuing as usual, in the aftermath of Thorkell's invasion, but no charter survives for the 'annus horribilis' of 1010, and only abbreviated texts of two charters issued in 1011; consequently little is known of the continued operation of royal government in those years. It is apparent, however, that a major development took place while Thorkell's army was at large in AEthelred's kingdom. Charters issued in 1012 show that Eadric Streona had by then gained significant promotion in the order of precedence so carefully observed among the king's ealdormen. Ealdorman AElfric had occupied the prime position for the previous ten years, from the death of Ealdorman AEthelweard (probably in 998) until the charter of late 1009; but some time during the period 1010-12 Eadric overtook the two ealdormen senior to him, and he must have gained this promotion at the expense of AElfric, who continued to attest charters until his death in 1016. 
Eadric's new position finds due reflection in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' for 1012, and it was perhaps later in the same year that Eadric found a pretext or opportunity for ravaging St David's in south-west Wales. Interestingly, all three of AEthelred's known daughters from his first marriage are said to have been given in marriage to earls who came into prominence during the latter years of the reign: Eadgyth (Edith) married Eadric Streona of Mercia; AElfgifu married Uhtred of Northumbria; and Wulfhild married Ulfcytel of East Anglia. Marriage within the English nobility represented a departure from earlier practice, when kings' daughters were sent overseas or hidden away in nunneries; and it may be that the policy, if it can be dignified as such, was itself an indication of AEthelred's determination to bind the kingdom together in any way that he could. 
After the dispersal of the viking force in 1012, forty-five ships from the Danish army 'came over to the king, and they promised him to defend this country, and he was to feed and clothe them' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). It transpires that it was Thorkell himself who thus entered into King AEthelred's service, as leader of a mercenary army based at Greenwich; and it was in this connection that AEthelred instituted the annual land-tax known as the 'heregeld' or 'army-tax', later known as 'danegeld' because it was paid to the Danish mercenaries (the term was later still mistakenly applied to the 'gafol' levied to pay off invaders). A chronicler reporting on the abolition (in fact only the temporary suspension) of the tax in 1051, remarks how oppressive it had been, and how it 'always came before other taxes' ('ASC', text D); yet it was one of the earliest and (from the king's point of view) most effective systems of public taxation in medieval Europe, and the basis of much that would follow. 
The raids of 1006-7 and 1009-12 all but destroyed the capacity of the English to offer any further resistance to the Danes. The point was probably not lost on Swein Forkbeard, king of Denmark, who took the earliest opportunity to launch an invasion, bent on conquest rather than merely on extortion. He arrived with his fleet at Sandwich in the summer of 1013, whereupon he made his way northwards up the coast to the Humber, and from there came south through the east midlands, receiving submission wherever he went. King AEthelred and Thorkell held out against him at London, so Swein went westwards via Wallingford to Bath, and there received the submission of Ealdorman AEthelmaer (who had evidently come out of his retirement at Eynsham) and all the western thegns, before returning to his ships; 'and all the nation regarded him as full king' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). The citizens of London also submitted; whereupon Swein demanded full payment and provisions for his army over the winter, and Thorkell demanded the same for the mercenary force at Greenwich. AEthelred stayed initially with Thorkell's mercenaries, then, after Queen Emma and the athelings Edward and Alfred had crossed the sea to seek refuge in Normandy, he moved to the Isle of Wight for the Christmas festival, before joining his family in Normandy. 
Swein Forkbeard died on 3 February 1014. The Danish force elected his son Cnut as king, but the councillors of the English people 'determined to send for King AEthelred, and they said that no lord was dearer to them than their natural lord if he would govern them more justly than he did before' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). AEthelred sent his son Edward back to England, with messengers, and undertook 'that he [AEthelred] would be a gracious lord to them, and reform all the things which they all hated'; moreover, everything said and done against the king would be forgiven, 'on condition that they all unanimously turned to him without treachery'. AEthelred came home to his people in the spring, 'and he was gladly received by them all'. Soon afterwards AEthelred took decisive action, bringing his full force to Lindsey and driving Cnut from the kingdom. It was at about this same time that Archbishop Wulfstan first preached his 'Sermo ad Anglos' ('Sermon to the English'), commenting at length on the decline which had set in since the days of King Edgar and had aroused the displeasure of God, and calling upon the English to mend their ways. Also in 1014 Wulfstan drafted further legislation for the king, including a code dealing with ecclesiastical matters ('VIII AEthelred'), probably complemented by a code focusing on secular matters (now lost, except for parts incorporated in 'II Cnut', chaps. 69-76), which may have enacted some of the promised reforms. 
AEthelred's return to England in the spring of 1014 raised the profile of AEthelstan, his eldest son from his first marriage, as his most obvious prospective successor. A glimpse of the circles in which AEthelstan moved is provided by his will ('AS chart.', S 1503; 'English Historical Documents', 1, 129), which suggests that the atheling enjoyed good relations with his father, with his brothers Edmund and Eadwig, and with a number of prominent thegns, including Sigeferth and his brother Morcar. AEthelstan died, however, on 25 June 1014, and henceforth his younger brother Edmund must have been regarded as their father's likely successor. Although it is difficult on the available evidence to understand the full complexity of domestic politics in the last years of AEthelred's reign, it is apparent that matters came to a head in 1015, at a 'great assembly' convened at Oxford. According to the chronicler, Eadric Streona 'betrayed Sigeferth and Morcar, the chief thegns belonging to the Seven Boroughs: he enticed them into his chamber, and they were basely killed inside it' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). The king seized their property, and held Sigeferth's widow at Malmesbury; whereupon the atheling Edmund took her against AEthelred's will, married her, went to the east midlands, and took possession of all Sigeferth's estates, and Morcar's, 'and all the people submitted to him'. At first sight, it looks as if Edmund was taking a stand against his father; but beneath the surface it was perhaps more a matter of Edmund taking a stand against the machinations of Eadric Streona, who was himself the driving force behind the king's actions at this time. Eadric had been the dominant voice in the king's council for at least three years, and it may be that his actions at Oxford had left Edmund with no choice but to take drastic action. 
After his death in 1014 Swein Forkbeard had been succeeded as king of Denmark by his son Harald, whose younger brother Cnut not unnaturally sought to make a kingdom for himself in England. It was Cnut's good fortune that when he invaded England, in the late summer of 1015, he came in the midst of this major domestic crisis, and was soon able to benefit from it. Upon arrival at Sandwich, he went south round the coast and then west into Wessex, so perhaps intending to leave Eadric Streona and Edmund temporarily to their own devices. Edmund's challenge had effectively denied Eadric any further prospect of advancement, and may even have helped to bring the king and Edmund back together; if so, it was under these circumstances that Eadric deserted from the English side, taking the Danish mercenary fleet with him into Cnut's service. The West Saxons submitted to Cnut, who stayed in the south-west until Christmas. In the opening months of 1016 Cnut and Eadric were active in Mercia, while Edmund and AEthelred attempted without much success to organize resistance. Edmund then joined forces in Northumbria with his brother-in-law Earl Uhtred, and went on the offensive into Eadric's home territory; but they were outmanoeuvred by Cnut, who was soon threatening York. Uhtred returned to Northumbria, where he submitted 'out of necessity' to Cnut and was then killed on the orders of Eadric Streona. For his part, Edmund rejoined his father in London. After Easter (1 April) Cnut turned with all his ships towards London, but his adversary died just as the campaign was drawing to its climax. In the words of the chronicler: 'He [AEthelred] ended his days on St George's Day [23 April], and he had held his kingdom with great toil and difficulties as long as his life lasted' ('ASC', texts C, D, E). 
AEthelred was succeeded as king by his eldest surviving son, Edmund Ironside, who after some spirited resistance was eventually defeated by Cnut at the battle of Ashingdon on 18 October 1016. For a few weeks the kingdom was divided between Edmund, in Wessex, and Cnut, in Mercia and Northumbria; then, after Edmund's death on 30 November 1016, Cnut succeeded to the whole kingdom. AEthelred's only remaining son from his first marriage, Eadwig, styled king of the 'Ceorls', was soon killed on Cnut's orders. He was also survived by the three children of his second marriage: Edward, Alfred, and Gode (who married first Dreux, count of the French Vexin, and then Eustace (II), count of Boulogne). All three took refuge in Normandy. In 1017 Cnut married their mother, Emma, hoping thereby to undermine their position, to gain her support for himself, and to provide for the succession with a son of his own. AEthelred's grandson through Edmund Ironside was Edward the Exile (died 1057), whose children included Margaret, wife of Malcolm III, king of Scots. Through her, the descendants of AEthelred came to include several kings of Scotland; and through Margaret's daughter Matilda, wife of Henry I, the blood of the West Saxon kings was passed on from AEthelred to the Plantagenet kings of England. 
According to Goscelin of St Bertin, Queen Emma moved AEthelred's body from London to Wilton Abbey, so that he could rest beside the body of his half-sister, St Edith; but all the indications are that he was buried at St Paul's. During the middle ages AEthelred's mortal remains lay entombed beside those of Saebbi, king of the East Saxons, in the north wall of the choir of Old St Paul's Cathedral. An inscription placed on a tablet on the wall above AEthelred's tomb (shown in an engraving by Wenceslaus Hollar published in Dugdale's 'History of St Paul's Cathedral', 1658), tells the tale of St Dunstan's prophecy on the day of the king's coronation, and of the unhappy outcome of the king's reign. The tombs of both kings were destroyed when fire engulfed Old St Paul's in September 1666. 
AEthelred has gained notoriety as a king whose acts of cruelty, cowardice, and incompetence were equalled only by the treachery, guile, and greed of those around him, and in this process he has come to be regarded as the personification of an age of national degeneracy. The major source of information is the account of the reign in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', which deals largely with the viking invasions; it was put together in its received form soon after the Danish conquest in 1016, so only when the chronicle is read in conjunction with and in relation to the king's charters, law-codes, coinage, and other forms of evidence, does a properly balanced picture of the reign begin to emerge. Yet AEthelred made enough of an impression, for better or worse, to ensure that he would always capture the historical imagination. The stories about Archbishop Dunstan's prophetic powers, displayed first on the occasion of AEthelred's baptism (when the boy urinated in the font) and again on the occasion of his coronation in 979, appear to have originated in the successive lives of St Dunstan by Adelard, Osbern, and Eadmer; they were picked up thereafter by the Anglo-Norman historians writing in the first half of the twelfth century, and thus entered the mainstream of English historical tradition. The story of the king's lifelong hatred of candles, because his mother had beaten him with them as a boy when he was so upset about his half-brother's death, originated in the 'Passio S. Eadwardi'. 
The more general presentation of AEthelred's reign, as a period when the people suffered under a king of singular incompetence, was developed by William of Malmesbury on the basis of his own reading of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', though it was Henry, archdeacon of Huntingdon, who propounded the notion that AEthelred's marriage to Emma of Normandy set in motion a train of events leading to the Norman conquest, and who took the view that the payments of tribute represented the origins of the oppressive taxation of his own day. It is also instructive to see how tales of the so-called 'massacre of St Brice's day' became steadily worse as they were told and retold in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 
It is perhaps not surprising that the principal AEthelredian subjects found among the paintings, prints, and other illustrations of English history in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries are the murder of Edward the Martyr and the massacre of St Brice's day; there was nothing that was uplifting, and precious little that was romantic. Among modern historians, the prime example was set by Sharon Turner, whose influential 'History of the Anglo-Saxons' was first published between 1799 and 1805. Turner made little attempt to assess the quality of the evidence or to consider dimensions of the subject beyond the tale of military catastrophe related in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. To his credit he made some use of the poem on the battle of Maldon, and found in Archbishop Wulfstan's 'Sermo ad Anglos' 'a contemporary picture of the internal state of England during this reign'. Yet AEthelred is made personally responsible for the outcome of events, and when the time comes is dismissed with utter contempt: 'At this crisis, the death of Ethelred released England from its greatest enemy' (Turner, 1.277). For E. A. Freeman, writing in the 1860s, AEthelred 'is the only ruler of the male line of Ecgberht whom we can unhesitatingly set down as a bad man and a bad King' (Freeman, 1.258-9), and few of his readers would have missed the resonances of a formulation adapted from the 'Book of Common Prayer': 'Under AEthelred nothing was done; or, more truly, throughout his whole reign he left undone those things which he ought to have done, and he did those things which he ought not to have done' (ibid., 1.297). 
In the early 1940s Sir Frank Stenton wrote of 'national degeneracy', and regarded AEthelred himself as 'a king of singular incompetence' (Stenton, 394-5). There has since been some attempt at rehabilitation, based on a deeper understanding of the problems that confronted the king, on a more critical assessment of the literary sources which form the basis of the traditional account of his reign, and on the integration of evidence derived from AEthelred's charters, law-codes, and coins. It remains difficult, however, for modern historians of the revisionist persuasion to have much effect on such a deeply rooted tradition. Indeed, it will long remain AEthelred's fate to be ridiculed among the very worst of English kings, as for example in the American composer Richard Wilson's one-act comic opera, 'Aethelred the Unready', which received its world premiere in New York on 13 May 2001. 
AEthelred the Unready undoubtedly deserves better. It is clear that much lay beneath the surface of recorded events, just as it is self-evident that a reign of thirty-eight years, in which so much took place, cannot be reduced to a simple matter of good or bad kingship. In the final analysis it is as difficult to decide what credit, if any, AEthelred can take for the positive aspects of his reign as it is to apportion blame for its manifestly disastrous outcome. It is enough, however, to suggest in this way that there was more to AEthelred than the familiar tale of viking invasions, exacerbated by incompetence, treachery, and intrigue in high places: unequal to the challenge that confronted him, and unfortunate in the circumstances that engulfed him, but always more interesting than merely unready. 


@@@@@


doc= 8916


Ailred of Rievaulx (1110-1167), religious writer and abbot of Rievaulx, was probably the youngest of the three sons of Eilaf, the last hereditary priest of the church of St Andrew at Hexham, grandson of Eilaf, treasurer of Durham, and great-grandson of the learned Alfred, son of Westou, sacristan of Durham and guardian of the shrine of St Cuthbert. 
Ailred was born at Hexham early in 1110 and, as a youth, was said to have been as intelligent as he was eloquent. He received a basic classical and literary education at Hexham and, probably, at Durham, but some time after 1124 he joined the court of David I, king of Scots, as a companion to David's eldest son, Henry, with whom he developed a deep friendship, and David's stepson, Waldef, another saint in the making. Here he sowed his wild oats, and here too he was elevated to the position of David's seneschal and was employed by his royal master on numerous diplomatic missions in Scotland and northern England. 
It was on one such mission to Archbishop Thurstan of York about 1134 that Ailred first learned of the Cistercians of Rievaulx. The abbey had been founded in 1132 by Walter Espec and, according to Walter Daniel in his life of Ailred, it took but a single visit to persuade Ailred to relinquish the court for the cloister. Whether his decision was really as precipitate as Walter describes may perhaps be questioned, for the 'Vita Ailredi', important though it is, is a hagiographical work and its author was not averse to manipulating the truth to suit his purposes. But whatever the facts of the matter, with his entry into Rievaulx there is no doubt that Ailred had found his true home. 
The new postulant, however, was unusual: he was familiar with the court, accustomed to power, and practised in diplomacy; and it would have been strange had William, abbot of Rievaulx, not profited from his talents. Thus, in 1138, during the war between Stephen and Matilda, Ailred probably accompanied William to Wark on the Scottish border to negotiate the surrender of Walter Espec's castle to King David; and in 1142, as William's representative, he journeyed to Rome to present to Innocent II the Cistercian objections to the election of Archbishop William of York. 
On his return from Rome, Ailred was appointed novice master at Rievaulx -- he was tender and compassionate with his charges, though there are indications that he was also somewhat lax -- but shortly thereafter, in 1143, he was appointed first abbot of Revesby in Lincolnshire. He governed the new abbey with a combination of deep spirituality and hard-headed business acumen, and as the religious life of the house grew in fervour, so its wealth and possessions grew in quantity. 
Meanwhile, in 1145, William of Rievaulx had died and his successor, Maurice, found the abbatial burden too heavy. He therefore resigned in 1147 and Ailred was elected to succeed him: he would hold the office for the next twenty years. His election, however, was not unopposed, for there were some who thought him ambitious, self-indulgent, and too involved with worldly affairs. But once elected, Ailred brought to Rievaulx all the talents he had displayed at Revesby, and under his guidance Rievaulx 'doubled its monks, lay-brothers, laymen, granges, lands, and goods, and trebled its religious life' ('Life', SS30). 
The new abbot, however, was hardly a model of monastic stability. He was much in demand as a fine preacher and was regularly sought out as an effective mediator in conflicts both secular and monastic. Thus, in the early 1160s he played an important role -- perhaps a decisive role -- in persuading Henry II to support the papacy of Alexander III; on 13 October 1163 he preached at Westminster at the translation of St Edward the Confessor; on 20 March in the following year -- it was St Cuthbert's day, a saint to whom he had a particular devotion and to whom he composed a (lost) eulogy -- he was preaching in a church in Kirkcudbright; and at about the same time (the year is uncertain) he negotiated peace between Fergus of Galloway and his contumacious sons. It was neither his first nor his last visit to Scotland, and on his way he would sometimes spend the night with his friend Godric of Finchale whose life, by Reginald of Durham, was written at Ailred's request. As abbot of Rievaulx he was also required to attend the annual general chapter at Citeaux and to make annual visitations of Rievaulx's five daughter houses: Wardon, Melrose, Dundrennan, Revesby, and Rufford. As a consequence he was often away from his monastery, but even when he was within its walls his influence spread far and wide: he was in contact with the pope, kings, archbishops and bishops, and the most distinguished men in the realm, and the loss of his collected letters has deprived scholars of a wealth of literary evidence for the period. 
For the last ten years of his life Ailred was plagued by serious and painful illness: he suffered from arthritis, gout, and kidney stones; and, for the twelve months before his death, from some chronic bronchial disorder. So severe were his sufferings (which were exacerbated by his own austerities) that in 1157 the general chapter gave him leave to move into the infirmary at Rievaulx and to conduct the business of the house from there. This he did for a short time, but then moved from the infirmary to a small hut nearby. There he read and worked, and there too he received visitors, both heavenly (according to Walter Daniel) and earthly, though the latter were surely the more importunate. The monks came to him in dozens -- even up to a hundred, says Walter -- and it seems that the Rievaulx community intended to reap all the benefit it could from the enforced presence of its ailing abbot. 
By January 1167 Ailred knew that he was dying. On the third of the month he spoke to his monks for the last time, advised them how best to choose his successor, and asked for certain relics and three books: his glossed psalter (it was preserved in the library after his death), Augustine's 'Confessions', and the gospel of 'St John'. On 5 January he was anointed 'in extremis' and given the viaticum by Roger of Byland, and as his body became ever feebler he grew impatient for death. 'Festinate [Hasten], for Crist luve', he would say ('Life', SS54), yet he lingered on for another week before he died on 12 January 1167 at about 10.30 p.m. He was fifty-seven. He was buried the next day in the chapter house at Rievaulx (his body was later translated to the church), and although never formally canonized, he became the centre of a local cult in the north of England which was recognized officially by the Cistercians in 1476. 
Ailred was an accomplished writer of historical, hagiographical, spiritual, and theological works. He had lived in troubled times and, as a man who had enjoyed the trust of kings, was well placed to write of current events. That he did so with apologetic interest is only to be expected. 
His earliest historical work is the 'Vita Davidis Scotorum regis' written in 1153 on the death of his friend and former patron. The work is a paean in praise of David's virtues and a plea for loyalty to his grandson and heir, Malcolm IV. Ailred then made the 'Vita' the first chapter of his 'Genealogia regum Anglorum' (1153-4), a work that is partly advice on how to be a good king and partly a careful (if tenuous) argument for accepting the young Henry II as a lineal descendant of Edward the Confessor and for seeing the Norman kingship as the true successor to the Anglo-Saxon royal line. The same intent appears in the 'Vita S. Eduardi regis et confessoris' (1162-3) written at the request of Lawrence of Westminster and dedicated to Henry II. It is not a particularly original work, being heavily dependent on an earlier biography by Osbert of Clare, but with Ailred's additions the book proved immensely popular and played an important role both in advancing the cult of the Confessor in England and in establishing the myth of Plantagenet legitimacy. 
Between the 'Genealogia' and the 'Vita' came 'De bello standardii' (1155-7), an account of the battle of the Standard fought near Northallerton between the Scots and the English on 22 August 1138. Ailred's account, however, was written at least seventeen years after the affray and the roles played by certain of the protagonists were not quite as Ailred wished to remember them. 
In the 'Vita S. Niniani' (1154-60) and 'De miraculis Hagustaldensis ecclesiae' (on the saints of Hexham, begun in 1155), history mingles with hagiography, for little definite was known of any of the saints in question. But although both works amalgamate earlier traditions with pious imagination, the story of the saints of Hexham is enriched by personal reminiscences of Ailred's own family -- the saints of Hexham were, after all, his family's saints -- and his comments are an important source for his own biography. 
The extraordinary and horrible story of the nun of Watton is contained in a letter written by Ailred ('De sanctimoniali de Watton') 'c'.1160, after he had been asked by Gilbert of Sempringham to investigate events at Watton Priory. There a young novice, having taken the veil despite showing little inclination towards the religious life, had an affair with a man of the house and became pregnant. When this was discovered, the nuns forced her to castrate her lover, and placed her in irons in a cell. She then claimed to have been restored to her virginal condition through the miraculous intervention of the now deceased archbishop of York, Henry Murdac, who had placed her in the convent as a young girl. Ailred, dismayed at the ease with which male and female religious could meet, was undoubtedly relieved when the investigation was over. 
Of Ailred's surviving spiritual treatises much has been written. The earliest (and finest) was the 'Speculum caritatis', a work requested by Bernard of Clairvaux whom Ailred had undoubtedly met on his way to Rome in 1142. It was begun when the author was novice master at Rievaulx and perhaps completed at Revesby. The last was the Augustinian 'De anima' (not one of his best works) which was composed during the last two or three years of his life. Between these came 'De Iesu puero duodenni' (1153-7), an allegorical exposition of 'Luke' 2:41-52; the Ciceronian dialogue 'De spiritali amicitia' ('c'.1160), a very popular work; the influential 'De institutione inclusarum' (1160-62) addressed to his sister (for whose existence this is our only evidence); the brief but very personal 'Oratio pastoralis' ('c'.1163-6); and a whole variety of sermons -- about 200 according to Walter Daniel's conservative estimate -- delivered at different times on different occasions: sermons that are in many ways more important than the treatises and certainly more neglected. 
In these works Ailred emerges as a theologian and spiritual director, and as a man wholly consumed with a love for the incarnate Christ. Much of his thought is rooted in the writings of the standard Western authorities (especially Augustine and Gregory the Great) and in the Cistercian tradition of which, in England, he was the foremost representative; but in his discussion of human and divine relationships and in his conception of God as friendship ('amicitia') he made important and original contributions to spiritual theology. 
Not all Ailred's works have survived. The loss of his letters and his eulogy to St Cuthbert have already been mentioned, but the Rievaulx library catalogue also lists an otherwise unknown 'De fasciculo frondium', and Walter Daniel notes that he composed a liturgical homily on 'Luke' 11:33 to be read on the feast day of St Edward the Confessor. A number of other treatises, both historical and spiritual, have at times been attributed to him (they are listed in Anselme Hoste's 'Bibliotheca Aelrediana'), but none is certainly from his pen and some are clearly spurious. And as to Charles Dumont's suggestion that Ailred was the author of the pseudo-Bernardine 'Jubilus rhythmicus de nomine Iesu', that remains no more than an attractive hypothesis. 


@@@@@


doc= 8917


AEthelstan (fl. 932-956), magnate, was the second of four sons of Ealdorman AEthelfrith, who ruled the southern and eastern territories of Mercia. AEthelfrith was descended from the West Saxon royal family and held extensive estates in Somerset and Devon. His wife, AEthelgyth, AEthelstan's mother, came from a wealthy family with estates in Buckinghamshire. AEthelfrith survived until about 915. Three years later the West Saxon royal house took over direct control of Mercia and under the new regime all of AEthelfrith's four sons became ealdormen in the second quarter of the tenth century. AElfstan, the eldest, received his father's ealdordom but died in 934. AEthelstan, created ealdorman in 932, took over the ancient kingdom of the East Angles, which had been ruled directly for forty years by the Danish king Guthrum and his successors until it came under the control of King Edward the Elder in 917-18. Besides Norfolk and Suffolk, AEthelstan's area of jurisdiction extended to practically the whole of the eastern Danelaw, from the Thames to the River Welland. It included Huntingdonshire, Cambridgeshire, and Northamptonshire, plus the fenland territory that was later known as the Holland division of Lincolnshire. Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire may also have been under his control. In addition to all this -- a territory as large as Normandy -- AEthelstan held extensive family estates outside his ealdordom, in Wessex and Mercia. His younger brother AEthelwold was made ealdorman in 940 and held jurisdiction in Kent and the adjacent shires; he died in 946. AEthelstan's youngest brother, Eadric, held the neighbouring ealdordom of central Wessex from 942 until his death in 949. By the mid-940s the three surviving brothers wielded immense power; between them they controlled well over half the extensive territories of the West Saxon kingdom. From 943 onwards AEthelstan habitually witnessed first, and his brother AEthelwold second among the 'duces' ('ealdormen') subscribing to royal charters; Eadric signed in third to sixth place until AEthelwold's death, after which he was second only to AEthelstan. 
For the whole of his brief reign (939-46), the young king Edmund remained strongly under the influence of his mother, Eadgifu, and of AEthelstan, who between them must have decided much of royal policy. Nor was the position much changed when Edmund's brother Eadred succeeded, for Eadred's adult years were clouded by chronic illness and the responsibilities of AEthelstan continued unabated. Moreover, from 944 onwards AEthelstan and his wife, AElfwyn (died 986), had fostered in their own household the infant atheling Edgar, a future king of England. In 949 AEthelstan added to his responsibilities that of the governance of south-east Mercia, and from the end of 951 onwards that of central Mercia too. These territories, like all the other areas under his control, must have been governed by suffragans. He was also prominent in military affairs, helping King AEthelstan and his successors gradually to secure control of territories under Danish occupation as far north as Strathclyde. Such deeds were remembered for a long time and in his eulogy on AEthelstan over two centuries later a chronicler at Ramsey Abbey praised him because 'apud hostes patriae non nullam virtus bellica invidiam generavit' ('his warlike virtue aroused great dread among the enemies of the country'; 'Chronicon abbatiae Rameseiensis', 11). The power exercised by AEthelstan and his family can be compared only with that of Godwine's family a century later; it is no wonder that he was remembered in later years as the 'Half-King'. 
It is a measure of the Half-King's achievement that the eastern Danelaw remained in subjection to the West Saxon royal line, its inhabitants loyal and quiescent, throughout the period of his government. There is no mention of revolts, of collaboration with the Danes of northern England in subversive movements, or of encouragement of viking raiders along the eastern coastline. He brought the administration of the eastern Danelaw into line with the system operating in Wessex, English Mercia, and the south-east. In conformity with the rest of the kingdom, East Anglia was hidated and divided into hundreds, units of local government that persist to the present day. In matters of local interest, law, and custom the Danes were allowed a considerable measure of autonomy; but in national affairs, such as the control of the mints, the raising of the geld, and the provision of military service, the area was no less effectively governed than the rest of the territories subject to the English crown. In this AEthelstan was helped by a group of subordinate Danish earls and English ealdormen scattered throughout his province. The beginning of East Anglian prosperity, so evident a century and a half later in 'Little Domesday Book', may fairly be credited to AEthelstan's rule. Development of continental trade led to significant steps in the growth of Ipswich, Thetford, and Norwich. 
AEthelstan Half-King was a constant and powerful friend of the English church, both nationally and within his own ealdordom, where the conversion of the Danes was zealously consolidated, church building and endowment by landowners encouraged, and a diocesan framework reconstituted. His wife, AElfwyn, whom he must have married soon after receiving his ealdordom, was of undistinguished birth; she appears to have come from a Huntingdonshire family whose estates were destined to form the nucleus of the large endowment of Ramsey Abbey. It is probable that AEthelstan's household, where Edgar was fostered, was centred somewhere in the neighbourhood. Perhaps it was at Upwood, on the edge of the fens, which is known to have been the home of his son and eventual successor, AEthelwine. 
The death of King Eadred on 23 November 955 led to a profound change in the circumstances, if not the fortunes, of the Half-King and his family. The new monarch, Eadwig, a youth of fifteen who appears to have been brought up in Wessex, commenced his reign inauspiciously by a major confrontation with Dunstan, then bishop of London and Worcester and a close friend of AEthelstan. Eadwig disappeared from his coronation banquet and Dunstan found him, crown cast to one side, in a compromising situation with a lady named AElfgifu and her mother, AEthelgifu, who were Eadwig's close relatives. Moreover, AEthelgifu (whose husband has not been identified) was almost certainly AEthelstan's sister. Dunstan remonstrated with the young Eadwig and brought him back forcibly to the banqueting hall. Shocked and humiliated by these developments, AEthelstan supported Dunstan's action. Eadwig never forgave them. Dunstan was banished and the estates of Queen Eadgifu, Eadwig's grandmother and close associate of AEthelstan, were confiscated. AEthelstan himself, his power base shattered, resigned his ealdordom to his eldest son, AEthelwold, in 956 or 957 and became a monk at Glastonbury, a house he had already endowed heavily with his family's west country estates while Dunstan had been abbot there. It is not known when AEthelstan died. The fortunes of the family of the Half-King received only a temporary setback; the ealdordom passed from AEthelwold to his brother AEthelwine. 


@@@@@


doc= 8918


AEthelweard (d. 998?), chronicler and magnate, was ealdorman of south-western England. He styled himself 'Patricius Consul Fabius Quaestor', a latinization of 'AEthel-/ealdorman/Fabius/-weard'. He was the father of AEthelmaer, grandfather of one AEthelweard and grandfather-in-law of another: all also ealdormen, and two of the same south-western ealdormanry as AEthelweard himself. He is important for his family's status as outlying members of the royal dynasty, and as holders over three generations of a key post in Anglo-Saxon government; but more important for the culture that made him and his son patrons of the homilist AElfric of Eynsham, and that led him to produce a remarkable Latin version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' (down to 975). This was written for Abbess Matilda of Essen, who was descended from King Alfred; AEthelweard's prefatory letter to her claims descent from AEthelred I, Alfred's elder brother, and he later says that AEthelred was his 'atavus' (great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather, great-great-great-grandfather, or merely ancestor). 
More light may be shed on AEthelweard's family by the charter whereby his son AEthelmaer founded Eynsham Abbey (1005). It records the acquisition by AEthelweard and AEthelmaer of lands from (among others) 'kinsmen' named Godwine and Bishop Brihthelm. In a will of 'c'.970 AElfgifu made a bequest to an AEthelweard who was probably her brother, and Ealdorman AElfheah's will of much the same date left land to a 'kinsman' AEthelweard. AElfgifu may be the lady whose marriage to King Eadwig was dissolved because of consanguinity. Ealdorman AElfhere, AElfheah's brother, is said by an early charter of Eadwig to be 'of the king's kin'; he or AElfheah had a son named Godwine. Eadwig also promoted his 'dear relative', Brihthelm, to a bishopric. AEthelweard may thus have been Eadwig's brother-in-law and have belonged to a branch of the dynasty that came to new prominence under his rule; he does give one of the few positive verdicts on Eadwig. But there is no proof that the will's AElfgifu was the former queen, and some reason to think that the AEthelweard it favours was a thegn of increasing seniority in Edgar's councils, who remained a thegn when the chronicler became an ealdorman (probably 976, or 'c'.973). If his kin were in one sense a casualty as much as a beneficiary of the success of Alfred's line, there is no hint of his own disaffection. His book simply rejoiced in his royal pedigree. As ealdorman he consistently witnessed the charters of Edward the Martyr and AEthelred II; third or fourth in ranking until 990, top from then to 998, when he evidently died. In one of his last appearances, he is 'occidentalium provinciarum dux' ('ealdorman of the western provinces'). He was an architect of the peace (linked to payment of danegeld) made by AEthelred and Olaf Tryggvason (994?). His son led the 'western thegns' in submission to the victorious Swein (1013). But Cnut's purge in effect destroyed the family: the homonymous grandson was killed in 1017, the grandson-in-law outlawed in 1020. 
Although intended for an overseas reader, AEthelweard's work survives only in one English manuscript. This was largely burnt in the Cottonian fire of 1731, but had been printed by Henry Savile in 1596. The only medieval author to use it was William of Malmesbury, and the manuscript could be the copy he saw. Aspects of the chronicle usually singled out are its eccentric Latin (which William set the fashion in deploring), and the impression it gives of access to a text of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' better in various ways than any now extant. Neither point may do justice to its author. His Latin, like his chronological and geographical excursions, is learned. He not merely knew Aldhelm; he could imitate his pursuit of exhibitionist neologism, literary variation, and poetic cadence. It is as if he were striving for a style suited to secular narrative, as Einhard had, but with Aldhelm, not Cicero and Suetonius, as his guide. The book is annalistic in structure, but is ordered in four books that make sense in terms of the story told. Many of its deviations from the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' arise from misreadings. But the written sources which must underlie such extra information as his unique and important account of the 890s need not have been restricted to an unusually well-stocked chronicle. He could be an independent (if not very detailed) source for the half-century before his own time; why should he not have researched further details for earlier centuries from whichever sources? What he omits (episcopal succession, other kingdoms, the apostasy of the second Christian West Saxon king) fits his professed intention to exalt his and Matilda's family. His is therefore a work not just of translation but of history, and it exhibits a pronounced intelligence. 
AEthelweard's exceptional literary commitment is confirmed by his regular appearance as patron of AElfric's 'Homilies', 'Lives of Saints', and biblical renditions. AEthelmaer, co-dedicatee of 'Lives of Saints', founded both AElfric's abbeys of Cerne and Eynsham, making him abbot of the latter. AElfric wrote for other laymen but for none so much. An intriguing speculation arises from a gift by AEthelmaer's son-in-law to an abbey that may be identified as his own foundation of Buckfast. It was a copy of Bede's 'Apocalypse' and Augustine's 'Adulterous Unions' (each a topical concern in England 'c'.1000), and its later-tenth-century scribe also wrote the Exeter book of Old English verse. AEthelweard can well be envisaged as the kind of man to relish literary celebration of aristocratic values in the era of 'The Battle of Maldon'. In his family the cultures of scribe and warrior met. He may therefore be perceived in ways that have become familiar to Carolingian scholarship but have yet to strike chords in study of the Anglo-Saxons. His counterparts were the Carolingian nobles who were close (even related) to royalty and its ideologists, cultivated and devout, ministerially active, loyal at least until their position became intolerable, and victims as much as they were movers in the age's seismic politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 8919


AEthelwine (d. 992), magnate and founder of Ramsey Abbey, Huntingdonshire, was the fourth and youngest son of AEthelstan, known as the Half-King (fl. 932-956), and his wife, AElfwyn (died 986). He was a few years older than the atheling Edgar, who was king from 959 to 975 and who had been reared as his foster brother in the same household. AEthelwine succeeded to the ealdordom of East Anglia in 962 after the death of his eldest brother AEthelwold and held it until his own death on 24 April 992. It is not known why AEthelwine, rather than one of his two surviving older brothers, inherited the ealdordom; perhaps it was because King Edgar knew him best. AEthelwold's ealdordom had probably included southern Northumbria within its remit, but responsibility for that province was taken over by Oslac. The remainder of the ealdordom included Cambridgeshire, the southern part of Lincolnshire, and possibly Bedfordshire, all of which were given to AEthelwine. From 984 to 990 he probably also had charge of central and north-west Mercia. During his early years of office AEthelwine was fourth in precedence of the ealdormen witnessing royal diplomas; from 966 onwards he witnessed fifth, from 971 second, and from 983 until his death he headed the lists, with Byrhtnoth in second place. 
The politics of Edgar's reign revolved to a large extent around the power struggle that had developed between the East Anglian and Mercian ealdordoms, with rivalry between AEthelwine's family on the one hand and the two brothers AElfhere, ealdorman of Mercia, and AElfheah, ealdorman of Wessex, on the other. Both families had ties of kinship with the royal house of Wessex. AEthelwine was the principal lay patron of Benedictine monasticism in England, whence his nickname, Dei Amicus ('Friend of God'). He found a strong supporter in Byrhtnoth, ealdorman of Essex, who also held Huntingdonshire and Northamptonshire and may have exercised a general supervision of the Five Boroughs and Northumbria during part of this period. Altogether AElfhere's influence was dominant in the early years, though differences with AEthelwine sharpened during the 'anti-monastic' reaction which followed the death of King Edgar in 975. But AElfhere died in 983 and his brother-in-law AElfric Cild (the last important adherent to AElfhere's party) was banished two years later. Shorn of this opposition, AEthelwine and Byrhtnoth were able to work closely together during the next eight years. 
Within his own ealdordom, as in national affairs, AEthelwine exercised his great power no less effectively than his father had done before him. In the pages of the 'Liber Eliensis', and to a lesser extent in the house chronicle of Ramsey Abbey, it is possible to watch him go about his duties; no other ealdorman had his official acts recorded in such detail for posterity. In Cambridgeshire he presided over meetings of the whole shire, of groups of hundreds, and even of a single hundred. Sometimes he sat with the royal reeve, but only once (in spite of what might be expected from the laws) with the diocesan bishop. According to the chronicles, AEthelwine had his hall and kept his court at Upwood near Ramsey. This court would have been concerned with the administration of his family estates rather than with his duties as ealdorman. He held also, on lease from Ely, the lordship of the five and a half hundreds of Wicklaw in Suffolk, probably the greatest franchise then in lay hands. 
As might be expected, Ealdorman AEthelwine was a considerable landowner in his own right. Details of most of his properties have not survived, but he and his family laid claims in Cambridgeshire and Northamptonshire, and there were large estates in Huntingdonshire, Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk. With these lands AEthelwine, his three wives -- successively AEthelflaed (died 977), AEthelgifu (died 985), and Wulfgifu (died 994) -- his brother AElfwold, and his sister-in-law AElfhild, endowed his foundation at Ramsey. 
The monastery owed its origins to the miraculous cure of a bad attack of gout which AEthelwine suffered about 963, a cure which he ascribed to St Benedict. In return he built a tiny wooden church on the Isle of Ramsey in the southern fenlands, near his home at Upwood; here he placed a simple community of three men who aspired to become monks. Shortly afterwards AEthelwine met Oswald, bishop of Worcester, at a funeral at Glastonbury (a foundation strongly supported by AEthelwine's family and where his father had ended his days as a monk). He offered Oswald the site at Ramsey for the building of a major monastery and Oswald sent monks from his own small community at Westbury-on-Trym, near Bristol. A larger wooden chapel was built, then a stone church with a central and a western tower, which was consecrated in 974. This proved to have inadequate foundations and a second stone church was erected, with conventual outbuildings, and consecrated in 991. This rebuilding, as well as the initial foundation, were handsomely furnished by AEthelwine, who decorated the high altar and installed a magnificent organ, a novelty in England at that time. Soon afterwards, Abbo of Fleury, the greatest scholar of the age, came to instruct the monks in the new learning, which was then transmitted from Ramsey to other reformed English abbeys. For many years Ealdorman AEthelwine and Bishop Oswald met annually at Ramsey to discuss its affairs and foster the quality of its learning. 
After a long illness, during which he was cared for by the community, AEthelwine died at Ramsey on 24 April 992 and was buried there. Byrhtferth of Ramsey, in his life of Oswald written two decades later, included a flowery obituary of AEthelwine. A century and a half later, another tribute was paid by an anonymous monk of Ramsey, compiler of the house chronicle. AEthelwine is said to have been handsome, cheerful, and, though illiterate, endowed with every virtue. A brass effigy was placed on his tomb at the end of the thirteenth century. In addition to Ramsey, AEthelwine was patron of satellite foundations at St Neots and Crowland. His three sons with his first wife, AEthelflaed (Leofwine, Eadwine, and AEthelweard), were local thegns who did not achieve an eminence comparable to that of their father. AEthelweard was killed at the battle of 'Assandun' in 1016. 


