@@@@@


doc= 8920


AEthelwold (904x9-984), abbot of Abingdon and bishop of Winchester, was a leading figure in the tenth-century church reform movement. He was born in Winchester to noble parents during the reign of Edward the Elder, probably between 904 and 909. 
As a youth AEthelwold spent a period in the royal household of King AEthelstan and may be the 'AEthelwold' who appears in the witness lists of royal charters in 932 and 934 ('AS chart.', S 417 and 425). After a period of royal service AEthelstan arranged for him to be ordained by Bishop AElfheah I of Winchester and he became a priest on the same day as Dunstan. After a period in the late 930s studying with AElfheah in Winchester, AEthelwold moved to Glastonbury where Dunstan had been made abbot. At Glastonbury he studied grammar, metrics, and patristics and, following Dunstan's example and teaching, took his vows as a monk; subsequently he was appointed dean. During the reign of King Eadred ('r'. 946-55), AEthelwold wished to travel to Europe to receive a more thorough grounding in the monastic way of life, presumably at one of the reformed Benedictine houses such as Fleury. On the advice of his mother, Eadgifu, the king refused AEthelwold permission to leave the country, and instead granted him the former monastic site at Abingdon, which at that time was served by a small body of secular priests. AEthelwold set about transforming Abingdon into a model Benedictine community, of which he became abbot. He was joined by clerics from Glastonbury, Winchester, and London who took vows as monks and one of them, Osgar, was subsequently sent to Fleury to study the observance of the Benedictine rule there. Eadgifu and Eadred were generous patrons and the king granted the 100-hide royal estate based on Abingdon to the new community before his death in 955. Work was begun on a new church, though it was not completed until the reign of King Edgar. 
The appointment of Edgar as king of all England in 959 gave AEthelwold the opportunity to initiate reform in the church on a much wider scale. He was already an intimate of the young king, having acted as his tutor. AEthelwold has been identified as the scribe known as 'Edgar A' who wrote a large number of the original charters to have survived from the period 960-63, and the implication is that he was in the personal service of the king during that time. In 963 Edgar appointed AEthelwold to the vacant see of Winchester and he was consecrated bishop on 29 November. In the following year, with the connivance of the king and with the support of an armed force led by a royal official, AEthelwold had the clerics of the Old and New Minsters expelled and replaced by monks from Abingdon; Chertsey and Milton Abbas were also reorganized as monasteries in the same year. Plans for the expulsion had been carefully laid as the king had sought permission from the pope the previous autumn. Further support from the king enabled AEthelwold to reintroduce monasticism in East Anglia, and between 964 and 971 he refounded monasteries at Peterborough, Ely, and Thorney. Nunnaminster in Winchester and probably other nunneries in the Winchester diocese were also affected by AEthelwold's zeal; Nunnaminster and Wilton were both enclosed by walls at this time. 
A synod held in Winchester some time between 970 and 973 agreed that a common rule should be followed by all the monastic communities in England. The customary which was adopted is known as the 'Regularis concordia' and was written by AEthelwold himself. His pupil AElfric identifies AEthelwold as the author in a composition he wrote for his own monks at Eynsham and there are also verbal links with other works attributed to AEthelwold. The basis of the customary is the rule of St Benedict, but some customs were also adopted from continental reformed houses and the advice of monks from Fleury and Ghent is acknowledged. Customs not paralleled on the continent probably indicate the retention of native practices and the emphasis on prayers for the royal house no doubt reflects the close relationship between King Edgar and AEthelwold. AEthelwold also encouraged close study of the Benedictine rule itself and was commissioned by King Edgar and Queen AElfthryth to provide a translation of it into Old English. Eight manuscripts or fragments survive suggesting a widespread circulation of the work. 
AEthelwold has emerged from modern scholarship as the driving force behind the movement to reintroduce monasticism into Anglo-Saxon England in the late tenth century. Some further idea of his overall aims comes from an anonymous document known as 'an old English account of King Edgar's establishment of the monasteries' of which AEthelwold is believed to be the author; it may have been composed to form a preface to his translation of the rule of St Benedict. The text suggests that AEthelwold's ideal was a return to the time of Bede, when the church was dominated by monks. His interest in and respect for that period can also be seen in his revival of the cults of seventh-century saints in his foundations, including those of St AEthelthryth and her saintly kinswomen at Ely and of St Birinus at Winchester. However, AEthelwold's historical vision seems to have led him to an espousal of monasticism that was more extreme than that of Dunstan and Oswald, the other great English monastic leaders in the reign of Edgar. Both Dunstan and Oswald followed the practice of many continental bishops in maintaining both secular priests and monks in their households and did not follow AEthelwold in his dramatic expulsion of secular clerks and their replacement by monks for all diocesan duties. AEthelwold's determination to achieve what he considered right also comes through from the zeal with which he obtained estates for his monasteries. It was not only the king who had to surrender lands to provide support for these foundations. The archives of Winchester and the 'Libellus AEthelwoldi' from Ely show that many small landowners were obliged to give up estates apparently on the grounds that the lands had once been granted to the religious communities, but had been alienated subsequently. Compensation was given, but does not seem to have been overgenerous and there were attempts to reclaim estates or renegotiate terms after the deaths of King Edgar and AEthelwold. If necessary, charters were forged to prove claims to title for which appropriate documentation had not survived or had never existed. AEthelwold in his various compositions shows himself to have been acutely aware of the pressures on monasteries and nunneries which might lead to church estates falling into secular hands and one of his priorities seems to have been to try to ensure that foundations were able to retain their wealth and independence. 
Some of the wealth accumulated by AEthelwold was used to rebuild churches and to furnish them in an appropriate manner, for he was also a major patron of ecclesiastical art and architecture; unfortunately only written accounts remain. His gifts to Abingdon are said to have included an altar table or retable, made of gold and silver and decorated with sculptured figures of the apostles, which cost $300. In addition to many other fittings he gave a gold chalice of immense weight, three gold and silver crosses which were 4 feet in length, and a golden-plated wheel which supported twelve lamps from which hung numerous small bells. AEthelwold's magnificent commissions might be matched by gifts from the royal house. King Edgar provided Old Minster, Winchester, with a gold and silver shrine for St Swithun, which was decorated with jewels and scenes showing the passion, resurrection, and ascension of Christ. These costly pieces have not survived the passage of time, but some of the manuscripts decorated at Winchester or other foundations associated with AEthelwold do still exist and are testimony to the high standards of craftsmanship which he encouraged. Foremost among these is the 'Benedictional of St AEthelwold' produced for AEthelwold's own use by his chaplain Godeman, whom he later appointed abbot of Thorney. The manuscript is lavishly decorated with gold and with full-page figural scenes in elaborate acanthus-leaved borders. Many scenes draw on continental prototypes, but others, including one of a bishop pronouncing benediction in a church, which may be intended as a portrayal of AEthelwold in Old Minster, seem to be original compositions. The artistic workshops established by AEthelwold continued to be influential after his death, both at home and abroad. 
None of the churches commissioned by AEthelwold survive. The one for which there is most information is Old Minster in Winchester, which has received substantial excavation, but is also described in some detail in the accounts of the miracles of St Swithun, who was translated there in 971. AEthelwold sponsored a major replanning of the west end of the church so that the original seventh-century building was extended to incorporate the first burial place of St Swithun and a free-standing tower of St Martin, which became the centre point of a massive western entrance or westwork, comparable to similar structures in France and Germany. The rebuilding was completed in 980 and the dedication was a major ceremonial occasion attended by the young King AEthelred II (died 1016), who had recently ascended the throne, and all the court. Evidence for some of the fixtures and fittings was also revealed by the excavations, including finds of window glass, glazed floor-tiles, and bell-pits. The rebuilding of the Old Minster was accompanied by a broader replanning of its physical surroundings. The south-eastern quarter of the town was reorganized so that Old Minster, New Minster, and Nunnaminster each had its own precinct, separated by walls from each other and from the activities of the town. Streams were diverted to serve the monastic buildings of Old Minster, which presumably were newly built at this time. AEthelwold also founded an episcopal palace at Wolvesey in the extreme south-eastern corner of the city. 
Larger churches were required at AEthelwold's foundations to allow the performance of the full Benedictine liturgy laid down in the 'Regularis concordia', which required numerous altars, processions, and provision for several choirs. AEthelwold drew upon the best of continental practice, but also seems to have been responsible for some imaginative innovations such as the re-enactment of the visitation to the tomb on Easter day, which has been seen as of prime importance in the development of liturgical drama. Monks from Fleury and Corbie were brought over to instruct the monks of Abingdon in the performance of plainchant, and the surviving 'Winchester tropers' enable some reconstruction of musical practice in Winchester which included development of forms of harmony. AEthelwold in the 'Regularis concordia' decreed that monks should hear mass each day and at Winchester he instituted private supplementary offices for his monks, which can be partly reconstructed from surviving manuscripts. But what has been seen as the most original and influential of his liturgical reforms was the production of a new form of benedictional represented in the texts of his own benedictional and the so-called 'Ramsey Benedictional' which was also produced at Winchester. The new benedictional involved a skilful blend of the two main forms in use in contemporary Europe and may be the work of AEthelwold himself or, if not, was certainly commissioned by him. Like the 'Regularis concordia', the Winchester benedictionals also took account of traditional English practices and incorporated benedictions for St Swithun and St AEthelthryth, two saints whose cults AEthelwold had specially promoted. All later English benedictionals were influenced by the new tradition established at Winchester. 
In addition to his other activities AEthelwold personally taught the older pupils at Winchester and their works suggest that they regarded him with much respect and affection. Wulfstan Cantor wrote: 'It was always agreeable to him to teach young men and mature students, translating Latin texts into English for them, passing on the rules of grammar and metric, and encouraging them to do better by cheerful words' ('Life', chap. 31). The surviving writings in both Old English and Latin which can be attributed to AEthelwold provide independent support for his reputation as a great scholar. His translation of the rule of St Benedict into Old English suggests that he had a nearly faultless command of Latin grammar. The 'Regularis concordia' is written in clear, straightforward Latin, but he also seems to have favoured a more rhetorical and flamboyant style with much use of Greek words, which shows the influence of Aldhelm. His pupil Wulfstan Cantor refers to his skill in the composition of Latin verse as well, but only two lines survive in a charter which can be attributed to him with any certainty ('AS chart.', S 745). AEthelwold also promoted the use of written Old English to enable essential texts to reach a wider body of people. His vernacular writings show a concern with clarity and with defining a precise Old English vocabulary which is believed to have played an important role in the development of Standard Old English. 
The work of AEthelwold's pupils can also be interpreted as testimony to his own scholarship and saw his ideals carried into the next generation. These pupils included AElfric, subsequently abbot of Eynsham, who was the most prolific author in Old English in the late Saxon period. He continued AEthelwold's concern with grammatical correctness in Old English and with the translation of Latin texts into the vernacular. Another pupil, Wulfstan Cantor, was a leading writer in Latin, both in prose and verse, and as an expert in musical theory continued AEthelwold's interest in the development of the liturgy. AEthelwold also commissioned new works from his entourage at Winchester, of which the most significant were connected with the promotion of the cult of St Swithun. Lantfred, a foreign scholar who had joined the community at Old Minster, produced the detailed 'Translatio et miracula S. Swithuni' which Wulfstan Cantor used as the basis for his own 'Narratio metrica de sancto Swithuno' written in hexameters. AEthelwold also had much patronage to bestow on those who followed him loyally and many of his monks became abbots or bishops. 
Although AEthelwold is primarily remembered for his contribution to the late Anglo-Saxon church, it must not be forgotten that he also played a political role. Some facets of church reform had ramifications that went beyond the ecclesiastical sphere. AEthelwold's refoundation of the fenland monasteries and recovery of large tracts of land in East Anglia may have had the subsidiary motive of creating an alternative power base to that of the ealdormanic families of the area. The emphasis on prayers for the royal house in the 'Regularis concordia' not only recognized the importance of their patronage, but also helped to stress the sanctity of kingship and the distance between the king and his greatest nobles. AEthelwold's involvement in contemporary politics emerges most clearly in his support for Edgar's third wife, AElfthryth, and their son AEthelred. Towards the end of the reign of Edgar it seems to have become an issue whether he should be succeeded by AEthelred or by Edward, the son of his first wife. Dunstan and Oswald appear to have supported Edward as the elder son, but AEthelwold backed AEthelred. Documents produced at Winchester towards the end of Edgar's reign stress the priority of AEthelred's claim over that of Edward, who is described as being of lesser status, apparently on the grounds that his mother, unlike AElfthryth, was not a consecrated queen. AElfthryth's status was further enhanced when she was given a supervisory role over the nunneries in the 'Regularis concordia'. The queen was a major patron of AEthelwold. A tradition preserved at Peterborough described her hiding in his closet so that she could find out how best to help him; when she heard him praying to be allowed to refound Peterborough, she leapt out and promised her support. Gifts of land from the queen are recorded, as is her help in reacquiring alienated possessions. However, AEthelwold's espousal of her cause may have more complex roots, stretching back to the obligations and allegiances he may have inherited as a member of a noble family based in Winchester. After Edward was murdered in 978, AEthelwold seems to have played a major advisory role during AEthelred's minority. It is significant that it was only after AEthelwold's death that AEthelred began to rule in his own right and marked his independence by acting against the interests of some of the reformed monastic houses. 
AEthelwold died on 1 August 984 at Beddington in Surrey, an Old Minster estate. His body was moved to Winchester on 3 August for burial in the crypt of Old Minster, as he had previously arranged with Wulfstan Cantor. Twelve years later, in 996, AEthelwold appeared to AElfhelm, a citizen of Wallingford, and instructed him to visit his tomb to be cured of blindness and to report the matter to Wulfstan. The miracle was taken as the necessary sign which preceded the formal recognition of AEthelwold as a saint and his body was translated soon after, on 10 September 996, from the crypt to the choir of Old Minster. The rebuilding of the east end of the church had recently been completed under the supervision of AEthelwold's successor AElfheah II, possibly in preparation for the translation. Wulfstan seems to have played the leading role in the promotion of AEthelwold's cult, including the composition of a life, which AElfric subsequently abridged in Latin and Old English. Wulfstan's life is the main source for AEthelwold's early years and contains accounts of miraculous signs from the time he was in his mother's womb onwards. Many of these details are likely to have come from AEthelwold himself and suggest that he may have laid plans for his eventual cult before his death. Wulfstan also seems to have been in charge of the liturgical development of the cult and has been identified as the author of the necessary hymns, collects, tropes, and mass sets which have survived. 
In spite of Wulfstan's dedication AEthelwold's cult seems never to have achieved great popularity and was rarely celebrated beyond the foundations which had some personal link with the saint. There is no record of the type of apocryphal stories which are a feature of Dunstan's cult, and even in Winchester he did not have either the following or the miracle-working reputation enjoyed by his own protege Swithun. The AEthelwold of Wulfstan's life inspires respect rather than devotion. Wulfstan stresses AEthelwold's personal piety and strict adherence to Benedictine practice, but his saint is an often formidable authoritarian who, for instance, commands a monk to show his devotion by plunging his hand into a boiling pot of stew, while another monk who had the presumption to watch AEthelwold while he was reading at night was punished with temporary blindness. 
Wulfstan's portrayal shows the influence of tenth-century continental saints' lives and the expected characteristics of the new breed of Benedictine saints, but there also seems little doubt that AEthelwold was a controversial figure in his own lifetime. He may have inspired great devotion from his pupils, but it would appear he also had many enemies among those he dispossessed of land and position and such enmities may have been exacerbated by his involvement in contemporary politics. Wulfstan records AEthelwold's triumph over his enemies at the dedication of the west end of Old Minster in 980, when the supporters of AEthelred and of the murdered Edward the Martyr came to be reconciled: 'God in his love gave such grace to the holy bishop that those high lay dignitaries, ealdormen, potentates and judges, and all who had previously seemed his enemies, standing in God's path, were suddenly made, as it were, sheep instead of wolves: they revered him with extraordinary affection and lowering their necks to his knee and humbly kissing his hand, commended themselves in all things to the prayers of the man of god. ('Life', chap. 40)' After AEthelwold's death his enemies attempted revenge on his foundations, and his cult and lives may have been in part an attempt to recreate by other means the protection he had so effectively provided during his lifetime. 
The way Wulfstan chose to present AEthelwold has influenced, of course, the way he has been viewed by later historians, who have tended to stress the stern authoritarian rather than the affectionate 'father' of monks who encouraged his pupils with cheerful words. David Knowles wrote of his 'austere and intransigent temper' (Knowles, 39) and Frank Stenton of 'the crude strength of his somewhat unattractive personality' (Stenton, 452). Events such as the forceful expulsion of the secular clerks at Old Minster have left a bitter taste and have given him a reputation for ruthless insensitivity which is not shared by the other tenth-century monastic reformers. His importance to the tenth-century reform movement has always been acknowledged, but appreciation of the range of his contributions and of his scholarship has only come in more recent years. Of particular importance has been the identification of his authorship of various key works of the tenth-century reform period, and his stock has risen with the close examination of these texts and others associated with him. There has also been a fuller appreciation of the fact that AEthelwold cannot be seen just as a monastic reformer; his career must also be viewed in a broader ecclesiastical context and in terms of contemporary politics in which he was a major player. The AEthelwold who has emerged is not necessarily more likeable, but commands greater admiration for his learning, depth of vision, and ability to carry through his policies. However, one of the clearest recognitions of his importance comes in a charter of King AEthelred issued some nine years after AEthelwold's death, which acknowledges how his passing 'deprived the country of one whose industry and pastoral care ministered not only to my interest but also to that of all the inhabitants of the country, the common people as well as the leading men' ('AS chart.', S 876). 


@@@@@


doc= 8921


AEthelwulf (d. 858), king of the West Saxons, was the son of Ecgberht (d. 839), king of the West Saxons. His mother's identity is unknown; no siblings are recorded. He was sent by his father to take control of Kent in 825. In 838 Ecgberht held an assembly at Kingston, Surrey: AEthelwulf was acknowledged as Ecgberht's heir, and perhaps (the evidence is oblique) received royal consecration from episcopal hands, in return for concessions to Canterbury and other churches. When Ecgberht died in 839, AEthelwulf succeeded, giving his eldest (and perhaps adult) son, AEthelstan, 'the kingdom of Kent, of Essex, of Surrey and of Sussex' ('ASC', s.a. 836). AEthelwulf's wife was Osburh (fl. 839), who as far as is known bore all his recorded offspring. Her ancestry was traced back to 'Goths and Jutes', who had received control of the Isle of Wight from their royal Cerdicing kinsmen. AEthelwulf married Osburh well before 839 -- their second son, AEthelbald, subscribed charters from 'c'.840. Their daughter AEthelswith married the Mercian king Burgred in 853. Four of their five sons successively became kings of Wessex: AEthelbald (858-60), AEthelberht (860-65), AEthelred (865-71), and Alfred (871-99). In 856 AEthelwulf married Judith ['see below'], daughter of the Carolingian king Charles the Bald (823-877) of West Francia and his queen, Ermentrude (died 869); whether Osburh had died or been repudiated is uncertain. AEthelwulf and Judith had no offspring and AEthelwulf died on 13 January 858. 
AEthelwulf's reign has been relatively under-appreciated in modern scholarship. Yet he laid the foundations for Alfred's success. To the perennial problems of husbanding the kingdom's resources, containing conflicts within the royal family, and managing relations with neighbouring kingdoms, AEthelwulf found new as well as traditional answers. He consolidated old Wessex, and extended his reach over what is now Devon and Cornwall. He ruled Kent, working with the grain of its political community. He borrowed ideological props for his kingship from Mercians and Franks alike, and went to Rome, not to die there, like his predecessor Ine (as recalled in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's' account of AEthelwulf's genealogy), but to return, as Charlemagne had, with enhanced prestige. AEthelwulf coped more effectively with Scandinavian attacks than did most contemporary rulers. 
Possibly himself descended from the kings of Kent, AEthelwulf oversaw the evolving association of Kent with Wessex rather than, as had formerly been the case, with Mercia. His sub-kingship of Kent is well documented in charters: in some, Ecgberht acted in Kent with his son's permission. The Rochester mint may have worked for son as well as father. AEthelwulf in turn established his son AEthelstan as sub-king of Kent, but exercised a more direct control over the sub-kingdom than Ecgberht had. AEthelstan, who attested as 'king' his father's charters for Kentish beneficiaries, apparently never issued charters or coins of his own. AEthelwulf visited Kent on several occasions: taking only a small retinue of West Saxons, he drew local Kentish nobles into his presence, and had them attest his Kentish charters. AEthelwulf, like Ecgberht, but unlike Kent's earlier Mercian overlords, had indigenous Kentish nobles as loyal ealdormen. For instance, Ealdorman Alhhere benefited directly from AEthelwulf's largess and also requested AEthelwulf's grant to a Kentish thegn of property at Canterbury. Already in 838, Kentish minster communities had chosen AEthelwulf 'for protection and lordship', and he had promised them freedom to elect their heads without interference from 'any other party': they were exchanging the archbishop of Canterbury's 'protection' for AEthelwulf's. AEthelwulf ran a Carolingian-style family firm of plural realms, held together by his own authority as father-king, and by the consent of the distinct elites. Increasingly heavy Scandinavian attacks convinced Kentishmen in halls and minsters, in countryside and town, that their best hope of security lay in West Saxon royal power. In Kent as elsewhere, local ealdormen had born the brunt, but in 850, says the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', 'King Athelstan and Ealdorman Alhhere destroyed a great host at Sandwich in Kent, captured nine ships and drove off the rest' ('ASC', s.a. 851). (AEthelstan may have died soon after this, his last recorded action.) Hardly coincidentally, Alhhere and AEthelstan came also in 850 to Wilton (in modern Wiltshire) and AEthelwulf granted the ealdorman a vast estate in Kent. Archbishops of Canterbury now remained firmly within the West Saxon orbit; and Canterbury housed the main mint for AEthelwulf's whole kingdom. 
From the 820s, Mercian dominance south of the Thames had weakened. In 840 Ashdown, in the west of what is now Berkshire, was already under West Saxon control and the birth of AEthelwulf's youngest son, Alfred, at Wantage in 848 or 849 suggests West Saxon control there then. By 858 the whole shire was in West Saxon hands. King Berhtwulf of Mercia ('r'. 840-52) was AEthelwulf's close ally. Their moneyers co-operated. In 853 AEthelwulf was asked by Berhtwulf's successor Burgred ('r'. 852-74) and his witan 'to help them bring the Welsh back into subjection' ('ASC', s.a. 854): a joint campaign was successful. That same year, AEthelwulf gave his daughter in marriage to Burgred, perhaps claiming a certain superiority over the new Mercian king. This kind of alliance was to continue under AEthelwulf's sons. 
Wessex remained the heart of AEthelwulf's kingdom: charters show him staying at, or summoning assemblies to, Wilton, Southampton (Hamtun), Edington, Dorchester, and Winchester. AEthelwulf's interest in Winchester, where his father was buried, and where Bishop Swithun was his appointee in 852-3, represented a shift of focus, only partially balanced by generous grants of a new shrine for St Aldhelm at Malmesbury and of land in what is now Somerset to his 'princeps' Ealdorman Eanwulf. This area was to become the power base of AEthelwulf's second son, AEthelbald, as, later, of his youngest son, Alfred. AEthelwulf's grant to himself, dated 26 December 846, of the large estate at South Hams, in the west of modern Devon, reveals a clear strategy: as 'bookland', it would be available for him 'to leave eternally to anyone whatever as it may be pleasing to me' ('AS chart'., S 298). AEthelwulf would thence reward loyal followers and fund the establishment of West Saxon control in this frontier zone. The Hams charter, surviving as an original, was subscribed by 'AEthelbald, king's son', perhaps already endowed in Somerset. In a Kentish charter dating to 855, and attested by his third son, AEthelberht as 'king', AEthelwulf granted land near Rochester to his thegn Dunn 'on account of the tithing of lands which... I have decided to do for some of my thegns' ('AS chart.', S 315). This grant, dated in relation to AEthelwulf's 'proceeding to Rome', referred back to the 'decimation' mentioned by the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' under 855 (apparently correct for Kent, though West Saxon charters suggest 854): 'King AEthelwulf booked the tenth part of all his land throughout all his kingdom'. Although much of the charter evidence is shaky, this 'decimation' certainly occurred (unlike an alleged earlier one in 844). AEthelwulf apparently released from secular burdens one tenth of all land in lay hands hitherto subject to them, thus enabling the owners to make grants to churches: a royal act of exceptional piety, and also of exceptional astuteness, designed to win the king secular as well as ecclesiastical friends, since laymen were keen to endow churches under their own patronage; but designed, too, to ensure a constant supply of the prayers believed to bring victory. 
The consecration of Offa of Mercia's son Ecgfrith as king in 787 may have inspired whatever Ecgberht arranged for AEthelwulf in 838. Carolingian precedent was probably more influential still. The Kingston assembly took place only months after the 837 Christmas assembly at Aachen, when Louis the Pious granted his son Charles (the Bald) a kingdom. Early in 839 Ecgberht was in touch with Louis about the Scandinavian threat to Franks and English and the need for repentance to avert divine punishment. Ecgberht sought permission to travel through Francia on pilgrimage to Rome, but died before he could accomplish it. In 855 AEthelwulf made a similar request to Charles the Bald, and this time the journey was made. Continental contemporaries registered its impact. Charles gave 'the king of the Anglo-Saxons... all the supplies a king might need, and... an escort, with all the courtesies due to a king' ('Annals of St Bertin', s.a. 855). The biographer of Pope Benedict III recorded AEthelwulf's arrival at Rome 'with a multitude of people', and carefully noted AEthelwulf's gifts to St Peter: 'a fine gold crown weighing 4 lb.,... one sword bound with fine gold; four silver-gilt Saxon bowls; one all-silk white shirt with roundels, with gold-studding; and two large gold-interwoven veils', as well as lavish donations of gold and silver to 'the clergy, leading men, and people of Rome' (Davis, 187). On the way home in 856, AEthelwulf enjoyed Charles's hospitality for three months, perhaps joining him in a successful campaign against Scandinavians west of the Seine. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, Charles's confidant, had written to AEthelwulf 'c'.852 to felicitate him on a recent victory against pagans and to solicit, in return for prayers, a gift of lead for the monastery roof (the request implies appreciation of AEthelwulf's access to the resources of the Mendip Hills). In July 856 AEthelwulf was betrothed to Charles's daughter 
Judith's consecration may have restored, even enhanced, the status of queenship in Wessex: within two generations, a queen's rite complemented the king's in Anglo-Saxon liturgical books. The prestige she herself conferred explains why, when AEthelwulf died, her stepson AEthelbald 'against God's prohibition and Christian dignity, and also contrary to the practice of all pagans... married Judith, daughter of Charles king of the Franks'. Asser's further comment about 'great disgrace' ('Life of Alfred', chap. 17) was not echoed in the Frankish record of the event. Although Asser's claim about its being contrary to pagan practice had been anticipated by Bede, who cited St Paul to the same effect, none the less Augustine of Canterbury had found it necessary to consult Pope Gregory about the lawfulness of stepmother marriage and Eadbald of Kent had married his father's widow in 616. Similar cases are attested among early medieval peoples in the British Isles and on the continent. A dowager queen seems to have been regarded as in some sense embodying her late husband's realm, hence to marry her conferred, or strengthened, a claim to rule. 
AEthelbald's death in 860 left Judith little future in Wessex. She was no older than seventeen, and still childless. 'Selling up the possessions she had acquired' there ('Annals of St Bertin', s.a. 860), she returned to her father who kept her 'under episcopal guardianship, and with all the honour due to a queen' (ibid.), in his stronghold of Senlis. Thence, early in 862, she fled with Baldwin, count of Flanders, at his instigation, and married him. The couple sought diplomatic support from King Lothar II and Pope Nicholas I, and apparently an offer of refuge from Roric, the viking lord of Frisia. Charles the Bald, initially furious, soon forgave his daughter, who settled down in Flanders and produced two sons. Baldwin died in 879. Some time between 893 and 899, their son Count Baldwin (II) married Alfred's daughter AElfthryth. If Judith was still alive, she probably helped negotiate this match. If not, the advantages of cross-channel alliance behind her own successive West Saxon marriages were not lost on her son. Perhaps she brought him up on stories of her youthful career. In the mid-tenth century Judith was remembered by the genealogist of the counts of Flanders as 'most wise, and beautiful', the transmitter of Carolingian blood to the comital dynasty, while any scandals were forgotten. Six generations after Judith, her descendant and namesake, the daughter of Count Baldwin (IV), remade an English connection through her marriage to Tostig Godwineson. 
From the early 840s the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' reports Scandinavian raids as increasingly frequent, and, in 850-51, a viking force as overwintering 'for the first time'. AEthelwulf's efforts at resistance are reported too: he fought unsuccessfully against thirty-five ships' companies of Danes at Carhampton in what is now Somerset in 843; in 851, after Danes had stormed Canterbury and London, and put the Mercians to flight, 'AEthelwulf and his [second] son AEthelbald with the West Saxon levies fought against them at 'Acleah' and there made the greatest slaughter of a heathen host that we have heard tell of up to this present day' ('ASC', s.a. 851). News of this important success reached West Francia. Notable in the chronicle's coverage of AEthelwulf's reign are repeated references to victories won by ealdormen with the men of their shires. Derived from contemporary records, and contrasting with the emphasis in the 870s on royal command, these entries present a more consensual leadership style in AEthelwulf's reign than in the earlier part of Alfred's. 
Vikings were not AEthelwulf's only problem in the 850s. For him in his later years, as for Alfred and several ninth-century Carolingians, tensions revealed in other sources, between the ageing father and adult sons, and between older and younger sons, are suppressed in the main annalistic record. According to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' for 853, AEthelwulf sent Alfred to Rome, where Pope Leo IV 'consecrated him king and stood sponsor to him at confirmation'. A fragment of a letter from Leo to AEthelwulf reports Alfred's reception and investiture 'with the belt of consulship' ('English Historical Documents', 1, no. 219). Mid-ninth-century entries in the 'Liber vitae' of San Salvatore, Brescia, indicate that AEthelred accompanied Alfred to Italy (he too may have been given an honorific reception at Rome, though neither the chronicle compilers nor the eleventh-century excerptor of Leo's letter were interested in recording that) and also suggest that Alfred went to Rome a second time, with his father. The terms of AEthelwulf's will, as described in Alfred's will (made between 879 and 888), indicate a considerable age gap between his two older surviving (after 851) sons and the two younger. These terms bear out charter evidence that AEthelwulf meant AEthelbald to inherit Wessex, and AEthelberht Kent. In sending his two younger sons to Rome (as Charlemagne had sent his, in 781), he affirmed their throneworthiness and hoped to secure them against the fate that threatened some little Carolingian contemporaries, of being tonsured (and hence excluded from the succession) by elder brothers. There was no better way to provide such security, and underwrite paternal arrangements, than to invoke papal authority (as Charlemagne sent his projected 'divisio regni' of 806 to the pope for 'approval'). If AEthelwulf intended AEthelred and Alfred to remain in the running, he may have thought Sussex, Essex, or even Surrey, capable of being reconstituted as separate kingdoms. He was also providing against one or both the elder sons dying heirless. 
One provision of AEthelwulf's will (mentioned in Alfred's will), concerned a particular part of his personal inheritance ('yrfe'), as distinct from the royal lands that sustained the kingship: evidently a rich estate (or cluster of estates) situated in old Wessex. The two younger sons were to have shares in this along with their eldest brother, AEthelbald, on condition that 'whichever of us should live longest was to succeed to the whole [estate]' ('English Historical Documents', 1, no. 96). 'Pace' some modern historians, this provision had nothing to do with the kingdom of Wessex, and introduced no new principles of fraternal succession or the realm's indivisibility. When AEthelbald died in 860, AEthelberht took over Wessex and became, at his younger brothers' request, temporary trustee for their shares of the 'yrfe'. Asser in his 'Life of Alfred' (written in 893) clarifies AEthelwulf's last years, without conflicting with the other, fragmentary, evidence. Asser states that Alfred went to Rome in 853, and again, with AEthelwulf, in 855. Then, 'while King AEthelwulf was returning from Rome, his son AEthelbald with all his councillors [Asser names Ealhstan bishop of Sherborne and Eanwulf ealdorman of Somerset as chief conspirators] tried to perpetrate a terrible crime: expelling the king from his kingdom'. News of AEthelwulf's impending Carolingian marriage had evidently provoked the rebellion, as AEthelbald reacted to the threat of displacement by higher-born (half-)brothers. Father and son negotiated a peace, whereby AEthelwulf received his kingdom's 'eastern districts', AEthelbald the western. Asser disapproved, 'because the western part of the Saxon land has always been more important than the eastern' ('Life of Alfred', chap. 12). Although this agreement has usually been read as severing Wessex again from the acquired lands to the east, Asser perhaps described a division of Wessex itself between parts west and east of Selwood: if so, AEthelwulf's West Saxon reign continued until 858, as implied by the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's' assigning him a reign length of eighteen and a half years. It is hard to see why Asser should have invented the story of the rebellion (though the chronicle understandably suppressed it). 
In, or soon after, late 856 AEthelwulf made a will, says Asser, 'so that his sons should not quarrel unnecessarily among themselves after his death'. He prospectively 'divided his kingdom between his two eldest sons', while 'his personal inheritance was split between his sons, daughter and kinsmen' ('Life of Alfred', chap. 16). AEthelwulf's planned division of his recently constructed composite kingdom has been judged retrograde by some historians -- a judgement coloured by teleology. Throughout the middle ages, dynastic thinking impelled the accumulation of plural realms in order to provide, through redistribution, for plural sons. AEthelwulf had long foreseen separate futures for Wessex and Kent. Yet Wessex itself was not to be divided (as perhaps in 856), and nor was any acquired realm. AEthelwulf's two younger sons, not yet of age, were designated to no kingdom. Within Wessex, AEthelwulf distinguished, significantly, between kingdom and personal inheritance. His moveable wealth (recall his resources in gold, silver, and lead) was to be split, in terms reminiscent of Charlemagne's will, between 'children, nobles, and the needs of the king's soul' for which last 'a great sum of money should be taken every year to Rome'. Judith remained childless, yet may well have cared for her young stepchildren, as Carolingian stepmothers did theirs. AEthelwulf's death early in 858 may have been unexpected. His body was buried at Steyning, Sussex, and only later transferred to Winchester. As the will stipulated, Wessex went to AEthelbald, the 'eastern districts' to AEthelberht. 
The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', especially its record of AEthelwulf's military effort against vikings, its stress on his Carolingian marriage, and its 855-8 entry with his lengthy genealogy, shows why his remembered reign had such importance for Alfred's court. Charter evidence shows the living AEthelwulf hard at work maintaining the support of aristocrats, West Saxon and Kentish, and especially of his thegns. A token, still extant, of that bond is the gold ring, about an inch across, richly decorated with religious symbols, and inscribed 'Ethelwulf Rex'. Found at Laverstock, Wiltshire, in 1780, it was surely made to be a gift from this royal lord to a brawny follower: the sign of successful ninth-century kingship. 


@@@@@


doc= 8922


Etheridge, George (1519-1588?), physician and classical scholar, was born in Thame, Oxfordshire. Presumably educated at Thame Abbey before going to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, he was admitted as a scholar there on 11 November 1534 aged fifteen years and one month. A pupil of John Shepreve, Etheridge graduated BA on 15 February 1539 and was elected a probationary fellow six days later. Made a full fellow on 26 February 1541, he graduated MA on 20 June 1543 and was appointed a college lecturer in Greek the same year. On taking his BM degree in autumn 1545 Etheridge resigned his college positions to take his 'place among the physicians' (Etheridge, 'In libros Pauli Aeginetae', sig. A4'v'). Two years later, in January 1547, he was appointed regius professor in Greek. 
At Christ Church, Etheridge was one of the few lecturers not to take pupils. As a classicist he was widely esteemed for his linguistic precision, his gift of poetry, and his skill as a translator. Pits knew of his translation of the works of Justin Martyr into Latin, as well as of an abridged version of the psalter, in Hebrew, neither of which survive. As a medical doctor he was similarly valued by his colleagues who, according to Etheridge's own testimony, showed respect for his double vocation: 'The great physicians... showed me much kindness' when teaching Greek in the university (Etheridge, 'In libros Pauli Aeginetae', sig. A4'v'). He was among the few Oxford physicians to publish a textbook of medicine and pharmacology, 'In libros Pauli Aeginetae'. Written specifically for the training of medical students, together with the works of Edward Wotton and Matthew Gwynn it formed 'the sum total of known works in Latin of all the Oxford medical graduates of the century' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 3: 'Colleg. univ.', 242). 
While Etheridge showed some initial support for the royal supremacy in 1538 when he was among a group of fellows censoring the continued appeal to papal supremacy in Corpus Christi College, like many Catholics he had to vacate his chair in 1550 following a royal visitation to the university. Reinstated within a month of Mary's accession, he was present at the trial of Latimer and Ridley in 1555 where he demanded that Ridley should be gagged at his degradation from the priesthood. 'A forward person against the Protestants in Queen Mary's reign', in April 1559 Etheridge was deprived of his lectureship almost immediately after his refusal to take the oath of supremacy following the accession of Elizabeth I (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.546f.). Following his dismissal from office, Etheridge moved from his quarters in Christ Church to William Hall in Kibald Street, which he had rented from the university. There he practised to great acclaim as a medical doctor, provided 'a refuge for poor scholars, granted hospitality to clergy, and his lavish liberality provided for all necessities of the Catholics' (Pits, 785). Wood reports that he counted William Gifford, later Catholic archbishop of Rheims, among his students at William Hall 'who received from him the rudiments in grammar, music and partly in logic' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.547). 
As a 'confessor of the orthodox faith' (Pits, 784), Etheridge was purportedly interrogated and imprisoned frequently, both in Oxford and London. While his opposition to Elizabethan claims to sovereignty was well established, in 1566 he none the less dedicated a Greek ode to the queen on the occasion of her visit to the university, in which he reminded her of the achievements and the faith of Henry VIII. Etheridge probably died in 1588. 


@@@@@


doc= 8923


Etherege, Sir George (1636-1691/2), playwright and diplomat, was the second child and eldest son of George Etherege ('bap'. 1607, died 1650) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Powney ('bap'. 1612, died 1699). Etherege's parents were married on 7 October 1634 at Bray, Maidenhead, and the dramatist was probably born in the same parish. Etherege's grandfather, also named George (1576-1658), was a prosperous London vintner who invested in the reorganized Virginian Company (1609) and the Bermuda, or Somers Islands, Company (1615). His name appears in the former's charter as 'George Etheridge, gentleman' (Huseboe, 'Etherege', 3). In 1625 he inherited a half share in the profits of the lease of the manor of Ives, or Ivy, in Maidenhead. He also bought two farms in Kent worth $40 a year in the name of his sons. Some time after 1628 Etherege's grandfather moved from the parish of St Clement Danes, London, to Bray. His son, known as Captain George Etherege, was sent to manage his father's four shares of land amounting to 98 acres in Paget's Tribe, Bermuda, finally returning shortly before his advantageous marriage to Mary, the twenty-two-year-old daughter of Richard Powney, gentleman, of nearby Old Windsor. Both fathers made generous settlements for the young couple. 
In 1636, the same year that his first son was born, Captain George used $300 from his father and $300 from his wife's dowry to purchase a place at court as purveyor to Queen Henrietta Maria. This was 'worth about two hundred pounds per annum before the troubles' (Bracher, 'Introduction', xiv). When the queen fled to France in 1644, he probably followed her since he died there in 1650. What is certain is that his father continued to support Etherege's mother and her seven children at his Maidenhead house until his death. 
The tradition that as a boy Etherege attended Lord William's Grammar School at Thame cannot be verified and is probably mistaken (Bracher, 'Introduction', xiv). Similarly, the story of his travel to France either as a boy or as a young man, though entirely possible, is not supported by evidence. He nevertheless had a fairly good education. He quotes from Horace in his letters, was well read in English literature and fluent in French: the collection of books he took with him to Europe late in life are those of an educated literary man (Beal, 'Etherege's reading'). Etherege was fourteen when his father died, old enough to experience the upheavals of the civil war and its direct consequences on his family. His mother's second marriage two years later to Christopher Newstead (1597-1660x63), a suspected royalist and formerly, if briefly, chaplain-extraordinary to Charles I (1641), together with Captain George's place in the queen's court, point to a family converting itself over two generations from City tradesmen into minor royalist gentry. 
His grandfather's decision in 1654 to apprentice the eighteen-year-old Etherege to the attorney George Gosnold of Beaconsfield and London is further proof of this ambition. Etherege's signature as witness to Gosnold's legal documents, and his admission to Clement's Inn on 19 February 1659 to study law, show him making the normal progression in his profession. 
However, by the time he began study at the inns of court Etherege was financially independent, if in a modest way. A family lawsuit (1656-7) over his inheritance had been resolved in his favour and when his grandfather died early in 1658, he came at the age of twenty-two into the possession of the two farms in Kent worth $40 a year. 
The stages in the transformation of Etherege from young lawyer to dramatist and court wit are not well recorded. Copies of his wittily libertine poem, 'The Imperfect Enjoyment', were circulating between 1660 and 1662 ('Poems', 78). By 1663 he had made the acquaintance of Lord Buckhurst (later earl of Dorset and an important literary patron). In 1662 the nineteen-year-old Buckhurst narrowly escaped a charge of murder and robbery, and in August of the same year he was apparently planning a translation, with four others, of Corneille's 'Pompee'. In 1664 Etherege dedicated his first play, 'The Comical Revenge, or, Love in a Tub', to Buckhurst. There he says that the 'Writing of' the play 'was a means to make me known to your Lordship' ('Works', 1.2). If so, the four familiar verse epistles which the two men wrote to each other in 1663-4, while Buckhurst was out of London, testify to an already well-established relationship. The poems between the twenty-seven-year-old dramatist and the twenty-year-old aristocrat, of which the two by Etherege are known in five manuscript copies, describe their shared pursuit of prostitutes, wine, and pleasure, and are performances on both sides. Signed simply 'Buckhurst' and 'Etherege', a clear proof of Etherege's acceptance in Buckhurst's circle, the verse letters are representative of a group of self-consciously transgressive rakes, transgressive both in vocabulary and sexual openness, for whom masculine camaraderie overrode fine distinctions of rank. But, as in later escapades, Etherege was the older, and probably more experienced, man. 
The mores of this small, outrageous, and socially protected group of young libertines is reflected in the character of Sir Frederick Frollick, the hero of 'The Comical Revenge'. The play was acted by the Duke's Company at the Lincoln's Inn Theatre. It was licensed and registered on 8 July 1664 and published, probably shortly thereafter, by Henry Herringman, who specialized in court literature, from his shop in the Lower Walk of the fashionable New Exchange. The exact date of the premiere is unknown, but Evelyn attended a performance on 27 April 1664, so that it was most likely first acted earlier in April. The cast was a strong one and the production was a 'succes d'estime'. John Downes, its prompter, later recalled, 'The clean and well performance of this Comedy, got the Company more Reputation and Profit than any preceding Comedy; the Company taking in a Months time at it 1000'l'' (Downes, ed. Milhous and Hume, 25). If so, the play must have monopolized the theatre for a month. Its unprecedented success for the Duke's Players came from the realism of the characters and setting but, above all, from the language in the comic plot, which was supported by an aristocratic love story (in rhymed heroic verse). It established Etherege at twenty-eight as a court wit, author, and man about town in a circle which now included Rochester and the duke of Buckingham as well as Buckhurst and Sedley. 
Little is known about Etherege for the next four years. By March 1665 he had addressed a complimentary poem 'To her Excellence the Marchioness of Newcastle after the Reading of her Incomparable Poems' ('Poems', 90), probably in the hope of some form of patronage from her husband. Other of his verses were circulating in manuscript: one poem, 'To a Lady, Asking him how Long he would Love her', was set to music for three voices by Matthew Locke, Charles II's composer-in-ordinary since 1661, and published in the latest version of John Playford's songbook, 'Catch as Catch can' (1667, 194-5). Otherwise, Etherege was no doubt womanizing, gambling, and drinking. 
Etherege's second play, 'She wou'd if she cou'd, a Comedy', was first performed on 6 February 1668, again by the Duke's Company at Lincoln's Inn Fields. Herringman, who registered the play on 24 June, was once more Etherege's publisher. Despite a strong cast and a capacity audience, the first performance was disastrous. The king was in the audience along with much of the court. Pepys reports the scene as the audience remained in the theatre sheltering from the rain: 'and among the rest, here was the duke of Buckingham today openly sat in the pit; and there I found him with my Lord Buckhurst and Sidley and Etherige the poett -- the last of whom I did hear mightily find fault with the Actors, that they were out of humour, and had not their parts perfect, and that Harris [who played the comic role of Sir Joslin Jolly] did do nothing, nor could do so much as sing a Ketch in it, and so was mightily concerned: which all the rest did through the whole pit blame the play as a silly, dull thing, though there was something very roguish and witty; but the design of the play, and end, mighty insipid.' This account is supported by Shadwell's 'Preface' to 'The Humorists' (1671), in which he adds 'that, had it not been for the favour of the 'Court', in all probability it had never got up again; and it suffers for it in great measure, to this very day' (sig. greekLetterpi4a). In the end the play 'took well' (Downes, ed. Milhous and Hume, 29) and held its place in the repertory until the mid-eighteenth century. 
Etherege, who styled himself 'Esq.' on the comedy's title-page, further benefited from royal favour. Early in 1668 he was appointed as one of the forty gentlemen of the privy chamber-in-ordinary, who waited on the king, and was made secretary to the newly appointed (and knighted) ambassador to Turkey, the Levant merchant Sir Daniel Harvey. The Turkish embassy was the country's most prestigious in rank and salary, bringing the secretary $200 a year. Etherege remained in Turkey almost three years. Although he was bored away from London, he was a shrewd and intelligent observer, who fulfilled his diplomatic role effectively, accompanying Sir Daniel to his audience with the grand signor on 30 November 1669 (Fujimura, 476-8). In July 1670 he fell ill, and left Constantinople in spring 1671. By May 1671 he was in Paris, where his wit amused the English company, before returning to London. 
Etherege was by now thirty-five. His habits had not changed. In September 1671 he had an abortive duel 'within the rayles of Covent Garden' with Edmund Ashton (Brett-Smith, 1.xx; Bracher, 'Introduction', xvii). That autumn he also wrote 'A Prologue Spoken at the Opening of the Duke's New Playhouse'. The new theatre at Dorset Gardens was built for Betterton's company and opened on 9 November 1671 with a performance of Dryden's 'Sir Martin Mar-All', originally played at the Lincoln's Inn Theatre in 1667. In the meantime, three of Etherege's poems had been printed in a verse miscellany, 'The New Academy of Complements' (1669), and nine more appeared shortly after in 'A Collection of Poems, Written on Several Occasions' (1672). He is unlikely to have had any hand in their publication, regarding himself as a gentleman writer, but that did not preclude a long friendship with Thomas Betterton (1635-1710), actor-manager of the Duke's Company who had taken important roles in Etherege's plays. By 1676 he appears to have been in the service of Mary of Modena, duchess of York and wife of the future James II. In the 'Dedication' to 'The Man of Mode' Etherege writes, 'I hope the honour I have of belonging to You, will excuse my presumption', claiming that his new comedy is 'the first thing I have produc'd in Your Service' ('Works', 2.183). The first recorded performance, which may also have been the premiere, of Etherege's third and last play, 'The Man of Mode, or, Sir Fopling Flutter', was acted before the king on 11 March 1676 at the Dorset Gardens Theatre. The king's presence at this performance, that of his court at later performances, along with Sir Car Scrope's prologue and song, Dryden's epilogue, and the printed dedication to the duchess of York, all testify to the court-centred ethos of Etherege's comedy. The play was licensed on 3 June and published by Herringman, probably shortly thereafter. 
It was an immediate and lasting success. The strong cast included Betterton as the lead character, Dorimant, with his wife playing Bellinda, while the young Mrs Barry probably took the part of Mrs Loveit. Downes remembered that 'this Comedy being well Cloath'd and well 'Acted', got a great deal of Money' (Downes, ed. Milhous and Hume, 39). Etherege's characters were immediately regarded as portraits of living people. Although Dorimant has been most frequently identified with Rochester, at the time he was also seen as representing the duke of Monmouth (and his affair with Moll Kirke) or alternatively as Buckhurst. Sir Fopling was variously believed to be based on Edward Villiers, 'Beau' Hewitt, or Etherege himself (see J. Spence, 'Observations', ed. J. M. Osborn, 1966, 2.638). Looking back in 1722, John Dennis was to claim that Etherege's play was 'well receiv'd, and believ'd by the people of 'England' to be the most agreeable Comedy for about Half a Century' (Dennis, 2.243). 
In the same summer Etherege was involved in the notorious episode of Rochester's attack on the watch at Epsom. Despite the playwright's efforts as peacemaker, a bystander, Mr Downs, was killed, and Rochester, Captain Bridges, and Etherege had to abscond ('Correspondence of the Family of Hatton... 1601-1704', ed. E. M. Thompson, Camden Society, new ser., 22, 1878, 133-4). Once again Etherege was the older man, forty to Rochester's late twenties. Not long after, in December 1677, Fleetwood Shepherd was 'run with a sword under the eye endeavouring to part Buckley and Etheridge squabbling in a taverne' (Brett-Smith, 1.xxvii-viii). 
At some point between November 1677 and 1679 Etherege acquired a knighthood and was married. It was rumoured that the dramatist bought his knighthood in order to marry a 'rich old widow' (Brett-Smith, 1.xxviii-ix). Mary Arnold, 'nee' Sheppard (died 1691/2), was the daughter of a London merchant, from whom she inherited $100 and half his goods and household stuffs. At some point before 1648 she had married Edmund Arnold, a successful London lawyer, on whose death in 1676 she inherited a further $600 together with $240 in annual rents and profits from the manor of Furthoe in Northamptonshire (Bracher, 'Introduction', xvii). As the first of her two sons, who both died as children, was baptized in August 1648, she was probably in her mid- or late forties when she married the somewhat younger Etherege (Nichol, 419-22). The tone of Etherege's one extant letter to her suggests that there was some coldness on her side (13 March 1687, 'Letters', 100), though the couple went to law together in 1687 to recover $300 which she had lent to a London skinner, John Rowley, while she was still a widow. 
Etherege's passion for gambling is well attested. Looking back on his London life, he wrote to the earl of Sunderland, 'I can assure your Lordship that I find I can live without play, a thing my best Freinds will hardly believe' (3 Dec 1685, 'Letters', 12), and he had always placed women and gambling above the pleasures of wine ('Mr Dryden's Letter to Sir George Etherege', ll. 53-4). Satires of the early 1680s describe him as suffering both from the pox and from an ageing wife, and if the 'Sr Fopling' depicted in Thomas Wood's 'Juvenalis redivivus' (1683) is Sir George, he was not only gambling away ''Grannum's' old Gold' at Locket's while leaving his 'Lowsy Footmen' unpaid, but had to flee the country. His 'Song on Basset' celebrating the new card game introduced to England in 1677, which he had played at the duchess of Mazarine's London house ('Poems', 11-12, 86), gives credence to these charges. 
Etherege nevertheless remained in the duke of York's favour. He is listed as one of the pensioners in his household in September 1682 at $100 a year, and when James became king in 1685, Sir George was swiftly appointed to the post of resident at Ratisbon (Regensburg, Bavaria). He reached Regensburg on 21 November 1685 after a leisurely journey, which included a stay at The Hague. 
His personal, social, and diplomatic life for the next four years is the most fully recorded part of Etherege's life, or that of any other Restoration writer. Not only are many of his personal letters preserved but no fewer than six versions of his letter-books were made (two of which are unlocated). The multiplicity of manuscript texts of his official correspondence reveals the complications of the political world into which Etherege had moved. Etherege's official copy of the letter-books is now at Harvard and has been edited by Bracher (1974). These two volumes were transcribed by Etherege's secretary, Hugo Hughes, with Etherege's autograph corrections. Unknown to his master, Hughes was transcribing parts of Etherege's official letters along with excerpts from his personal correspondence with a view to discrediting his employer's professional integrity with his superiors. Hughes disapproved equally of the resident's rakish lifestyle and his pro-Stuart politics. The resulting manuscript is now in the British Library, and has been transcribed and edited by Rosenfeld (1928). Hughes, along with associates in England and the Dutch representative at the diet, Pierre Valkenier, was part of the whig and protestant plan to replace the Catholic James II with William of Orange. The three other extant versions of the letter-books were further copies for Hughes's allies or were made by them. Peter Beal found a further cache of Etherege's papers left behind at Regensburg when he gave up his post in 1689. These include some 116 letters to Etherege, substantially filling out the printed correspondence and papers (Beal, 'Index', 446-68). They are unpublished, but are described by Beal and throw important light on Etherege's performance as a diplomat. 
Etherege's post as resident at the German imperial diet at Regensburg was the lowest rank in the diplomatic service. His role was purely that of an observer with no official powers to treat with the other envoys there. His duties were to write dispatches to his immediate superior, Lord Middleton, reporting any developments, and to send on any political news he could pick up, while representing his king with appropriate dignity. All of this depended on establishing good relations with the other diplomats at Regensburg. Although Etherege was efficient at reporting to the secretary of state, generally twice a week, the first year of his mission was, to the delight of Hugo Hughes, unfortunate. Even before reaching Regensburg, Etherege had, Hughes reported, lost $250 gambling at The Hague, and went on to caress 'every dirty Drab that came in his way from Holland to this place' ('Letters', 292). Once in Regensburg, Etherege refurbished the lodgings of the previous resident, Edwin Poley, and established his household, but he was once more bored away from London and oppressed by the stiff formality of his fellow diplomats. He wrote, 'London is dull by accident, but Ratisbonne by Nature' (ibid., 153). Hughes reported on the new resident's gambling, his drunken brawls, and the very public affair with a travelling actress from Nuremburg (ibid., 299-303) which scandalized the local community and only ended when Etherege ran out of money. According to Hughes, Etherege had destroyed his credibility as a diplomat. 
However, in spring 1687 Etherege found that his reputation in Paris, Vienna, and London was being threatened by letters written by the count of Windischgratz, the emperor's co-commissioner. Thereafter he mended fences and took his duties increasingly seriously. Etherege's diplomatic post, traditionally regarded as an unimportant one, was certainly taken seriously in England. Sir Gabriel Sylvius told him as early as 11 January 1686, 'You are got into a station, where there is more to be done, & more to bee seen than in all Europe besides' (Beal, 'Index', 447). This analysis cannot have applied to the diet itself, which had been meeting in Regensburg since 1663, and which, as Etherege complained, never did anything. Rather, its importance lay in the opportunity it gave for gathering intelligence. The eagerness with which his dispatches were awaited in London by July 1688 is indicative of his professional success in this respect. 
Apart from his diplomatic duties, Etherege employed musicians, a fencing-master and a dancing-master, played tennis, and went hunting. He also had a library of at least sixty-four titles and over ninety volumes, including Dryden's 'The Hind and the Panther' (1687), while letters from England kept him up with the news. Etherege was to claim that his creative imagination had deserted him, but the two familiar verse letters he wrote to Lord Middleton at some time between January and April 1686 ('Poems', 115) as supplements to his official dispatches, show his abilities in this male verse genre to be undiminished. They, as much as Dryden's verse letter in response, demonstrate his intelligent playfulness, but at the same time express the nostalgia for his past in London which appears in his letter to John Cooke, written on 28 November 1687: 'You can do no less than pitty me who have been forc'd from the shoar of delightfull Thames to be confin'd to live on the banks of the unwholesome Danube where we have been this moneth choak'd with fogs, and cannot now set a foot out of doors, without being up to the knee in snow. ('Letterbook', 293)' The bawdy verse letters to Middleton, his friend and immediate superior, like his similar exchanges with Buckhurst in the early 1660s, say much about the way in which Etherege's literary gifts helped his career at key stages. And this applied as much to the former duke of York. In December 1685 the continuing popularity at court of 'The Man of Mode' led James II to hope Etherege would write another comedy, an expectation which had turned into a request by 5 March 1686, communicated to him by Lord Middleton: 'Since you made no answer to what the King had commanded me to acquaint you with, I mean your writing a play, I should not have troubled you with it, if his Majesty had not again renewd his commands in that matter, so that I must tell you, he does seriously expect it from you. (Beal, 'Index', 447)' But Etherege had given up writing plays. As he told Buckhurst, now earl of Dorset, on 27 February 1687, he had 'lost for want of exercise the use of fancy imagination' ('Letterbook', 239). 
But if he would not write a comedy for his king, Etherege remained deeply loyal to the Stuart cause against his better interests. At considerable expense he organized elaborate celebrations for the birth of the prince of Wales on 6 July 1688. Festivities began with a 'Te Deum' at the Scottish Benedictine monastery on Sunday 25 July, followed by a dinner for the ministers at the diet in Etherege's second residence at the Wildische Haus (now 3/4 Arnulfplatz), and continued for another two days ('Letters', 214-16, 279-85; Beal, 'Index', 446). But his dispatches to England were desperately urging Middleton and Sunderland to warn the king of the seriousness of the Williamite plans to force him to give up the throne in favour of a protestant succession. By now, however, it was too late, and James II fled England on 23 December 1688. On 18 January 1689 Etherege learned that James had arrived in Paris. Shortly after, he left Regensburg to join the Stuart court in exile just as his father before him had done, and reached Paris by 20 February. It may be that he could not have returned to London because of debts. Although there is no record of his membership of James's court, Abbot Fleming was put in charge of his affairs in Regensburg by James on 20 July 1689. There were rumours in February 1691 that he had died in Paris, but his nephew, George, later testified that he had died there 'on or about' 10 May 1692 without issue (Bracher, 'Introduction', xxiii). He probably died a Catholic: his friend Abbot Placidus Fleming added against Etherege's name in the monastery's syllabus of benefactors 'Obiit Parisiis factus Catholicus' (ibid.), though there is no further evidence of Etherege's surprising conversion. 
No portrait of Etherege is known. The adjectives with which Etherege was characterized by his contemporaries, 'easy' and 'gentle', seem to have described not only his literary style but also his social behaviour. Writing some sixty years later, William Oldys cited the account of Etherege given him by the veteran actor John Bowman ('c'.1651-1739), who had been a member of the Duke's Company: 'Sir George was, in his person, a fair, slender, genteel man; but spoiled his countenance with drinking and other habits of intemperance; and in his deportment, very affable and courteous, of a sprightly and generous temper; which with his free, lively, and natural vein of writing, acquired him the general character of 'Gentle George' and 'Easy Etherege'. ('Biographia Britannica', 3.844)' This fits well enough with the man as he appears in his letters and his early association with Buckhurst and Sedley. However, one story, again one which was reported at second hand after his death, suggests that his gentility depended heavily on a strong sense of his own class and gender. Birch reported that he had been told by Otway of a dispute at Locket's when 'some Company there, who were highly incensed at some ill manage of their Entertainment or attendance, were all in a violent Passion with the waiters, so that Mrs Locket came up; when Sr Geo. told her they were so provoked that he could find it in his Heart to pull the Nosegay out of her Bosom and throw the flowers in her Face, wch turned all their anger to a Jest. (Brett-Smith, 7.xxxi n. 3)' One feature of Etherege's character agreed on by himself, his friends, and his enemies, was his laziness. The eight-year gap between his second and third comedies, despite his having 'more fancy, sense, judgement and wit' than any of his contemporaries, was attributed by the author of 'A Session of the Poets' (1676) to his 'crying sin idleness' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 1.353). Years later Etherege was provoked by Dryden's verse letter to him in Regensburg to assert his own pre-eminence in laziness. 'If you persist in your claim to Laziness, you will be thought as affected in it as Montaigne is, when he complaines of want of memory', he wrote on 20 March 1687, continuing 'I (whose every action of my life is as a witness of my Idleness) little thought that you... durst have set up to be my Rival' ('Letters', 102-3). Yet judging by the regularity of his diplomatic correspondence from Regensburg he was less lazy than content to place a premium on pleasure, whether in women, gaming, or male friendship, if these had to be set against the demands of business. Dryden was indeed an immensely hard-working and ambitious poet and author: for Etherege, writing, whether of letters, verse, or plays, was a way to preferment and social recognition. Only in that sense was he a gentleman who wrote with ease. Failure to raise, and to maintain, the interest of his superiors in rank and position through his writing would have foreclosed the success of his diplomatic career. 
The importance of Etherege's role at Regensburg has been traditionally underrated. Yet even though his correspondence proves the seriousness with which he undertook the actual work required of him, his letters have real value if read as literature. The virtues of his letters, official and unofficial, are those of clarity, liveliness, and immediacy, based on shrewd (and amused) observation of Regensburg society, all expressed through a style which approximates to a colloquial spoken language. Dryden, himself a master of prose, was not flattering Etherege when he said 'I will never enter the lists in Prose with the undoubted best author of it which our nation has produced' ('Letters', 276). 
It is precisely that ability to catch vernacular speech in a variety of linguistic registers, from tradesmen and servants to young men and women about town (as well as their unfashionable elders), which at once distinguished his 'talking plays' from his immediately contemporary rivals, and pointed the way for subsequent writers of Restoration comedy. Yet for all the early objections that his plays lacked 'plot' his three plays catch the moment of a rebellious younger generation opposed to relationships between the sexes based merely on interest. At the same time, in particular 'The Man of Mode', they give a sceptical analysis of the stresses between libertinage, love, sexuality, and money. His final commitment to the exiled James II, and his probable last-minute conversion to Catholicism, suggest that in the final analysis Etherege may have been as much an idealist as a cynic. 


@@@@@


doc= 8924


Etheridge, John Wesley (1804-1866), Wesleyan Methodist minister and Semitic scholar, was born at Youngwoods, a farmhouse near Newport, Isle of Wight, on 24 February 1804. His father was a Methodist local preacher and had been urged by Wesley to enter the itinerant ministry, but refused. His mother was Alley Gray, daughter of a naval officer. As a youth Etheridge was thoughtful and studious. He was privately educated and began to preach in 1826. Towards the end of 1827 the president of the conference sent him to Hull to assist Dr Joseph Beaumont, whose health had broken down. At the Bristol conference in August 1831 Etheridge was received into full connexion, being then second minister in the Brighton circuit. During that year he married Eliza Middleton. They had a daughter who, under her father's teaching, became a remarkable Hebrew scholar and linguist. He took delight in the sacred literature and languages of the East, and most of his works related to these subjects. During several years of indifferent health he lived in Devon, Guernsey, and then France, where he availed himself of the libraries for carrying on his favourite studies, and helped in the missions at Paris and Boulogne. He wrote extensively on the history and writings of the Syriac churches, revealing an impressive knowledge of the Jewish, biblical, and rabbinic literature of the early Christian era. The University of Heidelberg in 1847 conferred upon him the degree of PhD in recognition of his exact scholarship and contributions to learning. 
Etheridge resumed circuit work on his recovery to health in 1846 and laboured successfully in Bristol, Leeds, and London. From 1853 he served in the Cornwall district at Penzance, Truro, Falmouth, St Austell, and Camborne. During this period he completed official biographies of two key figures in Methodism, Adam Clarke (1858) and Thomas Coke (1860). Etheridge died at Camborne on 24 May 1866, leaving an unpublished biography of John Fletcher in manuscript form. 


@@@@@


doc= 8925


Etty, William (1787-1849), painter, was born at 20 Feasegate, York, on 10 March 1787, the seventh child of Matthew Etty (1743-1818) and Esther, 'nee' Calverley (1754-1829). His father was a baker and miller; Esther Etty was of gentle birth and a forceful character. Etty recalls in his 'Autobiography' (published in the 'Art Journal', January 1849), that the 'first panels on which I drew were the boards of my father's shop floor' (Etty, 13), and he graduated from white chalk to watercolour and crudely made oil paints. Alexander Gilchrist, Etty's first biographer, records that his uncle William showed artistic talent, but an austere Wesleyan Methodist upbringing was not very conducive to Etty's development as an artist (Gilchrist, 1.21-2). 
After a rudimentary schooling Etty had to serve a seven-year apprenticeship to a printer at Hull from October 1798 to 1805. He worked for three weeks as a journeyman printer, before his prosperous uncle William (1740-1809), a manufacturer of gold lace, invited him to his house at 3 Lombard Street, London, in November 1805. Etty's elder brother Walter (1774-1850), who supported him financially for many years, became a partner in the gold lace firm of Bodley, Etty, and Bodley in 1809. Etty had to overcome the twin disadvantages of a deficient education and a late start in his profession; he spent a year drawing from prints and from nature, besides copying from antique casts in J. B. Gianelli's cast shop, near Smithfield, in preparation for the Royal Academy Schools, where he was enrolled in January 1807. His generous uncle paid 100 guineas' premium in July 1807 to enable Etty to study for a year with Sir Thomas Lawrence. He learned to imitate something of Lawrence's style and later earned money by making copies for him. 
More immediately important to Etty were John Opie's lectures on painting to the Royal Academy students (published in 1809), that fired Etty's ambition to become a history painter. Opie extolled the work of Titian and Rubens, two artists whose techniques greatly differed, but by whom Etty was inspired to paint the female nude in succulent textures and full-blooded colour, an innovation that later established his reputation and, less agreeably, invited censure from contemporary critics. Henry Fuseli, keeper of the Royal Academy Schools, widened Etty's intellectual horizons; and John Flaxman, appointed professor of sculpture in 1810, both by his lectures and by the example of his line engravings of antique subjects provided him with an iconographic vocabulary. Etty's lifelong devotion to the Royal Academy life school provoked comment from his fellow Academicians. On his uncle William's death in May 1809, Etty received a handsome legacy and moved into a succession of lodgings, until, in 1824, he settled at 14 Buckingham Street, Strand, London. He lived there until his retirement in June 1848 when he moved to a house in Coney Street, York, which he had bought for $1100 two years before. 
Etty advanced slowly in comparison with successful near-contemporaries such as David Wilkie, and between 1808 and 1811 strove to improve his anatomical knowledge by studying anatomical atlases and prints of antique sculpture. In 1811 he sold, for 25 guineas, a 'Sappho', from the British Institution exhibition, and showed 'Telemachus Rescues Antiope from the Fury of the Wild Boar' at the Royal Academy. Thereafter, he became a regular contributor to the academy summer exhibitions. Some family portraits of 1811 apart, none of his early exhibited works has survived, but seven sketchbooks covering the period 1810-35 in York City Art Gallery provide evidence of his powers of draughtsmanship, of his artistic development, and of which old masters interested him on his travels. 'Manlius Hurled from the Rock' (1818; Birmingham Art Gallery), exhibited at the British Institution in 1819, is the first of his surviving early heroic works. A somewhat drily painted academy male nude is seen back view, plunging through space to its doom; influenced by antique sculpture and Michelangelo, it shows Etty's ambitious approach to history painting. Far more appealing are two highly competent large half-length portraits, 'The Rev. Robert Bolton' and 'Mrs Robert Bolton and her Children', painted in 1818 (New York Historical Society, New York). Although grandly conceived, with classically inspired poses, they have an unforced naturalism that Etty would have learned from Lawrence, while avoiding his master's glittering finish. The portrait 'Miss Arabella Mary Jay' (1818; National Gallery, London) is more obviously in the Lawrence style. 
Etty travelled to France in early January 1815, arriving at Calais, from where he wrote to his brother Walter; this letter is the only evidence of the visit. Whether he reached Paris or not is unknown; in September 1816 he embarked for Italy, travelling to Paris and Dijon 'en route' for Switzerland and Florence. Alone, ill, unrequited in love, and homesick as he was, his first Italian expedition was a failure, and he returned to Paris in late October, staying a month. He entered the neo-classicist painter Jean-Baptiste Regnault's studio briefly, besides studying at the Academie des Beaux-Arts. Etty began collecting prints assiduously; these were later to be an iconographic treasure trove. 
Two paintings sent to the Royal Academy exhibition of 1820 won Etty some critical attention: 'The Coral Finder: Venus and her Youthful Satellites Arriving at the Isle of Paphos' and 'Drunken Barnaby' (both priv. colls.); the latter was an uncharacteristic essay in the domestic genre popularized by William Mulready and Wilkie. 'The Coral Finder' is the first of those serene mythological compositions that Etty made so peculiarly his own, and which surprised both the public and his fellow artists by their freshness and apparent originality. He sold it for $30 to a pianoforte maker, and won a commission from Sir Francis Freeling, secretary to the Post Office. This was for 'Cleopatra's Arrival in Cilicia' (exh. RA, 1821; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), a subject taken from Plutarch's 'Life of Antony' and Shakespeare's 'Antony and Cleopatra'. The palette is still somewhat gaudy and the scale of the boat to its occupants absurdly idiosyncratic; although both the 'Coral Finder' and the 'Cleopatra' are indebted to Titian, Etty was principally inspired by the crowded allegorical compositions of Regnault and the eclecticism practised by contemporary academic painters. There are echoes of Rubens's 'The Landing of Marie de Medicis' (Louvre, Paris), in the figures of the Triton and sea-nymphs, which Etty had admired in 1816. The 'Cleopatra', praised by reviewers, also provoked the first of those charges of indecency that were to persist until the late 1830s. The 'Times' critic wrote: 'we take this opportunity of advising Mr Etty, who got some reputation for painting 'Cleopatra's Galley', not to be seduced into a style which can gratify only the most vicious taste. Naked figures, when painted with the purity of Raphael, may be endured: but nakedness without purity is offensive and indecent, and in Mr Etty's canvass is mere dirty flesh. ('The Times', 19 Jan 1822)' The 'canvass' referred to was a preliminary study for 'Youth on the Prow and Pleasure at the Helm' (1832; Tate collection), exhibited at the British Institution. Clearly, Etty had struck a new note, but the literal directness with which he painted the female nude, a quality admired by Eugene Delacroix, annoyed his critics. He made no attempt to idealize or 'etherealize' the female form, and fell foul of the emerging cult of respectability, led by the sabbatarian evangelicals of the Clapham Sect. 
Accompanied by a fellow student, Richard Evans, Etty set off in June 1822 on his grand tour, only returning to England in early January 1824. He benefited greatly from his experiences, studying intensively and travelling as far as Naples, where he spent a month, with prolonged stays in Rome and, above all, in Venice, which became a second home and where he remained for almost nine months: 'dear Venice -- Venezia, cara Venezia! thy pictured glories haunt my fancy now! Venice, the birthplace and cradle of colour, the hope and glory of my professional life' (Etty, 38). He was welcomed by the British vice-consul and by the artists of the Accademia, who nicknamed him Il Diavolo for the speed with which he painted nude studies, and they elected Lawrence and him honorary academicians. Extensive correspondence with his brother Walter and with Lawrence enables us to follow Etty's peregrinations closely and gauge what most interested him. He copied industriously, making many 'memorials' of paintings by Titian, Tintoretto, and Veronese, as well as a full-size copy of Titian's 'Venus of Urbino' (Royal Academy of Scotland, Edinburgh) in the Uffizi, Florence, and of Titian's 'Sacred and Profane Love' in the Borghese, Rome. Back in Paris by November 1823, he stayed on into the new year to paint copies in the Louvre after Rubens's 'water nymphs' (from the 'Landing of Marie de Medicis'), Veronese's 'Marriage of Cana', and Poussin's 'Le deluge: l'hiver'. These were artists whom Delacroix admired at about the same time, and for a brief moment Etty and Delacroix pursued similar interests; Delacroix met Etty in London in 1825, but there is no evidence of any close professional friendship. 
Etty's foreign tour had greatly increased his self-confidence and skill; he simplified his compositions, and 'Pandora Crowned by the Seasons' (City Art Gallery, Leeds), shown at the 1824 Royal Academy exhibition, reflects this greater maturity. The flattened diamond-shaped grouping of the main figures around Pandora became, with variations, a favourite formula throughout the rest of his career. The paint handling is now far more subtle, the palette more harmonious, and the general tonality cooler. Lawrence bought the painting for 300 guineas, a welcome accolade. Still more welcome was his election as an associate of the Royal Academy on 1 November 1824. In 1818 Etty had hired an assistant, George Henry Franklin, who served him for thirty years until they became estranged. Some of the poorer imitations of Etty's life studies may be Franklin's work. Notwithstanding his uncle's legacy, Etty was still heavily dependent on his brother Walter's financial help; his move to larger quarters in Buckingham Street in June 1824 caused him considerable anxiety. A niece, Elizabeth, kept house for him from about 1819 to his death. As late as May 1831, Etty owed Walter $804, Walter having paid out $3937 on Etty's behalf and received $3133 (Gilchrist, 1.358-9); by 1841, however, all outstanding debts had been paid, and Etty had $300 invested in 3 per cent bank stock. By the end of November 1845 he had $8500 so invested, but at his death this had doubled to $17,000 in funds. This dramatic turnaround was largely due to the emerging class of self-made men such as the Birmingham pen-nib manufacturer Joseph Gillott, and Daniel Grant, a Manchester cotton magnate, who patronized Etty, and to the dealers who promoted his work. 
The years 1825-40 undoubtedly form Etty's 'heroic' period, to which belong most of the 'grandes machines', beginning with 'The Combat: Woman Pleading for the Vanquished -- an Ideal Group' (NG Scot.), shown at the Royal Academy in 1825. This illustrates an abstract virtue, Mercy, and is shorn of any underlying historical or mythological story. Although the figures recall combat scenes in the metopes of the Elgin marbles, there is a pervasive tempestuous romanticism. More classically inspired was the large 'Judgment of Paris' (Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), commissioned by Lord Darnley for $500, and shown at the Royal Academy in 1826. Etty reinvigorated a hackneyed subject, and 'The Times' praised him for his 'brilliant and harmonious colouring, combined with graceful grouping and careful execution, such as no artist of the present day can equal' (29 April 1826). The general composition derives from a Flaxman engraving of the subject, from Rubens, and, ultimately, from a Marcantonio Raimondi engraving after a lost 'Judgment' by Raphael. The 'Judith and Holofernes', shown at the Royal Academy in 1827, was the first of a trilogy, based on the 'Apocrypha' story, illustrating the theme of patriotism. The Royal Scottish Academy, having bought the 'Judith', in 1829 commissioned Etty to paint two pendants, which were exhibited in 1830 and 1831; all three pictures are now in the National Gallery of Scotland. Some of the oil sketches for the central panel have a vigour and brilliance quite unlike any other contemporary English artist's work. The fluent brushstrokes, glazing of half-tones, and brilliant colour appear again in his 'Self-Portrait' (Manchester City Galleries) of 1825, showing him in classical cameo-like profile, but infused with a brooding introspection that places it with similar works of the French Romantic school. 
Etty's portraits, usually of friends and relatives, are among his most attractive creations, being notable for a direct, sympathetic insight into character, especially so for the male sitters; while in his female portraits he captures equally well the charm and freshness of youth or matronly gravitas. He began to paint still lifes as self-sufficient subjects in September 1839; they have the same delightful fluency, and are unusual in English art of the time. Early in his career he had thought of becoming a landscape painter, and the several landscapes he painted in the 1840s have an atmospheric vividness that makes one regret he did not paint more of them. 
Etty became a Royal Academician in February 1828, and presented his diploma work, 'Sleeping Nymph and Satyrs' (Royal Academy), that October. A large work (51 in. x 701/2 in.), it has a simple monumentality and mingles Venetian colour with a Poussinesque composition. The nymph is displayed in a twisting pose and the two satyrs struggle between themselves to reveal her, thus providing a dynamic tension which Roger Fry found disturbing. Etty, in Paris during the 1830 July revolution, made five copies in the Louvre, including one of Giorgione's 'Fete champetre' (priv. coll.), and another of Ruisdael's 'Fresh Breeze: Sea Coast'. Perhaps as a respite from his heroic compositions, he began to paint, in 1831, a new type of subject matter, 'Window in Venice during a Festa' (Tate collection). This shows a group of three elegantly dressed young women, two of whom lean out over a vine-clad balcony observing the festive crowd hidden from view. It is the secular equivalent of the Venetian 'sacra conversazione', and was bought by an army contractor, Robert Vernon, for $120. Vernon bequeathed 160 paintings, mostly by contemporary English artists, including eleven Ettys, to the National Gallery, London, in 1847. 
Etty's later religious subjects included, among others, the figures of Moses and Aaron for the church of St Edmund, King and Martyr, London, in 1833, and two versions of the Prodigal Son, in 1836 and 1841; they culminated in an ambitious trilogy devoted to the life and martyrdom of Joan of Arc (exh. RA, 1847), on which he spent much time and effort, even travelling in 1843 to Rouen, Paris, and Orleans to gather impressions of places connected with St Joan. The engraver C. W. Wass and the dealer Richard Colls jointly bought all three for 2500 guineas as a speculation. Wass engraved them, but the paintings were split up, and only the left and central panels seem to have survived: the former, 'Joan of Arc, on Finding the Sword', in a private collection, and the latter, 'Joan of Arc Making her Sortie', in a museum at Orleans. They measure 6 feet 6 inches by 9 feet 9 inches and 15 feet by 9 feet 9 inches respectively, and do not add much lustre to Etty's reputation. By the 1830s Etty had abandoned his Methodist roots, becoming increasingly attached to high Anglicanism, and at times wistfully recalling the glories of the 'old faith'. As late as November 1847, he sought Sir Charles Eastlake's advice on the merits of Roman Catholicism, but unlike A. W. N. Pugin, whom he knew and admired, he did not become a convert. He campaigned vigorously in defence of York Minster and the preservation of the British medieval heritage, against the vandalisms of modern 'restorers'. He served on the council of the South Kensington School of Design and championed the establishment of such a school at York, which opened in 1842. 
By the late 1830s, Etty's work began to show signs of unevenness and his brushwork became looser; physically, the artist increasingly suffered from rheumatism and asthma. He had resigned himself to bachelorhood. Short in stature, his face scarred by smallpox, with sandy hair and a 'shrill and feeble tone of voice' (so noted the actor, William Macready, in his diary, in 1822), Etty, although much liked by many friends, was probably too easily rebuffed (and impecunious) to find a wife (F. Pollock, ed., 'Macready's Reminiscences, and Selections from his Diaries and Letters', 1875, 1.xvi, p. 266). Perhaps his devotion to the female nude was a form of sublimation. Yet he could still produce large mythological works, such as 'The Sirens and Ulysses' (exh. RA, 1837; Manchester City Galleries), almost 10 by 15 feet, and 'Pluto Carrying off Proserpine' (priv. coll.) shown at the Royal Academy in 1839, that again caused some critics to complain of indecency, charges that he repudiated. He was invited by the prince consort in 1843 to submit a design for one of eight lunettes in a new summer pavilion in the gardens of Buckingham Palace, to illustrate Milton's 'Masque of Comus'. He could not master the unfamiliar medium of fresco, and eventually painted a version in oils: 'Circe' (Art Gallery of Western Australia, Perth), and a new subject, 'Hesperus' (Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), shown at the Royal Academy in 1844. In 1840 and 1842, he visited the Low Countries and lower Rhineland to see altarpieces by Rubens. 
At a private view on 9 June 1849, Etty had the satisfaction of seeing 133 of his paintings, spanning 1820-48, exhibited in London at the Society of Arts, Adelphi; the exhibition ran for three months, and was warmly praised by fellow artists, but received mixed reviews. Etty had a genuine gift for beautifully fresh brushwork and a spontaneity of expression that was justly admired; but he was wedded to the grand history piece as his chosen vehicle to paint 'some great moral on the heart' (Etty, 40). He was neither the Ingres nor the Delacroix of the British school; his considerable native talent was too often constrained by an outmoded classicism. His reputation was not well served by pressure from dealers to produce small, easily saleable pictures, in his later years. A man of strong feelings and simple piety, he succumbed to an unusually fierce attack of asthma on 3 November; ten days later, speaking serenely of death's mystery -- 'wonderful, wonderful, this death' -- he died at his home in Coney Street, York, in the evening of 13 November 1849. He was buried, with full public honours, in St Olave's churchyard, York, on 23 November. In May 1850, the contents of his studio were sold at Christies over seven days for $5186 16's'. 6died Substantial holdings of Etty's paintings are in the Tate collection and York City Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 8926


Eugenius I (d. c.360), reported to have been killed in a battle between Scots and Picts in which the latter owed their victory to Roman allies, 


@@@@@


doc= 8927


Eugenius II (fl. 419-452), who appears as a model ruler in the pages of Buchanan, and 


@@@@@


doc= 8928


Eugenius III (fl. 535-558), a notable warrior against the Saxons and Picts, do not occur in authentic king-lists and are first recorded only in Fordun's fourteenth-century compilations. There is no reason to suppose that Fordun himself created them, but the stages by which they came to enjoy the standing of historical figures cannot be traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 8929


Eochaid Buide (d. c.629), was one of the younger ones (his epithet means 'yellow') ['see also 'Eugenius I-VIII (act. c.350-763)]. It was not usual for a king to be followed immediately by his son, and perhaps that was why it was told of Eochaid that when he was a child Columba prophesied that he would be king after Aedan. 
The entry of Eochaid's death ('c'.629) in the annals of Ulster reads: 'Death of Eochaid Buide, king of the Picts, son of Aedan. So I have found in the 'Book of Cuanu'' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.151). It is not clear how much of the entry came from Cuanu's book (a version of the annals, of uncertain date, known only from the Ulster annalist's quotations from it, of which this is the last). Eochaid's kingship 'of the Picts' has not been satisfactorily explained. 
Eochaid Buide's death was followed by the brief reign of 


@@@@@


doc= 8930


Eochaid (d. 697), the son of Domangart, son of Domnall Brecc. The lists give Eochaid a strange epithet, Rianamhail and the like. In one text (list E) it was understood to mean 'crooked nosed' and translated into Latin as 'habens curvum nasum'. He was killed in 697, the year in which Ferchar Fota died. He left at least one son, another Eochaid, who does not appear in the annals until 726, and may have been very young when his father was killed. 



@@@@@


doc= 8931


Eugenius VI (fl. 687-697) and 


@@@@@


doc= 8932


Eugenius VII (fl. 698-715) seemingly represent a confused duplication of a king named Ewen or Eogan, the son of Ferchar Fota ['see under 'Dal Riata, kings of (act. c.500-c.850)], who reigned for either thirteen or sixteen years after the death of his father. Ferchar, who died in 697, was apparently ruler of Lorne rather than of Dal Riata, and this was probably also true of his descendants, although they certainly aspired to a wider dominion. They appear as kings only in the Latin lists. Among them was another Ewen or Eogan ['see under 'Dal Riata, kings of (act. c.500-c.850)], the son of Muredach ['see under 'Dal Riata, kings of (act. c.500-c.850)], who probably lies behind Eugenius VIII ('fl'. 761-763), though it is impossible to be certain when he ruled -- his father lost his kingship in 736, and his successor, Aed (or Aed) Find, may have begun to rule in 748. His kingship too was presumably confined to Lorne. 


@@@@@


doc= 8933


Ewen (d. 763), Muredach's son; perhaps a genuine king of Lorne, he was styled Eugenius VIII by Fordun, who gives 763 as the year of his death. In 750 there is a (probably late) entry in the annals of Ulster which has been variously translated: 'Ebbing of the sovereignty of [Oengus]' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.240) or 'End of the reign of [Oengus]' ('Ann. Ulster', 204-5). It is uncertain how far it relates to the Dal Riata. Welsh sources record a heavy defeat of Picts by Britons in the same year. 
Aed was almost certainly a son of the King Eochaid who died in 733. Some texts of the pedigree are corrupt, but the one in the Poppleton manuscript can be accepted as true: 'Aed Find son of Eochaid son of Echu son of Domangart son of Domnall Brecc' (Anderson, 'Kings and Kingship', 189). He may have been very young when his father died. In 768 there was a battle in Fortriu 'between Aed and Cinaed', that is, Aed Find and Ciniod, son of Uuredech (Feradach), king of Picts. Presumably Aed had invaded Fortriu. He was remembered, however, for more than military success. He had an epithet (in the older version of the Irish synchronisms) Airectech, from 'airecht', 'a public assembly'. Nearly a century after his death a body of law, adopted by an assembly of Scots for a united Pictish-Scottish kingdom, was named after him: 'laws of Aed son of Eochaid'. 
Aed was succeeded in 778 by his brother Fergus who died in 781. Each brother is 'king of Dal Riata' in the annals. Defects in the sources over the next sixty years make it difficult to establish the sequence of kings with certainty. The following list, especially the dates, should be treated with caution (for further details 'see' Picts, kings of the). 

'r'. 781- 'c'.805, Domnall. He is not mentioned in the annals. The later synchronisms call him 'Constantine's son', which is probably an editorial fiction. 

'r'. 805-7, Conall, son of Tadg. King of Picts until 789, when he was routed by Constantine, son of Fergus, a Pictish rival, he was king of Dal Riata from 805. He was killed in 807 by Conall, son of Aedan, in Kintyre. 

'r'. 807-11, Conall, son of Aedan. He killed Conall, son of Tadg, in 807. His death does not occur in the annals. 

'r'. 811-20, Constantine (or Causantin) ['see under 'Picts, kings of the], son of Fergus (who was son of Eochaid and brother of Aed Find). King of Picts from 789 when he routed Conall, son of Tadg, and king of Dal Riata also from 811, he died in 820, a 'king of Fortriu'. 

'r'. 820-832 or 834, Oengus ['see under 'Picts, kings of the], also a son of Fergus and also styled 'king of Fortriu'. He died in 834, but may have abdicated in 832. 

'r'. 832?-836, Aed, son of Boanta. He was killed in 839, supporting Eoganan, son of Oengus, in battle against 'pagans' (perhaps Danes). 

'r'. 836-9, Eoganan, son of Oengus, king of Picts ['see under 'Picts, kings of the]. He died in 839 with many men of Fortriu, in the conflict with the 'pagans'. 
In addition Donncorci (Brown Oats). He died in 791 as 'king of Dal Riata', but is otherwise unexplained. 
Constantine was said to have built the church of Dunkeld, and Oengus to have built the church of Kilrymont (St Andrews). Constantine and Eoganan, and perhaps Oengus also, are commemorated in a Northumbrian 'Liber vitae'. 
Constantine, his brother Oengus, and his nephew Eoganan are the first certainly to have held both kingships simultaneously. They may have owed their Pictish kingships to dynastic intermarriages. After Eoganan's death in 839 the two kingships apparently separated again. His successor as king of the Dal Riata was his possible cousin 


@@@@@


doc= 8934


Eusden, Laurence (1688-1730), poet, was baptized on 6 September 1688, at Spofforth, Yorkshire, where his father, Laurence Eusden (died 1699), was rector. He went to St Peter's School, York, and was admitted as pensioner (aged sixteen) at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 24 March 1705. He graduated BA in 1708, MA in 1712. On 2 April 1706 he became a scholar of his college, was admitted as a minor fellow on 2 October 1711, and advanced to a full fellowship on 2 July 1712. He became third sublector on 2 October 1712, and a year later was admitted as second sublector. He drew no stipend after 1720, but continued at least occasionally in residence until 1725. 
Eusden, a whig, was not among the Trinity fellows hostile to the master, Richard Bentley; he wrote a congratulatory poem to Bentley on the refurbishment of the college chapel. He also wrote sensuous love poetry, including translations of Claudian and Musaeus, and a faintly risque satire of women, 'Verses at the Last Publick Commencement in Cambridge' (1714). He was one of the largest contributors to a collection of English versions of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' by Dryden, Garth, and others (1717). 
Meanwhile Eusden's verse compliments to Addison, Lord Halifax, and the duke of Newcastle brought him the patronage of highly placed whigs. Listed by Steele among 'Spectator' and 'Guardian' authors, Eusden was credited (by John Nichols) with letters in 'Spectator' numbers 54, 78, and 87 (1711), and 'Guardian' numbers 95 and 124 (1713). Eusden certainly contributed translations from Claudian in 'The Guardian' (127 and 164) which were reprinted with ten other poems by him in Steele's 'Miscellanies' (1714). He was one of seven poets granted the honour of having their commendatory verses on Addison's 'Cato' prefixed to the seventh edition of the play (1713). His lines 'To a Lady that Wept at Hearing Cato Read' in Steele's 'Miscellanies' (1714) were promptly parodied by Pope as 'On a Lady who P -- St at the Tragedy of Cato'. 
In 1717 Eusden published a flattering epithalamium on the duke of Newcastle's marriage to Lady Henrietta Godolphin. His reward came when Nicholas Rowe died a year later and Newcastle, as lord chamberlain, made Eusden poet laureate. Over the next ten years he produced a steady drip of adulatory new year odes, birthday odes, and other conventional laureate verse addressed to members of the royal family, alongside complimentary verse addressed to actual or potential aristocratic patrons. 
Eusden was ridiculed by the duke of Buckingham in 'The election of a poet laureate' ('Works', 1723); Thomas Cooke wrote of him in 'The Battle of the Poets' (1725) as 'a laurel'd Bard... Who has by few been read, by fewer prais'd'; and Swift satirized his laureate verse in 'Directions for a Birth-Day Song' (1729, first printed 1765). Pope joined the attack in 'Peri Bathous' (A. Pope and J. Swift, 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse', 1728), 'Dunciad' (1728), and 'Dunciad variorum' (1729), and continued it, with further variations, in the 'Epistle to Arbuthnot', 'Imitations of Horace: Ep.II.i', and 'Dunciad' (1743), well after his target's death. Pope accuses Eusden repeatedly and equally of dullness and drunkenness. The second charge is reiterated in Richard Savage's preface to his 'An Author to be Lett' (1729), but it is not known whether the accusation is well grounded or is the common taunt that a poet craves the laureateship solely for the perquisite of sack. Thomas Gray's well-known punning remark in a letter to William Mason (19 December 1757) that 'Eusden was a person of great hopes in his youth, though at last he turned out a drunken parson' might be based on Pope's satire, rather than independent testimony. 
Eusden never replied to the many attacks upon his character and poetry. Whatever his character, his poetry has little merit. He was ordained deacon (Lincoln diocese) on 20 September 1724, and priest on 25 March 1729. He was chaplain to Richard Verney, Lord Willoughby de Broke, from 1725 to 1730, when he became rector of Coningsby, Lincolnshire, a living he obtained through the favour of a Mr Cotesworth. Eusden died at Coningsby on 27 September 1730, and was buried there three days later. He left behind him in manuscript a translation of the works of Tasso with a life of that poet. The sale catalogue of his library was dated 1763. His portrait, painted in the 1720s by Saunders (1682- 'c'.1735) of Cambridge, had not been traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 8935


Eustace (d. 1215), administrator and bishop of Ely, is likely to have been of Norman or French origin. A student at the schools of Paris, alongside Gerald of Wales, who became a lifelong friend, he seems to have been a 'consistent benefactor' to the abbey of St Victor, while Roger of Wendover's description of him as 'a man of learning both divine and secular' ('Flores historiarum', 2.114), as well as Gerald's reference to his skill in law, points to a legal as well as a theological training. He is first recorded in 1177 as a clerk of Robert Foliot, bishop of Hereford, and seems to have remained at Hereford, where he became a canon, until at least 1186. By 1190 he was parson of Withcall, Lincolnshire. It is not known when he entered the king's service, but he must have done so well before 20 April 1194, when he acted as deputy for the chancellor in issuing a royal charter at Winchester. Ecclesiastical preferment followed. By 5 May 1194 Eustace was dean of Salisbury, and in 1196 he became successively dean of Richmond, Yorkshire, and treasurer of York. From 1194 onwards he was constantly in attendance on Richard I in Normandy; referred to as the king's seal-bearer, he also continued to act in the place of the chancellor, William de Longchamp. When Longchamp died, on 31 January 1197, Eustace succeeded him as bishop of Ely, the election taking place at Vaudreuil on 10 August 1197; but the king's needs -- Eustace was sent to represent Richard at an assembly summoned for 22 February 1198 to elect a new German emperor -- prevented his being consecrated until 8 March following, when Archbishop Hubert Walter performed the ceremony in St Katherine's Chapel, Westminster. Later that year, between 18 and 22 May, Eustace was formally appointed chancellor. In October and November 1198 he acted as a justice at Westminster, the only occasion on which he is recorded as having done so. But he then returned to the king's side, and in January 1199 was sent by Richard to the French king to declare an end to the existing truce. 
Following the death of Richard I, Eustace was replaced as chancellor by Hubert Walter on 27 May 1199. But this does not mean that he was out of favour with the new king, whose coronation he attended on the same day, and from whom he obtained a charter confirming Ely in its liberties on 23 August. He accompanied John to Normandy in 1200, was present when William, king of Scots, did homage at Lincoln on 21 November, and in both 1202 and 1204 was sent on unsuccessful embassies to the French king. However, although his attestations of royal charters show that he still came to court with some regularity, his energies were increasingly absorbed by the administration of his diocese, and still more by his frequent employment by Pope Innocent III ('r'. 1198-1216) as a judge-delegate and as an executor of papal mandates. In 1199-1200 he was first a judge-delegate and then an arbitrator in the bitter dispute between Archbishop Hubert Walter and the monks of Canterbury over the former's plans for a collegiate church at Lambeth. In 1200 and 1201 he devoted much time to promoting the canonization of Gilbert of Sempringham. An arbitrator between Bishop Savaric of Bath and the monks of Glastonbury, in 1203 he was appointed to investigate the miracles of Wulfstan of Worcester. In the latter year, and again in 1206, he was employed as an arbitrator in the quarrel between the monks of Evesham, their abbot, and the bishop of Worcester. Towards the end of his life he became deeply involved in the disputes over the election of Hugh of Northwold to be abbot of Bury St Edmunds. The recipient of at least thirty-five letters from the pope, he also addressed correspondence to Rome, on 19 December 1204 drawing from Innocent the celebrated letter 'Pastoralis officii diligentia', which contained rulings on some nineteen points of law, every one of which later passed into the law of the church. 
Eustace was also closely involved in the difficulties that faced the English church as a result of King John's refusal to accept the election of Stephen Langton as archbishop of Canterbury. Following Innocent III's consecration of Langton on 17 June 1207 the monks of Canterbury who had elected Langton were expelled from their monastery. The pope appointed Eustace, together with William de Ste Mere-Eglise, bishop of London, and Mauger, bishop of Worcester, all of them former royal servants, to negotiate with King John. Negotiations dragged on until 23 March 1208, when the bishops issued an interdict on England. The king's reprisals were thorough, and a complete seizure of all clerical property began, followed by piecemeal negotiations for its recovery. But those clergy who fled abroad, who inevitably included the three executors of the interdict, did not recover their possessions until 1213. Eustace continued to be involved in Innocent's efforts to put pressure on John, and made several visits to England in aid of these. But negotiations always broke down, and Eustace was present at Arras when John was excommunicated in November 1209. Late in 1212 Eustace went to Rome with Langton and the bishop of London in order to complain of John's oppression of the English church, a visit claimed by some chroniclers -- implausibly -- to have led the pope to declare John deposed. 
When the crisis was resolved on 15 May 1213, by John's becoming a papal vassal, Eustace returned to England, and was present at Winchester when the king received absolution on 20 July, and at St Paul's, London, when John took an oath of fealty to the pope on 3 October. As part of the settlement John was ordered to pay 100,000 marks to the papal legate, Nicolo of Tusculum, Archbishop Langton, and Eustace of Ely as an earnest of restitution to the ecclesiastics who had suffered serious losses in the previous seven years. Eustace's own damages were variously estimated at $750 and $1050. Finally, at a great council held in St Paul's, London, presided over by the legate, the interdict was formally lifted by Bishop Eustace on 2 July 1214. As John passed from conflict with the pope to confrontation with the barons, Eustace was one of the bishops wooed by the king, who on 15 January 1215 transferred to him the crown's rights of patronage over Thorney Abbey. He is said to have played a leading part in negotiations between John and the rebels, before he died at Reading on 3 February 1215. He was buried in Ely Cathedral, before St Mary's altar, on the south side of the choir. 
When circumstances permitted, Eustace was an active bishop. His statute on the tithing of lambs is one of the earliest acts of English diocesan legislation to survive. He appears to have rebuilt and endowed the church of St Mary in Ely; he gave land in Witcham, Somersham, and March to the convent of Ely; and he assigned the church of Impington to the monastic precentor, in order to provide for books. He is also credited with the construction of the Galilee porch at the west end of his cathedral church (though little of his work now survives), with the endowment of a light at the lady altar, and with a grant of land on the west side of the convent enclosure to make a cellar for the monks. Finally, the Ely chronicle records that he gave a number of vestments, a gold chalice and pyx, silver basins and spoons, a pastoral staff, and a little gold cross containing a fragment of the True Cross. Variously praised for his learning, discretion, and authority, Eustace was clearly widely admired by his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 8936


Eustace, James, third Viscount Baltinglass (1530-1585), nobleman and rebel, was the eldest son and heir of Sir Roland Eustace, later second Viscount Baltinglass (1504-1579), and Joan, daughter of James Butler, Lord Dunboyne. The family had a long and distinguished record of royal service in Ireland, in both central and local government. This loyalty was rewarded when Thomas, James's grandfather, was granted the viscountcy and lands of Baltinglass, a dissolved abbey in Wicklow, by Henry VIII in 1541. Although Sir Roland continued the tradition of government service after his succession as viscount in 1549, he was a vehement opponent of the cess, the state's policy of arbitrary taxation for victualling the army in Ireland. After his release from some months' imprisonment in 1577-8, he engaged in a bitter dispute with Marshal Nicholas Bagenal over oppressive billeting of the army on his estate at Kilcullen, co. Kildare. 
On his father's death in 1579, James succeeded to the title and estates. His early education had been under the tutelage of Norman Eustace, a cousin and Roman Catholic priest. In 1567 James was admitted to Gray's Inn, London. By then he was married to Mary ('b'. 'c'.1548), daughter of Sir John Travers, master of the ordnance in Ireland; the marriage was childless. While a student in London, Eustace may have been confirmed in his zeal for Catholicism. On his return to Ireland, he came under the influence of the Jesuit Robert Rochford and of Edmund Tanner, Roman Catholic bishop of Cork, and he travelled to Rome in the mid-1570s. 
Eustace's recusancy was manifested when he was fined and imprisoned by the court of high commission for flouting the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1578. His religious disaffection led him to question the right of Queen Elizabeth to be monarch of Ireland. Influenced by radical priests such as Rochford and Tanner, Eustace was prepared to take militant action which, for him, was the logical imperative of the papal bull of excommunication of the queen. Although viewed as 'a very simple man without wisdom, manhood or any other quality meet to embrace such an enterprise' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/79/26, i), Baltinglass organized a conspiracy comprising some of the leading lords in Leinster and elsewhere. Both the earl of Kildare and the baron of Delvin were implicated in plans for an uprising but withdrew on its eve. Concurrently with renewed insurrection in Munster, Baltinglass prepared for a military campaign, drawing in his fellow gentry of the pale and the Gaelic clans of southern Leinster, led by Feagh McHugh O'Byrne. The paramount chieftain of central Ulster, Turlough Luineach O'Neill, also evinced interest. With the help of prominent Dublin merchants (who supplied him with munitions) and the blessing of the priests, Baltinglass declared himself to be in rebellion against Queen Elizabeth in mid-July 1580, rejecting her claim to be supreme governor of the church as a woman 'uncapax of all holy order', and condemning 'the oppression of poor subjects under pretence of justice' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/74/62). 
The administration of Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton, feared that a countrywide campaign with continental aid was imminent. The alarm became more acute when Baltinglass, Feagh McHugh O'Byrne, and their allies inflicted a severe defeat on the English forces in Glenmalure in Wicklow on 25 August 1580. This ambush deterred the state army from campaigning in the mountainous countryside, and thereafter the uprising took the form of raid and counter-raid in the southern pale. The state's effort was not helped by the ambiguous stance of the earl of Kildare who, with the baron of Delvin, was arrested and imprisoned in Dublin Castle at Christmas 1580. A confederacy of Delvin's connections in Meath and Kildare failed to aid Baltinglass militarily, however, and by the spring of 1581 Grey's attritional war had begun to succeed. The massacre of a continental force at Smerwick in November 1580 and the wearing down of the Munster rebels dashed hopes of extra-provincial assistance, and a series of arrests and surrenders of Baltinglass's relatives and allies left him with a dwindling force. Eventually he opted to flee the country with the aid of some Wexford sailors, and sailed for the Iberian peninsula to seek more support from the Spanish king. 
The trials of the captured rebels took place in November 1581, and at least twenty were convicted of treason and executed. Among these were Baltinglass's brother, Walter, and several cousins and followers, many of whom went to the scaffold professing their Catholicism. The estates of the rebels, including those of the viscount, were confiscated in the aftermath of the uprising, the act of attainder finally passing through the Irish parliament in 1585. Having spent time in Lisbon and Rome, Baltinglass had moved to Madrid by 1584. His embassy at the court of Philip II of Spain did not bear fruit, though his presence there was a source of alarm to the authorities in Dublin Castle. He died at Madrid on 24 November 1585. 
Viscount Baltinglass's rebellion emanated from his own zeal for the restoration of Catholicism as the official state religion, and he struck a chord with opponents of state political and religious policies in many parts of Ireland. A small group of priests orchestrated the enterprise, but the failure of the earl of Kildare to commit himself was a major blow to the viscount's hopes. Most of the disaffected palesmen eschewed military confrontation, preferring to use constitutional means in pursuit of their political ends. Undoubtedly, however, the bravery of Baltinglass and his followers served to galvanize many of the Old English population into recusancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 8937


Eustace, John Chetwode (1761-1815), travel writer and Roman Catholic priest, was born in Kildare, the son of Maurice Eustace and his wife, Katherine Keegan. His father's family was of Anglo-Norman descent and also claimed a connection with the Chetwodes, a family of Cheshire origin settled in Queen's county. After early education at Sedgeley Park, a Roman Catholic school in Staffordshire, he spent seven years as a novice in the English Benedictine monastery of St Gregory's, Douai, but did not make his final profession. He subsequently found employment as tutor to the sons of the marquis de Foucaut and the duke of Ursell. Ordained priest for the diocese of Kildare and Leighlin, he was appointed in 1795, at the recommendation of Sir Edward Bellew, to the chair of rhetoric at the newly established college of Maynooth. In October 1796 he presented Edmund Burke with a copy of the verses he had composed for the inauguration of the college by the lord lieutenant, Lord Camden, whom he declined to eulogize. Burke found the piece full of spirit, evidence that 'bad as things are in Ireland, principle is not quite dead' ('Correspondence', 102). 
From 1798 Eustace served for two years as chaplain to Sir William Jerningham at Costessey, Norfolk, and henceforth made his career in England. In 1801-2 he travelled in Italy as tutor and companion to three young gentlemen who included John Cust (later Lord Brownlow). In 1805 he moved to Cambridge to act as tutor-companion to George Petre, nephew of the tenth Lord Petre, the first Roman Catholic to attend the university (as a member of Jesus College) since the Reformation -- though barred from taking a degree, and liable to fines for non-attendance at chapel. Eustace moved in Cambridge literary circles, and was encouraged by the antiquary and traveller Edward Daniel Clarke, a fellow of Jesus, to prepare the journal of his Italian tour for publication. He later accompanied Petre on a further tour of Dalmatia, western Greece, Sicily, and Malta. His moderate whig principles are evident in the 'Political Catechism' which he published anonymously in 1810. By now he had settled at Great Chesterford, Essex. 
When Eustace's two-volume 'Tour through Italy' was eventually published in 1813, it won him instant celebrity, and the work (from 1815, entitled 'A Classical Tour through Italy and Sicily') went through eight editions between 1813 and 1841, becoming the standard vade-mecum of classical tourists. While the guide was antiquarian in tone, with an aesthetic preference for pure classicism over the Gothic and baroque styles, it was eloquent in its denunciation of contemporary absolutism and its championship of Italian liberty. Rejecting papal infallibility as 'absurd', and sceptical in his attitude towards miracles and relics, Eustace was ahead of his time in advocating a vernacular liturgy and urging the adoption within the Papal States of the principles of constitutional government. John Cam Hobhouse, in his annotations to 'Childe Harold', dismissed the 'Tour' as inaccurate and derivative ('Byron: Complete Poetical Works', 2.262-3) -- a judgement which is ungenerous and unjust. 
In June 1814 Eustace accompanied lords Carrington and Essex on a visit to Paris. His 'Letter from Paris to George Petre, Esquire' (1814), which was reprinted eight times in its year of publication, depicted the effect on Parisian society of war and 'revolutionary madness' ('Letter from Paris', 1). 
Eustace wore his learning lightly, and his polish and conversational charm made him popular in English aristocratic and literary society. Though he maintained friendly relations with Anglican clergymen, he was an eloquent champion of Roman Catholic liberties, which he defended in a celebrated exchange with the bishop of Lincoln in 1812. However, his ecumenism and attachment to the Cisalpine party earned him the hostility of his ecclesiastical superior Joseph Milner, who delated him to Rome as a latitudinarian. Milner was later to write that 'instead of gadding with Protestants through classical scenes, he [Eustace] ought to have been teaching Irish Catholics their catechism' ('Orthodox Journal', August 1819, 303). 
Eustace returned to Italy in 1815, and was collecting material for a supplement to the 'Classical Tour' when he contracted malaria at Naples, where he died on 1 August 1815. He was interred in Naples in the church of the 'Crocelle', where a Latin inscription by the 'abate' Campbell marked his monument (Clayton). His projected supplement was completed by Sir Richard Colt Hoare and published in 1819. At the time of his death Eustace's literary reputation was such that he was said to have been offered an advance of $2000 by his publisher, John Murray, for a didactic poem on 'the culture of the youthful mind' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 5.263). 


@@@@@


doc= 8938


FitzEustace, Roland, first baron of Portlester (d. 1496), administrator, was the eldest son of Sir Edward FitzEustace (died 'c'.1454), head of a leading Kildare family of gentry with extensive possessions in the Kildare and Meath marches. The FitzEustaces were among the most prominent of Richard of York's Irish retainers. Edward was York's deputy lieutenant from 1452 and just before his father's death Roland was in 1454 appointed treasurer and apparently held office continuously until 1492. Roland married, first, Elizabeth, daughter of John Brune; second, in 1458, Joan Bellew, widow of Christopher Plunket, Lord Killeen; and third, Margaret Dartas (or Marguerite d'Artois), widow of John Dowdall and of Thomas Barnewall. In 1455 he built St Mary's Chapel in St Audoen's parish church, Dublin, and later erected there 'a goodly monument' with recumbent effigies of himself and his wife Margaret, remains of which survive. 
Edward IV's accession sparked a Lancastrian rising by the Butlers and Philip Bermingham in Meath in the winter of 1461-2 and on FitzEustace's visit to court, Edward rewarded his good service by granting him Duke Richard's manor of Portlester and other Meath lands and raising him to the peerage as baron of Portlester. From June 1462 he served for ten months as the duke of Clarence's deputy lieutenant, with a retinue of 300 English archers, until replaced as governor by the earl of Desmond, the victor of the battle of Piltown which saw the final overthrow of the Lancastrian cause in Ireland. Throughout this period he was also closely associated with the earls of Desmond and of Kildare and frequently at loggerheads with the Meath gentry led by William Sherwood, bishop of Meath. These factional alignments lay behind various charges of treason against Portlester. Accused of urging Desmond to make himself king of Ireland, he was acquitted by parliament. In 1468 he was heavily involved in the troubles surrounding Desmond's attainder and execution by the earl of Worcester, releasing Kildare from prison and, with the earl, joining Desmond's brother in his revenge attack on Meath. Another charge of treason against him at Dublin in 1470 may relate to Henry VI's 'readeption'. 
From the 1470s Portlester was prominent in the Brotherhood of the Arms of St George which organized a standing defence force for the English pale. He undertook much building work, fortifying Kilcullen town and bridge and settling waste lands at Galmorestown near Baltinglass. In 1486 he established at Kilcullen a house of Franciscan Observants, known as the New Abbey, where he was later buried. He also served occasionally as lord chancellor -- jointly and 'for life' with John Tapton, in 1472-4, 1476-8, and from 1487. In 1478 he supported the pretensions of his young son-in-law, Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare (d. 1513), to the governorship, denying Lord Deputy Grey access to the great seal and, as treasurer, assigning the king's revenues to deny him ready money. These disturbances stoked Portlester's feud with Bishop Sherwood, whose servant threatened him with decapitation, and in the settlement of 1479 Edward ordered Portlester to remit all ill will to Sherwood, now appointed chancellor, and Chief Justice Bermingham. 
When Portlester's daughter, Alison, married Gerald Fitzgerald, the reversion of the manor of Portlester was thereby secured; and shortly before Sherwood's death Portlester had his son Oliver, reputedly disabled, appointed chief baron of the exchequer in 1482, acting by deputy. He played a leading role in the Simnel conspiracy in 1487, serving as chancellor for Kildare's brother, Thomas (died 1487), who commanded the Irish contingent at Stoke, but was eventually pardoned. Portlester was dismissed from the treasurership in 1492 and during the Warbeck conspiracy he was ordered in 1493 to appear before the barons for audit of his accounts for the past forty years. He died on 19 December 1496, 'being very aged', and was succeeded by his son and heir, Richard Eustace of Harristown. 


@@@@@


doc= 8939


Evans, Abel (1675-1737), Church of England clergyman and poet, son of Abel Evans and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Spalding ('bap'. 1638?), was baptized at St Mary, Whitechapel, Stepney, on 26 February 1675. He entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 11 March 1685, matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 2 July 1692, and proceeded to the degrees of BA in 1696, MA on 23 March 1700, BD on 26 April 1705, and DD on 16 May 1711. He was ordained in 1700 and presented to the college living of St Mary's, Kirtlington, near Oxford, but retained his college fellowship until 1724. He resigned Kirtlington on 4 June 1707. 
Evans's low-church sermon at the university church on 23 August 1705 vexed the Oxford tories, but its praise of the duke of Marlborough earned him the favour of the duchess, who sent him a gift of venison. In December 1706 he further antagonized colleagues by publicly reflecting upon the president and most of the fellows of his college, for which he was deprived on 20 February 1707 of the chaplaincy which he had held for only eight months. 
About 1709 Evans fell into line with the preponderant toryism and high-churchmanship of Oxford, was reinstated in his college chaplaincy (which he held until February 1713), and served at various later times as senior bursar, dean of divinity, and vice-president. As a tory he also wrote 'The Apparition', 'a dialogue betwixt the Devil and a Doctor concerning the rights of the Christian Church', published in January 1710. This long satire in heroic couplets against Matthew Tindal, the deist, was popular enough to run into four authorized editions and five piracies. 
Evans's 'Vertumnus' (June 1713), an epistle in octosyllabic couplets to Jacob Bobart (1641-1719), the botanist, is shorter and more agreeable. The modern attribution of a Miltonic imitation, 'Pre-Existence' (1714), to Evans is highly unlikely (Chapin, 178-80). 
On 31 July 1713 Evans was presented to the college living of St Giles', Oxford. Thomas Hearne noted the politics of his sermons, from ultra-toryism on 25 September 1715, when Evans hinted that George I was a usurper, to 'a most vile, Whiggish Sermon' on 30 January 1719 ('Remarks', 5.121, 6.294). Hearne concluded that Evans was seeking preferment from the whigs, but in the event Evans's college remained his only ecclesiastical patron. It provided him with the vicarage of St Andrew, Great Staughton, Huntingdonshire, where he was incumbent from 3 January to 6 December 1723, and the rectory of St Dunstan, Cheam, Surrey, to which he was presented on 31 May 1724 and where in less than three years he was 'at odds wth all his Parish, & talks of Law, but is yet got no farther than Epigrams' ('Correspondence of Edward Young', 54). 
Evans is remembered as an epigrammatist, though the originality of his well-known epitaph on Vanbrugh beginning 'Lie heavy on him, Earth' has been questioned; also as the admirer and friend of Alexander Pope, who praised him in 'The Dunciad' (1728, 2.108). Although the Cheam benefice had been held by no fewer than five bishops, Evans was still rector when he died there on 18 October 1737; he was buried there four days later. He never married. He was survived by two widowed sisters and a niece, who administered his estate. Six naturalized, 'realistic' pastorals by Evans, variously dated from 1707 to 1726, were first printed in volume 5 of Nichols's 'Select Collection of Poems' (1782); they were from a manuscript, now lost, which, it seems, contained at least thirteen pastorals. 


@@@@@


doc= 8940


Anne Evans (1820-1870), author, was born on 4 June 1820, probably at Britwell Court, near Burnham. She never married, and after the death of her father she moved to Kensington. Her health broke down in 1867, and she was an invalid until her death on 19 February 1870. Anne Evans wrote poetry and music, which were edited and published with a memoir after her death by Anne Thackeray Ritchie (1880). Lady Ritchie described her as a 'diffident woman, who... unconsciously touched and influenced us all by her intense sincerity of heart and purpose' (Ritchie, viii). 


@@@@@


doc= 8941


Evans, Arthur Benoni (1781-1854), writer, was born at Compton-Beauchamp, Berkshire, on 25 March 1781, son of the Revd Lewis Evans (1755-1827) of Basaleg, Monmouthshire, vicar of Froxfield, Wiltshire, and his wife, Ann, eldest daughter of Thomas Norman. Lewis Evans was a well-known astronomer, and held for many years the professorship of mathematics at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. Arthur Evans was educated at the college school, Gloucester, of which his uncle and namesake was headmaster; his courageous character earned him the nickname the Bold Arthur. He went up to St John's College, Oxford, in October 1800, and graduated BA on 21 February 1804, MA in 1820, and BD and DD in 1828. In addition to Greek and Latin, he learned Hebrew, French, Italian, Spanish, German, and Icelandic. His other interests included music -- he played several instruments -- and art; he sketched in pencil, crayon, and sepia. He also studied geology and botany, and his knowledge of Greek, Roman, and English coins, of which he had a large collection, was considerable. 
Evans was ordained to the curacy of Hartpury, Gloucester, in August 1804, and after receiving priest's orders in September 1805 was in the following month appointed professor of classics and history in the Royal Military College, then just established at Great Marlow, Buckinghamshire. He moved with the college to Sandhurst in October 1812. In June 1819 he married Anne (1791-1883), third daughter of Captain Thomas Dickinson RN of Bramblebury, near Woolwich, with whom he had four sons and two daughters. 
Evans resigned his chair at the Royal Military College in 1822, and went to Britwell, near Burnham, where he prepared pupils for the universities and served the curacy of Burnham until 1829. In that year he accepted the headmastership of the free grammar school at Market Bosworth, Leicestershire. He also held successively the curacies of Bosworth, Carlton, and Cadeby between 1829 and 1841. Clerical appointments never brought Evans more than $100 a year, but as a schoolmaster he was very successful and prosperous. His publications included sermons, poems, and pastoral and polemical works, as well as 'Leicestershire Words, Phrases, and Proverbs' (1848), which was reprinted by the English Dialect Society in 1881. He died at the free grammar school, Market Bosworth, on 8 November 1854. 
One of Evans's sons, John Evans (1823-1908), became a leading archaeologist and numismatist, serving as treasurer of the Royal Society (1878-98) and president of the Society of Antiquaries (1885-92). Another, Sebastian Evans, was a designer for glass work and a poet; he also edited the 'Birmingham Daily Gazette' from 1867 to 1870, and was for some time the editor of 'The People', a Conservative Sunday journal. Evans's daughter, 


@@@@@


doc= 8942


Evans, Benjamin (1740-1821), Independent minister, was born on 23 February 1740 at Ffynnon Adda, Meline, Pembrokeshire, the son of Daniel Evans, farmer and drover, and his wife, Ann. After attending schools in Glandwr and Monkton, in Pembrokeshire, he completed his formal education at the Haverfordwest grammar school, aged fifteen, without attending a dissenting academy. 
Though his father was a Baptist, Evans and his mother joined the Independents at Moylgrove, where he was baptized on 24 March 1764. He began to preach, and undertook a preaching tour through south Wales. Influenced by Lewis Rees, he went to the north in 1768 for a trial period at Llanuwchllyn, Merioneth; being approved, he was ordained minister there in 1769. There were sixty members and 600 'hearers'. He married about 1770 Ann Lloyd, daughter of the Revd Daniel Lloyd of Brynberian; apparently, there were no children. The Independents encountered considerable persecution in north Wales, and he obtained in 1772 a high court judgment compelling the magistrates to register a house for the purpose of worship at Cutiau, near Barmouth. He moved in 1777 to Albany Church, Haverfordwest, and thence to Tre-wen, Cardiganshire, in June 1779, where he remained for over forty years until his death. 
Evans was a high Calvinist by persuasion, and steadfastly opposed the advance of Arianism and Arminianism in the area. His predecessor at Tre-wen had Arminian sympathies, but Evans, showing great tact, gradually and successfully led back the congregation to Calvinism. His members founded several new churches, of which he took charge. He was also a pioneer of the Sunday school movement. The distribution of tracts among his members by the Baptists obliged him to defend his position on infant baptism, which he did most ably, bringing him into dispute with William Richards of Lynn, who argued the opposite viewpoint. Evans published (in Welsh) 'Letters on Baptism' in two editions (1788 and 1789), a translation of Mathias Maurice's 'Social Religion' (1797), and two works on the sufferings of the black slaves in the West Indies, as well as sermons, catechisms, hymns, and poetry. 
Evans was a rather short man of strong and shapely build, with an intense look. An acknowledged leader of his denomination, Evans's services to his countrymen, through the pulpit and the press, were very great. He was taken ill in 1816, and died in Tre-wen on 2 March 1821, survived by his wife. He was buried in Hawen Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 8943


Evans, Brooke (1797-1862), nickel refiner, was born in Bull Street, Birmingham, the son of a woollen draper and tailor. He went to school in Singer's Hill, Birmingham, and Aldridge, Staffordshire. On leaving school at the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to a gun maker, and made his first acquaintance with metallurgy. 
Having served his apprenticeship, Evans travelled to the United States, and entered into partnership with a gun maker in New York. He was only partially successful in this trade, and he returned to England in 1826. He then went off prospecting in Central America, where he became an indigo planter and merchant in Guatemala. In the course of a voyage home, the captain of his ship and several of the crew were seized with yellow fever in the Gulf of Mexico. Evans apparently took command of the ship, and navigated her successfully to the British Isles. He afterwards purchased a small business in the glass and lead trade at Stratford upon Avon, where he lived six years with his sister. This business prospered, and enabled him to save up to $6000. 
Charles Askin, a veterinary surgeon who was greatly interested in chemistry and metals, was a friend of Evans. While staying in Warsaw, Askin had discovered that a white metal called argentan contained nickel and he and Evans experimented with methods of refining nickel from speiss (an impure mixture of cobalt, nickel, and other metals), left after the preparation of cobalt blue for painting pottery. They were successful, and Askin went into partnership with Messrs H. and T. Merry to manufacture German silver, an alloy of nickel, copper, and zinc. Askin gained $1500 from the venture, and subsequently went into partnership with Evans. In 1835 they built works in Birmingham, where they successfully produced refined nickel from nickel-speiss. The demand for Evans and Askin's refined nickel and German silver increased rapidly, because it was durable, attractive, and able to be stamped, spun, cast, and wrought. 
The speiss produced by the cobalt blue manufacturers was quite insufficient for their requirements, however, and Evans explored Europe for new sources of ores containing nickel. He heard of its existence at the mines of Dobschan in Hungary, visited the place, and bought all the ore for which he could afford to pay, although this new ore contained half as much cobalt as nickel. As cobalt was detrimental to the German silver, and as Askin could not by his mode of refining separate these metals, new techniques had to be developed. The demand for nickel was meanwhile steadily increasing, especially from the Birmingham electroplating business of Elkingtons; and by steady perseverance Evans and Askin discovered a process by which they obtained refined nickel in large quantities. To meet the demand Askin visited some nickel mines near Geisdal in Norway in 1847, where he died suddenly on 25 August. He was taken home and buried at Edgbaston. The nickel business was continued by Evans, who died at Edgbaston on 15 September 1862 and was buried near his partner. The firm of Evans and Askin was taken over by Henry Wiggin, who had joined the business in 1842 and had become a partner six years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 8944


Evans, Caleb (1831-1886), geologist, was born on 25 July 1831 at 7 Pullins Row, Islington, the third of five children of John Evans (died 1846), barrister, and his wife, Frances (died 1848), daughter of George Knight of Headcorn, Kent. He was educated at University College School, London, until 1846, when the death of his father forced him to begin work, initially in a solicitor's office. From 1852 he was (like his elder brother) a clerk in the chancery pay office, until ill health forced his early retirement in 1882. 
Evans's involvement with geology began after he attended lectures given in 1855 by, among others, the eminent anatomist Richard Owen. Evans excelled as a collector, and from 1858 specialized in the fossils of the Tertiary formations of the south of England, taking advantage in particular of exposures made in south London by the Metropolitan Board of Works in the course of its major sewerage schemes of the 1860s. He also collected extensively from the Chalk, and, during his annual vacations, investigated the strata of the Isle of Wight, Lyme Regis, Weymouth, Swanage, and Portsmouth. His geological work found formal expression in numerous scientific papers and field-meeting reports, published mainly in the 'Proceedings of the Geologists' Association'; the most notable of these were 'On some sections of Chalk, between Croydon and Oxtead' (1870), and 'Geology of the neighbourhood of Portsmouth and Ryde' (1871). The former paper marks the first English attempt to subdivide the Chalk, an important geological formation in southern England, into zones correlatable with those previously established in continental Europe. Certain fossil crabs that Evans collected from the Lower Tertiary sediments of Portsmouth were subsequently described (by Henry Woodward) as new species. Evans also constructed geological models or relief maps, of England and Wales, and of specific areas therein, by pasting layer upon layer of cartridge paper to achieve the required topography, and then colouring the rock outcrops appropriately. 
Because he was an amateur, most of Evans's geological work reached fruition under the auspices of the Geologists' Association. This he joined in February 1859 as one of its earliest and most active members, serving on its general committee for many years, acting as an auditor of its accounts, and leading its members on field meetings. On the strength of his geological work, in 1867 he was admitted as a fellow of the Geological Society of London. Evans never married, but domestically remained part of a tightly knit family, living for many years with his unmarried sisters and brother in Hampstead, where he died at 3 Downshire Hill on 16 September 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 8945


Evans, Charles Smart (1778-1849), singer and composer, was born in London. He was a chorister at the Chapel Royal under Edmund Ayrton, and on 14 June 1808 became a gentleman of the Chapel Royal. His name appears among the alto singers in the chorus of the Ancient Concerts of 1798, and he took part with John Braham and others in the music performed at Weber's funeral in 1826. Four of Evans's partsongs gained prizes from the glee and catch clubs namely, 'Beauties, have you seen a toy?' (1811), 'Fill all the glasses' (1812), a setting of William Linley's 'Ode to the Memory of Samuel Webbe' (1817), and 'Great Bacchus' (1821). He was also the composer of many songs and some anthems, and for several years served as organist at St Paul's, Covent Garden. He later became a Roman Catholic and a member of the choir which sang at the chapel of the Portuguese embassy in South Street, Grosvenor Square, for which he wrote a 'Magnificat' and several motets. These were included in Novello's 'Collection of Motets'. Evans died in London on 4 January 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 8946


Evans, Christmas (1766-1838), Baptist minister, was born on 25 December 1766, at Esgair Wen, a thatched cottage in the parish of Llandysul, Cardiganshire, the son of Samuel Evans, shoemaker, and his wife, Joanna Lewis. They had three children, a daughter and two sons; Christmas was their second child. His father died in 1775, when Evans was only nine years old, and left the family in a state of complete destitution. The next four years Evans spent with James Lewis, his mother's brother, at Bwlchog in the parish of Llanfihangel-ar-arth in Carmarthenshire. He left him to become a farm servant, working at various places, including Castellhywel, the home of David Davis (1745-1827), the learned Arian minister of the Arminian congregation at Llwynrhydowen. In 1783 Evans underwent conversion during a revival there and became a member of the church. He was given a basic education by Davis in his school, learning to read Welsh, and acquiring some knowledge of English. 
Evans began to preach at cottage meetings, but as the strict rules of the Presbyterians required an academic education for their ministers, he gravitated towards the Baptists, who had no such limitations, in order to enter the ministry. In 1788 he was baptized in the River Duar at Llanybydder in Carmarthenshire by Timothy Thomas (1754-1840), and joined his Baptist congregation at Aberdyar. Earlier, he had lost one eye in an accident but according to the Baptist minister Robert Hall (1764-1831) his surviving eye was one 'that could light an army through a wilderness on a dark night' (W. Morgan, 25). 
In 1776 the Baptists had launched their mission to north Wales. At the assembly held at Maes-y-Berllan, Brecknockshire, on 8-11 June 1789, representatives from the new churches in north Wales pleaded for ministerial help. Christmas Evans volunteered his services and had a successful preaching tour in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire. In August 1789 he was ordained at Salem, Ty'ndonnen, in the parish of Botwnnog to serve the Baptists of Llyn. On 23 October 1789, at Bryncroes parish church, he married Catherine Jones, a member of his congregation. They had no children. 
During the autumn of 1789 Evans experienced a transformation of spirit due to a profound realization of the wonder of God's grace, and the discovery of the significance of the Welsh revivalist tradition. At once his preaching became more vivacious and dramatic, marking the incursion of the Methodist spirit into the Baptist pulpit. On Christmas day 1791 he moved to Anglesey to act as minister to all the Baptist churches in the island. He lived at Llangefni, where the leading chapel, Cil-dwrm, was situated. Between 1795 and 1798 the minister of Ramoth, Merioneth, John Richard Jones (1765-1822), sought to persuade his fellow Baptists of the validity of the anti-evangelical teachings of Robert Sandeman (1718-1771) and Archibald McClean (1733-1812), and in 1798 initiated a split among the churches. For a time Christmas Evans was attracted to these views, but as he later confessed, Sandemanian opinions drove away his 'spirit of prayer for the salvation of sinners'. He resumed his orthodoxy, and became the central figure in a great Baptist movement in Anglesey. Although for many years his salary was only $17 a year, he ruled over the Anglesey Baptists with a rod of iron; he built new chapels, and made at least two long and laborious preaching journeys every year all over Wales to collect money to pay off the chapel debts, which often weighed heavily upon him. These tours boosted his reputation, as crowds flocked to hear his sermons. Evans alternated humour and pathos effectively, and his startling power of declamation exercised extraordinary influence over his auditors. 
On 22 October 1823 Catherine Evans died; in the same year Evans suffered much ill health. His wounded eye often troubled him, and he was periodically threatened with blindness. At last the Baptist churches of Anglesey threw off the yoke of Evans's ministry, aiming to become independent churches: his position as a sort of Baptist bishop was no longer tenable. He bitterly resented their choosing ministers without reference to him, and a lawsuit about a chapel debt added to his difficulties. In 1826 he gladly accepted the ministry of Tonyfelin Chapel in Caerphilly in Glamorgan. 
Evans ministered very effectively at Caerphilly for two years. On 23 April 1828 at Eglwysilan parish church, he married as his second wife Mary Jones, who had been his maid at Llangefni. They had no children. But difficulties with his flock again arose, causing him to move to Cardiff in September 1828; but the constitution of that church was so democratic that his autocratic ways again created problems, and in 1832 he made his final change to Caernarfon. Despite the dissensions of the thirty church members, the drunkenness of some, and the pressure of a debt of $800, he was not unhappy. 
While on a journey to collect money towards the chapel debt in south Wales, Evans was suddenly taken ill, and died on 19 July 1838 in the house of the Revd Daniel Davies in Oxford Street, Swansea, attended by his wife. On 23 July he was buried with great honour in the burial-ground of the Bethesda Welsh Baptist Chapel at Swansea. 
Christmas Evans was a complex character. He was generous to a fault, an untiring worker, perfectly sincere, and a man of deep spirituality. And yet he was impulsive and wayward. He could be dictatorial in his pastoral work and could not suffer criticism with equanimity. Apart from his sermons, published in Welsh, his only other publications were some Welsh hymns and tracts. But there is no doubting his extraordinary influence as a preacher: huge crowds gathered to hear him and his converts were legion. His vivid imagination transformed biblical stories and parables into gripping dramas. Although he sought by hard reading to overcome the limitations of his lack of education, he never acquired the equipment to make a sophisticated contribution to theology. Nevertheless he had a significant place in the growing influence of evangelicalism in nineteenth-century Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 8947


Evans, Cornelius (fl. 1648), impostor, is said to have been born at Marseilles, of a Welsh father and a Provencale mother. Nothing is known of his early life, but it was reported in 1648 that he spoke English 'not perfectly and in another dialect than it is usually pronounced by Englishmen' ('Kingdomes Weekly Intelligencer', 955). Despite his slight resemblance to Charles Stuart, prince of Wales -- the future Charles II -- he was 'shorter than the Prince by the head, a little bowed in his shoulders, with hands like to a butcher's boy's hands' ('A Declaration', 1). Evans himself claimed that he was a poor gentleman who had been in the service of the king, but a parliamentarian newsletter sneered that he was 'well known in London especially at some of the common gaols' ('Perfect Weekly Account', 29 May 1648). In early May 1648 Evans was lodging in the house of Nicholas Evans, a seaman, in the parish of St Katharine by the Tower, London. Seeking shipboard work, but failing to find it, he set out on foot shortly afterwards for the channel ports. 
Whether Evans had yet hatched the idea of impersonating Prince Charles is unclear. Having walked from London to Dover, he set off for Deal, and there fell into the company of dissident sailors from the ship 'Providence'. At this meeting the idea of an imposture (whoever suggested it) was agreed. Evans later tried to implicate Vice-Admiral Thomas Rainborowe in the business, but he and his new friends quietly left Deal, where Rainborowe was governor, and made instead for Sandwich, the sailors by means of a longboat, and the 'prince' on foot. It was here that his imposture was launched. Arriving probably on 17 May, Evans refreshed himself at the Bell tavern, with a butcher, Casimir Mathew, and a victualler, Charles Baron, while the sailors (including some officers) spread the news of the princely presence. A Captain Henry Foster was persuaded of Evans's royal status and presented him to William Mandey, the mayor. To Mandey the visitor explained that his mother, Queen Henrietta Maria, had sought to poison him, forcing him to flee in haste from France. When it was proposed to carry him to London so that parliament could verify his credentials, Evans found a reason for refusal which conflicted with his first explanation: Kent and other counties: 'had declared their affections to settle him and his father in their rights, and that therefore he was come over to join with them, and that his intent is to assist them to the bringing of the king his father to London. ('A Letter from Kent', 5)' It seems that Evans had concocted the poisoning story in advance, but that a sceptical response decided him to risk taking advantage of the loud rumblings of rebellion newly heard in Kent. 
Despite this inconsistency, Evans's claims were treated as true until proved otherwise. Lodged at Captain Foster's house, he held court: 'many gentlemen and women came daily to kiss his hand, and many presents he had made him' ('A Letter from Kent', 6). A gentlewoman, revealed Evans later, brought him 'one hundred pieces of gold and three bunches of asparagus' ('JHL', 1647-8, 300). He had arrived in Sandwich 'in an old black ragged suit, with no companions but lice', but the authorities accepted that this misfortune stemmed from the hardships of his escape (Carter, 43). They put to work the tailors of the town, and on Sunday 21 May the eminent visitor was able to attend church: 'in a rich suit lined with crimson satin, and laced with gold and silver lace. One Thomas Richards, a man of an extraordinary stature, was chosen to carry the sword... [he] walking before him in a slow and stately posture, commands the people to bear back: and cries out, 'Room for the Prince'. ('Kingdomes Weekly Intelligencer', 953)' At Foster's house dinner was taken in the grand manner, 'trumpets sounding his meat to the table most commonly' (Carter, 44). Evans promised a knighthood to his host and posts to various others. 
Evans's imposture was reported to have received crucial support: 'certain ancient servants of the king then in the town being desired to give their attestation who by a great mistake did all affirm that it was the prince' ('Kingdomes Weekly Intelligencer', 953-4). The presence of navy officers and sailors may also have exerted influence, especially if, as seems likely, they were armed. The mayor and jurats were suspicious, and sent to parliament a detailed description of their guest, set down by the town clerk, James Thurburne. On 20 May the committee of both houses wrote back, explaining that whereas Thurburne had depicted a blond-haired man with light skin: 'the Prince himself is of a black complexion and very black hair -- we are fully satisfied he is only an imposter, and doth now appear of purpose to raise tumults and insurrections in the county. We therefore desire you to take special care for securing the person of the above said man. ('CSP dom.', '1648-9', 73)' But in Sandwich there were the sailors, and many others, who believed Evans's claims. Even doubters understood his value as a figurehead: 'it is believed by most of judgement that it is not the prince; but that he was one that was appointed to have been reputed so, to have animated the cavaliers to join in a speedy body, out of this and some other counties. ('A Letter from Kent', 6)' Meanwhile there had arrived at Dover a servant to the queen, Sir Thomas Dishington, who was startled to hear of his young master's presence at Sandwich, since he had only just received from the real prince a letter sent from the court of St Germain, in Paris. He persuaded the mayor of Dover to send an express to Sandwich, explaining that Charles was still in France. But Mandey was unmoved, so on Saturday 20 May Dishington hastened there himself. What he found on arrival was Evans, 'delighting himself in the town haven with the pleasures of hunting the duck... in a boat attended by many of the chiefest inhabitants' ('Kingdomes Weekly Intelligencer', 955). As Carter remarked, this was 'indeed a Welsh prince but not the prince of Wales'; Sir Thomas, 'being much incensed, called him villain, and counterfeit rogue' (Carter, 43). But Evans had already grown accustomed to his part, and was equal to the challenge. Feigning high indignation, he 'commands the Mayor to clap Sir Thomas up in prison for his treason; the mayor presently obeys his command' (ibid.). The mayor may have had less choice than this implies, for as Dishington explains, it was the mayor 'with 20 or 30 mariners' who effected his arrest, and 'presently committed me to the common gaol'. There he remained until, on Sunday, several friends arrived from Dover to vouch for him ('A Declaration', 1). In the evening Dishington was released. Confronting Evans for a second time, he demanded to know the names of the prince's servants, and posed other questions designed to expose before the governors of Sandwich the falsity of the man he knew to be a fraud. 
Evans's failure to answer was not immediately fatal to his scheme. The authorities did not rearrest Dishington, and gave him permission to leave the town. Many of the inhabitants, however, had other ideas: 'the women, and mariners would have stoned me in the streets, for not confessing that rogue to be the Prince: when we got to our horses, they refused to let us out at Dover gate, and beat us back with halberts, we were forced to take us to Canterbury gate, where with much ado we got out. ('A Declaration', 2)' It is also likely that the defectors from the 'Providence' remained in Sandwich and continued to champion Evans's cause. Caught between conflicting forces, it seems that the town authorities, though aware that his imposture could no longer be doubted, still hesitated to arrest and expose the counterfeit prince. 
On Tuesday 23 September parliament sent a second order demanding that Evans be secured, and instructed Rainborowe to take him by force if the Sandwich authorities should prove obstructive. That day, however, rebel Kentish troops under the command of Sir Richard Hardress and captains Hamond and Carter gained entry to the town and quickly imposed their authority. Would they recognize the pretended prince? At first the rebel commanders were uncertain. Captain Carter paid Evans a visit 'to satisfy not only himself, but some deputy lieutenants in the county whether it were he or not' (Carter, 43). By Friday, it seems, they too had become convinced of Evans's imposture and sought to persuade him to leave quietly with them, for 'the hearts of the people were much inclined to him' (ibid., 44). But Captain Foster, Evans's host, was one of the believers. When the 'prince' declined the rebel leaders' offer of a coach, Foster refused to admit them, even when confronted by sixty musketeers; and 'now the whole town grew into a mutiny, and distraction' (ibid., 45). The officers: 'commanded all houses and shops to be shut up. Meanwhile this young imposter, ranting in his new invested authority, waves his hat and plume out at the window, calling out, 'raise the town, raise the town; seamen, stand to me seamen', throwing out handfuls of money into the streets among the people, which began to swarm up and down in throngs and tumults;' these street scenes 'would have ended in much mischief, had not the gentlemen bestirred themselves resolutely, and undauntedly in the quelling of them' (ibid.). 
At length Evans was taken by his followers from the house, 'through the backside; and some seamen waiting purposely at the waterside, transported him immediately over into the Isle of Thanet' (Carter, 45). Here, it seems, Evans may have been handed over to the parliamentarian authorities by means of Sir Nicholas Crisp, the customs farmer and sequestered royalist of Birchington, Thanet, for the committee of both houses summoned him to appear before them on Saturday 27 May and that day or the next Evans was found in Thanet, 'at Mr Crispe's house at supper' (Carter, 46). Taken to Rochester and examined by the mayor, Philip Ward, and a JP, George Newman, Evans made a full written confession which revealed his true identity. He was taken to London and appeared before the House of Lords, who consigned him to Newgate. Mysteriously, Evans was able, or was enabled, to escape from his confinement. On 5 June he signed a letter addressed to his role model, the prince of Wales, in which he recommended his services. It may be assumed that Charles did not reply. The following month the real prince left for England to reclaim it for the Stuarts, but the attempt met with no more success than that of his imitator. Evans had already vanished into the mist, as quickly as he had appeared. 


@@@@@


doc= 8948


Evans, Daniel (1774-1835), Independent minister, was born at Maindala, Eglwyswrw, Pembrokeshire, on 16 January 1774. As a youth he received little education and was apprenticed as a tailor. He frequently attended prayer meetings in private houses and, at the age of fifteen, became a member of the Independent church. Soon afterwards, in 1792, he began preaching with great enthusiasm from house to house. He thus trained himself for his future work, and became very successful as a missionary. His first settlement was at Llanwrtyd, Brecknockshire, as co-pastor with the Revd Isaac Price, from 1796 to 1799. In 1799 he accepted a call to Bangor, where his congregation had but twenty-five members, who were unable to pay him a sufficient wage. Supported partially by his own private means, he worked extremely hard and succeeded in enlarging his own congregation, as well as establishing seven new ones in the immediate neighbourhood, and extending his ministry as far as the Conwy valley. In 1808 he moved to Mynydd-bach, near Swansea, where he was again exceptionally successful. During a period of only six months, in 1828-9, he added no fewer than 650 to the membership of his churches and Mynydd-bach became the mother church of a cluster of Independent chapels in a district extending over much of the Swansea valley and Swansea itself. 
Evans's published works, which were all in Welsh, included several biographies and religious commentaries, and a volume of sermons published posthumously. He died at Mynydd-bach on 3 March 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 8949


Evans, Daniel (1792-1846), poet, was born at Maesymynach in the parish of Llanfihangel Ystrad, Cardiganshire. His father, David Evans, was a prosperous farmer, and he was the second of three sons. He was educated at Lampeter grammar school under Eliezer Williams, and subsequently went to Jesus College, Oxford. His BA (1814) was followed by his MA (1817) and BD (1824). He took holy orders and, although elected to a fellowship, chose to reside mainly in Wales. 
Daniel Ddu became involved with the 1819 eisteddfod organized by the Dyfed Cambrian Society, whose members sought to revive the old institution. In the same year he was elected poet to the London Gwyneddigion Society. It was in 1823, however, that he gained prominence as a poet, winning two major prizes at the Carmarthen eisteddfod for his strict-metre poetry, but his popularity in his home county was based on his simplistic love and nature verses. Several of his pieces were published in pamphlet form. His collected works appeared in 1830, entitled 'Gwinllan y bardd', followed in 1872 by an enlarged second edition, collected mainly from unpublished sources, and a third edition in 1906. The few English poems in the collection are of very inferior merit. 
A sensitive man -- as is evident in his love poems and his verses to nature's mute sufferers -- prone to depression, Daniel Evans died by his own hand in Maesnewydd, Llanwnnen, Cardiganshire, on 28 March 1846, and was buried on 1 April in the churchyard of Pencarreg in Carmarthenshire. E. H. Rowland summarizes his century's verdict on his works: 'one of the most deservedly admired of modern Welsh poets' (Rowland, 53), but his reputation has diminished, and he merited only a passing reference in the 1986 'Oxford Companion to the Literature of Wales'. 


@@@@@


doc= 8950


Evans, David Morier (1819-1874), financial journalist, was the son of Joshua Lloyd Evans, stationer, of Llanidloes, Montgomeryshire. His occupation was given as shorthand writer at the time of his marriage, at Haggerston on 27 June 1840, to Jemima, daughter of Stephen Thomas Swan, baker. He formed an early connection with journalism, and became assistant city correspondent on 'The Times', a post that he occupied for several years, and left to assume the direction of financial articles in the 'Morning Herald' and 'Standard'. He left 'The Standard' at the end of 1872, and in the following March, with Tom Hamber, started a paper called 'The Hour' as an ultra-protestant tory paper. Evans spent his entire fortune on it, being adjudged bankrupt on 19 December 1873 (though he left about $4000 when he died a month later). The paper limped on until 1876 when Disraeli heard of its death with 'a pang' (Escott, 204). Evans's health broke down under the strain of his financial difficulties, and he died, from cirrhosis and general dropsy, at Albion House, King Edward's Road, South Hackney, London, on the morning of 1 January 1874, aged fifty-four. His wife survived him, with several children. He was buried in Abney Park cemetery, Stamford Hill, the funeral being attended by a large number of fellow journalists among whom he was popular. 
In addition to his regular work, Evans was connected with several other commercial and financial periodicals, among them the 'Bankers' Magazine', to which he was one of the principal contributors, 'The Bullionist', and the 'Stock Exchange Gazette'. He also conducted the literary and statistical departments of the 'Bankers' Almanac and Diary'. He recognized the significant role of 'panics' in nineteenth-century financial history and two of his books are valuable records, anticipating much subsequent historical work: 'The Commercial Crisis, 1847-8' (1849) and 'History of the Commercial Crisis, 1857-8' (1859). He also published (anonymously) 'The City, or, The Physiology of London Business' (1845); 'City Men and City Manners' (1852); 'Facts, Failures, and Frauds' (1859); and 'Speculative Notes' (1864). 


@@@@@


doc= 8951


Evans, Edward (b. 1573/4), Church of England clergyman, was the son of a clergyman from West Meon, Hampshire. He was educated at Winchester College, matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 10 October 1594, aged twenty, and was admitted a fellow there in 1595, graduating BA in 1598 and proceeding MA in 1602. On the presentation of the college he was vicar of Heckfield, Hampshire, briefly in 1601-2, and of Chesterton, Oxfordshire, between 1604 and 1610. 
Since he was apparently 'a noted preacher of his time in the university' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.' 2.168), it was almost certainly he who published in 1615 'Verba Dierum, or, The Dayes Report of Gods Glory', based on sermons or lectures given in Oxford, rather than the Edward Evans ('b'. 'c'.1582) of Denbighshire and Christ Church to whom Wood gave credit for the work (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.299). Dedicated only to 'the honour and glory of the holiest of all, the Almightie and most high King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Father of Lights, Maker of all Things, fountain of all glory', and stiff with explanations of Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic meanings, the work celebrates the knowledge of God written in the world as well as the 'Bible', approves 'rites and ceremonies... royaltie and magnificence' as 'very singular means of the advancement of the glory of the most glorious', affirms holy days, and stresses the importance of the laity's acting as a spiritual priesthood, speaking and preaching by their good lives and conversation, for 'beautifying ourselves sets forth the glory of God'. 
Describing himself on the title-page as 'Preacher and Minister of Godsword', Evans does not at that date appear to have been beneficed, but is probably the same man who was vicar of Leckford, Hampshire, in 1627. There is no other indication of his later career or date of death. 


@@@@@


doc= 8952


Evan, Edward (1716-1798), nonconformist minister and poet, was born in March 1716 in Tir Evan Rhys, a farmhouse at Llwydcoed, Aberdar, Glamorgan, the son of Ifan ap Sion ap Rhys, a weaver and smallholder noted for his geniality and fondness for poetry. Reputedly a skilled harpist when he was only eleven years old, Evan's services in that capacity were later frequently in demand. The 'englynion' he sang in the eisteddfod held in Cymer, Glamorgan, on 1 March 1735 show that, although he was then only eighteen years old, he was already taking an intelligent interest in Welsh prosody. He received very little education in his early, formative years, but he was later taught by James John, a hooper and farmer from Aberdar, who was well read in both Welsh and English and a fairly good poet. 
After working for a few years as a weaver, Evan was apprenticed, at the age of twenty-three, to carpentry and glazing under Lewis Hopkin (1707/8-1771) at Hendre Ifan Goch, in the parish of Llandyfodwg, Glamorgan, and it was his close association with Hopkin which explains the main features of his career as a Welsh bard and nonconformist. Under his guidance Evan applied himself to mastering the Welsh strict metres and the contents of the bardic grammar, and he soon set about composing an 'exemplifying ode', that is, a composition incorporating one of each of the canonical twenty-four strict metres. It was probably Hopkin who also aroused his interest in English literature, and Evan's work contains Welsh translations of some of the poems of Pope, Samuel Butler, Bishop Horne, and Isaac Watts. It may also have been under the influence of Hopkin and the religious congregation at Cymer, Porth, that Evan became a nonconformist. 
Edward Evan worked for many years as a carpenter and glazier -- in seventeen parishes in all. After his first marriage in 1744 to Margaret Thomas of Penderyn (died 1774), he settled for a while at Cefnpennar Isaf, Glamorgan, but in 1749 he moved to the farm of Ton-coch, above Dyffryn House, Mountain Ash, where he remained until his death in 1798. About 1748 (or possibly a little earlier), he joined the nonconformist congregation at Cwm-y-glo, and when a separate church -- 'the Old Meeting-House' -- was later established near Aberdar, he became one of its most prominent members and a preacher. An orthodox Calvinist in his earlier days, according to Edward Williams 
(Iolo Morganwg; 1747-1826)
, he later turned towards Arminianism and, later still, to Arianism. However, he did not take a prominent part in contemporary theological disputations. Some of his political views were of a distinctly radical nature. From 1 July 1772 until 1796 he was pastor of the Old Meeting-House. About 1776 he married Mary Llywelyn of Rhigos (1733-1824). The second marriage produced two sons, Edward (1776?-1862), and Rhys (1779-1867), who was of some literary repute and an ardent supporter of eisteddfodau. 
During his lifetime Evan published two prose works: 'Gwersi i blant a dynjon jeuaingc, mewn dau gatecism' (1757), a Welsh translation of one of Samuel Bourn's catechisms; and 'Golwg ar gynheddfau gwasanaeth, ac anrhydedd gwasanaethwyr Crist' (1775), a sermon delivered at one of the Presbyterian gatherings. He also published in 1767, jointly with Lewis Hopkin, a Welsh translation in the 'cywydd' metre of the book of 'Ecclesiastes', a translation first begun by David Thomas (died 1735), who proceeded no further than the first chapter. 
Evan died at Ton-coch on 21 June 1798, aged eighty-two, and was buried in St John's churchyard, Aberdar. After his death some of his poetry was published at Merthyr Tudful under the title 'Caniadau moesol a duwiol' (1804). Three enlarged editions were later published under the title 'Afalau'r awen' -- at Merthyr in 1816 and 1837, and at Aberdar in 1874. His verse, which shows that he remained a jovial character to the end of his days, was very popular among the Welsh inhabitants of upper Glamorgan. He became a somewhat romantic figure after it was claimed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in November 1789 that he and Iolo Morganwg were by then the only surviving legitimate descendants of the ''Ancient British Bards''. 


@@@@@


doc= 8953


Evans, Edward (1789-1835), printseller, was probably born in London. He was the founder of a noted London print dealership which was eventually inherited by his two sons. Almost nothing is known of Evans's early life except that he trained as a compositor at the printers Nichols & Son in Red Lion Passage, Fleet Street. His 'Gentleman's Magazine' obituary records that the firm of Nichols & Son quickly elevated him to the more senior position of reader on account of his efficiency and speed. Despite this advancement, Evans was obviously a man of determination. Having saved a small capital sum he decided to set himself up in business as a printseller with a specialist interest in engraved historic portrait heads. Although published without a date, Evans's 'Catalogue of a Collection of Engraved Portraits' indicates the extensive stock of upwards of 20,000 English and foreign portrait prints that was available at his Great Queen Street shop. Evans was particularly well suited to this trade. First he was remembered for his 'cleverness and industry' ('GM', 1860, 434) in arranging his complicated stock into a taxonomy which met the needs of his customers and, second, as an 'amiable, good-tempered man' ('GM', 1835, 105), he was able to develop close relationships with a number of collectors and literary men. For example, the antiquarian Mark Noble frequently consulted him on matters of biographical research and, in return, Evans supplied him with detailed accounts of the information inscribed on various prints. 
The enterprise prospered, and following Edward Evans's death, at Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, on 24 November 1835, his wife, Anne, continued the business with their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 8954


Edward David Evans (1818-1860). He too attained a reputation for his knowledge of rare portrait prints. Edward David Evans died on 15 August 1860, at the age of only forty-two, at his home, 3 Circus Road, St John's Wood. He was survived by his wife and four children, and the business continued trading, as A. E. Evans & Son, under the guidance of his brother Albert Evans, from new premises at 403 Strand. 


@@@@@


doc= 8955


Evans, Evan (1731-1788), scholar and poet, was born on 20 May 1731 at Cynhawdref farm in the parish of Lledrod, Cardiganshire. The son of Jenkin Evans (died 'c'.1758), a farmer, and his wife, Catherine (died 1788), he sat at the feet of Edward Richard at his celebrated school in Ystradmeurig before entering Merton College, Oxford, in December 1750. He left without graduating, but by 1754 he was an ordained priest and he spent the following two decades wandering disconsolately from curacy to curacy. He served in at least eighteen different cures in England and Wales, and became an instantly recognized figure among his countrymen. He adopted the bardic name Ieuan Fardd (Ieuan the Poet), but since he was an extraordinarily tall and lean man his contemporaries normally referred to him as Ieuan Brydydd Hir (Ieuan the Tall Poet) or Longobardus. 
For much of his life Evans was preoccupied by two issues of critical importance in eighteenth-century Wales. The first was the Anglicization of the established church in Wales, the direct result of the appointment of non-Welsh prelates. Evans despised the absentee 'Esgyb-Eingl' ('Anglo-bishops') who passed over deserving Welsh clergymen in favour of pliant, non-Welsh-speaking time-servers, and became convinced that ardent and outspoken Welsh patriots within the church would always be denied affluent and permanent preferments. As avenues of advancement were closed to him, he began to thunder and rage against his 'betes noires', the Anglo-bishops and the place-hunters and sycophants who preached 'horrid unintelligible jargon' in Welsh pulpits. In 1764-5 he completed an unpublished polemic entitled 'The grievances of the principality of Wales in the church considered', the most sweeping indictment of the established church since the publication of Erasmus Saunders's tract on the diocese of St David's in 1721. Since the manuscript was riddled with barbed references to 'ravenous wolves', 'ignorant bunglers', and 'useless rogues' who had turned the church into a 'house of Merchandise and a den of thieves' (NL Wales, MS 2009B), it is not surprising that the Society of Cymmrodorion was reluctant to publish it. Convinced that bishops looked upon him with 'an evil eye' (Owen, 2.620), however, Evans continued until his dying day to vent his spleen on arrogant English churchmen, tithe-grabbing landowners, and the new Methodist enthusiasts. 
Evans's second preoccupation was the sorry plight of Welsh culture. At a time when Wales lacked major cultural institutions and libraries, he resolved to concentrate on fostering the cause of Welsh scholarship. Influenced by Edward Richard and Lewis Morris, he joined the Morris circle and spent his leisure hours seeking out and copying manuscripts of literary and historical interest. He tramped the length and breadth of Wales in search of unpublished manuscripts in private libraries, many of which had been subjected to the ravages of mildew, mice, rats, and rain. His manuscripts and books were so numerous that two men and horses were required to move his library in 1767. He established fruitful links with the poet Thomas Gray and the antiquary Thomas Percy, and his joy was boundless when he discovered valuable texts such as 'Y Gododdin' and the work of Taliesin. His knowledge of the contents of Welsh manuscripts was second to none, and his major work, 'Some Specimens of the Poetry of the Antient Welsh Bards' (1764), has been widely acclaimed as a seminal landmark in the history of Welsh scholarship. This was the first attempt to interpret the works of the Poets of the Princes and to chart the development of Welsh poetry from the sixth century to the Tudor period. It established Evans's reputation as the greatest Welsh scholar since Edward Lhuyd. Evans also composed 'awdlau', 'cywyddau', and 'englynion', mainly for the benefit of his patrons and companions, and his most celebrated poem is 'Llys Ifor Hael' ('The court of Ifor the Generous'), a series of 'englynion' lamenting the demise of the heroic poetic tradition which he composed in 1779 during a visit to the ruins of the court of Ifor Hael (Ifor ap Llywelyn) at Gwernyclepa, near Basaleg, Monmouthshire. 
Increasingly, however, Evans became a misanthropic, disorganized, and dishevelled figure, given to fits of melancholic depression which he sought (unsuccessfully) to relieve by imbibing prodigious quantities of alcohol. During the 1770s the second Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (1749-1789) took pity on him and gave him a modest pension and access to the literary treasures at the Wynnstay library. But Evans remained at odds with himself and the world around him. His writings became passionately patriotic and Anglophobe, and in the preface to a collection of translated sermons in 1776 he berated the likes of Williams Wynn for 'wearing the badge of their vassalage, by adopting the language of their conquerors, which is a mark of the most despicable meanness of spirit' (E. Evans, 'Casgliad o bregethau', 1, 1776, sig. B3). Similarly, in his best-known English poem -- 'The Love of our Country', published in 1772 -- he depicted Owain Glyndwr as a popular hero rather than as a bandit rebel in order to instil into his fellow countrymen greater pride in their national heritage. 
During the latter years of Evans's life Paul Panton and Thomas Pennant sought to relieve his penury by inviting subscriptions from well-wishers on his behalf, and in 1787 Panton also purchased his remarkable collection of manuscripts, much of which entered the public domain when 'The Myvyrian Archaiology' was published in three volumes between 1801 and 1807. Although Evans's burning patriotism and hard-hitting criticisms did not endear him to the establishment in Wales, he was highly regarded as a scholar. Unmarried and virtually penniless, he died on 4 August 1788 in the remote farmhouse where he had been born, and was buried in Lledrod churchyard. Such a gifted man deserved a better fate than a life of penury and neglect. 


@@@@@


doc= 8956


Evans, Evan (1804-1886), Congregational minister, was born at Gellillyndu, Llandewibrefi, Cardiganshire, on 8 March 1804, the son of David Evans, a member of Daniel Rowland's Calvinistic Methodist congregation. In 1824 he moved to industrial Monmouthshire, becoming a schoolmaster at Pontypool and later at Goetre and Nant-y-glo. He began preaching with the Methodists in 1825 and was an ardent supporter of the Sunday school movement and the education of children, editing the monthly publication, 'Cyfaill Plentyn' ('Companions of children'), from 1835. After 1830 he became a complete abstainer, and was a powerful advocate for the temperance cause, suffering persecution because of his views. Changing convictions led him to join the Congregationalists at the nearby community of Beaufort, Brecknockshire, in 1847. Becoming a popular minister for his new denomination at Llan-giwg, Glamorgan, in 1852, he subsequently moved to chapels in southern Monmouthshire, at Risca and Machen and then Risca alone, from 1857 to 1860. In 1869 he emigrated to America, following his father and other family members who had left Wales in 1833. Initially settling at Oakhill, Ohio, he travelled and preached in various places before establishing the first Welsh church in Arkansas at Curtis in 1881. His wife, Mary Valentine of Beaufort, whom he had married about 1830, died in January 1886; Evans himself died in Curtis, Arkansas, on 29 October 1886. They were survived by three children, one of whom, Beriah Gwynfe Evans (1848-1927), became a prominent Welsh nationalist, journalist, and pioneer dramatist. 
In addition to his periodical work and contributions to many journals, such as 'Cyfaill yr Aelwyd' ('Companions of the hearth', volumes 6 and 7), on contemporary issues, Evans was the author of five books: 'Rhodd mam i'w plentyn' ('Mother's gift to children', 1833), 'Y cyfammod gweithredoedd' ('Covenant of deeds', ), 'Ffordd Duw yr y cyssegr a'r mor' ('God's way in the sacred sea', 1842), and two volumes of sermons, 'Arthrawiaeth a dyledswydd' ('Doctrine and duty', 1865-6). He also translated six works on theology and religion into Welsh. At the time of his death he was working on his reminiscences of eighty years of changes in Wales, a work which was never completed. 


@@@@@


doc= 8957


Evans, Evan Herber (1836-1896), Congregational minister and college head, the eldest son of Josiah Evans (1814-1876), a blacksmith, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' James (1817-1894), was born at Pant-yr-onnen, near Newcastle Emlyn, Carmarthenshire, on 5 July 1836. He spent some early years with his grandfather Jonah Evans at Pen-yr-herber, whence, in 1873, he adopted his second name. He received his early education at the private grammar school of John Davies in Adpar, Newcastle Emlyn, and at the British School in Llechryd. He was apprenticed to a local draper at Rhydlewis from 1850 to 1853 and after a year's further service in Pontypridd and Merthyr Tudful he moved to Liverpool. Here, in 1857, he started to preach in the Welsh Congregational church (the Tabernacle), Great Crosshall Street, then under the pastorate of John Thomas (1821-1892). After twelve months' preparatory training at the Normal College, Swansea, he entered the Memorial College, Brecon, in 1858, where he remained for four years. He was ordained as pastor of Libanus church, Morriston, on 26 June 1862, and almost immediately he became one of the leading Welsh preachers. After three years at Morriston (during which time a debt of $2000 was paid off the chapel) he moved in October 1865 to Caernarfon to undertake the charge of a small church, Salem, established only two or three years previously, and still heavily in debt. Before he left it, in April 1894, it had the largest congregation of any Congregational church in north Wales, the chapel having been enlarged in 1890. 
Evans was elected chairman of the Union of Welsh Independents in 1886, and delivered his address, entitled 'The answers of Christ to the questions of the age', at Aberdar. 
On 20 September 1865 Evans married Jenny ('b'. 1841/2), only daughter of John Hughes, jeweller, of Caernarfon; she died on 10 May 1875, leaving an only daughter, Lizzie, who married the Revd O. L. Roberts of Liverpool. On 28 September 1877 Evans married, secondly, Annie Ellen (1842/3-1927), the only daughter of Owen Jones, of Waterloo House, Caernarfon, who survived him. Their only child, Owen Herber, died in infancy on 27 May 1883. 
In 1891 Evans was elected chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, and his first presidential address, entitled 'The free churches and their opportunities', delivered at the City Temple, London, was described by Dr A. M. Fairbairn of Mansfield College, Oxford, as 'magnificent'. His second address, delivered at Bradford in October 1892, 'A living church', was (by special vote of the assembly) ordered to be printed in a cheap form for general circulation. In 1891 he became lecturer on homiletics at Bala-Bangor Congregational college. In 1894 he became its principal. 
Throughout his life Evans took an active part in local politics; he was elected on the first school board at Caernarfon in 1874, and on the first county council in 1888. He declined, however, to stand as Liberal candidate for Caernarfon boroughs in May 1885 and April 1890. In 1895 he was appointed to the commission of the peace for Caernarvonshire, apparently an honour never previously conferred on a Welsh dissenting minister. He was awarded an honorary doctorate in divinity by the University of Miami, Ohio, in 1887. 
Evans acted as editor of 'Y Dysgedydd' ('The instructor'), one of the monthly magazines of the Welsh Congregationalists. From December 1873 to May 1880 he shared its editorship with Robert Thomas 'Ap Vychan', but had sole charge of it from 1880 until his death. A selection of his editorial notes was issued shortly after his death by his son-in-law, O. L. Roberts, under the title of 'Nodiadau Herber' (1897). His brother, the Revd W. Justin Evans, also edited a volume of his sermons entitled 'True and False Aims and other Sermons' (1897) including reprints of his two addresses from the chair of the Congregational Union. A volume of his Welsh sermons, entitled 'Goleuni yn yr hwyr' (1904), was edited by his son-in-law. Evans had just completed, before his final illness, a chapter which he was contributing to a biography of Dr John Thomas of Liverpool, and a short life of David Rees of Llanelli, which appeared posthumously. 
But it was as a preacher that Evans was chiefly remembered: unoriginal in content, his sermons were practical rather than dogmatic, but his physique, his voice, the cast of his sermon, his entire personality, all combined to win him a position unequalled by any living preacher. Probably no other Welsh preacher so often appeared in English pulpits; between 1873 and 1877 he turned down several calls to minister to Congregational churches at Bishopsgate, Bath, and Brighton, and Westminster chapel and Harecourt chapel, London. Evans died on 30 December 1896 at his home, The Roft, Upper Bangor, and was buried there on 4 January 1897 in the Glanadda cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 8958


Evans, Sir Frederick John Owen (1815-1885), naval officer and hydrographer, son of John Evans, master RN, was born on 9 March 1815. He entered the navy as a second-class volunteer in 1828. After serving in the 'Rose' and the 'Winchester' he was transferred in 1833 to the 'Thunder', Captain Richard Owen, and spent three years in surveying the coasts of Central America, the Demerara River, and the Bahama banks. Evans subsequently served in the Mediterranean on the 'Caledonia' (flagship), 'Asia', 'Rapid', 'Rolla', 'Dido', and 'Wolverene', passing through the different ranks of the 'master's' line, the officers then charged with the duties of navigation. In 1841 Evans was appointed master of the 'Fly', and for the next five years surveyed the Coral Sea, the great barrier reef of Australia, and Torres Strait. Beete Jukes, the geologist, was on the 'Fly', and wrote an account of the expedition. Shortly after his return to Britain Evans married, on 12 November 1846, Elizabeth Mary, eldest daughter of Captain Charles Hall RN, of Stoke, Plymouth. 
After a short spell of duty in the Isle of Man, Evans returned in 1847, in the 'Acheron', to New Zealand, where he spent four years in surveying. During the Russian war he served on the 'Lighting', Captain Bartholomew Sulivan, in the Baltic, where he received the special thanks of Sir Charles Napier for his share in piloting the fleet through the Aland isles. 
By this time Evans had become known by his scientific qualifications, and in 1855 he was appointed superintendent of the compass department of the navy. He had at once to consider a difficult problem, the use of the compass in iron ships and armourclads. In co-operation with Archibald Smith, he accomplished the task satisfactorily, and he contributed seven papers, on the magnetism of ships, to the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society, of which he was elected fellow in June 1862. This work was critical to the safe navigation of iron warships. 
In 1858 Evans prepared a 'Chart of Curves of Equal Magnetic Declination', published by the Admiralty. In 1860 he wrote a valuable 'Report on Compass Deviations in the Royal Navy', on the magnetic character of the various iron ships in the navy, and also of the 'Great Eastern'. His most important work was the 'Admiralty Manual for Deviations of the Compass' (1862), of which Smith and himself were joint editors. A simple account of the same subject was issued by Evans in 1870 as an 'Elementary Manual for Deviations of the Compass'. These became standard textbooks, and were translated and adopted by the major maritime nations. 
Evans later devoted much attention to terrestrial magnetism. He compiled the magnetical instructions for the observers on the 'Challenger' in 1872, and delivered a lecture on the 'Magnetism of the earth' to the Royal Geographical Society in 1878. He was made a staff commander in 1863, staff captain in 1867, and full captain in 1872. In 1865 he was appointed chief naval assistant to the hydrographer to the Admiralty, Captain G. H. Richards, whom he succeeded in 1874. He was made CB in May 1873, and KCB in May 1881. He was vice-president of the Royal Geographical Society from 1879 to 1881, and president of the geographical section of the British Association in 1876. In 1881 he contributed a paper to the latter on 'Oceanic or maritime discovery from 1831 to 1881'. 
After resigning the post of hydrographer in August 1884, Evans was appointed one of the British delegates to the international conference held at Washington in 1885, to fix a prime meridian and universal day. He died at his residence, 21 Dawson Place, Pembridge Square, Bayswater, London, on 20 December 1885. He was the only officer to join the hydrographic service as a master who rose to be hydrographer of the navy. 


@@@@@


doc= 8959


Evans, George (bap. 1631, d. 1702), antiquary, was baptized in the abbey church, St Albans, on 19 February 1631, the son of George and Mary Evans. He was probably educated at the free school and thereafter was admitted to Jesus College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1650 and proceeding MA in 1653. He was a fellow from 1650 to 1658, and was awarded a doctorate in divinity in 1665. By this time he had been admitted a canon of Windsor (26 July 1660) and on 6 May 1663 he was given a lease of the rectory and parsonage of St Benet Fink, London, by the college of canons. He was also, on 26 March 1667, instituted rector of the parish of Hitcham, Buckinghamshire, where he seems to have spent some time. 
Evans and his wife, Rebecca, had five sons and four daughters; a son and a daughter were buried in the churchyard at Hitcham in 1685 and 1690 and his daughter Mary married there in 1697. He seems to have been an affectionate father, asking to be buried 'as near my dear children... as conveniently can be' and 'with as much privacy and little expense as well may be' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/454, sig. 45). He also had a lively interest in the past and present of St George's Chapel, Windsor; two volumes of his notes of deeds and memoranda of events concerning the college survive in the chapter library. Some of his work was published in 'The Antiquities of Berkshire' (1719) by his friend Elias Ashmole, with whom he corresponded over a number of years. Evans died at Hitcham on 2 March 1702 and was buried in the churchyard there four days later; his wife survived him. In addition to the advowson of Hitcham, he owned land and property in Buckinghamshire, Huntingdon, and Cambridgeshire, and had lent about $170 to the crown to be repaid as annuities from the excise. Among his bequests were gifts to the free school of St Albans, the college of Windsor, and the poor of St Albans and New Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 8960


Evans, Sir George de Lacy (1787-1870), army officer, was born on 7 October 1787 in Moig, co. Limerick, the third son of John Evans, a small landed proprietor, and his wife, Mary Ann, a descendant of the Anglo-Norman family of de Lacy, which had a distinguished military tradition. Evans attended the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, before joining the army in India as a volunteer in 1806. Appointed ensign in the 22nd foot on 1 February 1807, he displayed an instinctive boldness and daring in the campaign against Amir Khan, and was promoted for gallantry to the rank of lieutenant on 1 December 1808. He served under Major-General the Hon. John Abercromby in the capture of Mauritius (1810) but declined an appointment on Sir John Malcolm's mission to Persia, preferring active service in the Deccan. In March 1812 he exchanged into the 3rd dragoons, then serving with Wellington in the Peninsula. He participated in the rear-guard action during the retreat from Burgos (1812) and, despite being wounded in the action at the Hermoza River, remained in the saddle as an example to his men. He led several cavalry charges at Vitoria (21 June 1813), earned plaudits for his daring in the battle of Sorauren, had a horse shot from under him at Bayonne, and served in the actions of Nivelle, Orthez, and Tarbes. In the battle of Toulouse (10 April 1814) he was twice wounded and had two horses shot from under him. Ever eager for combat, he served as an engineer in the trenches before San Sebastian and in the siege of Pamplona. Apart from a brief attachment to the quartermaster-general's department (13 March - 25 May 1814), and the award of the military general service medal with bars for Vitoria, the Pyrenees, and Toulouse, his Peninsular services were unrecognized, leaving him deeply embittered about the purchase system of promotion in the army. 
Evans found further action in the Anglo-American War, during which he served on the staff of Major-General Robert Ross. He had another two horses shot from under him in the battle of Bladensburg (24 August 1814), took part in the retaliatory burning of public buildings in Washington, and served in the abortive assault on Baltimore. As the only soldier in the naval operations which preceded the battle of New Orleans, he earned the naval general service medal, and subsequently participated in the disastrous attacks on New Orleans (December 1814 and January 1815), where he was twice wounded but praised for his 'indefatigable zeal and intelligence'. Mentioned five times in dispatches from the United States, Evans was promoted captain in the 5th West India regiment (12 January 1815), and gained a brevet majority (11 May 1815) on his appointment as deputy quartermaster-general with the duke of Wellington's army in the Southern Netherlands. He served at Quatre Bras and then at Waterloo (18 June 1815), where he had two horses shot or sabred from under him but gave the order for the advance of the Union brigade of cavalry and assisted in reorganizing the brigade after its charge. Made a brevet lieutenant-colonel on 18 June 1815, he remained on the staff of the army of occupation until its withdrawal from France. 
Placed on half pay (25 April 1817) and frustrated in his hopes for further military employment, Evans immersed himself in radical politics. A Russophobe, he wrote two alarmist books which sounded the tocsin over a possible Russian threat to the empire. They prompted an official inquiry by the India board (1830) into the state of Britain's imperial defences and advanced his political credentials. Adopted as the radical candidate for Rye, he narrowly won and lost elections in 1830 before regaining his seat in the pre-reformed parliament in 1831. An assiduous MP, he regularly attended meetings in Rye and spoke in parliamentary debates, but was never a good orator. He based his speeches upon masses of factual data and lengthy quotations, and was often criticized as inaudible and sometimes incoherent. Nevertheless he promoted many radical causes, such as electoral reform, the ballot, triennial parliaments, Polish independence, Irish reform, and the separation of church and state. He advocated the abolition of slavery, military flogging, the purchase system, and the corn laws, and deplored the use of the yeomanry to maintain public order. His extreme radicalism, together with boundary changes, lost him elections in Rye and Westminster in 1832, but in 1833 he defeated Sir John Cam Hobhouse in a Westminster by-election, profiting from a tory candidacy which split the anti-radical vote. In the Commons he championed the causes which concerned many of his metropolitan constituents, including the burdens of assessed taxation on houses and windows, the powers of the Metropolitan Police, and the 'Poor Law Amendment Act'. He was re-elected in January 1835. On 21 June 1834 he married Josette Hughes ('nee' Arbuthnot), a wealthy widow. They had no children. 
In May 1835 General Alava, the Spanish ambassador in London, obtained the permission of the king and of Lord Melbourne's ministry to raise a force of 10,000 volunteers, which would be known as the British Legion, to support the Spanish constitutional cause against the Carlist insurrection. While tories disparaged the volunteers as mercenaries Evans, a prominent advocate of the constitutional cause in Spain and Portugal, accepted the offer of command. Now politically and financially secure, and with the local rank of lieutenant-general and a salary of $5000 a year from Madrid, he yearned for field command. When Evans assumed command of the legion in San Sebastian in August 1835 he found his corps undermanned (with only some 7000 effective soldiers), untrained (as training had been banned in Britain), and bereft of experienced officers (as the duke of Wellington and Lord Hill, the commander-in-chief, had explicitly condemned military service in Spain). Still willing to proffer support to the Spanish cause, Evans marched his forces over 150 miles to Vitoria in December, assisted in the skirmish at Arlaban (16 January 1836), and, accompanied by a battalion of Royal Marines under Lord John Hay, raised the siege of San Sebastian (5 May 1836) after a fierce battle. The Madrid authorities, none the less, utterly neglected the legion, leaving officers and men with mounting arrears of pay, inadequate supplies and reinforcements, and scant medical support, especially at Vitoria when fever and dysentery swept through the ranks. Throughout the summer of 1836 Evans had to cope with falling morale, contractual disputes, and dissension over the lack of pay and medals (he even dismissed several hundred mutineers from the legion's service). The legion repulsed formidable Carlist attacks on its lines on 31 May, and 6 and 9 June, and mounted an abortive assault on Fuenterrabia (11 July 1836) before withstanding a massive Carlist offensive on 1 October 1836. In this battle Evans was slightly injured, but took even greater risks by conspicuously riding from one part of the line to another in complete disregard for his personal safety. Thereafter the legion endured several months of grinding inactivity until it received the long-awaited reinforcements of 210 officers and 5135 men. Now able to take the field with some 9000 troops (supported by Royal Marines and Spanish forces), Evans launched a disastrous attack upon the Carlist lines at Hernani (15 March 1837), losing 900 men killed and wounded. Only the arrival of General Espartero's army of 14,000 men enabled Evans to resume his offensive, and, on 14 May 1837, the combined forces stormed the heights overlooking Hernani. They then seized the towns of Oyarzun, Irun, and Fuenterrabia (18 May 1837), with the last garrison surrendering after Evans had spared the prisoners of Irun. Although the Spanish authorities belatedly recognized the achievements of the legion, Evans and the majority of legionnaires declined requests to re-engage and left Spain. Evans received the grand crosses of San Fernando and of Charles III. 
Evans encountered a mixed reception on his return to London. Despite promotion to the rank of colonel on 10 January 1837, re-election for Westminster in July, and the appointment as KCB in August 1837, Evans found his military achievements derided by Conservatives in the press and parliament. Having failed after an ineffectual speech to assuage criticisms in the house, Evans continued to press Madrid over the legion's arrears of pay and sought to defend his actions in a book entitled 'Memoranda of the Contest in Spain' (1840). This preoccupation with the legion, coupled with divisions among Westminster Liberals, left his constituency vulnerable to a revival of Conservative fortunes in the general election of 1841. Narrowly defeated at the polls, Evans remained a prominent figure in radical politics by participating in the campaign for the repeal of the corn laws. Re-elected for Westminster at a by-election in 1846 (and at the subsequent general elections of 1847 and 1852), he continued to promote local Westminster grievances and army reform in the Commons, but aroused increasing criticism from ultra-radicals within his constituency by tempering his support for the more extreme Chartist proposals. 
Evans's military career revived, however. Promoted to the rank of major-general (9 November 1846), he was given a brigade command at the Chobham camp exercise in the summer of 1853. Having impressed Lord Hardinge, the commander-in-chief, he was appointed colonel of the 21st Royal North British Fusiliers (29 August 1853) and given command of the 2nd division in the Crimea, with a subsequent promotion to lieutenant-general on 20 June 1854. He was always concerned about the health and morale of his men, choosing camp sites with care in Bulgaria to minimize losses from cholera and authorizing recreational sports to relieve boredom and sustain morale. At the battle of the Alma (26 September 1854), he not only led his forces with distinction, taking them across the river to the relief of the light division, but also maintained the offensive by prompting the duke of Cambridge to provide support with the 1st division. Though severely wounded at the Alma and weakened by illness, he commanded his men in their successful repulse of a Russian sortie from Sevastopol (the battle of little Inkerman, 26 October 1854). After a fall from his horse Evans was hospitalized, but returned to his division during the main battle of Inkerman (5 November 1854), inspiring officers and men without undermining the command of Major-General Pennefather. Debilitated by his exertions, Evans retired from the war and returned as a national hero. He received a vote of thanks from the House of Commons and a GCB in July 1855. He was appointed grand officer of the Legion d'honneur in 1856, and received both an honorary DCL from Oxford University and the Turkish order of the Mejidiye. 
Although Evans deprecated parliamentary criticism of the Crimean army and deplored the cessation of hostilities in January 1856, he remained passionately committed to army reform. This became his main concern during his last ten years in parliament (retaining his Westminster seat without opposition in the elections of 1857 and 1859). He served on several royal commissions and select committees, spoke in army debates, championed the volunteer movement of 1859, and repeatedly pressed for the abolition -- in whole or in part -- of the purchase system. His dismal oratory, laced all too often with personal invective, failed to sway the house, and he found that the press was much less interested in the issue after the army's suppression of the Indian mutiny. Evans lost further credibility as a reformer and dissipated his energies by promoting the cause of the local European forces of the East India Company. He bitterly opposed the 'European Forces (India) Bill' (1860) and so found himself isolated from both front benches and ignored by the metropolitan press. Despite promotion to the rank of general on 10 March 1861 he achieved little as an army reformer, and attended parliament less and less frequently on account of recurrent illnesses. He retired from political life at the dissolution of 1865 and died at his home, 6 Great Cumberland Place, London, on 9 January 1870, aged eighty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 8961


Evans, John (c.1652-1724), East India Company chaplain and Church of Ireland bishop of Meath, was born into a Welsh-speaking family at Plas-du, Llanarmon, Caernarvonshire. Although the precise details of his parentage and early life remain obscure, it seems most likely that he was the son of Ynyr Evans of Plas-du, and that he was the John, son of Bonner (an Anglicization of ab Ynyr or Bynyr), who matriculated at Gloucester Hall, Oxford, in 1668 (when his age was given as sixteen), but left the university without taking a degree. 
After ordination Evans served as a curate at St Magnus the Martyr, Thames Street, London, and then at Isleworth in Middlesex, where he came to the attention of Sir Joseph Ashe, first baronet, governor of the East India Company. Through Ashe's recommendation Evans was appointed in 1678 as the company's first chaplain in India, at $100 a year. On 13 February 1679 he married Elizabeth Trenchfield, sister of the interloping merchant Richard Trenchfield, and himself became drawn into the interloping trade. He thus attracted the unwelcome attentions of William Hedges, the agent sent out by the company in 1682, who reported that Evans 'busies himself too much in trade and merchandise for a man of his coat, being certainly one of the greatest traders in Hugli' ('Diary of William Hedges', 1.140). Furthermore, Evans was regarded by those who had business dealings with him as a 'great knave' (ibid.). In consequence, Evans lost the trust of the company directors, who disparaged him as 'the quondam minister but late great merchant', and as the 'politic padre' (ibid.), and he was eventually dismissed from the chaplaincy in 1692. He made his own way back to England, took his bachelor's and doctor's degrees in divinity at Oxford in 1695, and secured a parish in his native county, though whether his advancement was the product of political influence or a tribute to the power of his money is unclear. He was certainly wealthy enough from his trading days to maintain a residence in Bloomsbury, Middlesex (which suggests that he may well have been an absentee rector), and he kept up his contacts with East India merchants. 
In 1699 Evans was said to be actively soliciting the likely vacancy in the bishopric of St David's, and in 1701 he succeeded in obtaining Bangor. A staunch whig, Evans soon showed his party colours in convocation, where in 1702 he caused a minor furore by accusing the leading high churchman Francis Atterbury of lying, in return for which Atterbury's high-church friends maliciously questioned the legitimacy of Evans's own summons. In the Lords he was a reliable junto whig and he regularly subscribed to partisan protests. He was also a founder member of the Most Honourable and Loyal Society of Ancient Britons, the first Welsh club to be established in London, which had a strong party-political bias. His active involvement in the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and in the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel is evidence that he was more than a political prelate, but it was undoubtedly his whiggism that earned him translation to the lucrative Irish see of Meath in 1716, at a time when he supposedly had his pick of several vacancies. In Ireland as in England Evans did not flinch from political controversy; he became a prominent spokesman for the English interest in the Irish House of Lords, in particular over the issue of the appellate jurisdiction of the house. 
Evans's correspondence with William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, reveals him to be not only a man of firm principles and unquenchable loyalty to administration, but one of passionate temper. Evans felt keenly his political isolation in Ireland, where he and a coterie of like-minded bishops, including his old friend William Nicolson of Derry, took prime responsibility for the defence of the ministry's position in parliament, and his often querulous commentary on the intrigues of his 'patriot' opponents, imputing to them the most extreme views (extending as far as the contemplation of armed rebellion in support of Irish legislative independence), sometimes suggests an imbalance in his own psychology. He carried his political vendettas over into ecclesiastical affairs, especially in his quarrel with Jonathan Swift, who held a living in Evans's diocese. At an episcopal visitation in 1718 words passed between the two men which resulted in Swift reminding his bishop that he was speaking to a clergyman and not a footman. When Swift did not attend subsequent visitations Evans petulantly refused to accept his proxy. Swift's letters of self-justification included the memorable reproof: 'I am only sorry that you, who are of a country famed for good nature, have found a way to unite the hasty passion of your own countrymen, with the long, sedate resentment of the Spaniard' ('Correspondence', 2.388-90). At the same time, however, Evans showed himself to be a determined opponent of clerical absenteeism (which again involved him in conflicts with Swift), and a surprisingly disinterested steward of the material interests of the church. His energetic pursuit of a legal case against an influential tenant, Henry St George, for the renegotiation of an over-indulgent lease eventually provoked Irish MPs to introduce a bill to preserve the rights of tenants at the expense of the church, which the bishop duly opposed in the Lords. 
Evans died suddenly in Dublin on 2 March 1724, after having been 'afflicted with a violent fit of the gout about ten days' (BL, Add. MS 6116, fol. 132), and was buried in the churchyard of 'Little St George's' Chapel in Temple Street in Dublin. His wife evidently outlived him, but there is no mention in contemporary correspondence of any surviving children, although at least one son (John) had been born in India. In his will, described by Swift as the 'wise' act of a 'fool' ('Correspondence', 3.11), he bequeathed $1000 for the building of an episcopal palace at Ardbraccan in co. Meath (which was completed only in 1776), a much smaller sum of money to endow his first rectory in Caernarvonshire, and the residue of his personal estate for the benefit of poorer clergy in England and the churches of his Irish diocese. 


@@@@@


doc= 8962


Evans, John (1679/80-1730), Presbyterian minister and historian, was born at Wrexham, Denbighshire, the son of John Evans (1628/9-1700), dissenting minister and schoolmaster, and his wife, Katherine ('bap'. 1638), widow of Vavasor Powell (1617-1670), Independent minister, and the fifth daughter of Gilbert Gerard of Crewood, parliamentarian colonel. His great-grandfather and grandfather were successively rectors of Penegoes, Montgomeryshire. After a brief spell at Magdalen College, Oxford, from where he was expelled in 1648, John Evans senior was ordained priest on 28 November 1648, yet soon had doubts about the established church. Briefly master of Bala School, Merioneth, he was appointed master of Oswestry grammar school in July 1657, on Cromwell's recommendation. Ejected in 1662, when he refused to subscribe to the 'Act of Uniformity', he went to live in Wrexham, where in February 1668 he was chosen pastor of the Independent chapel. Licensed as a Congregational minister on 22 May 1672, he came to share his wife's Baptist views; by 1689 his congregation included Baptists as well as Independents and Presbyterians, although the Presbyterians withdrew in 1691. 
The younger John Evans was educated first in London, under Thomas Rowe, and from 26 May 1697 at Richard Frankland's academy at Rathmell, Yorkshire, which was continued by Timothy Jollie. Following his father's death, on 16 July 1700, Evans was taken into the household in Boreatton, Shropshire, of Mrs Hunt, widow of Rowland Hunt and sister of Lord Paget, ambassador to the Porte. While living there he studied under James Owen and, according to Harris, read the whole of Matthew Poole's five-volume biblical commentary in Latin and the works of all the Christian writers of the first three centuries after Christ. On 18 August 1702 he was ordained minister at Wrexham, after which he took charge of the new Independent congregation there. In 1704 he was invited to join the ministry at Dublin but was dissuaded from accepting it by Daniel Williams, who offered to take him as his assistant in London. Evans served as assistant at the meeting-house in Hand Alley, Westminster, until Williams's death, in 1716, when he was chosen as his successor. Under Williams's influence he was persuaded to join the Presbyterians in London, rather than the Independents, as was his original intention. 
Evans was an eloquent and popular preacher. A man of tolerant views, he played a prominent role on the side of the non-subscribers in the Salters' Hall controversy in 1719. His appreciative congregation built him a new chapel in New Broad Street, Petty France, that opened on 14 December 1729. He also acted as Sunday evening preacher for several years until 1716, and in October 1723 he was elected preacher of the Merchants' Lecture at the same place. Over twenty of his sermons were published separately, yet his most successful publication was a collection, 'Practical Discourses Concerning the Christian Temper: Thirty-Eight Sermons' (2 vols., 1723); a fourth edition appeared in 1737 and it was still being reprinted as late as 1812. In the preface to the sermons Isaac Watts declared that 'they contain, perhaps the most complete summary of those duties which make up the Christian life, that hath been published in our age' (Wilson, 2.216). The collection was also highly praised by Philip Doddridge, who regarded it as among the best practical treatises in English. Evans's 'Sermons on various subjects, preach'd to young people; designed for the promoting of early piety' (1725) was reissued in 1802, together with Dr John Erskine's memoir of the author. Evans also published his side of a correspondence with Dr John Cumming, minister of the Scottish church at London Wall, 'concerning the regard which ought to be had to Scripture consequences', and commented on the epistle to the 'Romans' for the 'New Testament' commentary left unfinished by Matthew Henry. In November 1728 he was awarded the degree of DD from Edinburgh University. 
Early in his career Evans had shown an interest in the history of dissent when he edited Charles Owen's account of his brother James Owen, who kept a dissenting academy first at Oswestry and then at Shrewsbury; this was published in 1709. He formed a plan to write a comprehensive history of nonconformity from the Reformation to the civil war and collected a large quantity of materials, some of which were donated, such as Thomas Dixon's information about Cumberland and Westmorland congregations, but most of which he acquired at great expense. He read exhaustively and accumulated a fine library that amounted to 10,000 volumes at his death. Ill health prevented him from writing more than a sixth of the intended three-volume history, but he compiled an invaluable list of the members of Baptist, Independent, and Presbyterian congregations in England and Wales from 1715 to 1729, which is preserved at Dr Williams's Library, London. 
On 7 December 1708 at St Katharine by the Tower, London, Evans married Elizabeth, the wealthy daughter of John Quick (bap. 1636, d. 1706), ejected minister, and his wife, Elizabeth Cook (died 1708). With his wife's fortune and his own savings Evans unwisely speculated in the South Sea Company, and lost all his investment. His last years were troubled by financial difficulties, which he kept secret, and his health rapidly worsened. Described as being of 'uncommonly tall stature, yet not a lusty man' (Wilson, 2.219), Evans died, aged fifty, on 16 May 1730, of dropsy and other complications, and was buried in Dr Williams's vault in Bunhill Fields, London; William Harris preached the funeral sermon at New Broad Street, Petty France. Evans was survived by his wife and by one of his daughters, Elizabeth; his library was sold at auction to provide a much needed income for them. 


@@@@@


doc= 8963


Evans, John (c.1677-1718), actor and theatre manager, was probably born in Ireland, but no details are known. He joined the Smock Alley troupe in Dublin in 1699 and was later associated with Thomas Elrington, Thomas Griffith, and Joseph Ashbury in the management of the theatre. In 1707-8 he played Friar Andrews in Mary Pix's 'The Spanish Wives', and on 2 December 1709 he received a benefit in Dublin. He then travelled to England, and is listed in Thomas Betterton's company at the Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket for the 1709-10 season. Billed as 'lately arrived from the theatre in Dublin', he took over the role of Kite in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer' from Richard Escourt on 16 March 1710. On 14 April he performed the title role in 'The Spanish Fryar', and on 4 May he played Falstaff in 'King Henry the Fourth' for his benefit before returning to Ireland. In 1714 his Dublin company played a summer season at Cork. According to William Chetwood, Evans was invited to a tavern, where he ill-advisedly proposed the health of Queen Anne. A duel ensued with a Jacobite officer whom Evans disarmed. Although the incident ended with reconciliation, a story spread that Evans had insulted the army. When the company returned to Dublin, Evans's performance as Alexander in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens' was stopped until he publicly apologized. A voice from the pit cried, 'Kneel, you rascal.' 'I'll kneel to none but God, and my queen!', said Evans. Although it has been reported that this reply and subsequent kneeling satisfied both Evans and his opponents, according to Chetwood the situation was only calmed by army officers who knew the history of the original quarrel. 
In 1715 Evans returned to London for an engagement at Drury Lane. On 22 January he played Claudius in 'Hamlet' and during the rest of the season revised his earlier roles of Kite, the Spanish Fryar, and Falstaff. On 21 March he played Aquilius in Lee's 'Mithridates, King of Pontus' for Thomas Elrington's benefit. At his own benefit, 'at the desire of several Ladies of Quality' on 28 March, he took the part of King Harry the Eighth in 'Virtue Betray'd' by John Banks, alongside Anne Oldfield. Back in Dublin in 1715 Evans played Alcibiades in 'Timon of Athens', Thomas Shadwell's version of Shakespeare's play, and Lieutenant Story in 'The Committee, or, The Faithful Irishman', by Sir Robert Howard. He was seen in Charles Shadwell's 'Irish Hospitality' at Smock Alley Theatre in 1717 and was again in London in 1718 playing at Lincoln's Inn Fields. On 26 September he appeared as Dorax in John Dryden's 'Don Sebastian, King of Portugal', which was followed by performances as Kite, Falstaff, the Spanish Fryar, Alexander, Tamerlane, and Cato. On 3 October he played Flip in Charles Shadwell's 'The Fair Quaker of Deal', a performance which ended in an uproar of drawn swords and pelted apples as a result of a gentleman's being denied admittance backstage. He appeared last as Tamerlane on 4 November 1718. On the journey back to Ireland, Evans became ill with fever at Whitchurch, Shropshire, and was taken to Chester for medical care. He died there, probably in December 1718, and was privately buried in the cathedral without monument or inscription. 
According to Chetwood, Evans was an actor of good reputation in Ireland who had a harmonious voice and just delivery. Unfortunately he was also considered gross, indolent, and lacking in delicacy. He has sometimes been ascribed later dates, as a John Evans performed in the 1723 London season; however, this Evans did not play any of the parts in Evans's usual repertory, and Chetwood is almost certainly correct in stating that Evans the actor-manager died in 1718. 


@@@@@


doc= 8964


Evans, John (d. 1779), Church of England clergyman and biblical commentator, was born at Meini Gwynion, Llanbadarn Odwyn (Llangeitho), Cardiganshire, and is said to have been educated at the University of Oxford. His first curacy was that of Llannarth, from where he moved to Portsmouth, also as curate. He is credited with being the John Evans who translated a work on the sacraments by Jabez Earle in 1735. In 1765 Evans published his 'Cyssondeb y pedair efengyl' ('Harmony of the four gospels'). This was the first commentary in Welsh on any portion of the 'Bible', being five years earlier than the commentary of Peter Williams; a second edition was published in 1804. Evans is supposed to have seen through the press the Welsh 'Bible' of 1769, which ran to 20,000 copies, and he also translated into Welsh Bishop Francis Gastrell's 'The Christian Institutes' in 1773. He died at Portsmouth in 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 8965


John Evans (b. 1767/8, d. in or after 1812), who was also a schoolmaster, topographer, and sometime resident of Bristol. He was the son of Benjamin Evans of Lydney, Gloucestershire. He matriculated on 4 April 1789, aged twenty-one, at Jesus College, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1792. He kept a boarding-school at Colston's Parade, Bristol, and in 1807 at Winterbourne Court, near Bristol. He was the author of 'A Tour through Part of North Wales' (1800) and 'Letters Written during a Tour through South Wales' (1804). He also wrote volume 12, on 'North Wales', and contributed to volume 11 of 'The Beauties of England and Wales', compiled by E. W. Brayley and J. Britton. At the time of his last publication, in April 1812, Evans was residing at Delancy Place, Camden Town, London. He had intended to write the account of south Wales for the 'Beauties', but died shortly after the completion of the first part of the undertaking. 


@@@@@


doc= 8966


Evans, John (1767-1827), General Baptist minister, was born at Usk, Monmouthshire, on 2 October 1767. He traced his descent through an almost unbroken line of Baptist preachers from the time of the Commonwealth. After some schooling at Bristol, in November 1783 he became a student at the Bristol Baptist college, over which his relative, Dr Caleb Evans, presided as theological tutor. In 1787 he matriculated at King's College, Aberdeen, where he remained for three years. He then spent a year at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MA. He returned to England in 1791. 
Having some doubts about Calvinist doctrine, Evans accepted an invitation from the morning congregation of General Baptists in Worship Street, London, where, after officiating for a few months, he was chosen pastor and ordained on 31 May 1792. He remained at Worship Street for the rest of his life. Immediately on assuming this office, Evans published 'An address humbly designed to promote the revival of religion, more especially among the General Baptists' (1793). Two years later he opened a seminary, located first at Hoxton Square and subsequently at 7 Pullin's Row, Islington, where he taught for about thirty years. 
In August 1795 Evans married Mary, daughter of John Wiche, General Baptist minister at Maidstone. They had four sons. In 1815 Evans was attacked by a degenerative disease which within two years deprived him of the use of his legs. In 1825 he withdrew from the Society of Antiquaries, to which he had been elected a fellow in 1803, and resigned his school, having in December 1821 lost his third son, the Revd Caleb Evans, who had been his intended successor. Although obliged to be carried from his couch to the pulpit, he continued to preach until a few weeks before his death at his home in Pullin's Row, Islington, on 25 January 1827. He was a liberal-minded man, knowledgeable on a wide range of subjects. 
Evans's writings, some forty in number, comprise sermons, tracts, prefaces, biographical and topographical notices, and school books. He is best-known for his 'Sketch of the Denominations of the Christian World', which first appeared in early 1795 in the form of a shilling pamphlet. Its rapid sale called for a second edition in July of the same year, and during the next thirty years fourteen successive editions were circulated; a fifteenth edition had been completed by the author immediately before his last illness. The book was translated into Welsh and various other languages, and several editions were issued in America, initially at Boston (1807). A sequel to the 'Sketch', entitled 'A Preservative Against the Infidelity and Uncharitableness of the Eighteenth Century' (1796), was later issued as 'The Golden Centenary' (1806). Other significant works included 'General Redemption the Only Proper Basis of General Benevolence: a Letter to Robert Hawker' (1809). 'Complete Religious Liberty Vindicated' (1813) considered the petition for the abolition of all penal statutes by the dissenting ministers of London and Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 8967


Evans, John (bap. 1774, d. 1828), printer, was born at Bristol, the son of David and Mary Evans, and baptized on 16 January 1774 at St Philip and St Jacob's Church. Nothing is known of Evans's early life. 
Evans was variously proprietor, printer, and editor of a number of local newspapers, none of which was a great success. In June 1808 Evans became the proprietor of the 'Bristol Mercury' and from about 1812 he took into partnership John Grabham. Evans retired on 7 March 1814 to set up as a printer. He produced the Bristol directories for the years 1815-17 from his premises at 7 St John Street as well as three books by his namesake, the Revd John Evans: 'The Substance of an Oration... on the Death of William Peter Lunell' (1811), 'Remains of William Reed' (1815), and 'Historical Account of the Church of St Mary Redcliffe' (1815). On 7 August 1817 Evans published the first number of the 'Bristol Observer', a weekly journal, printed by John Sharp until 1823 when the Bristol directory gives Evans as the printer. He was living at 13 Kingsdown Parade and contributed many articles to the 'Observer', but the paper ended on 1 October 1823 after 322 numbers had been published. That year Evans also published 'Practical Observations on the due Performance of Psalmody'. In 1824, while living at 9 Somerset Street, Kingsdown, he put together a 'Chronological outline of the history of Bristol, and the stranger's guide through its streets and neighbourhood', a storehouse of entertaining facts, but the book was not a success. He applied for financial assistance from the corporation of Bristol, which awarded him $20 on the delivery of four copies of his book. He then left the printing profession and went to work as a clerk in the Phoenix Glasshouse. 
Evans's wife died at the end of 1827 and early in 1828 he left Bristol for London to go into business with a printer named Maurice of Fenchurch Street. Maurice was also the proprietor of the newly decorated Brunswick Theatre in Well Street, Wellclose Square. Evans and Maurice were among the ten people killed when the theatre suddenly collapsed on the morning of 28 February 1828. Twenty others were injured. The company was rehearsing the evening's performance of 'Guy Mannering'
'when suddenly a crackling noise was heard from the wrought-iron roof of the building, and almost instantaneously it fell in with a tremendous crash, throwing the front wall of the theatre into the street. The shouts and wailings of the persons inclosed within the theatre were of the most pitiable description. ('GM', 264)' Evans left two young daughters and a son. A subscription was taken for their benefit in Bristol and $200 was raised. His son, William Evans (1809-1858), became a landscape painter, styled Evans of Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 8968


Evans, John (1784-1831), schoolmaster and writer, was born in Bristol and educated there by John Prior Estlin, a Unitarian minister and schoolmaster. He married Lucy, daughter of Bernard Hickason, a Bristol custom house officer, in or after 1807. He kept a school in Bristol from about 1809 to about 1825 at various addresses in Clifton, except for a short period around 1816 when his school was at 1 Somerset Street, Kingsdown. From 1816 to 1820 he was also minister of the Presbyterian congregation at the Old Meeting-House, Marshfield, and for a shorter time at the Grove Meeting, Bradford-on-Avon, where Presbyterians had adopted Unitarian views. He moved to Bath and then to London, where he had a school in Drummond Street, Euston Square. He died in London in December 1831 and was survived by his wife. Besides some schoolbooks Evans wrote 'An Oration on the Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity' (1809) and 'The Ponderer' (1812), a series of essays originally published in the 'Bristol Mercury'. More important are his topographical works, including 'The Picture of Bristol... Including Biographical Notices of Eminent Natives' (1814), which appeared in various forms and editions, and the second volume of 'The History of Bristol' (1816), the first volume having been written by John Corry. This last work was soon eclipsed by Samuel Seyer's history of the city (1821-3) and was criticized for being very largely drawn from the works of William Barrett (1733-1789). Evans also edited, with a memoir, the 'Remains' (1815) of William Reed of Thornbury. 
Evans is to be distinguished from 
These two John Evanses must further be distinguished from their namesake the Bristol writer John Evans (bap. 1774, d. 1828). 


@@@@@


doc= 8969


Evans, John (1779-1847), Calvinistic Methodist preacher, was born at Cwm Gwen, Pencader, Carmarthenshire, in October 1779, the son of John Evans and his wife, Rachel. His parents gave him a religious education, and he could read his 'Bible' when he was four. He was sent to the best schools within reach, and under Mr Jones of Maesnoni he is supposed to have learned Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. As a boy he often preached without hearers. His parents were members, and his father a deacon, of the Independent church at Pencader. At the age of fourteen he was taken to hear David Jones of Llan-gan, one of the great Methodist preachers of the day. At sixteen, when his father had failed to persuade him to join the Independent church, he joined the Calvinistic Methodists and in 1796 began to preach at Llanpumsaint, where he had opened his own school. At nineteen he went to the Presbyterian college, Carmarthen, but soon left, though his tutor, the Revd D. Peter, thought highly of him. He married Mrs Jones, a widow of Llwyn Ffortun, Llanegwad, about 1808, and the year after his marriage he received deacon's orders, after examination, from Richard Watson, bishop of Llandaff. He held several curacies in succession -- at Mynyddislwyn, Monmouthshire, and Bridgend and Laleston in Glamorgan -- for short periods, and wherever he went he filled the churches. Great opposition was raised by some against his 'Methodistic ways' and he returned to Llwyn Ffortun. His last curacy was at Llanddowror. He could not confine himself to his own church, and often preached off tombstones to crowded assemblies. He soon found, however, that the episcopal church was no proper place for him, and he returned to his old friends the Calvinistic Methodists, though he preached also among the Baptists or Congregationalists, and was everywhere welcome, and followed by an admiring multitude. 
After the death of his first wife he married Rachel Davies of Pen-twyn, Llan-non, Carmarthenshire, and he spent the remainder of his life at her home. As he advanced in years he became much troubled with melancholia, and sometimes he had to be fetched from his bed to his pulpit duties. He died on 6 October 1847, and was buried at Pen-twyn Chapel, Llan-non. 


@@@@@


doc= 8970


Evans, John (1814-1875), Welsh scholar and businessman, was born at Ty Mawr, Llansanffraid Glan Conwy, on 23 July 1814, the son of David and Grace Evans. His education consisted of two periods, at Abergele in 1824 and at Wrexham in 1830. He started work in his uncle's shop when he was eleven, and by the age of sixteen he had written 'Hanes yr Iddewon' (1831). He then edited 'Difyrwch bechgyn Glanau Conway' (1835), a volume of poetry which included some of his own work. On 9 November 1836 he married Ann (1817-1850), daughter of Thomas Williams, a grocer of Llansanffraid. They went on to have six children. 
Evans continued his study, and his effort as a lexicographer is found in 'Geiriadur Saesneg-Cymraeg' (1847), which included a glossary of herbs. His first wife died in 1850, and in 1853 he married Hannah, who survived him. From January 1869 to December 1874 Evans contributed a series of 483 satirical letters, published as 'Llythyrau Adda Jones' in 'Baner ac Amserau Cymru'. His lasting contribution, however, is his translation of 'Paradise Lost' ('Coll Gwynfa', 1865), although he also translated 'The Life of Dick Turpin' ('Bywyd Turpin Leidr', 1835) and Young's 'Night Thoughts' (NL Wales, MS 4757), which remain unpublished. 
Evans combined his literary work with a thriving business career, eventually taking over his uncle's shop and running four other businesses -- a nail factory, a sawmill, a watermill, and another shop. Ordained in the Calvinistic Methodist church in 1853, he never accepted a call, but preached regularly, and also campaigned for the Liberation Society and for temperance, and was an enthusiastic attender of eisteddfodau. His bardic name was given credence when he was accepted into the order of bards at the national eisteddfod held at Denbigh, on 7-10 August 1860. He was presented with a national testimonial in 1869. John Evans died of pneumonia at Llansanffraid Glan Conwy on 4 March 1875, and his remains were interred in the burial-ground of his native parish on 10 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 8971


Evans, John (1840-1897), Wesleyan Methodist minister, was the eldest son of David and Margaret Evans of Ty Du, a small farm in the parish of Eglwys-bach, Denbighshire, where he was born on 28 September 1840. The name of his native parish became associated with him, and was the name by which he was popularly known in Wales. He was educated at the national school of the parish and, after leaving, he acted as his father's shepherd, using his spare time for private study. At the age of seventeen, he began preaching, and soon became a well-known and popular preacher with his congregations. He was accepted for the ministry in 1860, but owing to ill health was unable to proceed to a theological college. His first appointment was as a local preacher in Anglesey in 1861, before he moved to Mold in 1863, and was fully ordained in 1865. He moved on to minister at the following circuits: Liverpool (1866); Bethesda (1869); Liverpool (1872-8); London (1878-86); Bangor (1886-9); Oswestry (1889-90); and Islington, London (1890-93). He also visited the USA on extensive preaching tours in 1873 and 1887. During his earlier ministries in Liverpool and London he strove to compensate for his lack of collegiate training by attending evening classes, becoming an associate of King's College, London. In 1884 he was elected a member of the legal hundred of the Wesleyan conference, and in 1895 became chairman of the South Wales district. During the last four years of his life he organized and vigorously conducted a 'forward movement' mission in Glamorgan, its headquarters being at Pontypridd. So successful did his work prove that arrangements had been made to enable him to exchange it in another year for that of peripatetic evangelist for the whole of Wales, but the strain of the Glamorgan mission proved too great. Early in 1897 he had to abandon all his literary work, but he did not reduce his ministerial role, and on 23 October 1897 he died suddenly of heart failure at St Domingo Vale in Liverpool (where he had gone to preach); he was buried there on 27 October at Anfield cemetery. 
Evans was married twice: first, in 1873, to Charlotte (died 1884), daughter of John Pritchard of Liverpool; and second, in 1886, to Clara Kate, daughter of James Richardson of Duke Street, Manchester Square, London. His second wife, by lecturing and conducting mission services, shared the burden of her husband's evangelistic work. Both she and a family of six children survived him. He was commemorated at Pontypridd by a memorial chapel, erected by public subscriptions drawn from all parts of Wales. 
Eglwysbach takes rank among the greatest of Welsh pulpit orators, and was probably the most eloquent that Wesleyan Methodism produced in nineteenth-century Wales. While in Liverpool he was often described as 'the Welsh Spurgeon', but in his style of preaching he resembled William Morley Punshon more closely. A contemporary commented that 'his power as a preacher of the gospel is well known in England and America, but especially in the Principality... the church at Eglwysbach will ever have reason to be proud that it brought up one of the ablest preachers in the Welsh language' (D. Young, 'The Origin and History of Methodism in Wales', 1893, 451). His missionary zeal and great charm made him an influential figure, and it was said that he converted thousands during the course of his life. 
Evans had strong literary tastes, and his output as a Welsh-language writer was considerable, given his activity as preacher and lecturer. His most important work was a Welsh biography of John Wesley (1880), a revised translation of whose sermons he also brought out in 1887. He published three volumes of sermons and contributed largely to the magazines of his own connexion, and edited 'Y Winllan' (1878-9) and 'Y Fwyell' (1894-7), a monthly journal connected to the Pontypridd mission. In the latter appeared in 1896-7 a long series of autobiographical chapters which he did not live to complete. 


@@@@@


doc= 8972


Evans, Lewis (fl. 1565-1571), religious controversialist, was of unknown parentage and bore a name common in the Elizabethan church, especially at the University of Oxford. Anthony Wood listed him as an Oxonian, but gloomily mentioned half a dozen namesakes and confessed, 'I cannot tell' which of them was the writer (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.411). Others have favoured 
About the time of the Council of Trent's definite prohibition in 1564 of 'church papistry' (Roman Catholic attendance at Church of England services), Evans seems to have abandoned his initial conformity to the Elizabethan settlement. He must have gone to the diocese of London, for in 1565 he recalled being before the bishop, Edmund Grindal, at Fulham Palace 'sundrie times for religion' -- 'I founde at youre handes a certayne kinde of favour' (Evans, 'Certaine Tables', sig. A2'r'). By 1565 he had withdrawn to the Catholic printing centre of Antwerp, where he published Willem van der Lindt's 'Certaine tables... translated into Englishe by Lewys Evans and by hym intituled the betraying of the beastlines of heretykes' and also 'A Brieve Admonition unto the Nowe Made Ministers of England' (signed by him at Louvain). Evans insisted that Catholics' political loyalty exceeded that of their protestant critics, and exhibited a particular interest in the sexual misconduct of protestant clergy. In this latter preoccupation he exceeded co-religionists such as Thomas Harding and John Rastell. He did not engage directly with Church of England opponents such as John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury, nor they with him, though James Calfhill noted that he could have said worse things about Catholics' morality 'if I had Lewis Evans his vein' (Calfhill, 331). 
By 1568 Evans was back in England, was imprisoned briefly, and published a protestant tract, 'The Castle of Christianitie, Detecting the Long Erring Estate... of the Romaine Church'. The title-page quoted 'Ecclesiastes': 'Be not ashamed to confesse thine errour, for he that is wise will remember himselfe.' The dedication to Elizabeth I thanked her for overlooking his drinking 'of the puddell of ignorancy, of the mudde of idolatrie, of the ponde of superstition' (Evans, 'Castle', sig. D'v'). He espoused patriotism, continuing in 'A Short Treatise of the Mistery of the Eucharist' (1569) that Catholics should 'understande where they were brought up... They knowe what I meane, and they be not ignorante what I doe know' (sig. A3'r'). The northern rising provided the occasion for 'The Hatefull Hypocrisie and Rebellion of the Romish Prelacie' (1570), which he began by refuting rumours that he had heard in 'the university of Oxforde' and London 'that I had revolted from the gospell, and... agayne gonne beyonde the seas... that I was deade' (Evans, 'Hatefull Hypocrisie', 'To the reader', sig. A4'r'). It, and 'The Castle of Christianitie', continued his favoured accusations of disloyalty and incontinence, merely reversing the direction of his arguments from those he had made in 1565. In summer 1571 he was at Denbigh -- he told Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, that he was seizing for the bishop of Bangor, Nicholas Robinson, 'sediciouse and trayterouse' prophecies. Moreover, 'there came hyther of late a Welshe booke wrytten by some of Rome... At the busshop's request I translated yt into English, and soe doe aunswere yt' ('Bath MSS', 5.182). This was Morys Clynnog's catechism, to which Evans published his 'Brief Answer' that year. 
The career of the Lewis Evans who was at Christ Church is clearer, but accords in some respects with the details of the life of the controversialist as they are known. He had Thomas Francis, later regius professor of physic, as tutor. Having entered under Edward VI's religious dispensation, he weathered later changes to graduate BA on 1 February 1554, proceeding MA in July 1557 and BD in February 1562. He was ordained subdeacon at Oxford in December 1557. Probably he was the MA presented in November 1561 to the rectory of Waterstock, Oxfordshire, by Elizabeth, widow of Sir Thomas Cave. He left Christ Church some time between Michaelmas 1562 and Michaelmas 1563, conceivably for Waterstock -- but this would also be a plausible time for a reversion to Catholicism. An argument against the controversialist's being Evans of Christ Church is that the latter seems to have retained Waterstock -- although it might have been sequestrated -- and was given dispensations to hold pluralities with it by Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, in May 1566 and by the faculty office in May 1567. This allowed him to become rector of Westwell in Oxfordshire, a Christ Church living, worth under $8 per annum. As Waterstock was worth $10 16's'. per annum, his circumstances were still not lavish, but he also held a third Oxfordshire rectory, Ducklington, worth $24 10 's'. per annum. He resigned Westwell by October 1574 and was replaced at Waterstock in May 1576, apparently being deprived and certainly departing rather than dying. Later references are probably to namesakes, especially the graduate of Oriel College, Oxford, who died in 1585, and has been identified as canon of Wells in 1566, MA in 1570, and chaplain to Ferdinando Stanley, Baron Strange, in 1576. 
Wood believed the controversialist Evans became a schoolmaster, which tends to identify him with the editor of John Withal's 'Shorte Dictionarie' (1574) -- published with a dedication to Leicester -- and possibly also with the author of 'Abridgement of Logique' (1568). The dedication of the latter to Grindal, who is thanked for 'clemencie' towards the author, might recall that of 'Certaine Tables', but the book's classical interests have little in common with those of the religious polemics and more with that of a fragmentary translation of Horace by 'Lewis Evans scholemayster', whose date of 1565 makes it unlikely that he was the controversialist (sig. A7'v'). Ultimately the controversialist's career is obscure except for the information he gives about himself -- the Christ Church identification is tempting but unproven. Evans the controversialist was remembered for self-contradiction; although he was listed in or before 1588 as both 'papist' and protestant divine, it is confirmed that he was then dead ('Salisbury MSS', 13.394). 


@@@@@


doc= 8973


Evans, Lewis (1755-1827), mathematician, was the son of the Revd Thomas Evans of Basaleg, Monmouthshire. He matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 16 December 1774, but left the university without a degree. In 1777 he was ordained by the bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, and was for a year curate at Ashbury, Berkshire. He then served for ten years as residential curate of Compton, Berkshire, during which time he married Ann, the daughter of Thomas Norman. They had at least two sons, Thomas Simpson Evans and Arthur Benoni Evans, and two daughters. In 1788 Evans moved to the vicarage at Froxfield, Wiltshire, and he retained the living until his death. In 1799 he was appointed first mathematical master at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, a post he held until 1820. 
In later life Evans devoted much of his time to astronomy. He possessed several valuable instruments, notably the fine transit by Edward Troughton, later known as the 'Lee circle' and preserved by the Royal Astronomical Society. For many years he employed himself as a skilful and successful observer, and he had his own private observatories at Froxfield (1788-99) and at Woolwich (1799-1820). He contributed several papers to the 'Philosophical Magazine'. Evans was elected FRS on 29 May 1823, and was an early fellow of the Astronomical Society. He died at the vicarage, Froxfield, on 19 November 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 8974


Evans, Philip (1645-1679), Jesuit, was born in Monmouthshire to William Evans and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Morgan. His sister was professed as a Blue Nun in Paris and became known as Sister Barbara Catherine. Philip Evans was educated at the English College, St Omer, and on 8 September 1665 he entered the Society of Jesus. After the completion of his noviciate at Watten and further studies he was ordained priest at the English College, Liege. In 1675 he was sent to conduct missionary work in south Wales and lived at the Jesuit college at Cwm in Llanrothal parish on the Monmouthshire-Herefordshire border. It has also been suggested that he was an occasional visitor to the Catholic household of the marquess of Powis at Powis Castle, but in 1678 he was a guest of Thomas Gunter, a recusant who lived at Abergavenny, and he lived at the home of Charles Proger of Wern-ddu in Llandeilo Bertholau in Monmouthshire. 
On 4 December 1678, at the height of intense persecution of Roman Catholics during the Popish Plot, Evans was captured at the house of his loyal friend and patron, Sir Christopher Turberville of Sker House, near Porth-cawl in Glamorgan. He was quickly brought before Judge Richard Lougher and was later offered bail by Sir Edward Stradling if he agreed to swear to the oaths of allegiance and supremacy. He refused to comply with this request and was consequently committed to gaol for three weeks, possibly in the Black Tower of Cardiff Castle. During this period of confinement he was kept in an underground cellar and allowed no visitors. 
Evans's persecutors had difficulty finding witnesses willing to testify against him or to produce any evidence of his being a priest. Eventually they forced an old poor woman and her daughter to testify upon oath that they had witnessed him say mass as well as preach in Latin, English, and Welsh. On 8 and 9 May 1679, after being confined for five months, he was brought before the spring assizes in the Shire Hall in Cardiff and charged with being a Roman Catholic priest. Mayne Trott, an apostate, and two female witnesses were subpoenaed by John Arnold of Llanfihangel Crucornau in Monmouthshire to give evidence against him. Earlier in November 1678 Arnold, the main persecutor of Roman Catholic priests in south Wales, had offered $200 in addition to the $50 reward the government had tendered for the apprehension and conviction of any Jesuit. Trott's unsubstantiated evidence implicated Evans in the alleged plot, and upon the further evidence of the two women he was condemned to death. He was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered by Judge Owen Wynne under the statute of 27 Elizabeth for being a priest. 
The execution was delayed until 22 July 1679, when Evans was taken from Cardiff gaol with Father John Lloyd. Both priests were put in a cart and with their arms tied behind them they were taken to Gallows Field. Evans was the first to be executed. Before mounting the gallows he knelt and kissed them, cried out 'welcome good cross' (Ellis, 120), and then began praying. The ladder to the gallows was too short and consequently it moved when his neck was placed in the noose. One of the sheriff's bailiffs therefore took hold of his legs and twisted them after his body. He was later disembowelled while still conscious, decapitated, and quartered. 
It has been recorded that Evans was 'remarkable for his unaffected candour and modesty; he had a cheerful and open countenance, marked by religious gravity. He was diligent in prayer, most observant of discipline, and obedient to the very nod of his Superior; and in his earnest desire to comply with the wishes of all, he made himself universally beloved. (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 187)' Shortly after the execution of the two Jesuits 'Short memorandums' about them were published at London; on 25 October 1970 Paul VI canonized Evans as one of the forty martyrs of England and Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 8975


Evans, Arise (b. c.1607, d. in or after 1660), prophet, usually known by his adopted name of Arise Evans, was born a mile from Barmouth, in the parish of 'Llangluin', presumably Llangelynnin. Rhys or Rice Evans was the son of Evan Evans (died 'c'.1614), who was a prosperous member of the gentry class, rich enough to subvent a local curacy by the gift or loan of a 'little Tenement of Land' (Evans, 2). Arise Evans claimed that he could trace his lineage back six generations, and beyond that to legendary times. He had at least two older siblings and one younger brother, perhaps a half-brother (ibid., 1-3, 35). 
Evans's native tongue was Welsh. He was educated by a local clergyman, and learned to read English at a young age and with such facility that 'all concluded that God had designed me for some great work' (Evans, 2). However, his father died when he was seven, leaving a will which apportioned property to his named family but from which Arise's name was excluded, presumably because it had not been revised since his birth. His mother shortly remarried, and he moved with her to 'a place four miles off, called 'Maisellan Kaderise'', probably the Maes-y-llan farmstead near Llanfihangel-y-Pennant, on the south-west flank of Cadair Idris (ibid., 6). He worked in several other households until he was contracted to work for a tailor from Chester. At eleven he returned to his mother, now widowed a second time, in Maes-y-llan. 
About the age of fourteen Evans began to experience visions. A third marriage took his mother to Wrexham, together with Arise. His contract with his first employer was fulfilled, and he was bound apprentice to another tailor, Hugh Jones, also of Chester, an autodidact, who recognized both intelligence and spirituality in Evans, and encouraged both. Jones was responsible for the nickname Arise: he told Evans to call himself by that name and reproved those who called him Rhys or Rice, maintaining, as Evans relates, 'they knew not the English of my name, giving me a charge not to answer any but such as did call me Arise.... This is the main cause why I write myself Arise, for there was a great providence of God in bringing me to understand my name' (Evans, 11-12). On completing his apprenticeship, Arise worked as journeyman tailor in Coventry and then, from 1629, in London, where he lodged in Creed Lane by Blackfriars Gate, moving by 1633 to Salisbury Court. His lapsed spirituality was reanimated by a sermon he heard at Blackfriars Church, and an intense period of 'Bible' study, confirmed by recollection of earlier visions, led him to understand that 'the King and the Kingdom was to be destroyed suddainly' (ibid., 17). His distracted and inspired condition lost him his journeyman employment, forcing him to seek out new masters, where, sitting at the shop-board, he 'beheld the Angel of the Lord all in white, stood upon the shop-board with a flaming sword in his hand ready to destroy me' (ibid., 20). 
Confirming his fears by randomly consulting the 'Bible', Evans felt thus prompted to communicate his prophecy of doom to Charles I, whom he followed to Greenwich, and he gave him the news in a letter presented as a petition. His landlord subsequently declined to give him further lodging out of fear of reprisal. Realizing that his first communication had been ignored, and prompted by further visions, he returned to Greenwich, declaring his revelation publicly to bishops and other worthies around the court. 
Evans was then prompted to seek out Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, in his London house, and to prophesy to him that he would be general of an army that would 'execute judgement upon the Court' (Evans, 28). Essex rewarded him but 'turned it all into a jest' (ibid., 29). While to prophesy that Charles I would face difficulties may have been unremarkable, his identification in 1633 of the future role of Essex, documented with plausible circumstantial detail in his own account, must have seemed singularly uncanny by 1642, and he frequently cites this success in substantiation of his later prophecies. 
Most of Evans's prophetic utterances related to English politics, and though he anticipated the civil war he was not himself a puritan. Indeed, when at Essex's presumably amused suggestion he repeated his prophecy to Robert Greville, Baron Brooke, he defended the Church of England to Brooke's puritan chaplain (Evans, 30). Arise returned to Wales to advise his relatives of the impending crisis, though his sanity was questioned and with his family's consent he was kept in custody until his mental health improved. He married, probably in 1635, though promptly left his wife to return to London, lodging in Blackfriars, and frequenting the court and Somerset House to repeat his prophecies. He was arrested and brought before Sir Francis Windebank, to whom he retorted, 'you are the Kings Secretary, and I am Gods Secretary' (ibid., 46). He was sent close prisoner to the Gatehouse in Westminster, where he remained until 1637, when his wife successfully petitioned for his release. He returned with her to Wrexham and had children before returning to London, once more settling in Blackfriars and working as a journeyman tailor. 
Prompted by a voice heard in a trance, Evans attacked Anabaptists and other sectaries, pursuing with reproofs the General Baptist Thomas Lambe the soap-boiler and defending the Church of England. Moving frequently in such radical circles in the mid-1640s and maintaining his own prophetic status, he was rumoured to have represented himself as Jesus Christ. Thomas Edwards, the great heresiographer, basing his account on this incorrect intelligence, included him in the second part of 'Gangraena' as 'one Sectarie who maintained and affirmed he was Jesus Christ' (Edwards, 2.173). The Independents in Lambe's circle regarded him as 'a Decoy sent to catch them', and drove him from their company (Evans, 59). He was arrested for the alleged blasphemy and brought before the recorder, Sir John Glynne, at the Old Bailey, and later before his deputy, who remanded him to Bridewell. He signed a confession: 'I know the Bench and people thought I recanted, but alas they were deceived, for I never beleeved nor understood my self any otherwise then thus.... [Christ] is my Saviour, and I am but his bought servant to do his will. (ibid., 65)' At the following sessions, he was released.Evans detected a concerted presbyterian conspiracy to imprison him or have him secured in Bedlam, and in the late 1640s, while retaining his loyalty to the captive king, in reaction he sought out Cromwell and his circle, visiting him and Henry Ireton at Cromwell's house in Drury Lane, and urging him to release Charles I and restore him to power. 
Evans published about twenty-five pamphlets. The overwhelming majority date from the period 1652-5. Several are addressed to Cromwell, and the recurrent theme is that Charles II should be restored and that Cromwell is the destined agent to accomplish that task. The idiom is generally prophetic, and sometimes he bases his prophecies on interpretations of the visionary experiences of others, as in 'The Bloudy Vision of John Farly' (1653) or 'A Message from God by a Dumb Woman [Elinor Channel] to the Lord Protector' (1653). These tracts are either printed for the author to be sold at his house in Long Alley in Blackfriars, or bear the spoof imprint of 'Giles Convert', in allusion to the most active publisher of radical tracts, Giles Calvert. His autobiography and apologia, 'An eccho to the voice from heaven, or, A narration of the life, and manner of the special calling, and visions of Arise Evans' (1652), is both a vivid evocation of the radical margins of London political and religious life in the 1640s and fascinating documentation, from an age of faith, of a mind obsessed with intrusive and delusional thoughts. As early as 1652, Evans referred to himself as 'being old, not able to labour' (Evans, 84), and it is unlikely that an unemployed journey-tailor could have financed such a publishing campaign without the assistance of presumably royalist funding. 
Evans's last publication, 'To the most High and Mighty Prince, Charles II', dates from 1660. Early in the Restoration John Aubrey, citing Elias Ashmole as his source, relates that he was touched for the King's Evil: 'Arise Evans had a fungous nose, and said it was revealed to him that the king's hand would cure him, and at the first coming of King Charles II into St James's Park he kissed the king's hand, and rubbed his nose with it, which disturbed the king, but cured him. (Aubrey, 128)' No later life record is known. Since so much of his prophetic output had related to anticipating the Restoration, the absence of further publication claiming credit and personal justification may suggest he died shortly after his meeting with the restored king. 


@@@@@


doc= 8976


Evans, Richard (1783?-1871), portrait painter and copyist, was born in Shrewsbury, Shropshire. He was possibly the Richard Evans who was baptized on 1 August 1783 at St Mary's, Shrewsbury, the son of Robert Evans and his wife, Elizabeth. About 1804 he followed his friend David Cox from Birmingham to London, taking lodgings near him. Evans was poor in those days and Cox, who was more proficient in landscape painting, lent him many of his Indian ink sketches to copy and sell in order to support himself. Eventually he turned to portrait painting and worked as an assistant to Sir Thomas Lawrence making duplicate copies of his master's portraits of members of the royal family. In 1814 Evans visited the Louvre in Paris and was one of the first Englishmen to copy the pictures there collected. He exhibited at the Royal Academy for the first time in 1816 from 26 Southampton Street, London, sending a portrait entitled 'Mr Sadler the Aeronaught'. In all he exhibited forty-two pictures at the academy and six at the British Institution. From 86 Newman Street, London, he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1818 a portrait 'His Majesty Henry Christophe, King of Haiti' (who in 1820 was deposed and committed suicide) and another of his son Prince Victor Henry, prince royal of Haiti (who with others was bayoneted to death). 
In 1821 Joseph Farington recorded in his diary that the architect John Nash had 'employed an English painter [Evans] to copy the works of Raphael in the Logio at Rome. Evans is now in the city proceeding on the work... the copies... are meant to embellish Mr. Nash's Gallery' in Regent Street (Farington, 'Diary', 16.5745). He also copied pictures by old masters and painted portraits. On giving up his studio he gave one of his fresco studies to the attendant who swept his studio. Years afterwards, he was astonished to find this identical work hanging in the South Kensington Museum. It was described as a genuine piece of antique fresco painting depicting 'Ganymede Feeding the Eagle', from a tomb in the neighbourhood of Rome. He examined his original sketch of the subject, made a special journey to London, and convinced Mr Redgrave, the director-general for art, that the work was really his and not antique. 
From about 1826 Evans was living at 15 Newman Street (remaining there until after 1845), sending to the Royal Academy a portrait, 'Admiral Sir Edward Owen KCB', which had been commissioned by the corporation of Shrewsbury (Evans's birthplace). Other portraits of important sitters he exhibited at the Royal Academy include in 1828 the Russian ambassador Count Vorontsov; Alderman Carden in his ninetieth year, painted for the corporation of Worcester in 1834, and Nelson's captain, Rear-Admiral Sir Thomas Masterman Hardy. His portrait of Harriet Martineau (National Portrait Gallery, London) exhibited in the same year received such 'brutal comment' by a notorious critic of the 'Morning Chronicle' that the critic was dismissed. The National Portrait Gallery also hold his portraits of the radical politician Sir Francis Burdett, the poet Thomas Campbell, his master, Sir Thomas Lawrence, John Nash, and the architect Sir Jeffry Wyatville. 
After 1845 Evans seems to have ceased portrait painting. His wife, Margaret Bridger ('c'.1782-1857), a British subject, was born in America. By 1851 they had moved to Southampton, and were living at Bugle Street. From there he sent two pictures to the British Institution in 1856, 'Gipsies by Moonlight', 30 guineas, and 'A Monk of Val Ombrosa', 40 guineas. When more than eighty-five years old he executed a large picture, 'The Death of Aesculapius', whom he had depicted in two other paintings: one at the Royal Academy in 1830 and another in 1832 at the British Institution. 
After being stricken with paralysis for eighteen days Evans died on 9 November 1871 at his home, 5 Bugle Street, Southampton, Hampshire, aged eighty-seven. Other examples of his work are in the British Museum, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and Southampton City Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 8977


Evans, Robert Harding (1777-1857), bookseller and auctioneer, was born on 6 December 1777 in Westminster, the son of Thomas Evans (1742-1784), a bookseller in the Strand, and his wife, Ann. He entered Westminster School in 1788, and was afterwards apprenticed to Thomas Payne, bookseller, of Charing Cross. He succeeded to the business of James Edwards of Pall Mall, but in 1812 took up auctioneering, his first sale being the library of the duke of Roxburghe. Between 1812 and 1847 many of the great libraries sold in England passed through his Pall Mall saleroom; his own marked set of catalogues is in the British Library. 
On 22 October 1833 Evans married Susannah (died 1861), eldest daughter of Thomas Baker of Limehouse. They had at least five children, including Thomas ('b'. 1804), who was also educated at Westminster, and Charles, both of whom followed their father's trade. Possessing an excellent memory and a rich store of information, Robert Evans was in the habit of discoursing upon the books passing under his hammer. His expertness as an auctioneer was not, however, matched by business acumen and he and Charles were declared bankrupt in 1846. He survived this calamity and recommenced trading, probably about 1849, in partnership with both sons. 
Evans took a keen interest in politics and in the history of the whig party, reflected in the books which he published between 1809 and 1851. Among the eight works bearing his imprint were a four-volume set of old ballads compiled by his father, which he enlarged and revised from the edition of 1784; a nine-volume set of Euripides' works in Latin and Greek (1821), in which he assisted the editors; and the 'Historical and Descriptive Account of the Caricatures of James Gillray' (1851), which he wrote with Thomas Wright. Two books attributed to him in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', 'Six Letters of Publicola' (1810) and 'A Letter... on Reform' (1817), are now considered to be by Robert Harding Evans (1784-1821), editor of parliamentary reports. 
Evans died at his house in Edward Street, Hampstead Road, London, on 25 April 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 8978


Evans, Robert Wilson (1789-1866), Church of England clergyman and author, second son of John Evans (1756-1846), a surgeon of Llwyn-y-groes, near Oswestry, and his wife, Jane Wilson, was born at the Council House, Shrewsbury, on 30 August 1789. He was educated under Samuel Butler at Shrewsbury School, and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1807. There he became seventh wrangler and second chancellor's medallist, proceeding BA in 1811, MA in 1814, and BD in 1842. He was elected a fellow in 1813 and classical tutor of his college in 1814, becoming a colleague of George Peacock, afterwards dean of Ely. Ordained in 1815 he was presented to the Trinity College living of Aysgarth, Yorkshire, in 1825, where he resided in the long vacations, acquiring experience of parochial ministry. This inspired the religious tale 'The Rectory of Valehead' (1830; 15th edn, 1852), his most popular work. 
Although a scholarly man, contributing five volumes to the 'Theological Library' series, Evans preferred parish work to university teaching, and resigned his tutorship in 1836 when his former headmaster, Samuel Butler, bishop of Lichfield, made him his examining chaplain and collated him to the vicarage of Tarvin, Cheshire. His ministry there and his addresses to ordinands provided the material for his 'The Bishopric of Souls' (1842; 5th edn, 1877), a handbook describing the various aspects of a clergyman's work. Highly regarded by J. B. Lightfoot, Evans's book now stands as a vivid account of the methods and aims of the early Victorian clergy in rural parishes (see O. Chadwick, 'The Victorian Church', part 2, 1972, 171-4). In 1842 he accepted the Trinity College living of Heversham, Westmorland, in the Lake District, which was congenial to one who had a deep attachment to the countryside. One of his first acts was to build a new vicarage house on the shoulders of Heversham Head, a spot from which he could command an extensive view of the Westmorland scenery. From 1856 to 1865 he was archdeacon of Westmorland. He maintained his literary output, contributing to the 'Christian Remembrancer' as well as publishing parochial sermons, charges to the clergy, and hymns. Evans died, unmarried, at Heversham vicarage on 10 March 1866. In 1869 his friends endowed in his memory the Evans prize at Cambridge, awarded to those students who distinguished themselves in the theological examination. 


@@@@@


doc= 8979


Samuel Evans (1762-1835), a topographical draughtsman from Flintshire, who taught drawing to the youngest daughters of George III before 1795. Samuel succeeded Richard Cooper as drawing-master at Eton College in 1808, and retired in 1822 to Droxford, Hampshire, near the birthplace of his wife, Ann Knight (1775-1852). His views of Wales were engraved, and he produced coloured chalk and watercolour pictures for his pupils to copy. 


@@@@@


doc= 8980


Evans, Theophilus (1693-1767), Church of England clergyman and author, was born on 19 or 20 February 1693 at Penywennallt, in the parish of Llandygwydd, in south Cardiganshire, the son of Charles Evans (died 1730) and his wife, Elinor Beynon. Little is known of his early education, but it is likely that he attended Carmarthen grammar school, and some circumstantial evidence suggests that he went on to Jesus College, Oxford, but that he left without graduating. He married Alice Bevan of Gelligaled, Glamorgan, some time in 1719-20 and raised three sons (Charles, Theophilus, and Michael) and two daughters (Elinor and Sarah). His favourite grandchild, Theophilus Jones, author of the celebrated 'A History of the County of Brecknock' (2 vols., 1805-9), described him, with pardonable exaggeration, as one who 'had perhaps as much of the milk of human kindness as any man who ever lived: of the value of money he knew little, books were his only treasures' (Jones, 2.276). 
Three factors moulded Evans's career -- his gentry blood, his warm attachment to the Anglican church, and his love of literature. His great-grandfather Griffith ab Evan Jenkin (who lived to be 100) and his grandfather Evan Griffith (popularly known as Captain Tory) were uncompromising royalists and churchmen. From an early age, therefore, Evans was taught to believe that dissent was not only a grave threat to the Anglican cause but also inimical to peace and good order. During his highly productive and sometimes controversial fifty years' service as an Anglican clergyman in Cardiganshire and Brecknockshire, he published an appreciable number of sermons and devotional works (mostly translations of English best-sellers) in which he regularly vilified 'heretical' sects, 'levelling' Roundheads, and, most of all, 'arrogant' enthusiasts. Methodism was anathema to him. He parted company with his patron, Marmaduke Gwynne of Garth, Brecknockshire, when the latter fell under the spell of the prominent Methodist Howel Harris in 1737, and he publicly chastised William Williams (Pantycelyn), who served as his curate in 1740-43, and Daniel Rowland. In 'The History of Modern Enthusiasm' (1752) he denounced all the allegedly 'heretical' sects which had sprouted since the Reformation and, as vicar of Llangamarch, Brecknockshire, he proudly declared in 1762 that his parish was an unblemished Anglican fiefdom: 'No Papists, nor any popish School. No Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, or Quakers' ('Church in Wales records', archdeaconry of Brecon, 1762). 
Theophilus Evans was born and bred in the Vale of Teifi, an area highly regarded at the turn of the seventeenth century for the vigour of its spiritual life and the richness of its literary inheritance. Like many other gifted authors, antiquarians, and poets in the locality he learned to transcribe, translate, and compose at an early age, and his most celebrated work, 'Drych y prif oesoedd' ('Mirror of the primitive ages'; (1716)), was published when he was twenty-three. In this vivid and uncritical epic, Evans not only celebrated what he considered 'Anglican' values in the early British church but also the 'British history' which had been so mercilessly pilloried since the days of Polydore Vergil. He considered the cynical attitude of English historians towards Brutus and Arthur both humiliating and unjust, and he unashamedly extolled the glorious origins of the Welsh by offering a Welsh-language version of the thesis of the Breton monk Paul-Yves Pezron that the Welsh were directly descended from Gomer, son of Japhet, son of Noah. Writing in robustly patriotic vein, Evans portrayed the history of Wales as a pageant of alien usurpations, bitter defeats, and epic victories. For the first time in their history, the Welsh were provided with a printed account of their own history in their native tongue. 'Drych y prif oesoedd' caught the imagination of the Welsh reading public and ran to five editions in the eighteenth century. Sixteen editions were published in the nineteenth century and even by the twilight years of the Victorian age it was still far and away the most popular history book in Welsh. 
In 1763 Evans made over the living of Llangamarch, Brecknockshire, which he had held since 1738, to his son-in-law Hugh Jones, though he retained the living of Llan-faes, Brecon, until his death on 11 September 1767 at his home, Llwyneinon, Llangamarch, Brecknockshire. He was buried in Llangamarch churchyard. Local inhabitants probably remembered him as the discoverer of the celebrated spring at Llanwrtyd Wells or as the hammer of Welsh dissenters and Methodists, but his posthumous fame rests on the triumphant success of 'Drych y prif oesoedd', undeniably one of the classics of Welsh prose. 


@@@@@


doc= 8981


Evans, Thomas (d. 1633), Church of England clergyman and poet, matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, at Michaelmas 1608; nothing is known of him before this date. He graduated BA from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1612-13, MA in 1616, and BD in 1622. Between 1618 and 1619 he was rector of St Helen, Bishopsgate, London, and he was rector of Little Holland, Essex, from 1618 until his death in 1633. 
Evans was the author of one publication: 'Oedipus: three cantoes wherein is contained 1 his unfortunate infancy, 2 his execrable actions, 3 his lamentable end, by T.E. Bach: Art. Cantab.' (1615). This long poem in iambic pentameter quatrains narrates the story of Oedipus in straightforward chronological order. There is an elaborate prose dedication (signed Thomas Evans) to John Clapham, one of the six clerks of chancery, which describes the poem as 'the first child, but not the heyre of all the father's wit': no further publication by Evans is known, although his name is associated with verses in at least one manuscript miscellany with a Cambridge University connection (BL, Add. MS 15227). 


@@@@@


doc= 8982


Evans, Thomas (1742-1784), bookseller, left no record of his parents or origin. He was apprenticed in London in 1757 for $40 to Charles Marsh, whose shop was registered as in St Martin-in-the-Fields (but later in Round Court in the Strand and in Charing Cross). A handwritten note on a copy of Marsh's poem 'The Library' (1766; Nichols, 3.647) suggests that Evans carried on at Marsh's shop beyond his apprenticeship, perhaps even under Marsh's successor Samuel Leacroft (1767), until he set up his own shop at 50 Strand, near the York Buildings, in 1774. 
Evans was a 'literary' bookseller who, as Nichols says, 'favoured the world with elegant editions of complete collections of the works of some very eminent poets' (Nichols, 6.435). Among these multi-volume editions (some of which Evans personally edited) were the works of Beaumont and Fletcher, George Villiers, Matthew Prior, Richard Savage, Oliver Goldsmith (the first collected edition), and Francois Rabelais. Other notable publications included Shakespeare's 'Poems', Evans's own four volumes of 'Old Ballads, Historical and Narrative', Nicholson's 'The English, Scotch, and Irish Historical Libraries', Caradoc of Lhancarvan's 'History of Wales', and a revised edition of Francis Peck's 'Desiderata curiosa'. The dedicatees of some of these works reflect Evans's circle of friends and acquaintances: Sir Joshua Reynolds, Richard B. Sheridan, Samuel Foote, and David Garrick. Pieces of his correspondence with Garrick are extant. Evans's engaging conversation and lively humour delighted fellow booksellers who met weekly at the Grecian Coffee House, a club that included Thomas Davies, Lockyer Davis, James Dodsley, Thomas Longman, Thomas Payne, Thomas Cadell, Robert Baldwin, and John Nichols, with most of whom Evans issued joint publications. 
Evans died at 50 Strand, London, on 30 April 1784, and his closest friend, Cadell, served as the executor of his will (witnessed by Isaac Reed and William Fell) and was appointed guardian to Robert Harding Evans, the only son of Evans and his wife, Ann, who survived him. Robert was only six years old at the time of his father's death, and in 1792 Cadell apprenticed the young Evans to Thomas Payne at Mew's Gate for $120. About 1804 Robert Evans took over the bookselling business of James Edwards in Pall Mall but then abandoned it about 1812 to become a celebrated auctioneer of private libraries. In a laudatory two-column obituary, Nichols says nothing of the cause of Evans's early death ('GM', 1st ser., 54/1, 396). Thomas Evans should not be confused with a contemporary bookseller of the same name, the one Goldsmith caned and whose bookshop was variously located at 20 and 54 Paternoster Row and 429 Strand. 


@@@@@


doc= 8983


Evans, Thomas (1738/9-1803), bookseller, was born in Wales and although the identity of his parents is unknown, his background, by all accounts, was humble, with the 'Gentleman's Magazine' discerning 'very little to boast of in point of [his] origin' ('GM', 696). Evans eventually moved to London, where at first he lived with and served as porter to William Johnston, a bookseller in Ludgate Street, and on 23 April 1776 was made free of the Musicians' Company. It was by 'industry and perseverance' that he became an 'eminent bookseller' (ibid.), working in the centre of London's book trade precinct from several addresses in Paternoster Row between 1770 and 1797. For a number of years during the early 1770s Evans was publisher of the 'Morning Chronicle' and 'London Packet', by means of which he became acquainted with many literary characters of the day. Although friendly with many members of London's literati, his association with the Irish writer Oliver Goldsmith was less amicable as a result of one article, reflecting upon Goldsmith and Miss Horneck, a female acquaintance, published by Evans in the 'Morning Chronicle'. Goldsmith was so incensed by the article that he resorted to a physical confrontation, but Evans reputedly defended himself 'in a true pugilistic style', and in a few moments the author of 'The Vicar of Wakefield' 'was disarmed, and extended on the floor, to the no small diversion of the by-standers' (ibid.). Goldsmith was subsequently indicted for an assault and compromised by paying $50 to a Welsh charity. 
By 1779 Evans had taken control of the extensive bookselling business of Hawes, Clarke, and Collins at 32 Paternoster Row, and was by this time a competent master of his trade, training apprentices who, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', became 'ornaments of their profession' ('GM', 696). Evans had married a woman named Ann about this time and was the father of his only son, James Evans. In 1789, father and son were working together, but the following year James was trading alone and married a daughter of Archibald Hamilton II. In 1792 James was made free of the Stationers' Company, but on 18 July 1795 he was declared bankrupt and went to America before returning to England, where he died in poverty eighteen months before his father. Thomas Evans, by contrast, had amassed a significant personal fortune and was able to retire in 1797, before separating from his wife the following year, apparently on account of her partiality for one of her sons. 
Evans died, aged sixty-four, on 2 July 1803 at his lodgings in Chapter House Court, London, after suffering from a short and unknown illness. Considered by some contemporaries as a man of rough and eccentric habits, Evans requested in his will that he was to be buried without a coffin, that his grave should not have a tombstone, and that the funeral would cost no more than 40 shillings. His son was to be a beneficiary of his will to the amount of $200, while to his wife he bequeathed $40 a year and a further $20 per annum to a niece, Sarah Morgan, as well as a share of his property to his sister, Eleanor Vaughan. The remainder of his estate was left to his friend of forty years and fellow bookseller, Christopher Brown. 


@@@@@


doc= 8984


Evans, Thomas (1764-1833), Unitarian minister and poet, son of Ifan and Hannah Evans, was born at Capel Sain Silin, near Brechfa, Carmarthenshire, on 20 June 1764. His father was an independent-minded weaver who bought books and essays for his children, including the religious works of Joseph Priestley, the English Unitarian. The prevailing theology in the neighbourhood was Calvinism; Evans, from an early age, was nicknamed Priestley Bach (Little Priestley) on account of the influence of Priestley on his theological development. In order to worship with like-minded friends he used to walk to Alltyblaca, 12 miles away, to hear David Davis of Castellhywel preach sermons of an Arian type. As an adult he began to preach in his father's house, a part of which he got licensed for this purpose; eventually a chapel was built for him. 
A democrat as well as a dissenter, Evans preached the rights of man, lamented the use of fast days to pray for military success, and advocated peace during the war with revolutionary France. As well as translations from Priestley and Theophilus Lindsey, he published three editions (1795-6) of the 'Miscellaneous Repository' or 'Drysorfa Gymmysgedig' to bring the benefits of enlightenment and dissent to his Welsh audience. The journal gave political news of the state trials against the English 'Jacobins'. It was once thought that he had translated 'La Marseillaise' into Welsh. 
In 1801, on the information of a spy belonging to his own congregation, Evans was apprehended, tried, and sentenced by Judge Harding to be imprisoned for two years in Carmarthen gaol, and to stand in the pillory. He was charged with singing, in English, a seditious song, an accusation which he consistently denied. Evans was the political victim of anti-Unitarian prejudice and malicious gossip; during his imprisonment he met with great sympathy and compiled an English-Welsh dictionary. 
Evans became minister of the Old Meeting-House, Aberdar, in 1811, the same year in which he published a collection of hymns for Unitarian worship ('Cyhoeddiad o hymnau'). He was married to Ann Davies, with whom he had eleven children. Of the Welsh dissenters and democrats of the period of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, Evans was the most sustained and persistent in his radicalism. One of a 'little knot of men, sturdy old republicans' (Evans, 'Dylanwad y Chwyldro Ffrengig ar lenyddiaeth Cymru', 96) in the industrial area of Merthyr Tudful, he died, after a short illness, on 29 January 1833 at Mill Street, Aberdar, Glamorgan. 


@@@@@


doc= 8985


Evans, Thomas (1840-1865), Welsh-language poet, was born at Cardigan on 8 September 1840, the son of Thomas Evans, ship carpenter. His early education was very rudimentary. At the age of eleven he was apprenticed on a coasting vessel, but his treatment was so bad that he ran away to Aberdar and worked in a coalmine in Cwm-bach. From here he sent a letter to his mother, written in verse (his first attempt), apprising her of his whereabouts. 
When Evans was about fifteen he devoted his leisure hours to music and attracted public attention as a singer. Shortly after this he competed successfully at a small eisteddfod, held at his chapel, for the best poem on humility. This brought him to public notice, and from this time his name was constantly in the local papers and mentioned in connection with eisteddfodau, where, under the bardic name Telynog, he won no fewer than twenty prizes. His achievement is all the more marked when one considers that during all this time he was working as a collier. His last six years were spent in constant battle first with dyspepsia, and then with consumption. He died on 29 April 1865 and was buried in the Aberdar cemetery. At the time of his death 'he was regarded as one of the most promising poets of Wales' ('DWB'). 
Evans's poetical works, including the lyrics 'Blodeuyn bach wyf fi mewn gardd' and 'Yr haf', were collected and arranged by Dafydd Morganwg, and published by subscription in a limited edition. The volume was prefaced by a brief memoir by Howel Williams. 


@@@@@


doc= 8986


Evans, Thomas Simpson (bap. 1777, d. 1818), mathematician, was baptized at Llangattock juxta Caerleon, Monmouthshire, on 12 August 1777, the eldest son of Lewis Evans (1755-1827), the curate of Ashbury, and his wife, Ann Norman. He was named after Thomas Simpson, the mathematician. On 12 February 1796 he was appointed assistant to Nevil Maskelyne at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. However, shortly after marrying Deborah Mascall, governess to Maskelyne's daughter Margaret and daughter of John Mascall of Ashford, Kent, on 7 June 1798, he left the Royal Observatory. He took charge of a private observatory at Blackheath belonging to William Larkins, formerly accountant-general to the East India Company at Bengal. Some time after the death of Larkins on 24 April 1800, he was appointed mathematical master under his father at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. There he continued until 1810, when he accepted the mastership of the mathematical school at New Charlton, near Woolwich. He left this position in 1813 to become master of mathematics at Christ's Hospital, London. He appears to have held the degree of LLD and to have been a fellow of the Linnean Society. He and his wife had five children: Thomas Simpson Evans (1798-1880), vicar of St Leonard, Shoreditch; Aspasia Evans (1799-1876); Herbert Norman Evans MD (1802-1877), a great book collector; Arthur Benoni Evans (died 1838); and Lewis Evans (1815-1869), headmaster of Sandbach Free Grammar School, Cheshire. 
Evans died in London on 28 October 1818, aged forty-one. He left a completed translation of Antonio Cagnoli's 'Trigonometria piana e sferica' besides other translations from foreign scientific works and a vast collection of unfinished papers in several branches of science. He also contributed various articles to the 'Philosophical Magazine'. Apart from these he wrote a comprehensive account of the Royal Observatory, its instruments, and the role of the assistant, and brief biographies of the astronomers royal, all of which appeared in John Evans's 'Juvenile Tourist' (3rd edn, 1810). His library was considered one of the most valuable collections of mathematical and philosophical works in the kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 8987


Evans, William (d. 1718), Independent minister and tutor, is of unknown parentage, and the year and place of his birth are likewise unknown. He was educated at Rhys Prydderch's school at Ystradwallter, and was later taught by Stephen Hughes. He was ordained at Pencader, Carmarthenshire, in 1688, where he then ministered and taught a school. With very slender means of subsistence, he had to rely largely on his wife's small private income. In 1703 he moved to Carmarthen to take charge of the Independent causes in the area, and to keep a school (assisted by the SPCK) for poor children. From 1704 he received in his house students for the dissenting ministry, thus establishing an academy which succeeded those at Brynllywarch and Abergavenny. He was patronized by the Presbyterian and Congregational funds in London and by wealthy dissenters. 
Evans educated a number of prominent ministers at his academy, including some who became noted authors, such as Matthias Maurice and Christmas Samuel. A man of immense energy, he maintained a close connection with his former charge at Pencader, and he achieved a coup by securing for dissenting worship the erstwhile Anglican chapel at Llan-y-bri, near Carmarthen. In 1707 he published in Welsh 'The Principles of the Christian Religion', a translation of the shorter catechism of the Westminster assembly, and in 1714 published 'Gemau doethineb' ('Gems of Wisdom'), by his old mentor Rhys Prydderch. Evans's wife was named Katherine, but no other details of the marriage are known; two sons and a daughter are mentioned in his will of 1716. Following Stephen Hughes's death, Evans came to be regarded as the new leader of dissent in Carmarthenshire. A man of superior attainments as scholar, preacher, and educator, he devoted himself with great diligence to his work. Jeremy Owen called him 'God's gift to his people... a public blessing' (Jenkins, 207). He died in January 1718 in Carmarthen Town, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 8988


Evans, William (d. 1776?), Presbyterian minister and lexicographer, was probably born in Carmarthenshire, perhaps in Cefngwili, Llanedi. He is believed to have been educated at Carmarthen Academy under Dr Jenkins between 1768 and 1772. His chief claim to notice is based on his work 'A New English-Welsh Dictionary', compiled while he was a student and published in 1771. This was used by William Richards as a source for his own dictionary of 1798, but was not fully superseded as a second edition appeared in 1812. The dictionary was described by the bibliographer the Revd D. Silvan Evans as a not irresponsible work. William Evans was for some years pastor of the Presbyterian congregation at Sherborne, Dorset, but, in 1776, owing to poor health, he took charge of a congregation at Moretonhampstead, Devon. However, he was able to remain in this post only for a few weeks, and probably died shortly after taking it up. 


@@@@@


doc= 8989


Evans, William (1809-1858), watercolour painter, known both as Evans of Bristol and as Welsh Evans to distinguish him from William Evans of Eton, was probably born in Bristol, where his father, John Evans (bap. 1774, d. 1828), was a printer. Nothing is known of William's early life. He was taught drawing in Bristol by Francis Danby ('c'.1824- 'c'.1826) and between 1827 and 1832 was himself giving drawing lessons in Clifton. In 1832-3 he was a member of a sketching club in Bristol whose members also included W. J. Muller and J. S. Prout ['see 'Bristol school of artists]. A drawing, 'Chepstow Old Toll Gate', dated 1834 (NL Wales, Aberystwyth), provides evidence of an early visit to Wales, perhaps in the company of friends from the sketching club, and he certainly toured with Muller, who seems to have been his closest companion, in 1842. The 'View of Snowdon' (City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery) is dated 1843, suggesting that by this time north Wales provided the main focus for his work. 
From about 1844 Evans lodged at Ty'n-y-cae, a cottage near the Fairy Glen at Betws-y-coed in the Conwy valley, and thereby became one of the first resident painters of the artists' colony popularized by David Cox, whose annual summer visits to the village commenced in that year. Evans's relationship with the increasing number of painters, both summer visitors and residents, who frequented Betws-y-coed at this time is unclear, but the paucity of references to him in letters and diaries suggests that he may have been less sociable than many of his contemporaries. He certainly lived in poverty and dire conditions at Ty'n-y-cae but produced some of the most lyrical landscape watercolours of the period there, as open and fluid as the later works of Cox, along with studies of domestic interiors and of the local people which reflect his earlier contact with Muller. Among the small number of his works which survive in public collections, the 'Autumn Landscape, North Wales' (BM), painted about 1844, is characteristic of his style in the Betws-y-coed period. 
Subjects from other parts of Wales and from England demonstrate that Evans continued to travel in the 1840s. However, his health began to decline and he went to Italy in 1852, spending the winter successively at Genoa, Rome, and Naples. Evans settled in London probably in late 1854. His work was held in high esteem by his contemporaries in the Old Watercolour Society, where his work was exhibited between 1845 and 1859. He died at 143 Marylebone Road, London, on 8 December 1858, the cause of death given as asthma. 


@@@@@


doc= 8990


Evans, William (1798-1877), watercolour painter, was born probably at Eton College on 4 December 1798, the elder son of 
After attending Eton College, William Evans abandoned a medical training to assist his father in 1819, and was appointed drawing-master of Eton by the headmaster, John Keate, whose children he was teaching, in 1823. William Collins and Peter DeWint gave him lessons, and he was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours on 11 February 1828, becoming a full member on 7 June 1830. His early work 'The Brunswick and Winchester Towers from the Locks, Windsor' (1829) was acquired by Margaret Carpenter. The influence of his bohemian friends George Cattermole, Edwin Landseer, and above all John Frederick Lewis becomes increasingly evident on his technique during the 1830s. In 1836 he toured Connemara, returning to this remote area with his former pupil Thomas Gambier Parry in 1838. 
Evans married Jane Grace Jackson ('b'. 1801) from Droxford in 1822; she died in 1837, leaving him with eight children. Encouraged by his colleagues George Selwyn and Edward Coleridge, he acquired Mrs Vallency's boys' house in 1839, and became an Eton 'dame'. Enlightened discipline prevailed at Evans's and it attracted a talented mixture of pupils. In the mid-1830s he depicted cricket and the wall game on the playing fields, and the pageantry of the fourth of June regatta. His two Eton 'Montem' pictures were exhibited in 1844, lithographed in 1852, and acquired by Lord Braybrooke in 1863; these remain his best-known works. In 1844 he recorded the visit of Tsar Nicholas I for Queen Victoria, and in 1846 began a lifelong friendship with the sixth duke and duchess of Atholl, which involved tutoring their son, Lord Tullibardine. Blair Atholl inspired several highland pictures, including 'Sheep Shearing' (1848). To compete with the brilliance of oil paint, his large exhibition watercolours consist of increasing layers of pigment and highlight. 
A broken jaw in 1844 left Evans with chronic pain which affected his painting arm, and opium was prescribed. His daughters began to help in the running of his house, Jane (1826-1906) becoming a school legend. Evans reacted with hostility to Henry Cole's plans to reform the teaching of art in schools and resigned as drawing-master in 1853 to concentrate on his exhibition work, sending three pictures to the 1855 Paris Universal Exhibition. After 1845 he generally added 'of Eton' to his signature in distinction from William Evans of Bristol (1809-1858), who shared his Welsh repertoire. He canvassed for the election of John Frederick Lewis as president of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, acted as his right-hand man, and never forgave him for his sudden resignation in 1858. He proposed the introduction of winter exhibitions at the society, after it failed to leave the Pall Mall premises in 1859. Cannes reinvigorated him in 1868-9, and he sent his last subject from Burnham Beeches to the 1874 exhibition. He died on 31 December 1877 at Evans's and was buried in Keate Lane cemetery, Eton. 




@@@@@


doc= 8991


Evans, Sir William David (1767-1821), lawyer, was born in London on 25 May 1767, the son of John Evans and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Butterfield. Educated at Harrow School (1779-80), on attaining his sixteenth year he was articled to a Warrington solicitor, in whose office he relieved the tedium of business hours by courting the muses. He was admitted an attorney in February 1789, and practised at Leigh, Lancashire. In 1790 he married Hannah (died 1832), daughter of Peter Seaman of Warrington. After being admitted as a student of Gray's Inn, on 29 January 1789, he was called to the bar in February 1794. He joined the northern circuit, residing in Liverpool, and practised there several years as a special pleader and conveyancer. He published an enlarged edition of 'Salkeld's Reports' (3 vols., 1795), 'Essays on the Action for Money Lent and Received' (1802), 'A General View of the Decisions of Lord Mansfield in Civil Causes' (2 vols., 1803), and 'A Treatise on the Law of Obligations and Contracts, from the French of Pothier' (2 vols., 1806). He moved to Manchester in 1807, and established a lucrative practice. His 'Letter to Sir S. Romilly on the Revision of the Bankrupt Laws' (1810) influenced subsequent legislation. He strongly favoured Roman Catholic emancipation, and in 1813 published 'Letters on the Disabilities of the Roman Catholics and Dissenters'. In 1813 he was appointed the first Manchester stipendiary magistrate. In 1815 he was appointed vice-chancellor of the county palatine court of Lancaster, holding these offices concurrently until 1818. Meanwhile he published more legal works including 'The Practice of the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster' (1814), 'A Charge to the Grand Jury at Preston' (1817), 'A Collection of Statutes Relating to the Clergy, with Notes' (1817), and 'A Collection of the Statutes Connected with the General Administration of the Law... with Notes' (8 vols., 1817 and later editions). He collected material for other works, but did not live to finish them. Sir Charles Harcourt Chambers's 'Treatise on the Law of Landlord and Tenant' (1823) was compiled from his notes, and he left a manuscript 'Life of the chancellor d'Aguesseau' which Charles Butler used in his work on d'Aguesseau. 
In 1817 Evans unsuccessfully applied for a vacant judgeship, but in 1819 he was appointed recorder of Bombay (at $7000 a year) and was knighted. On the voyage out he wrote 'A Treatise upon the Civil Law' and initiated a weekly literary publication to entertain his fellow passengers. He began his duties in India with great promise of success, but fell victim to a pre-existing condition, presumably aggravated by the climate, and died at Bombay on 5 December 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 8992


Evans, William Edward (1801-1869), Church of England clergyman and naturalist, was born on 8 June 1801 at Shrewsbury, son of John Evans MD, and his wife, Jane Wilson Evans (1756-1846). He inherited a taste for poetry and natural history from his father, who wrote a poem in four books on bees (1806-13). A brother, Robert Wilson Evans (1789-1866), became archdeacon of Westmorland. From Shrewsbury School, where Samuel Butler was then headmaster, Evans gained a scholarship at Clare College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1823 and MA in 1826. He was ordained deacon in 1824 and priest in 1825. From 1825 to 1829 he served as curate of Llanymynech, his father's native parish. When he married his cousin, Elizabeth Evans, he was presented to the perpetual curacy of Criggion, Montgomeryshire. This, however, he resigned in order to live at Burton Court, Leominster, which his wife had inherited, and to hold the sole charge of the parish of Monkland (1832-50). In 1841 he was appointed prebendary of Hereford and prelector of the cathedral. 
Evans was an eloquent and effective preacher, a keen naturalist, and an excellent angler. His chief work is 'The Song of the Birds, or, Analogies of Animal and Spiritual Life' (1845), in which the habits of birds were shown to offer spiritual lessons. The twenty-two chapters on British song birds revealed the carefulness and accuracy of Evans's observations. His other works included 'The First Revelation of God to Man' (1849), a series of sermons on 'Genesis', 'An Order for Family Prayer' (1844), and a 'Letter to the Bishop [of Hereford] on Diocesan Education' (1850). 
After holding Monkland for eighteen years, in 1850 Evans accepted the living of Madley with Tibberton, Herefordshire. In 1861 he became canon of Hereford Cathedral. His health failed in the last two or three years of his life, and he died in the close, Hereford, on 22 November 1869. Memorial windows were erected in Llanymynech church to commemorate Evans, and his father and brother. Evans left one daughter and three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 8993


Evanson, Edward (1731-1805), Church of England clergyman, was born at Warrington on 21 April 1731, the son of Thomas Evanson, mercer, and his wife, Margaret. His uncle, John Evanson, rector of Mitcham, Surrey, educated him, and sent him to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1745. He took the degree of BA (1750), and MA (1753). He was ordained deacon and became curate to his uncle, who also kept a school where Evanson assisted. He was ordained priest on 21 September 1755. In 1766 he became vicar of South Mimms, near Barnet. In 1769 the lord chancellor, Lord Camden, gave him the vicarage of Tewkesbury, at the request of John Dodd, MP for Reading. The bishop of Worcester, Richard Hurd, introduced Evanson, as a member of his own college, to William Warburton, bishop of Gloucester, who, on the strength of Hurd's introduction, gave him also the perpetual curacy of Tredington, Worcestershire. In August 1770 he exchanged South Mimms for Longdon in Worcestershire. 
Evanson soon began to show doubts about the trinitarian orthodoxy. He wrote to the archbishop of Canterbury, Frederick Cornwallis, who was then discussing with the bench possible changes to the liturgy, and asked for his objections to the Nicene and Athanasian creeds to be considered. Cornwallis never replied and Evanson adapted the liturgy to his own opinions. His sermon on the resurrection on Easter day (31 March 1771) was an additional provocation and a prosecution was instituted by Neast Havard, town clerk of Tewkesbury, and others, in the consistory court. In 1772 Evanson published anonymously a pamphlet upon 'The Doctrines of a Trinity and the Incarnation of God'. His heterodox views were symptomatic of a growing sense of dissatisfaction among some Anglican clergymen with traditional trinitarian formulations. The Feathers Tavern Association was a London lobbying group formed in July 1771 to press for the abolition of clerical subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and lay subscription to them in the universities ['see also 'Feathers tavern petitioners]. A petition presented to parliament in 1772 was rejected, which contributed to Theophilus Lindsey resigning his orders and establishing a Unitarian chapel. 
Evanson's case was heard before the bishop of Gloucester on 16 January 1775. Some technical objections led to the failure of the prosecution; but appeals were made to the court of arches, and afterwards to the court of delegates. He was popular in the parish, and his court expenses were paid by a subscription of his Tewkesbury parishioners; his Longdon parishioners expressed their willingness to accept his alterations of the services. Alexander Wedderburne, the solicitor-general, defended him gratuitously, and on 31 May 1775 appointed him his chaplain. In 1777 Evanson published 'A Letter to the... Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry' in which he argued that 'either the christian revelation is not true, or the religion of every orthodox church in Europe is fabulous and false' (E. Evanson, 'A Letter', 1777, 127). He argued that the prophecies foretold the great apostasy of trinitarianism. This overtly heterodox statement naturally led to his resignation from his living, in a letter to his bishop dated 22 March 1778. Evanson's case illustrated the difficulty of maintaining doctrinal orthodoxy in the Church of England by the system of ecclesiastical courts. Rather, the problem was resolved when Evanson resigned as a matter of conscience. 
Evanson returned to Mitcham, and set up a school. The father of one of his pupils, Colonel Evelyn James Stuart, son of the earl of Bute, settled an annuity upon him, which was paid until his death. He held family services, using Samuel Clarke's version of the liturgy, with additional changes of his own. He administered the Lord's supper to visitors, maintaining that it was the only sacrament and intended for all social gatherings. He also wished to set up a society of 'Christo philanthropists' to hear expositions of the authentic scriptures. He debated the sanctity of the sabbath with Joseph Priestley. Their exchanges were collected and published by Evanson with a letter to Priestley as 'Arguments Against the Sabbatical Observance of the Sunday' (1792). In 1792 he also published 'The Dissonance of the Four Generally Received Evangelists, and the Evidence of their Authenticity ExaminedE'. In this early work of biblical criticism he rejected the gospels according to 'Matthew', 'Mark', and 'John', the epistles to the 'Romans', 'Ephesians', 'Colossians', and 'Hebrews', and those of 'James', 'Peter', 'John', and 'Jude', besides part of the other books of the 'New Testament'. He was again answered by Priestley (in reply to whom he published in 1794 'Letter to Dr. Priestley's Young Man'), expelled from a book club, and 'pestered by anonymous letters'. Thomas Falconer also replied to him in a course of Bampton lectures published in 1811. Evanson also published 'Reflections upon the State of Religion in Christendom' (1802) and 'Second Thoughts on the Trinity' (1805). 
On 27 July 1786, in London, Evanson married Dorothy ('b'. 1751), daughter of Robert Alchorne, a respectable merchant of Old Jewry, London, and his wife, Margaret. His bride probably brought him a fortune, as he afterwards bought an estate at Great Blakenham, Suffolk. He retired to Great Bealings, near Woodbridge, thence to Lympston, Devon, where he preached to a Unitarian congregation, and finally to Coleford in Devon where he died on 25 September 1805. He was survived by his wife. Two volumes of his collected sermons were published in 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 8994


Eveleigh, John (1748-1814), college head and university reformer, was born on 22 February 1748, and baptized on 17 March 1748 at Winkleigh, Devon, the eldest of the three sons of John Eveleigh (1716?-1770), rector of Winkleigh, and his wife, Martha, daughter of John Scobell of Nutcombe, Devon. Having matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 15 May 1766 he was elected Goodrich and Pigott exhibitioner of his college in the same year and admitted scholar on 25 September 1767; he was again elected Goodrich exhibitioner, in 1767 and 1769, and was Hody exhibitioner from 1767 to 1770. He graduated BA on 19 January 1770 and was elected fellow of Oriel College on 30 March; he proceeded MA on 25 November 1772, BD on 17 November 1782, and DD on 7 May 1783. 
Eveleigh served as vicar of St Mary the Virgin, Oxford, from 1778 until 1781, when he was elected provost of Oriel College on 5 December, in succession to John Clarke. As head of house he also became prebendary of Rochester Cathedral. On his election as college head Eveleigh was released from the statute that prevented college fellows from taking a wife, and married Dorothy, daughter of William Sanford ('c'.1711-1783), sometime fellow of All Souls. They had a daughter, Jane Dorothy, who was baptized on 14 June 1788 at Lechlade; she married John Heathcote Wyndham, rector of Corton, on 26 April 1813. 
Eveleigh proved to be a highly successful provost, and under him the college entered its most illustrious period. Keen to raise its intellectual standing, and frustrated by the restrictions on some fellowships, Eveleigh invited the brilliant young scholar Edward Copleston to accept a vacant fellowship in 1795, even though Copleston did not conform to the stipulation that the candidate should be a native of Wiltshire. Copleston's election and the subsequent method of examining candidates set the pattern for open competition and election on intellectual merit that was soon adopted by other colleges. Furthermore this reform enabled Oriel to attract many other high-calibre fellows, such as John Keble, Richard Whately, and Edward Hawkins, who guaranteed the college's intellectual pre-eminence in Oxford into the mid-nineteenth century. 
Eveleigh's innovation at Oriel of selecting fellows by setting them four days of examinations prompted him to suggest that the university should adopt a similarly rigorous system to examine undergraduates. Together with Cyril Jackson, dean of Christ Church, and John Parsons, master of Balliol, Eveleigh secured the examination statute of 1800. This stipulated that candidates for the degree of BA should undergo public examination in grammar, rhetoric, logic, moral philosophy, mathematics, physics, and the Christian religion, notably the doctrinal articles of the Church of England. An additional examination was established for those undergraduates who wished to compete for an honours degree, and the best twelve candidates were ranked according to merit. The new examinations succeeded and a further university statute, of 1807, abolished the list of the twelve best candidates and instead listed candidates alphabetically in two classes, the origins of first- and second-class degrees. 
Vicar of Aylesford from 1782 to 1792, Eveleigh delivered the Bampton lectures in Oxford in 1792, which were published as 'Eight Sermons' in the same year; a second edition, with four additional sermons, appeared in 1794, a third edition, in two volumes, in 1814. He also brought out 'The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity' (1791) and a few separate sermons. In failing health, Eveleigh spent the summer of 1814 in Brighton, and died at Oxford on 10 December 1814; he was buried in St Mary the Virgin six days later. In his funeral sermon Copleston, who succeeded him as provost, praised Eveleigh's achievements as a university reformer and hailed him as 'one of the most strenous originators of the present system of classes and honours' (Copleston, 28). 


@@@@@


doc= 8995


Evelyn, John (1655-1699), translator and government official, was born on 14 January 1655, at Sayes Court, Deptford, Kent, the third but eldest surviving son of the diarist, John Evelyn (1620-1706) and his wife, Mary Evelyn (c.1635-1709), daughter of Sir Richard Browne, of Sayes Court. In his early years Evelyn was brought up at Arundel House among the children of Henry Howard, later sixth duke of Norfolk. However in 1662 Evelyn's father put an end to the association with the Howard children, 'for fear of their perverting him in the popish religion' (Evelyn, 3.326). From 1663 to 1665 Evelyn was tutored by Edward Phillips, a nephew of the poet John Milton, and from 1665 to 1667 by Ralph Bohun. He entered Trinity College, Oxford, in 1667 under the care of the president of the college, Dr Ralph Bathurst. He matriculated on 2 May 1668, and left Oxford the following year. In 1672 Evelyn was admitted to the Middle Temple by the solicitor-general, Sir Francis North, and was called to the bar in 1683. During the time of his education he had been presented on separate occasions to the queen mother, Henrietta Maria, and to Charles II, and had been with the court party in Dover and Calais during the negotiations of the secret treaty of Dover. At the age of eighteen Evelyn received instruction and advice from the Anglican bishop of Chichester 'before he received the Holy Sacrament'. In 1675 Evelyn travelled to France in the entourage of the English ambassador, Lord Berkeley. On 24 February 1680 Evelyn married Martha ('c'.1660-1726), daughter of Lady Martha Stonhouse by her first husband, Richard Spencer, a London merchant. Although the marriage produced two sons and three daughters, only a son and a daughter survived infancy. The marriage settlement included a dowry of $5000 plus a jointure of $500 a year after the death of Evelyn's parents. 
Evelyn's work as a translator included 'Of Gardens: Four Books, First Written in Latine Verse by Renatus Rapinus, and now Made English' (1673), a version of Francois de Chassepol's French work, translated as 'The History of the Grand Visiers' (1677), and Plutarch's 'Life of Alexander the Great' for 'Plutarch's Lives by Several Hands' (1683-6). He contributed some prefatory Greek hexameters, which he had written at the age of fifteen, to his father's work, 'Sylva' (8th edn, 1678), as well as a reprint of the second book of his translation of Rapin's 'Hortorum liber'. He also had several poems published in the third edition of Dryden's 'Miscellanies' (1702) and in John Nichols's 'Collection of Poems'. 
Evelyn's career in government commenced in 1687, when he was employed in Devon on a commission from the Treasury lords about concealed lands. In December of the following year he joined William of Orange at Abingdon, and, as a volunteer in Lord Lovelace's troop, helped to secure Oxford. In 1690 he purchased the chief clerkship of the Treasury, a post from which he was removed within a year. In early 1692 he was appointed as one of the seven commissioners of the revenue in Ireland. Although Evelyn was pleased with the appointment, his father considered it to be 'far from my wishes' and could only hope that 'I may yet see him in prosperity again' (Evelyn, 5.92, 113). His father's wishes were not to be fulfilled, and after four years in Ireland, Evelyn returned to England in ill health. Thereafter he spent his remaining years in England. Evelyn died on 24 March 1699, at Berkeley Street, London, from the illness which he had contracted in Ireland. He was buried in the family vault in Wotton, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 8996


Evelyn, John (1620-1706), diarist and writer, was born on 31 October 1620 at Wotton in Surrey, the second son and fourth child of Richard Evelyn (1590-1640) and his wife, Eleanor (1599-1635), daughter of John Stansfield (died 1627) and his wife, Elianor, 'nee' Comber (died 1613). Evelyn believed that his family came from Shropshire and ultimately from Normandy. From his great-grandfather John, who first brought the invention of gunpowder into England, his grandfather George (1526-1603) inherited the patent for its manufacture that descended in the family until the outbreak of the civil war. 
Evelyn's father, Richard, who was the only son of George's second marriage (to Joan Stint), inherited Wotton with about 700 acres of land. He was worth $4000 a year, and became sheriff of Sussex and Surrey in 1633. Having been sent to stay with his maternal grandfather in Lewes at the age of five, Evelyn began to draw and sketch even before he went to school in 1630 and kept a diary in the following year. In 1632 his father wanted to send him to Eton College but was persuaded by his son to allow him to stay at the free school in Southover, a school where (Evelyn later believed) he had an inadequate education at the hands of Edward Snatt. His mother died in 1635 of an excessive remorse, Evelyn claimed, for the death of his sister Elizabeth (1614-1634) and other children dead in infancy. On 13 February 1637 Evelyn and his two brothers were admitted to the Middle Temple where his tutor was his later fellow traveller on the continent Thomas Henshaw. In April 1637 Evelyn was admitted fellow-commoner of Balliol College, Oxford, and matriculated on 29 May. His tutor was meant to be Ralph Bathurst (later a friend, and supervisor of his son's education) but instead he was assigned to George Bradshaw, whom Evelyn later believed negligent in his duty. Like many of his rank, he left without a degree. 
In July 1641, in the company of Mary, princess royal, Evelyn made his first journey to the continent, remaining in Holland and Belgium until the following October. A year later he was present at the battle of Brentford, but realizing that he could do the king's side no service, he procured another licence to travel and by November 1643 he was in Calais. This was the beginning of a visit that lasted nearly four years, to France and Italy, a journey on which Thomas Howard advised him, and which has become one of the great seventeenth-century examples of the grand tour. At the end of that tour, in June 1647, Evelyn married Mary Browne ['see 'Evelyn, Mary (c.1635-1709)], the daughter of the English resident in Paris, Sir Richard Browne, though they did not cohabit until three years later. 
At the age of eleven Evelyn began to keep the notes from which his best-known work, the 'Diary', was subsequently composed. Probably it began in the same sort of almanac that he used for the year 1637 and that is in the library of Balliol College. He did not put these notes into the form of what is now the 'Diary' until the 1680s, and many of the entries about the continent, Beer points out (Evelyn, 'Diary', 1.87-101), make use of later guidebooks that refer to things Evelyn could not have seen himself. Certainly the diary contains both his personal reflections and what is more like news reporting. It exists in essentially two forms: a work called 'De vita propria' which covers the period from 1620 to 1644 (which Beer prints separately), and another called the 'Kalendarium' which covers his life from 1620 to 1697 (BL Add. MSS 78323-78325) and covers much of the material in 'De vita propria' though with significant variations. In addition there are some loose sheets covering the period between 1697 and 1706, and a later transcript of 'De vita propria' made by his grandson Sir John Evelyn (BL, Add. MS 78326) in 1737. Beer's edition of the 'Diary' supersedes all others and, with Evelyn's correspondence, provides the primary basis of his life record. Like most of Evelyn's manuscripts, these are all now in the British Library. 
Evelyn's return to England in 1647 signalled his first engagement with property: both that which he had inherited in 1640 from his father and the lease of Sayes Court, Deptford, a 200 acre estate (Evelyn, letter copybook, 2, fol. 22'v', letter 469 (467)) which his father-in-law had held from the crown. The execution of Charles I in 1649 was for him a dark day that he never forgot or forgave, and it confirmed him in a suspicion of public life that remained with him in spite of his later contribution to it. In 1652 his wife moved to London and gave birth to their first child, Richard (1652-1658). He was the first of eight children, only four of whom reached adulthood. John Stansfield (1653-1654), George (1657-1658), and a second Richard ('b'. and died 1664) died in infancy. John Evelyn (1655-1699), the only son to survive childhood, was never well, and two of his sisters, Mary Evelyn (1665-1685) ['see under 'Evelyn, Mary (c.1635-1709)] and Elizabeth (1667-1685), died young of smallpox. Only Susanna (1669-1754) outlived her father. 
The deaths of three young children in the 1650s, as well as the increasingly hostile climate of the interregnum, darkened Evelyn's youthful exuberance but established his lifelong interest in pedagogy and education. This was first reflected in his translation of St John Chrysostom's 'Golden Book' (1659), which Evelyn dedicated to the memory of his first son, the infant prodigy Richard, the subject of a moving tribute in his 'Diary'. In a letter to Samuel Hartlib in 1660 Evelyn also praised the usefulness of John Comenius's 'Orbis sensualium pictus' (1659) to children's education (Evelyn, letter copybook 2, fol. 22'v', letter 467 (165)). Later he both employed Milton's nephew Edward Phillips as tutor to his son John and encouraged him to contribute to Edmund Gibson's 1695 edition of William Camden's 'Britannia' to which he himself contributed. A series of unpublished treatises on educational subjects (BL, Add. MS 15950) and later letters to Samuel Pepys, Charles Spencer, Robert Berkeley, and Francis Godolphin also represent this tutorial side of his character. He first met William Wotton, the instigator of the ancients and moderns controversy, as a child prodigy, and although Evelyn himself was never simply an ancient or a modern, he encouraged Wotton in his part in the controversy and urged him to write the life of Robert Boyle. 
In 1652 Evelyn began to create the garden at Sayes Court, a project that signalled the beginning of his serious interest in botany and garden history. This led to his writing the 'Elysium Britannicum' (BL, Add. MSS 78342-78344), an encyclopaedic history of gardens and gardening practices that occupied him for most of his life. It was first proposed to Sir Thomas Browne in 1655 and publicly announced in Evelyn's 'The French Gardiner' (a translation of Nicolas de Bonnefons's 'Le jardinier francois') in 1659. The 'Elysium' project led also to the extensive 'information exchange' on horticulture that grew out of garden making, an exchange that is reflected in Evelyn's two letter copybooks (BL, Add. MSS 78298-78299) and elsewhere. Learned as the intention of the project was, it also attracted the correspondence of many ordinary gardeners or 'planters of coleworts', as Evelyn frequently described himself. Among these were George London and Henry Wise, the founders of the Brompton nursery, and Moses Cook, the gardener at Cassiobury who, like John Rose, another of Evelyn's correspondents, became a partner in that enterprise. 
Through Samuel Hartlib's 'Office of address', Evelyn also came to know John Beale, a pioneer of pomiculture in Herefordshire, who introduced Evelyn to Le Gendre's 'Maniere de cultiver les arbres fruitiers' which Evelyn translated and published in 1660 as 'The Manner of Ordering Fruit-Trees'. Beale also contributed to Evelyn's 'Pomona' (1664), and offered extensive material for 'Elysium Britannicum' (BL, Add. MSS 78312, 78313). In a robust and extensive correspondence in the early 1660s Beale also challenged Evelyn to redefine his thoughts about the nature of gardens. Beale encouraged him to move away from the French model of Pierre Morin which was the source of the first flower garden at Sayes Court, and to pursue the idea of extensive or rural gardening with trees that Evelyn also discussed in letters with Sir Richard Browne (BL, Add. MS 78306). 
Having experimented with garden design at Wotton in 1643 and again in 1652 Evelyn went on to create a garden for his old neighbours and friends the Howards at Albury. He also consulted with Arthur Capel, earl of Essex, about the design of Cassiobury, the first garden to be made entirely with trees. And at Euston, Lord Arlington's estate in Suffolk, he recommended laying out the grounds in a way that anticipated the landscape gardens of the mid-eighteenth century. 
Evelyn's interest in science led to other research and publication. The first book of his translation of Lucretius's 'De rerum natura' was published in 1656 ('An Essay on the First Book of T. Lucretius Carus De rerum natura'), though the remaining books were not published until 2000 (ed. M. Repetski). The abortion of this project was due partly to Evelyn's disgust with the slovenly proof-reading of the text in his absence, a problem that was to continue to plague his books. There are also documents on scientific subjects among his manuscripts. His 'Coelum sanitatis' (BL, Add. MS 78346), a translation of an anonymous alchemical work, represents his belief that translation was part of the work of extending Bacon's 'Great Instauration'. More significant are his 'Medicus itinerarius' and related papers (BL, Add. MSS 78336-78338) as well as the famous anatomical tables done for him in Padua in 1646 and published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1702 (12, no. 158). There are also manuscripts on mathematics, physics, mechanics (BL, Add. MS 78333), natural history, and chemistry (BL, Add. MSS 78335, 78346), in the last of which he was instructed by Nicholas Le Fevre in Paris. The most complete of Evelyn's library catalogues (1687, BL, Add. MS 78632) also indicates his interest in books on all these subjects, as well as grammar, law, philology, philosophy, poetry, mechanics, and theology. 
Many of Evelyn's books and manuscripts were alienated from the collection both before and after his death, not least by William Upcott, the editor of his 'Miscellaneous Writings' (1825). The chief dispersal of his library, however, was in the Christies sale of 1977 when his collection of prints, largely purchased in Italy, and his furniture (including two cabinets for his collection of curiosities) were also sold. Most of the books from Evelyn's library containing significant marginalia are now in the British Library and have their own pressmark (EVE). (An alphabetical list of them was published by Michael Hunter in 'John Evelyn in the British Library', 1995). The marginalia in these books reflect Evelyn's sense of a text as cumulative and exemplify his refusal to see any document as complete. 
In 1664 Evelyn's friend Abraham Cowley wrote and dedicated an essay and pindaric ode on gardens to Evelyn; Evelyn's pindaric ode in reply is less well known. He later revised the ode for another gardening friend, the second countess of Clarendon, about her garden at Swallowfield. Apart from the Lucretius translation, all of which is in verse, there is a considerable body of occasional poetry among his manuscripts, including the letters. He also wrote a play, 'Thersander', and advised his cousin Sir Samuel Tuke on his translation of the Spanish play 'The Adventures of Five Hours' (1663). 
Evelyn's pioneering work on tree cultivation ('Sylva', 1664) and on soils ('A Philosophical Discourse of Earth', 1676; in later editions entitled 'Terra: a philosophical discourse') were both outgrowths of the 'Elysium Britannicum'. Although primarily intended to encourage tree planting after the devastation of the civil war, 'Sylva' was a learned work addressed more to gentlemen than to foresters. In it he introduced the word 'avenues' into the English language of landscaping. By its fourth edition it contained 'an Historical Account of the Sacredness and Use of Standing Groves' that demonstrates its relation to the 'Elysium' project. 'Sylva''s handsome reissue with additional plates by Alexander Hunter in 1776 gave it a renewed popularity. The subjects of both 'Sylva' and 'Terra' are also extensively represented in his manuscript collections, including his incomplete treatise on staves (BL, JE MS D13.2) and his notes on husbandry (BL, Add. MS 78340). Never more than an amateur scientist, Evelyn was none the less one of the virtuosi who formed the Georgical committee of what became the Royal Society in 1661 ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. In 1659 (Evelyn, letter copybook, 2, fol. 19, letter 159 (155), 1 Oct 1659), he both proposed a model for the society to his friend Robert Boyle and contributed to Boyle's 'A History of Cold' (1665, pp. 407-9). 
In his lifetime Evelyn also published works that were part of the unpublished 'Elysium Britannicum: Kalendarium hortense' (1664) and 'Acetaria' (1699), as well as a paper in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1670 on Lord Sandwich's discovery in Spain of an early seed drill, the 'sembrador' (5.60). In the twentieth century a further 'Elysium'-related document was published: his 'Directions for the Gardiner at Sayes Court' (1932). Also related to the 'Elysium' were Evelyn's translation of Nicolas de Bonnefons's 'Le jardinier francois' (1659), a book Evelyn believed the best introduction to vegetable gardening, and 'The Compleat Gard'ner' (1693), a translation of the work by la Quintinie in which Evelyn was probably assisted both by Thomas Creech and George London who, with Thomas Wise, brought out a condensed version in 1699. His wife's work in the still room also contributed to the 'Elysium' proposal, as did his own notes on culinary and other subjects (BL, JE MS D4). Throughout Evelyn's correspondence from 1660 onwards there are also many letters related to what Evelyn frequently called 'my hortulan affair'. 
Evelyn's earliest publications were essentially royalist tracts: 'A Character of England' (1659), 'An Apology for the Royal Party' (1659), and 'The Late Newes from Brussels Unmasked' (1660). All of them were published before the Restoration. Although, like his father, Evelyn was loath to be drawn into public life, much of his life after 1660 was involved with public affairs of one sort or another. 'Fumifugium' (1661), the first English book on pollution, announces his commitment to the improvement of public life, evident in his agreement to serve as a commissioner of the sewers the previous year. Thereafter he found himself on other committees of this kind: for licensing hackney coaches (1663), reforming the streets (1662-4), regulating the Royal Mint and Gresham College (1663), repairing St Paul's Cathedral (1666), or even for replanning London after the great fire (1667, 'London Revived', ed. E. S. de Beer, 1938), a disaster of which he wrote a powerful account in his 'Diary'. 
These were far less important and time-consuming than Evelyn's appointment to the commission for the sick and wounded in the Second and Third Anglo-Dutch Wars (1664-7; 1672-4) that consumed a large part of his energy and resources for the better part of a decade. He was also a member of the council for foreign plantations (later trade and plantations, 1670-74). Already an investor in the East India Company, Evelyn was thereby enabled to pursue his interests in botany, exploration, and trade, interests that led to his friendship with William Dampier. He was also a commissioner of the privy seal in the difficult period preceding James II's abdication (1685-7), and treasurer of the commissioners for erecting Greenwich Hospital (1695-1703). 
The corruption of public and private life, especially at court, is a theme that runs through Evelyn's correspondence. It appears as early as his description of dissolute public gatherings in 'A Character of England' (1659) and reappears in his argument for legal restraint on luxury in 'Tyrannus, or, The Mode' (1661). Not surprisingly it also appears in the writing of his pious and studious daughter Mary. 
In spite of his desire to avoid the court, Evelyn found it necessary to pursue great men of office in an attempt to settle legal cases. One was over the ownership of Sayes Court that had been thrown into question by the civil war. The other was over the money owed to Evelyn's father-in-law for his work as English agent of the crown in Paris during the interregnum. Although Charles II had promised to reimburse Sir Richard, this claim was not settled until 1687. In the meantime Sir Richard's brother-in-law was suing for reimbursement of the money that he had lent Sir Richard for his expenses at that time. 
While his son John went abroad in 1675 in the household of the first Lord Berkeley, Evelyn stayed behind to manage the Berkeley estate and later advised Lady Berkeley on the development of what is now Berkeley Square. He was also a lifelong friend of Anne Digby, wife of the second Lord Sunderland, the wily prime minister in all but name. Arlington, Clarendon, Clifford, Fox, Godolphin, Mordaunt, and Osborne were all his close acquaintances, but he was never at the centre of politics, nor wished to be, and his literary controversy with Sir George Mackenzie in 1665 about whether the public or the private life was to be preferred was as much an old-fashioned exercise in academic disputation as an endorsement of public employment. Commanded by Charles II to write about the history of the conflict between the Dutch and the English over the sovereignty of the seas (BL, Add. MS JE Gq), Evelyn found his labours rejected as malapropos in a time of peace. The introduction was published as 'Navigation and Commerce' in 1674, but the rest of his history, given to Pepys for his proposed history of the navy, was lost. 
Although Evelyn continued to be interested in the work of the Royal Society, he was increasingly out of sympathy and touch with the direction that it took -- towards an exclusivist science and away from the arts and the wide range of humanist interests that had been part of its early mandate. His attitude to knowledge was essentially encyclopaedic rather than taxonomic, connotative rather than denotative. He celebrated Boyle's invention of the air-pump and recognized how it might be used to vacuum-pack food, but he was disgusted by the cruelty of a dog's vivisection in 1667. The great works of his later life are on the arts: 'Sculptura' (1661); his translations of Gabriel Naude's 'Advis pour dresser une bibliotheque' ('Instructions Concerning Erecting of a Library', 1661) and of Roland Freart's 'Parallele de l'architecture antique et de la moderne' ('Parallel of Architecture', 1664) and 'Idee de la perfection de la peinture' ('Idea of the Perfection of Painting', 1668); and 'Numismata' (1697). 

'Sculptura, or, The History, and Art of Chalcography and Engraving in Copper' represents Evelyn's project (evident as early as his manuscript notes from the 1650s) to fulfil one of Bacon's recommendations to compile a history of trades. But 'Sculptura' also recognizes the earlier work of Giacomo Favi, who is celebrated in its preface by Samuel de Sorbiere. Evelyn's manuscript 'Trades. Secrets and receipts mechanical' (BL, Add. MS 78341) and its variant, 'Circle of mechanical trades' at the Royal Society, were motivated by his desire to protect the arts from vulgarization by defining their function. As with 'Elysium Britannicum', 'Sculptura' was concerned more with the skills of the artist and virtuoso than the mere mechanic. The book announces the invention of the mezzotint, as represented by one done by Prince Rupert, but it is concerned to guard that invention from being 'prostituted'. 
Whether Evelyn discovered the woodcarver Grinling Gibbons (as he claimed, Evelyn, 'Diary', 3.567) has been disputed, but certainly Evelyn was interested in the encouragement of artists of all kinds. His translation of Freart's 'Parallele de l'architecture antique et de la moderne', augmented by an account of modern architects in the third edition published just after his death, celebrates his friend Wren and refutes the claim that Lord Burlington rescued Palladio from obscurity. His translation of Freart's 'Idee de la perfection de la peinture' reflects his own keen interest in painting as a young man as well as his own landscape and portrait drawings and those of his wife and daughter. His portrait was painted by Chanterell when he was six and again by van der Borcht when he was twenty. His best-known portraits are by Walker in 1648 (now in the National Portrait Gallery) and Kneller in 1679 and 1685, but perhaps the most engaging is the drawing made in 1650 by Nanteuil that was subsequently engraved. Evelyn also continued to number among his friends such painters as Lely, Kneller, and Verrio. His friendship with Wren grew out of several architectural projects in which they were both interested -- the Sheldonian Theatre at Oxford, the rebuilding of Whitehall, Chelsea Hospital, and the rebuilding of St Paul's. And Evelyn spent a good deal of time in 1667 ensuring that the great collection of classical inscriptions assembled by his friend Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, be given a home at Oxford. For this he was awarded a DCL by the University of Oxford in 1669. 
Evelyn's 'Numismata' is as much about the depiction of physiognomy as it is about its ostensible subject, medals. Ranging as it does over a wide range of subjects, it reflects at the end of Evelyn's life his continuing commitment to the plurality of knowledge. In it is also contained the story of the motto by which Evelyn is still best known to the general public, 'Decus et tutamen' ('an ornament and a defence'), suggested by him to Sir Henry Slingsby for the new milled coinage and still on the English $1 coin. This motto is the title of John Brydall's book on the laws of England, a work that Evelyn listed in the 1687 catalogue of his library. One of the four catalogues of his books, it represents his lifelong concern for book collecting and cataloguing that led him to translate the 'Advis pour dresser une bibliotheque' (1661) by Cardinal Mazarin's librarian Naude. He also offered advice to Arlington and Pepys about their libraries, arranged the gift of the library of Henry Howard, sixth duke of Norfolk, to the Royal Society, and encouraged the establishment of a public library at St James's Palace under the care of his friend Richard Bentley. 
Collections of the writings of others also constitute a major part of what is one of the more extensive sorts of writing by Evelyn, the religious. Among his posthumously published works (1850) is his 830-page 'History of Religion' (BL, Add. MS 78367). Begun by him in 1657, it was added to as late as 1704 and arose from Evelyn's doubts about his own religion during the persecution of the Church of England in the interregnum. In part it is a response to the conversion to Roman Catholicism in this period both of John Cosin, the son of his friend Bishop Cosin, and of Evelyn's distant cousin Thomas Keightley. But it also represents Evelyn's long-standing interest in religious subjects, an interest reflected in the large number of clergy who were among his friends, including many bishops and most of the archbishops of Canterbury from the Restoration until his death. Evelyn's falling-out with his brother-in-law William Glanville near the end of his life was because of the latter's Socinianism (disbelief in the Trinity), a subject on which he had a firm and outspoken position. 
Among Evelyn's manuscripts are his annotated 'Bible' (BL, Add. MSS 78360-78361), his collection of lectures from the 'New Testament' (BL, Add. MS 78363), and his 'briefe Account of divers Sermons' (BL, Add. MS 78365), on some of which he drew for the 'Diary'. He also published three other works on religion: 'Another Part of the Mystery of Jesuitism' (1664), a translation of a work by Antoine Arnauld; 'The Pernicious Consequences of the New Heresie of the Jesuites' (1666), a translation of a work by Pierre Nicole; and 'The History of the Three Late Famous Impostors' (1669), accounts of three religious cheats, two of them gleaned from Pietro Cesii and the third from Sir Paul Rycaut. 
Even Evelyn's letter to Boyle about the buildings for a Royal Society (Evelyn, letter copybook, 159) reflects his religious interests. It sounds as much like a proposal for a monastery as an academy. Among his religious papers there are also devotional collections and offices from the interregnum, most of them composed for Margaret Godolphin between 1672 and 1675 (BL, Add. MSS 78375-78385). Much has been made of the apparently pathological element in Evelyn's attachment to her, but this approach fails to consider the intense strain of high-church devotion that existed, largely apart from the court, in the late seventeenth century. Evelyn first met Margaret in 1672, and the anniversary of her death in childbirth in 1678 is one that he never forgot. A maid of honour to Catherine of Braganza, she represented to him everything that the court was not: intelligence, piety, and modesty. 
After the death in 1691 of his nephew John, the last surviving son of Evelyn's elder brother George, Evelyn arranged to inherit the family estate, Wotton, and he moved there with his wife in 1694, leaving Sayes Court in the hands of his son-in-law William Draper. Evelyn's inheriting Wotton was not without challenge by his brother's granddaughters: he had to contest a case in the House of Commons in 1698, the year before his brother's death. In 1696 Sayes Court was let to Admiral Benbow, who in turn sublet it (through William III) to the youthful Peter the Great, thereby precipitating its ruin. Although Evelyn continued to travel to London about Greenwich Hospital business his life was based at Wotton; it was at his son's house in Dover Street, London, that he died at the age of eighty-five on 27 February 1706. He was buried in the chancel of Wotton church. 
Long dismissed as a virtuoso dabbler in the arts and sciences, Evelyn has now come to be recognized as a scholar and participant in the reception of the new science of the seventeenth century. Over a period of more than half a century his voluminous correspondence reflected and extended the social and scientific interchange of his time. His enthusiasm for horticulture in particular, both in his own garden at Sayes Court and in his correspondence and publications, translated continental ideas into England and laid the groundwork for the English landscape garden of the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 8997


Everard, John (b. 1586/7?), Roman Catholic convert and author, presented himself in 1610 at the English College, Rome, giving a somewhat confusing account of his life thus far. He was two months short of either his twenty-third or his twenty-fourth birthday, and had been born a younger son at Deene, Northamptonshire. His father, who had died two years previously, a gentleman worth $100 a year, was an 'Anglicanus' (Kenny, 223), but his father's twin sister, Mary Brudenell, was a Catholic, as was their nephew, Richard Everard of Leicester. This suggests that John was the son of Humphrey Everard of Whittington, Staffordshire, an identification strengthened by his reference to an elder brother was a 'captain with the heretics in Belgium'; this could be Michael Everard, son of Humphrey, later killed while fighting in the service of the United Provinces, or Edward Everard ('b'. 'c'.1575). However, John also refers to his mother, 'nee' Diggles, who had remarried Richard Smith (died 1615), rector of Bulwick and canon of Peterborough. This woman appears in other sources as the Elizabeth Diggles, 'nee' Palladay, who on 8 May 1581 married the rector of Deene, Christopher Everard (died 1608), a first cousin of Humphrey Everard. Elizabeth and Christopher Everard's second child and eldest son, another John Everard, was born and baptized on 19 April 1584; two sisters and two brother also survived their father, just as John of Rome claimed in his own case. 
This is not the limit of confusion over which of the second cousins called John Everard presented himself at Rome. The convert says that, after private education of about eight and a half years, at the age of eleven or twelve, he went to Clare College, Cambridge, where he studied under the principal, Thomas Byng (died 1599), and after four years graduated and became a fellow. College records reveal one John Everard admitted as a Leeds scholar in 1597, who graduated BA in 1601, and another admitted in 1603; neither seems to have been a fellow, but one proceeded MA in 1607. John of Rome, however, recalled that he had caught the plague in Belgium when he was seventeen, which does not indicate uninterrupted residence in Cambridge. His stay at university was long enough for his reading in the works of Cardinal Bellarmine and Thomas Stapleton to lead him into the Catholic faith. He claimed that, having gone to the English Jesuits' College at St Omer, he was reconciled to the Roman Catholic church by John Floyd, although Everard does not appear in the register there. Under the name Edward Smith, in 1610 he was admitted to the English College at Rome as a probationer, but he left after two or three months because he was afflicted with dizziness in the head during his studies, and because he was unable to agree with his fellow students. 
It must have been this John Everard who, following his return to England, published under that name in 1611 'Britanno-Romanus, sive, Angligenarum in Collegio Romano vitae Ratio'. A detailed account in Latin of how the college worked, it exhibited hostility to the Jesuits who ran it, and evidently marked Everard's reconversion to protestantism. The later life of the author, and in particular his relationship to the protestant preacher John Everard (1584?-1640/41), is uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 8998


Everard, John (1584?-1640/41), preacher and religious controversialist, has been identified as the John Everard born on 19 April 1584 and baptized the same day at St Peter's, Deene, Northamptonshire, the second child and eldest son of Christopher Everard (died 1608), rector there, and his wife, Elizabeth Diggles, 'nee' Palladay. Some circumstantial evidence supports this, but the preacher himself did not name his parents and there were at least two John Everards whose early lives have been confused ['see 'Everard, John (b. 1586/?)]; it is just possible, given his later connection with the Rich family, that he was a member of the puritan Everard family of Essex rather than of the Leicestershire and Northamptonshire family, several of whom were recusants. Although he claimed that he had wasted his youth in ignorance and error, he was certainly well educated, since in later life he translated from Greek, Latin, and possibly Arabic, and it is plausible that he was one of the John Everards admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, either in 1597, as a Leeds scholar, or in 1603. The former graduated BA in 1601, and one proceeded MA in 1607. Given that he later held benefices, it is likely that it was he who was made a deacon in 1606 and who was ordained priest in 1609 in the diocese of Peterborough. He may have been the John Everard who in 1610 presented himself at the English College in Rome as a convert to Catholicism, only to repudiate his new faith in print the following year, but the internal contradictions in this man's testimony further weaken an already unproven link. 
By 1618 John Everard the preacher was a lecturer at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. He may have been the John Everard or Everett who with his wife Frances had three children baptized in the parish, John ('bap'. 1617, died 1621), James ('bap'. 1627), and Frances ('bap'. 1630, died 1632); equally, the children's father may have been a John Everett (died 1631). Everard the lecturer was probably the man who proceeded BD from Cambridge in 1619; by the 1620s he was known as Dr Everard, although there is no record of this degree. He quickly attracted unfavourable attention for outspokenness. By about the beginning of 1618 he had attacked the administration of the court of orphans, for which the lord mayor and aldermen of London were responsible, and he had been censured by the bishop and admonished that if he spoke the truth it should not be before a large number of people. Plainly trouble was feared. In the same year Everard published a sermon preached at St Andrew's Holborn, as lecturer at St Martin-in-the-Fields: in 'The Arriereban' he expounded godly attitudes to war, believing that malicious people desired to disgrace him, perhaps for stating that God's power, much more than the king's, was not to be questioned, and for the general implication that war against Spain would be in a good cause, as parliament urged. Over Christmas 1620 he prayed that the English might be delivered from a Catholic king, as they already were from Catholic bishops -- a direct challenge to the proposed terms of the Spanish marriage. In February 1621 he attacked the Spanish match directly in a sermon in St Martin's, and was imprisoned in the Gatehouse for about six months, after which he asked pardon and promised amendment. 
Soon after this Everard was presented to the living of Hinton Martell in Dorset, and in 1622, ironically by James I, to Wilby in Northamptonshire, which he held until 1627. However in August 1622 he attacked the liberation of all Roman Catholic priests and refusers of the oath of supremacy in connection with the Spanish marriage, and consequently was committed to the Marshalsea prison. After his release, in December he visited Tregony in Cornwall and, as the result of seeing a triple sun in the sky, published an anonymous tract, 'Somewhat Written by Occasion of Three Sunnes Seen at Tregnie' (1622), warning that God 'is whetting his sword, and making ready his quiver for impenitent sinners', because most of the church was deceived, implicitly by Roman Catholicism. In March 1623 he was once again imprisoned for expressing unease about the Spanish match. Powerful friends such as Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, had repeatedly pleaded for his release, but finally James I's patience wore out. He is reported to have said, 'Who is this Dr Ever-out you come so oft about? his name shall be Dr Never-out'. In all, Everard stated that he was imprisoned six or seven times. 
By 1626 the emphasis of Everard's preaching began to change. He was investigated by Bishop George Montaigne of London for arguing that it was unlawful to pray for temporal blessings. This marks a step towards the more contemplative content of his later sermons, like 'The Rending of the Vail'. Influenced by the Dominican mystic Johannes Tauler (1300-1361), Everard increasingly expounded humility, simplicity, and letting God have his way in individual lives as important themes. He then became chaplain to Henry Rich, Lord Holland, and moved to Holland House in Kensington. He was also lecturer at the parish church by September 1628, by which time he was renowned as a preacher, drawing a very wide auditory from all sections of society. Sermons preached in city churches like St Giles Cripplegate may date from this time. 
According to Rapha Harford, who knew Everard well -- and who wrote a foreword to the 1659 edition of Everard's 'The Gospel Treasury Opened' -- bishops attacked him and deprived him of benefices worth $400. Perhaps these were actually lectureships. Certainly he was not rector of Fairstead, Essex, as has been assumed; John Etheridge was incumbent by 1628, and resigned in 1643. The John Evered of Fairstead summoned and dismissed by the court of high commission in 1636 was more likely to have been a member of the Everard family of Essex. It seems certain, however, that he was deprived of substantial sources of income. According to Harford his reaction was to kneel in court, praising God, and saying, 'The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof: therefore I will not fear', and, with St Stephen, 'Lay not this sin to their charge' (Everard, c4). He refused to submit, though William Laud reputedly threatened to bring him to a morsel of bread. 
In the late 1630s Everard was the dominant figure influencing London separatism outside the Baptists, though probably not formally separated. Many of his sermons were preached at 'public meeting places' in Kensington, and fashionable Middlesex villages like Islington, and he also preached privately, especially in Kensington. He is mentioned as a separatist in 1638, and may have had links with the Familists, one of whom he helped. By this time he was influenced by Henry Niclaes, and the medieval 'Theologia Germanica' favoured by Martin Luther. He translated the latter at this time, and made copies for the earls of Holland and Mulgrave. His other translations included 'The letter and the life, or, The flesh and the spirit' and, from works by Sebastien Franck, 'The tree of life' and 'The vision of God'. Their thought later had an influence on the early Quakers, probably partly through his preaching. Some or all of these books were copied by Woulston, a Chancery Lane scrivener, and bound by Rapha Harford. 
In November 1637 the privy council issued a warrant to search Everard's house in Fulham, seize all his papers, and remove those concerning the state. Perhaps these provided material for his trial by the high commission, where he was, according to Harford, falsely accused. He was charged with keeping conventicles and on 11 July 1639 fined $1000 for teaching and publishing heretical doctrine. Such a crippling fine must have been intended to be unpayable, and he was imprisoned. Though negotiations about his submission began in November, only after conferring with the bishops of Ely and Rochester, and reference to Archbishop Laud, did he finally read his submission kneeling in June 1640. He was released from clerical suspension, and in July his fine was remitted. He predicted the downfall of bishops should there be a parliament which the king could not dissolve. 
William Penn described Everard as a renowned Independent, and as the great spiritual separatist. He was princely in presence and behaviour, yet able to mix with the humblest if they wished to learn. His greatest desire was to share his faith clearly with others, and he counted all his intellectual gifts as dung beside knowing Christ crucified. His words are notable for their love: 'Beloved' is his usual way of addressing his hearers, and his sermons burn with an eagerness for his hearers to share in a deep encounter with God which he plainly experienced. He describes how, to a repenting and bleeding soul, God appears 'in Mercy and Love, and Marrieth himself to them, and as he communicates to them his sweet Loves, so their 'Wills' and their 'Loves' are swallowed up in his' (Everard, 7). His portrait, engraved by T. Cross, shows a plump man, ruffed and gowned, with a little goatee beard, and dark, curly, shoulder-length hair. The verse beneath catches the spirit of his admirers' views: '
This is the Shadow of that House of Clay 

Where dwelt a Soule who richly did Display 

Such Light of Trueth abroad, as did Unseal 

The Book of God and Hidden Things Reveal. 
(ibid., frontispiece)' Everard died in Fulham, Middlesex, leaving a modest sum, at the end of 1640 or in early January, 1641, when administration of his goods was granted. In 1658 Elias Ashmole published 'The Way to Blisse', an anonymous work of natural philosophy dated by Ashmole to the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century, to which 'the industrious Dr Everard' ('To the Reader') had added explicatory marginal notes. 


@@@@@


doc= 8999


Everard, Mathias (d. 1857), army officer, was the third son of Thomas Everard of Randilestown, co. Meath, and his wife and cousin, Barbara, daughter of O'Reilly of Ballinlough Castle and sister of Sir Henry Nugent. He was appointed ensign in the 2nd (or Queen's) regiment at Gibraltar on 28 September 1804, and became lieutenant on 21 March 1805. In December 1805 the company to which he belonged, with two others of his regiment and two of the 54th foot, were captured on their voyage home from Gibraltar by a French squadron under Admiral Guillaumet, bound for Mauritius. The troops were put on the frigate 'La Volontaire' and carried about for three months, until 'La Volontaire' went into Table Bay for water, ignorant of the recapture of the Cape by the British, and surrendered to the shore batteries. The troops were landed, and the companies of the Queen's did duty for some months at the Cape; those of the 54th, to which Everard appears to have been temporarily attached, were sent with reinforcements to the River Plate, and acted as mounted infantry with the force under Sir Samuel Auchmuty. Everard led the forlorn hope at the storming of Montevideo on 3 February 1807, when twenty-two out of thirty-two men with him were killed or wounded. For this he received a sword of honour from the Patriotic Fund at Lloyd's and the freedom of the city of Dublin. 
Everard was promoted, on 23 April 1807, to a company in the 2nd battalion, 14th foot, with which he served at Corunna and in the Walcheren expedition. During the latter he was thanked in general orders for his conduct at the siege of Flushing (12 August 1809), when the flank companies of the 14th, one of which he commanded, supported by the rest of the battalion, in conjunction with some of the German legion, stormed one of the enemy's batteries and effected a lodgement within musket-shot of the walls. 
Everard was subsequently transferred to the 1st battalion of his regiment in India, and commanded it at the siege of Hathras in 1817. He commanded a flank battalion in the operations against the Pindaris in 1818-19, was made regimental major on 10 July 1821, and commanded it at the storming of Bharatpur on 29 December 1825. The 14th headed one of the columns of assault at Bharatpur, and unsupported cleared the breach after the premature explosion of a mine and effected a junction with the other column led by the 59th foot -- the steadiness and discipline of these two regiments, according to Lord Combermere, 'deciding the fate of the day'. Everard was made CB in 1826 and a brevet lieutenant-colonel. 
Everard became regimental lieutenant-colonel in 1831, and commanded the regiment for a period of sixteen years in the UK, the West Indies, and North America. He was made KH in 1831 and major-general on 11 November 1851, and received a distinguished service pension. Everard, who had succeeded his elder brother in the family estate, died at Southsea, unmarried, on 20 April 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 9000


Everard, Robert (fl. 1647-1664), religious controversialist, whose parentage and date of birth are unknown, probably had humble origins as he later described himself as a 'poor man' (Clarke, 'Puritanism and Liberty', 42). He served in parliament's New Model Army, in Cromwell's regiment; he was a trooper in Cromwell's cavalry regiment by autumn 1647. At the end of April 1647 the soldiery of the New Model Army began to elect two agitators from each regiment to express their grievances with parliament. About late September it seems that disillusionment with the army grandees led to new agents being selected by five regiments, although these did not replace the old agitators. Everard was one of these new agents. In this capacity he was a signatory to (but may not have been involved in the composition of), among other documents, 'The Case of the Armie Truly Stated, to-Gether with the Mischiefes' (18 October), and 'An Agreement of the People for a Firm and Present Peace' (3 November). On 27 October he presented 'An Agreement of the People' at the army headquarters in Putney. This led to the celebrated Putney debates of 28 October to 1 November 1647 at which officers, soldiers, and civilians debated how best to negotiate a settlement for the nation. On the first day of these debates the army secretary, William Clarke (then unaware of Everard's name) recorded his speeches under the name 'Buff-Coat'. Everard spoke with commitment at Putney, on the side of the Levellers and those influenced by them. He clearly wished to guide the debates towards agreement, but his main concern was that such an agreement should be speedily reached. He showed that he had little time for the prevarications of senior officers, on the second day he warned them: 'yett this message God hath sent mee to you, that there is great expectation of suddaine destruction; and I would bee loath to fill uppe that with words' ('Clarke Papers', 1.286). 
In 1649 there were a series of Leveller mutinies caused by opposition to the Irish campaign, and the perceived failure of the army grandees to fulfil the obligations set down in their early engagements. Everard was involved in these mutinies. In May 1649 one pamphlet records a Captain Everard with a 'considerable party' fighting with some of the lord-general's forces ('The Declaration', 3). Twenty prisoners were taken by Everard's troop, and almost the same number were killed. He is said to have been riding westward to meet other mutineers, and the pamphlet later locates him (this time identified as Mr Everard) and his party near Oxford. His army career may have ended after the mutinies, although one source suggests that it ended after the battle of Worcester in September 1651 (Everard, 'Antidote', 1-2). 
Everard tried a number of the different varieties of Christianity which abounded during his early life before settling upon the General Baptist faith. He fully enunciated his General Baptist beliefs in his first pamphlet, 'The Creation and Fall of Adam' (1649; 2nd edn, 1652). In this pamphlet he used both argument from observation and scripture to demolish the idea of original sin. It seems that on first publication this pamphlet had some impact on the wider General Baptist movement. 'The Faith and Practice of Thirty Congregations' (1651), which was largely signed by Leicestershire and Lincolnshire Baptists, was printed as an appendix to the second edition of this work, although the exact relationship of Everard to these congregations remains unclear. Whatever his influence over these congregations was, it seems to have declined significantly before the end of the interregnum. He was to return to the question of the status of nature, which he had first written about in 'The Creation and Fall of Adam', in 'Nature's Vindication' (1652). Here he attempted to disprove the view that nature itself was fundamentally evil, by scriptural means. 'The Creation and Fall of Adam' elicited a hostile response from the presbyterian minister Nathaniel Stephens in 'Vindiciae fundamenti, or, A Threefold Defence' (1658). 
In 1650 Everard continued to expound General Baptist beliefs in 'Baby-Baptisme Routed'. This pamphlet is no longer extant, but it attracted a similarly unfavourable response from Nathaniel Stephens, 'A Precept for the Baptisme of Infants' (1651), which prints extracts from the lost Everard pamphlet. Stephens also makes it clear that this pamphlet debate grew from a series of disputes concerning paedobaptism in Earl Shilton, Leicester. 
By March 1652 Everard had been in Newcastle, seemingly on a proselytizing mission. According to his own account he resided there for about four months, preaching three or four times a week. He may have been encouraged from within the army garrison, particularly by Lieutenant-Colonel John Mason. His behaviour in Newcastle, however, brought the opprobrium of the resident ministers. In a letter to Cromwell, and 'Articles exhibited against Captain Robert Everard', they outlined some of their criticisms of him. These range from claims that he untruly said that he could discourse in Hebrew and Greek, to allegations that he drunkenly interrupted one of the presbyterian Cuthbert Sydenham's services. They then wrote of the unorthodox theological positions which they believed that he held -- highlighting his stances on election and original sin. He responded to these criticisms in 'An Antidote for the Newcastle Priests' (1652), refuting many of the criticisms and clarifying his views. He also used the pamphlet to attack the ministers themselves. Their views on paedobaptism and their collection of tithes attracted most censure, Everard even claimed: 'I believe, so long as a hireling Minister remains in this Nation, it will not be absolutely free from tyranny and slavery' (Everard, 'Antidote', 12). 
Everard's final Baptist pamphlet, 'Robert Everard's Three Questions' (1655), concerns whether or not there was any scriptural warrant for the practice of laying on of hands. It records a debate which he entered into with Benjamin Morley. Everard's pamphlet is printed with another pamphlet that enters into this debate, Thomas Morris's 'A Messenger Sent' (1655), itself a response to Morley's 'A Vindication of... the Laying on of Hands' (1653). 
Very little is known of Everard's life in the following nine years. He re-emerges in print in 1664 to detail his recent conversion to Roman Catholicism. At one point after the Restoration he met a lay Catholic gentleman who questioned the basis of his faith and convinced him, with the help of some Roman Catholic tracts, to convert. This conversion appears to have been emphatic and complete. He renounced not only his religious beliefs, but also asked Charles II for forgiveness for the part he played in the New Model Army. The pamphlet which he published, 'An Epistle to the Several Congregations' (1664; rev. 2nd edn, 1664), elicited responses from a number of different perspectives. The General Baptist Jeremiah Ives responded in 'Rome is No Rule' (1664); the Quaker Francis Howgill in 'The True Rule, Judge and Guide' (1665); the presbyterian biblical commentator Matthew Poole replied in the appendix of 'The Nullity of the Romish Faith' (1666); Joseph Harrison in 'The Popish Proselyte' (1684). All of these responses are hostile, and they are perhaps testament to the fear within nonconformist groups after the Restoration that they might become associated with Roman Catholicism. 


@@@@@


doc= 9001


Everard, Thomas (1560-1633), Jesuit and translator, was born on 8 February 1560, and baptized on 10 February at Linstead Parva, Suffolk, the son of Henry Everard (died 1596), of Pond Hall, Linstead Magna, and Catherine Gawdy. His father was imprisoned in 1578-9 in the common gaol at Bury St Edmunds for refusing to conform to the established church. He was repeatedly fined for recusancy from 1581 until his death in 1596, leaving the estate heavily in debt with accumulated unpaid fines. In 1572 Thomas Everard entered Jesus College, Cambridge, where he remained for two years, and then possibly enrolled at one of the inns of court as did his brothers. At the age of thirty, in 1590, he met the Jesuit John Gerard either in London or, more probably, at Lawshall, Suffolk, where Gerard was living with Henry and Elizabeth Drury. A number of Catholics from the eastern counties visited Gerard there for instruction and to make the spiritual exercises under his direction. Among them were Everard and his cousin Anthony Rous of Dennington. As a result of Gerard's influence both men left England in 1591 to enter the English College at Rheims, receiving the diaconate in 1592 and priest's orders later in the same year. In 1593 Everard entered the Society of Jesus at Tournai and followed the course of Jesuit formation at houses in the Spanish Netherlands until his final profession in 1604. 
Everard was sent to join John Gerard in London in 1605. Gerard referred to him in his autobiography as Everett, not a pseudonym but a common variant of Everard. In the aftermath of the Gunpowder Plot, Robert Cecil had ordered a particular search to be made for Gerard. Everard, who was considered to resemble him, had two narrow escapes from arrest, once when tracked to Gerard's house and the second even more dramatically as he was preparing to say mass on Maundy Thursday. As it was thought to be too risky for him to remain in London he moved to East Anglia, where for five years he tramped the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk saying mass and strengthening the scattered Roman Catholic communities. In Suffolk he met his cousin Anthony Rous who had weakened under the rigours of the missionary life. In 1608 he had betrayed a fellow priest, Thomas Garnet SJ, and abandoning his Roman Catholic priesthood retired to be incumbent of the Church of England parish of Sweeting, Norfolk. Everard appears to have reconciled him to the Roman Catholic church as in 1613 both returned to Flanders, Everard to St Omer and Rous to Louvain. 
An able linguist, Everard continued to work on the translations into English of spiritual classics from Latin, Spanish, and Italian originals which he had begun during the final years of his Jesuit training. Those published, mostly in St Omer, include two works of Luca Pinelli, published as 'The Mirrour of Religious Perfection' (1618) and 'Meditations upon the... Sacrament' (1622); 'The Paradise of the Soule' by Albertus Magnus (1617) and translation of works by Francisco Arias and St Francis Borgia were included in the compilation 'A Treatise of Mental Prayer' (1617). Less certainly he may have been involved in two translations of the works by Fulvio Androzzi published as 'Certaine Devout Considerations of Frequenting the Blessed Sacrament' (1606) and 'Meditations uppon the Passion' (1606). Later works included an adaptation of works by Luis de la Puente, published as 'Meditations upon the Mysteries of our Faith' (1624), of St Francis Borgia published in 'The Practice of Christian Workes' (1620), and, perhaps in collaboration with John Heigham, 'An Instruction how to Pray and Meditate Well' (1618) from the work of Ignacio Balsamo. Finally, he may have been responsible for three posthumous translations from Bellarmine published from 1638 to 1641. 
In 1618 Everard was back again in Suffolk where he was arrested and imprisoned, and was finally exiled from England in 1620. In 1623 he attempted to return to England disguised as a soldier and using the pseudonym of Harrison, but was arrested on arrival at Dover and imprisoned in the castle for three months. He was then bound over in the sum of $100 to appear before the magistrates in London. For the last ten years of his life he divided his time between Suffolk and London, continuing with his translations. Contemporary accounts describe his increasing lameness and the loss of power in his arms and finally his blindness, so that in London he could not go about nor read. When he could no longer work he filled his time with vocal and mental prayer. It was remarked that he returned to the familiar patterns of prayer taught him as a child, the rosary and in particular, the much loved Jesus psalter of pre-Reformation English Catholic piety. He died in London on 16 May 1633. 


@@@@@


doc= 9002


Everdon, Silvester of (d. 1254), administrator and bishop of Carlisle, came from Everdon in Northamptonshire; his parentage is unknown, but he was related to the locally important family of Thrupp or Thorp. Instituted vicar of Everdon in 1219, by 1229 he was in the service of the chancellor, Ralph de Neville (died 1244), and made his career in the chancery thereafter, his advance being marked by his presentation to a number of valuable livings, culminating in the archdeaconry of Chester in 1245. In 1242 he was entrusted with the custody of the exchequer seal, this being a temporary substitute for the great seal, which went to Gascony with Henry III, and in 1244 he became temporarily keeper of the great seal itself, though he was never formally appointed chancellor. In 1246 the seal was committed to him again. He was by this time increasingly active in court circles, in 1243 receiving a gift of robes from the king, and according to Matthew Paris coming to be regarded as 'the king's faithful clerk, dear and close, obtaining the first place in the chancery, where he served him wisely' ('Flores historiarum', 2.322). Royal favour and personal piety -- in 1235 he appears to have gone on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela -- made him a natural candidate for a bishopric, and in 1246 he was elected bishop of Carlisle, but at first refused promotion, apparently because he had qualms about accepting high spiritual office in return for secular administrative work. He was persuaded to change his mind, probably by the king, who provided him with pontifical vestments; the temporalities were restored on 8 December 1246, and he was consecrated bishop on 13 October 1247. 
Everdon proved an effective and conscientious diocesan, settling disputes, ensuring that vicars received proper stipends, and safeguarding the rights and property of the see of Carlisle, most notably by bringing to a satisfactory conclusion in 1249 the long-running dispute over their respective endowments between the bishops and the canons of Carlisle Cathedral priory. In 1251-2 he returned to the king's service, acting as a justice itinerant at eyres for Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Warwickshire, and Leicestershire, though his role appears to have been primarily that of a figurehead, since he did not attend all the sessions, and was restricted in the exercise of his judicial functions by being forbidden to act in the absence of more experienced colleagues. In May 1253 he attended parliament at Westminster, and formed one of a delegation of bishops which asked Henry III to respect the liberties of the church, particularly over episcopal elections; Henry's response was to ridicule the petitioners by reminding them that they owed their own promotion to his influence, Everdon being derided as having been formerly 'clericorum meorum clericulus' ('the littlest of my clerks'; Paris, 5.374). But he remained in the king's favour and service, and was on his way to court in March 1254 when he was thrown from his horse near Northampton, suffering injuries from which he died a few days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 9003


Everest, Sir George (1790-1866), geodesist and military engineer, was born in Greenwich on 4 July 1790, the third of six children and the eldest son of (William) Tristram Everest (1747-1825), a lawyer at Greenwich, and his wife, Lucetta Mary Smith (died 1809). He was educated at the Royal Military College, Marlow, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1805), before joining the East India Company as a cadet in 1806. That year he sailed for India as second lieutenant in the Bengal artillery. After seven years' service, about which little is known, he was sent to Java, where from 1814 to 1816 he surveyed the island at the request of the lieutenant-governor, Stamford Raffles. He was chosen for this task because of his proficiency in mathematics and astronomy. He then returned to Bengal and spent the next two years improving the navigation of the rivers connecting the Ganges and the Hooghly. The success of these engineering works brought him to the notice of William Lambton, superintendent of the great trigonometrical survey of India, and as a result Everest was appointed chief assistant on the survey in 1817. He delayed joining it in order to survey a line for a visual telegraph (for the transmission of messages by semaphore) from Calcutta to Benares, a distance of 400 miles. In 1818 he joined Lambton at Hyderabad and began surveying. 
There were three main surveying projects current in India at the time: the revenue survey, the topographical survey, and the trigonometrical survey. Lambton and Everest were associated with the last of these projects, which was of international geodetic importance because of its part in determining the figure of the earth. Lambton had begun the work of measuring a meridian arc north from Cape Cormorin, and Everest's task was to complete the arc. From the start he was hampered by inadequate staff and instruments, but was insistent that work be carried out to the greatest degree of precision possible. This meant he had to do much of the fieldwork himself, particularly in its early stages, and this in turn worsened his already poor health. In 1820, while he was surveying in a swampy and malarial part of the nizam of Hyderabad's territory, he contracted malaria for the second time and he was ordered to the Cape of Good Hope to recuperate. He used his time to investigate a meridian arc measured in southern Africa in the mid-eighteenth century. In 1821 he returned to India and continued work. On the death of Lambton in 1823 Everest was appointed superintendent of the survey and began to extend his predecessor's work northwards from the valley of Berar, insisting on working in the field even though half paralysed from the effects of fever and rheumatism. In November 1824 he measured a base-line in the Sironj valley, and in 1825 had carried the observations on to Bhaorasa when his health gave way and he returned to England, bringing work on the arc to a halt. 
Although initially too ill to work, Everest used his time in England to good effect. He had three main aims: the first was to win the unequivocal support of the East India Company for the completion of the measurement of the arc, the second was to investigate the methods and instruments in use by the Ordnance Survey, and the third was to secure lasting improvements in the instruments available in India. He achieved the first at least in part by winning interest in scientific circles for the continuation of the arc, in which connection he was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 8 March 1827. By 1830 the company had abandoned earlier plans to use astronomical methods to survey the northern plains, and Everest was charged with extending the work by trigonometrical means whatever the cost. Everest achieved his second aim particularly through contact with Thomas Colby of the Ordnance Survey in Ireland; he returned to India with compensation bars modelled on Colby's. He achieved his third aim by persuading the East India Company to engage Henry Barrow to travel to India to make and maintain mathematical instruments for the survey. While in England he published 'An Account of the Measurement of the Arc of the Meridian' (1830). 
Everest went back to India in June 1830 to become, in addition to superintendent of the trigonometric survey, surveyor-general of India. His administrative duties were thus considerably increased, and this delayed his return to scientific work on the great arc until 1832. However, despite further bouts of sickness, he was able to see the work through to completion in 1841 under Andrew Scott Waugh, by which time an arc of meridian more than 21 degree in length had been measured from Cape Comorin to the northern border of British India. He worked tirelessly, in the field and at survey headquarters, to ensure the steady progress and high scientific standard of the survey work. These years were marred by a quarrel between Everest and Thomas Jervis whom, without consulting Everest, the East India Company had provisionally appointed as his successor. In that capacity, Jervis had lectured to the Royal Society in London on the inadequacies of the present Indian survey and had gathered support among fellows for improvements. Everest, always rather hot-tempered and devoted to the survey, reacted furiously to this criticism in effect of himself and Lambton, publishing 'A Series of Letters Addressed to the Duke of Sussex as President of the Royal Society' (1839). The letters are stinging attacks on the fellows of the Royal Society for meddling in matters of which they know little. In the end the affair came to nothing: the Royal Society retreated into inaction and Jervis resigned in 1841 and thus never succeeded Everest. In November 1842, the arc complete, Everest resigned, successfully recommending Waugh as his successor. He left the administration in good order, having in Thomas Renny-Tailour and Waugh officers in whom he had great trust and having promoted to positions of considerable importance local staff such as the computer Radhanath Sickdhar and the instrument maker Saiyid Mir Mohsin Hussain. 
The price of Everest's trigonometrical success, however, was the relative neglect of topographical survey. This latter was pursued 'ad hoc' and for its neglect Everest was criticized at the time by Henry Prinsep, member of the Council of India, and later by some historians. Edney (289) defends Everest, pointing out that the great trigonometrical survey was seen as the fundamental geographical project and the other surveys as secondary in the sense that their results could be contained within the 'archive structure' of the great trigonometrical survey. 
On 16 December 1843 Everest retired and returned to England. There he married, on 17 November 1846, Emma ('b'. 1822/3), the eldest daughter of Thomas Wing, a lawyer of Gray's Inn and Hampstead; they had four daughters and two sons. Everest wrote 'An Account of the Measurement of Two Sections of the Meridional Arc of India' (2 vols., 1847), for which he received the medal of the Royal Astronomical Society. He was elected an honorary member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal and fellow of the Royal Asiatic and Royal Geographical societies. He was as active as his health allowed in his masonic lodge and at the Athenaeum. He reached the rank of colonel with effect from 1854, was named CB on 26 February 1861 (having solicited this honour in memoranda to the directors of the East India Company as early as 1838), and knighted on 13 March 1861. He served on the council of the Royal Society from 1863 to 1865, was a member of the council and a vice-president of the Royal Geographical Society, and was a manager of the Royal Institution from 1859 to his death. He died at his home, 10 Westbourne Street, Hyde Park Gardens, London, on 1 December 1866, survived by his wife and children, and was buried on 8 December in St Andrew's churchyard, Hove. 
Everest is chiefly remembered not for his geodetic work, but because his name was given in 1856 by his successor in India, Andrew Waugh, to Peak XV in the Himalayas. Mount Everest (originally Mont Everest), at 29,028 feet, is the highest summit in the world. It was exceptional to name a feature after a European, since the surveyors were normally scrupulous in using local names. In this instance, however, no local name could be agreed on. Everest's scientific achievements have inevitably lasted less well. His great vision was to calculate the figure of the earth, comparing his great arc with arcs in higher latitude, particularly that from Spain to Scotland, and F. G. W. Struve's western Russian arc, as well as the short arc in Peru. Astronomical measurements along the Indian great arc were subsequently found to be too disturbed by the attraction of the Himalayas, and to be too inaccurate in its southernmost part (that is, the part for which Lambton was responsible) to make it reliable. Everest's figure was soon superseded and, although he had made considerable procedural and technical improvements in surveying, he left no major scientific discovery or invention as his legacy. By the later twentieth century satellite technology had completely changed the method of calculating the figure of the earth. Everest's importance was as a man of vision who with immense determination carried out his plan to the limits of precision then possible, without regard to his own comfort or that of those around him, and whose achievement was of great importance to contemporary geodesy and to the accurate surveying of India. 


@@@@@


doc= 9004


Everett, James (1784-1872), Methodist minister and religious writer, was born on 16 May 1784 at Alnwick, Northumberland. He was the second son of John Everett and his wife, Margaret Bowmaker. Everett's father died while he was young, and the boy soon learned to help his mother. After a short time at a private school in Alnwick he was apprenticed to a grocer and general dealer, where he was given to practical jokes. In 1803 he was converted and joined the Wesleyan Methodist Society. He began to preach in Sunderland in 1804 but refused an offer made in the same year to send him to Hoxton Academy to prepare for the Independent ministry. He showed such preaching power that in 1807 he was accepted for the itinerant ministry among the Wesleyans. His first circuits were Sunderland, Shields, and Belper in Derbyshire. In August 1810 he married Elizabeth Hutchinson of Sunderland. From an early period he took careful notes of the celebrated characters whom he met, and thus preserved recollections of Robert Southey, the poet laureate, James Montgomery, the hymn writer, William Dawson, the preacher, and many others. From 1810 to 1821 he served in a variety of Yorkshire towns, and also spent two years in Manchester (1815-17) under Adam Clarke, who became a close friend. He was enrolled as a member of the Literary and Philosophic Society there. 
On account of a serious throat complaint in 1821, Everett gave up the regular ministry and became a bookseller and writer, first in Sheffield and afterwards in Manchester. He had been collecting materials for the history of Methodism in those towns, part of which he published in 1823 and 1827. Everett preached occasional and special sermons while in business, and extended his popularity. In 1834 he resumed full ministerial work at Newcastle upon Tyne, and from there moved to York in 1839. Through failure of health he was again made a supernumerary minister in 1842, but remained in York, writing more actively than ever. His main contributions were in the areas of biography and church history, and he displayed a talent for poetry through his friendship with James Montgomery, editor of the 'Sheffield Iris'. His accounts of the lives of Adam Clarke (1843, 1849), William Dawson (1844), Samuel Hick, the village blacksmith (1848), and William Crister, the Wallsend miner (1851), were very popular and went into many editions. His verses on the death of Joseph Benson (1823) and the 'Sacred Grave' (1831) were widely read. 
The most important event in Everett's life was his expulsion from the Wesleyan conference in August 1849. For many years he had been opposed to the policy and working of conference, and had published critical comments in works such as 'The Disputants' (1835), in which he argued against the scheme for starting a theological college for the training of ministers. He defended Adam Clarke and Richard Watson in the dispute concerning the doctrine of the eternal sonship of Christ against Bunting and his party, to whose perceived autocracy he became deeply opposed. He was an encourager of the religious revival that the American James Caughey brought to York and other places, in opposition to the more orthodox and static preaching style of Robert Newton and Wesleyan conservatives. He was the author of the chief part of 'Centenary Sketches of Ministerial Character' (1841), a work in two volumes containing disparaging sketches of the preachers with a humorous but satirical tone. In 1845 and following years certain clandestine pamphlets, called 'Fly Sheets', were circulated widely, bearing neither printer's nor publisher's names. They contained serious charges against the leading men of the conference, reflecting both on their public actions and on their personal character. A general suspicion attributed the authorship of these pamphlets to Everett. He was brought before the conference and questioned respecting them, but declined to give any answer. After further inquiry and discussion he was formally expelled. Everett then took the lead in an agitation against the conference which shook the entire Wesleyan connexion, and resulted in the loss of more than 100,000 members and adherents. Some of the seceders joined others who had previously left the 'old body', and formed a new denomination which they styled the United Methodist Free Churches. Everett was elected the first president of their assembly, which met at Rochdale in July 1857. To the end of his life Everett remained a minister of this denomination, filling its pulpits as health and opportunity permitted. 
Everett lived for some years in Newcastle, and finally in Sunderland. He wrote many articles for magazines and printed a few poems. In July 1865 his wife died, leaving no children. Everett, as a connoisseur of books and manuscripts, had formed a large collection of Methodist literature and artefacts, revealing a fascination for curious and unusual items. Much of the collection he disposed of to Luke Tyerman, the biographer of Wesley. Everett died at Tavistock Place, Sunderland, on Friday 10 May 1872, and his library was bought for Ranmoor College, the theological institution of the United Methodist Free Churches. 


@@@@@


doc= 9005


Everitt, Allen Edward (1824-1882), artist, was born on 10 April 1824 at 59 Newhall Street, Birmingham, the son of Edward Everitt (1793-1880) and his wife, Harriet Parkes (1797-1877), and grandson of Allen Everitt (1759-1851), successive proprietors of the principal artists' repository in the city. His maternal grandfather was David Parkes, the Shropshire antiquary. 
Taking drawing lessons in early life from David Cox, Everitt soon showed a special talent for the illustration of old buildings and interiors. With J. G. Jackson he contributed the illustrations to 'The Churches of Warwickshire', a survey initiated in 1844 by William Staunton and Matthew Bloxham, and made a series of watercolours of Aston Hall for a book by his friend Alfred Davidson, 'A History of the Holtes of Aston' (1854). Between 1848 and 1860 he undertook several continental tours to the old towns of Belgium, France, and Germany, and showed watercolours at the Royal Academy in 1857 and 1858, and at other London exhibitions. 
In 1857 Everitt joined the Royal Society of Artists in Birmingham, of which he became honorary secretary in 1858, a post that he held until his death. A respected drawing master in the midlands, for many years he taught drawing at the Birmingham Deaf and Dumb Institution, of which he was also virtually the secretary. In 1870 an archaeological section of the Midland Institute was formed, and Everitt was appointed one of the honorary secretaries of what was to become the Birmingham and Warwickshire Archaeological Society, contributing many papers to its 'Transactions'. He also illustrated J. T. Bunce's 'History of Old St. Martin's' (1875), the parish church of Birmingham. Everitt was also for some time a member of the general council of the Midland Institute. In June 1880 he accepted the post of honorary curator of the Free Art Gallery, a municipal institution which was the forerunner of the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery. 
On 1 May 1880 Everitt married Frances Hudson ('b'. 1835/6) of Moseley, and they received as a gift from the Society of Artists a magnificent carved and painted cabinet designed by J. H. Chamberlain (known as the Everitt cabinet; Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery). Everitt lived in Edgbaston, first in George Road and from 1855 at The Grove, 28 Frederick Road, where he died, of congestion of the lungs, on 11 June 1882; he was buried in the churchyard of St Bartholomew (Edgbaston Old Church). His very large collection of topographical drawings, invaluable as a record of the appearance of the west midlands in the mid-nineteenth century, is now at the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9006


Eversden, John (fl. 1294-1315), Benedictine monk and chronicler, derived his surname from either Great Eversden or Little Eversden, villages near Caxton in Cambridgeshire. At an unknown date he became a monk of Bury St Edmunds, and by 1294 was kitchener and by 1296 cellarer, holding the latter office for about twenty years. The thirteenth-century chronicle of Bury St Edmunds Abbey records that in 1299 John Eversden, cellarer, stayed at the cellarer's manor of Warkton (near Kettering in Northamptonshire), endeavouring to obtain the manor's disafforestment. The chronicle records that he was successful and that he visited Warkton again the next year, this time defending the abbey's right to a certain pasture. In 1302 Eversden was one of the six delegates chosen by the monks to elect their new abbot, and he was the delegate chosen to announce the election of Thomas Tottington to the rest of the convent. In 1306-7 he was one of Abbot Thomas's two proctors at the parliament in Carlisle, and again in 1309 at the parliament at Westminster. The abbey's registers have a number of entries for the period between November 1296 and November 1315 recording some of Eversden's other activities, mainly on business relating to the cellarer's office. 
Eversden was evidently a monk of some, but not outstanding, importance. He owes his subsequent reputation to the attribution to his authorship of part of the Bury chronicle. This originated as a chronicle from the creation of the world to 1265 by the Bury monk, John of Taxster (died 1265). Some time before the end of the 1270s Taxster's chronicle was revised at Bury. This new recension survives complete in only two copies, London, College of Arms, Arundel MS 30, and West Suffolk Record Office, MS A 8/1, both of the late thirteenth or early fourteenth century. The text has significant variants from Taxster's work. For instance, it omits the notice under 1244 that Taxster took the habit in that year, and a notice under 1264 about the siege of Gloucester by the Lord Edward, but adds to Taxster's narrative a note (an addition, not by the original scribe in Arundel MS 30 but incorporated in MS A 8/1) under 1255 'hic attonsus fui', and a paragraph under 1264 about the fine of 800 marks imposed on Bury St Edmunds Abbey by the parliament at Winchester. This revised version of Taxster's chronicle was the basis of two continuations, to 1296 and 1301 respectively, both valuable sources for Edward I's reign. The 1265-96 continuation was borrowed from by chroniclers in a number of monasteries, most of them in East Anglia: Bartholomew Cotton (died 1321/2) at Norwich, the chronicler known as John of Oxnead at St Benet of Hulme, and the Peterborough chronicler were especially indebted to it. This continuation, together, with the revised version of Taxster's chronicle, is the section of the Bury chronicle usually attributed to John Eversden, who, it has been supposed, was the monk whose tonsuring the chronicle records under 1255. 
The reason for the chronicle's attribution to Eversden is to be found in Arundel MS 30. This manuscript is of Bury provenance and contains, besides the chronicle, a miscellaneous collection of treatises and notes, in various thirteenth- and fourteenth-century hands. It has the best, and only complete, copy of the 1265-96 continuation, and the unique copy of the 1296-1301 continuation. In the margin by the passage recording Eversden's expeditions to Warkton in 1299 and 1300 is a sketch of the head of a man -- apparently a rustic -- hooded. Arundel MS 30 was once owned by the antiquary and bibliographer John Bale (died 1563). Quite possibly it was because of the above reference to Eversden in the text that Bale attributed the whole Bury chronicle to him. Bale may also have supposed that the marginal sketch represented Eversden. Until the twentieth century scholars concurred with the attribution in so far as it referred to the 1265-96 continuation, although Liebermann in 1888 pointed out that the known evidence for Eversden's authorship is extremely weak. Then in 1943 V. H. Galbraith reiterated Liebermann's doubts, and further research has yielded nothing to substantiate the attribution. Bale attributed four other works, besides the chronicle, to Eversden, copies of all of which are in Arundel 30. Nothing is known to corroborate these attributions. It would seem that Bale, having attributed the chronicle in Arundel MS 30 to Eversden, concluded that these other works in the manuscript must likewise have been by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9007


Evesham, Hugh of (d. 1287), physician and cardinal, was born, and possibly educated, at Evesham, before first making his name at Oxford University, where he distinguished himself as a peacemaker in various university disputes between 1267 and 1274. However, he sided with the Dominicans against the Franciscans in their battle over evangelical poverty in 1269. In 1275 he was granted licence, as archdeacon of Worcester, to study abroad for a year. Archbishop John Pecham (died 1292) referred in correspondence to acquaintance with Hugh 'vel in curia vel in scholis' ('both at the curia and in school'; Martin, 1.219). The men were near contemporaries and it is likely that they knew each other at Oxford and at Paris and, later on, at the papal court, probably before 1279. 
By the early 1270s Hugh was styled king's clerk, serving Edward I and his mother, Eleanor of Provence, probably as a medical adviser. By 1279 he was being referred to in English documents as a famous physician. Hugh enjoyed numerous royal and ecclesiastical incomes and honours, especially in the diocese of York, where he was presented to the rectories of Hemingbrough and Spofforth, and became prebendary of Bugthorpe in 1279. In the same year, his friend William de Wickwane (died 1285) was chosen ahead of Hugh as archbishop of York and in 1282 asked him to mediate at Rome in William's disputes with the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of Durham. 
Hugh, like many church officials, found the vogue for alchemical medicine at the papal court during the latter part of the thirteenth century an excellent road to papal patronage. Either Nicholas III ('r'. 1277-80) or Martin IV ('r'. 1281-5) commissioned him to find a cure for a fever raging around Rome, and it is possible that he became a medical adviser to Martin in 1280. The pope created him cardinal-priest of San Lorenzo in Lucina on 23 March 1281, a position he held until his death at Rome on 27 July 1287. He was buried in his own church of San Lorenzo. Rumour persisted that Hugh died by poisoning, but such stories were common explanations for sudden death from any unknown cause. He had remained archdeacon of Worcester until his death, and in his will he made a bequest to at least one of his Worcestershire kinsmen. 
Early bibliographers record several works by Hugh, including 'Super opere febrium Isaac', a commentary on the book on fevers of Isaac Israeli, beginning 'Quoniam de filii bonitate sicut' (Thorndike and Kibre, col. 1270), but this has been lost. A sermon for Septuagesima Sunday by him survives in a Bodleian Library manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 50, fols. 299'v' ff.). Most interesting are his surviving medical writings, all but one of which appear in company with those of the English Cistercian, Cardinal John of Toledo. John, who died in 1275 and was also a papal physician, was sometimes called the white cardinal, and his association with Hugh, once an advocate of the Dominicans, perhaps explains the name 'atratus' ('black'), sometimes attached to Hugh's name. Gloucester Cathedral, MS 18, folio 273'v', contains a recipe 'secundum magistrum H. de Eveham contra phisum' ('a recipe against consumption'). Manuscript 1246 in the Biblioteca Riccardiana at Florence has a panacea attributed to 'dominus Ugo cardinalis' contained in 'Liber de sanitate conservanda a Johanne de Toleto compositus' (fol. 32'v'). The two men are mentioned again in a collection of medical/alchemical recipes found in Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, MS 405 (fol. 102). A treatise on medical alchemy found in Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 7817, fol. 54, contains a recipe for 'aurum potabile' (a medical/alchemical concoction). In it, both Hugh and John affirm the usefulness of the preparation, which is said to have been a secret ingredient used in the food of all the cardinals, to liven them up and improve their memories. 


@@@@@


doc= 9008


Alexander Charles Ewald (1842-1891), writer, was born in Jerusalem in 1842. He was educated abroad and appointed by open competition to a clerkship in the Public Record Office in August 1860; he was promoted senior clerk in 1872. His main responsibility was the completion of Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy's work of calendaring the Norman rolls of Henry V; Ewald's calendars were printed in the deputy keeper's reports (vols. 61-2, 1880 and 1881); Ewald also prepared for this precis the glossary of French words. Within the Public Record Office he was left behind in an increasingly competitive and professionalized service, but found his metier by writing for a wider public a great many popular works of biographical and historical character. Compilations of general English history and constitutional development were followed by 'Our Public Records: a Brief Handbook to the National Archives' (1873), a serviceable but inadequate introduction. A life of Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, first published in 1875 (and apparently written partly in official time), enjoyed minor reputation, and among other works Ewald prepared a two-volume biographical compilation on Disraeli (1883) and a life of Sir Joseph Napier, the Irish lord chancellor (1887; rev. edn, 1892). Scarcely anything from his extensive literary output is worthy of remembrance, however, not even 'How to Pass: a Civil Service Textbook' (1867). A pseudonymous novel, 'Harry Disney: an Autobiography' by Atholl de Walden (3 vols., 1871), is attributed to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9009


Ewald, Ferdinand Christian (1802-1874), Christian missionary to the Jews, was born of Jewish parentage near Bamberg, and joined the Christian faith in 1822. As a Lutheran minister he came under the aegis of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews and studied at its seminary at Palestine House, Bethnal Green, before entering the society's service in 1832. He worked for a decade among the oppressed and lowly communities of north Africa, selling bibles and distributing tracts, preaching and persuading. In 1836 he was ordained by the bishop of London, and returned to the Mediterranean coast until repeated attacks of ophthalmia forced him to return to London in 1841. He was then appointed chaplain to Michael Solomon Alexander, first Anglican bishop of Jerusalem and, like Ewald, a convert, and wrote of their work in 'The Journal of Missionary Labours in Jerusalem, 1842-1844' (1846). Continued ill health obliged him to return home again in 1851, when he became head of the society's London mission. He was employed there until 1870. During that time hundreds of Jews were baptized out of the thousands he had instructed, and he helped the society to set up a 'Wanderers' Home' for the assimilation of convert Jews into their new community. 
Ewald published in 1856 a German translation of the Talmudic treatise 'Abodah Sarah' ('Idolatrous worship'), for which he was awarded a doctorate of philosophy by the University of Erlangen. In 1872 he was awarded by Archbishop Tait the Lambeth degree of bachelor of divinity, in recognition of his proficiency in Hebrew and oriental learning, as well as for his prominent services to the society. He died at his home, 14 Woodside Villas, Gipsy Hill, Upper Norwood, London, on 9 August 1874. 
His son 
Ewald is reported to have been in line for promotion in his department at the time of his premature death at his home, 31 Victoria Road, Upper Norwood, on 20 June 1891. He was survived by his wife, Amelia Isabella. 


@@@@@


doc= 9010


Ewart, Joseph (1759-1792), diplomat, was born on 30 April 1759, the eldest son of the minister of Troqueer in Kirkcudbrightshire. He attended a local school before entering Edinburgh University, where he took the degree of MA. He then acted as travelling tutor to John Macdonald of Clanranald, and while abroad he met Sir John Stepney, the British envoy at Dresden. On Stepney's transfer to Berlin in October 1782 Ewart became his private secretary. Ewart remained at the embassy after Lord Dalrymple succeeded Stepney and served as secretary of legation from October 1785 and as charge d'affaires from May 1787 to July 1788, when he was appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary. In 1785 he married a daughter of Count Wontensleben, with whom he had a son and two daughters. 
In Berlin, Ewart worked hard to re-establish a close relationship between Britain and Prussia and played a significant role in concluding the general defensive alliance between the two countries that was signed in Berlin on 13 August 1788; this completed the triple alliance between Britain, Prussia, and the Netherlands. Ewart then pressed for a consolidation of the alliance to put pressure on Russia, then engaged in war against Turkey, to make peace and return conquered territory to Turkey -- in particular the Black Sea port of Ochakov. On leave from Berlin in autumn 1790 Ewart presented his case to William Pitt, arguing that it was in Britain's interest to join Prussia in thwarting Russia's expansionist plans in the east. By early 1791 Pitt appeared committed to enforcing a peace treaty on Russia and began preparing for war against Russia; by mid-March 1791 a Baltic squadron in Spithead was ready to go into action. However, in the face of growing hostility to a war in both parliament and the press, Pitt backed down. In April he ordered Ewart to return to Berlin to persuade Prussia to adopt a more conciliatory policy towards Russia. Ewart was a broken man and was held responsible for the deterioration in relations with Prussia. To add to his difficulties, he bungled the legal issues involved in arranging the marriage of Frederick, duke of York, to Princess Frederica Charlotte, the king of Prussia's eldest daughter. He was granted permission to return home on grounds of ill health and left Berlin on 22 October 1791, with a pension of $1000 per annum and the promise of the Order of the Bath. 
Ewart died shortly afterwards, on 27 January 1792, at his brother's home in Bladud's Buildings in Bath, where he had gone to recover his health; he was buried in Bath Abbey. The fact that he died in delirium gave rise to rumours that he had either been poisoned by a Russian agent or gone mad as a result of political disappointments, but the delirium appears to have resulted from acute appendicitis. 


@@@@@


doc= 9011


Ewart, William (1798-1869), politician, was born on 1 May 1798 at 7 Queen Square in Liverpool, the second of the four sons of William Ewart (1763-1823), merchant, and his wife, Margaret (1773-1844), daughter of Christopher Jaques of Bedale, Yorkshire. Descended from a Kirkcudbrightshire family, William Ewart senior, who was the brother of the diplomatist Joseph Ewart and godfather of the future statesman William Ewart Gladstone, had made his fortune as a general commission merchant, and was senior partner in the firm of Ewart, Rutson & Co. of Liverpool. His son and namesake was educated at Eton College from 1811, and proceeded in 1817 to Christ Church, Oxford, where he won the college prize for Latin verse in 1819 and the Newdigate prize the following year. He graduated in 1821, undertook a two-year tour of the continent, and, having been admitted to the Middle Temple in March 1820, was called to the bar on 26 January 1827. On 15 December 1829 at Prestwich he married his first cousin Mary Anne (1805-1837), the daughter of his father's youngest sister, Mary, and the Manchester cotton merchant George Augustus Lee of Singleton. 
Ewart, who was elected for Bletchingley at a by-election in July 1828, took his seat in the Commons on 5 February and made his maiden speech in favour of Catholic emancipation on 27 March 1829. He was left without a constituency in 1830, but, following the death of William Huskisson later that year, he was narrowly elected for Liverpool after a fierce contest. Although unseated on petition by the house on 28 March 1831, he regained his seat at the general election in May, and held it until 1837. A Liberal with radical leanings, who advocated the ballot, reform of the established church, abolition of colonial slavery, and repeal of the corn laws, he was active in parliament, speaking on general topics 'with considerable ease, and with much rapidity... without being eloquent' (Grant, 289-90). In 1832 he secured the passage of an act to end the use of capital punishment in cases of theft of money or animals from a dwelling house (2-3 Will. IV c. 62), and in subsequent years succeeded in obtaining other legislative steps towards the total abolition of the death penalty. On 1 August 1833 he made the first of a series of annual motions for equalization of the duties on East and West Indian sugars, as an indirect attack on the use of slave labour in the West Indies. Other humanitarian achievements of his included the acts of 1834, to end the hanging of the bodies of prisoners in chains (4 & 5 Will. IV c. 26), and of 1836, to allow felons to be defended by counsel (6 & 7 Will. IV c. 114). 
Having been defeated at Liverpool and Kilkenny borough in 1837, Ewart lost a by-election at Marylebone in March 1838, but returned to the Commons as member for Wigan in March 1839. In 'The Reform of the Reform Bill' (1837) he urged the case for widening the scope of political changes, and in a major intervention in the Commons on 28 January 1840, called for these to be extended to the realms of free trade and national education. At the general election of 1841 he returned to his family's Scottish roots, becoming member for Dumfries burghs, which he represented for the next twenty-seven years. In the 1840s he continued to press for free trade, being involved in the activities of the Anti-Corn Law League. Strongly internationalist in his outlook, he also attended several peace congresses in Europe. He maintained consistent opinions on public finance, arguing for a system of more direct taxation in a published speech (28 May 1847). Other speeches which were separately printed were those on capital punishment (10 June 1856) and European settlement in India (16 March 1858), in which he expressed the hope that 'our mission there would be for the benefit of the Natives themselves' (Munford, 145). He chaired a select committee on this question, which provoked John Warden to write his 'Letter to William Ewart'. The select committee on the adoption of the metric system, which he also chaired, led to the permissive act of 1864 (27 & 28 Vict. c. 117). On 3 May 1864 he secured the appointment of a royal commission on capital punishment, on which he served from July 1864 to January 1866. 
Ewart's concern to promote education and public libraries, which was largely motivated by a wish to improve the economic and social status of the lower classes, began in 1836, when his select committee's report on arts and manufactures led to the creation of the School of Design at Somerset House, London. He spoke often on education -- for instance, on the need to free it from church domination (20 June 1839) -- and in 1841 requested that an annual ministerial statement be made to parliament. In the autumn of 1846 he explained to Lord John Russell that while he was against large-scale public provision of education, he was 'rather desirous of combining the voluntary system with government inspection and public encouragement of it' (Baines, 135). He endeavoured to introduce competitive examinations for entry to the civil and diplomatic services (1845 and 1852), and the army (1847). He supported the 'Museums Act' of 1845, which enabled town councils to levy rates to pay for local museums, and was instrumental in securing the extension of this scheme to libraries, chairing the select committees which were appointed in 1849 and 1850. The resulting 'Libraries Act' of 1850 (13 & 14 Vict. c. 65) established what ultimately became a nationwide system of public library provision. He sponsored an amendment bill in 1855, and on the introduction of another on 27 February 1866, Gladstone told the Commons that Ewart's name was 'associated with many achievements of public utility, but with this act of legislation [of 1850], I think, he may feel assured that his name will be associated not only during his life, but after he is gone' (Munford, 151). In July 1863 Ewart proposed in the Commons a scheme for 'inscribing on those houses in London which have been inhabited by celebrated persons, the names of such persons' (Cole, 9). Ewart's idea of identifying residences with plaques was initiated by the Society of Arts in 1866 and taken on by London county council in 1901 and English Heritage from 1986. A blue plaque marking Ewart's home at 16 Eaton Place, Belgravia, was installed in 1963, a century after his original proposal. 
Ewart, who retired from parliament in 1868, died of pneumonia on 23 January 1869, at Broadleas, near Devizes, Wiltshire, which had been his country residence since 1854. He was buried on 28 January at Bishops Cannings, Wiltshire, where his next younger brother, Joseph Christopher Ewart (1799-1868), who was Liberal member for Liverpool from 1855 to 1865, had recently been interred. He left the bulk of his estate, which included personalty sworn under $70,000, to his only son, William Lee Ewart (1836-1892), and provided for the two of his four daughters who survived him. Ewart, who was described by Benjamin Robert Haydon as 'a keen little man' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 3.356), was a slightly built figure of respectable character, who applied himself diligently to the introduction of many social improvements over a long career. He was an advanced Liberal, whose political philosophy was based on a desire for better public administration, and this was expressed in all his concerns, which ranged from the organization of business in the Commons to the establishment of free public libraries. The Ewart Library in Dumfries is named in his honour, and a bust of him is displayed in the Ewart room at the Library Association headquarters in London. 
His eldest daughter, 


@@@@@


doc= 9012


Ewbank, John Wilson (bap. 1799?, d. 1847), painter, was probably baptized at St Cuthbert's Church, Darlington, co. Durham, on 4 May 1799 and was adopted when a child by a wealthy uncle who lived at nearby Wycliffe, on the banks of the Tees, Yorkshire. It was intended that Ewbank should become a Roman Catholic priest and he was therefore sent to Ushaw College, near Durham. He absconded, however, and became an apprentice to T. Coulson, an ornamental painter in Newcastle. On visiting Edinburgh with his master, Ewbank was encouraged to study under Alexander Nasmyth, and he soon set up in practice as an independent artist and drawing-master. The vigour and accuracy of his sketches from nature were especially admired; a series of fifty-one drawings of Edinburgh, by him, were engraved by W. H. Lizars for Dr James Browne's 'Picturesque Views of Edinburgh' (1825). Another view of the city, 'View of Edinburgh from Inchkeith', was one of his finest landscapes. His reputation, however, was chiefly established by his small-scale marine paintings, which reflected the influence of Dutch seventeenth-century artists, such as Willem Van de Velde, and he was considered one of the foremost marine artists of this period. During the late 1820s he turned to subject matter of a more ambitions character, painting 'The Visit of George IV to Edinburgh', 'The Entry of Alexander the Great into Babylon' (exh. RA, 1826), and 'Hannibal Crossing the Alps' at the apogee of his career. His annual income at this point was said to be no less than $2500, and in 1826 he was nominated a founder member of the Royal Scottish Academy. He exhibited numerous paintings at the academy between 1827 and 1833 as well as twenty-seven works (mostly shipping and coastal views) at the Carlisle Academy between 1825 and 1833. 
At a late stage in his career, however, Ewbank became an alcoholic and he descended into extreme poverty. In a letter of 27 December 1829 he wrote of having 'made a sacrifice of part of my Pictures', but of still facing imprisonment for debt (NL Scot., MS 1831, fol. 178). His pictures were frequently painted in the bar of a public house or in his own squalid home. According to one obituarist: 'a solitary chair and a pile or two of bricks formed the only articles in the shape of furniture to be seen -- the window-sill serving for his easel... [the pictures] were generally painted on tin, within an hour or two, and sold on the instant, wet and unvarnished, for sixpence or a shilling, which was immediately spent in ministering to his sensual gratifications. ('GM', new ser., 29, 1848, 668)' According to his death certificate Ewbank died, aged forty-seven, of typhus fever on 28 November 1847 in the workhouse infirmary at Bishop Wearmouth, Sunderland (not at Edinburgh as stated in his 'Gentleman's Magazine' obituary). His letters refer to his 'family', with whom, according to the 1841 census, he was living at Oakwellgate, a very poor part of Gateshead; the census return indicates that he was married to Mary Ewbank, with whom he had three daughters and a son, the eldest daughter then being fifteen. Examples of his work are in the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh; the Shipley Art Gallery, Gateshead; the British Museum, London; the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle; the Sutherland Art Gallery; and Tyneside Public Libraries. 


@@@@@


doc= 9013


Ewbank, Thomas (1792-1870), writer on hydraulics and physics, was born at Barnard Castle, co. Durham, on 11 March 1792. When thirteen years of age he began work as a plumber and brass-founder. In 1812 he went to London, where he was employed in making cases for preserved meats. His spare hours were given to reading. In 1819 he emigrated to America, and the following year commenced business in New York as a manufacturer of lead, tin, and copper tubing. 
In 1836 Ewbank was able to retire from business and devote himself to studying and writing on mechanical matters. In 1845-6 he travelled in Brazil, and on his return to New York published an account of his travels, 'Life in Brazil' (1856). He was appointed commissioner of patents by President Taylor in 1849, but was criticized for the manner in which he fulfilled the duties of his office, which he held until 1852. 
Ewbank was one of the founders and a president of the American Ethnological Society. He wrote on a variety of subjects, including hydraulic machinery for raising water; the physical relationship of man to the earth; matter and force; and inorganic forces ordained to supersede human slavery. He also wrote a number of other papers on scientific subjects, ranging from the ingenuity of spiders to the design of steam engines, many of which appeared in the 'Transactions of the Franklin Institute'. One of his papers on marine propulsion attracted some attention in Europe. He died at New York on 16 September 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 9014


Ewen, John (1741-1821), songwriter, was born in Montrose, of poor parents, and received only a very slender education. Having saved a few pounds working as a travelling merchant he went in 1762 to Aberdeen, where he opened a small hardware shop. This appears to have prospered, but the chief rise in his fortunes was owing to his marriage, on 3 March 1766, to Janet, one of two daughters of John Middleton, a yarn and stocking maker in Aberdeen. Through Janet, who died shortly after giving birth to a daughter, Ewen came into possession of half his father-in-law's property. 
Gradually Ewen came to be recognized as one of the most respectable public characters of Aberdeen. Trevor Royle suggests that he probably based 'O weel may the boatie row', published anonymously in Johnson's 'The Scots Musical Museum', 'on an older fragment' (Royle, 102). Burns described it as 'a charming display of womanly affection mingling with the concerns and occupations of life. It is nearly equal to 'There's nae luck about the house''. 
Ewen died on 21 October 1821, leaving, after the payment of various sums to the public charities of Aberdeen, about $14,000 to found a hospital in Montrose to maintain and educate boys. The will was challenged by his estranged daughter and, after conflicting decisions in the Scottish court of session, was appealed to the House of Lords. There, on 17 November 1830, the settlement was set aside because the deed was imprecise on the sum to be accumulated by the trustees before building, and on the number of boys to be educated. 


@@@@@


doc= 9015


Ewer, Isaac (d. 1650/51), army officer and regicide, was a close relation and possibly son of Richard Ewer of Hatfield Broad Oak, Essex, and may have been related to the Ewers of Pinner, Middlesex, and Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. He was living at Hatfield by 1633, having by that year married Joan (died in or before 1649), daughter of Thomas Thurloe, rector of Abbot's Roding, Essex, and sister of John Thurloe (bap. 1616, d. 1668), later Cromwell's secretary of state. Ewer's assessment for 9's'. of ship money and post as a surveyor of highways for Hatfield in 1636 suggests he was of middling sort status. After joining parliament's army some time after the outbreak of civil war, he captained a troop of horse by 1643. In March 1645 he was major of the dragoons in the eastern association. Later that year he was appointed lieutenant-colonel to Robert Hammond's foot regiment in the New Model Army, succeeding Hammond as colonel in October 1647. In February 1648 he was granted a coat of arms, recognizing his rising status. 
At The Garter inn in Windsor on 20 April 1648 Ewer was overheard plotting with other officers to threaten to disarm the city of London and extract $1 million in order to wage war on their enemies. During the second civil war, his regiment was at first employed in south Wales and was then left by Cromwell to besiege Chepstow Castle. Ewer took Chepstow on 25 May 1648, killing the governor, Sir Nicholas Kemish, and his subsequent report earned him parliament's thanks. The regiment was then ordered to Essex, where Ewer was one of the commissioners who signed the articles for the surrender of Colchester and was presumably a member of the council of war that condemned Lucas and Lisle. Soon after he was appointed governor of Portsmouth and on 20 November 1648 headed the deputation which presented the army's remonstrance against the treaty with the king to the House of Commons. 
With the army resolved to bring the king to trial, Ewer was ordered to convey Charles's then custodian, the doubting Hammond, from the Isle of Wight, where he arrived on 26 November 1648; he was eventually forced to arrest his former colonel, leaving his subordinates to remove the king to Hurst Castle. Appointed one of the king's judges, Ewer attended the high court every day and signed the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. He later recounted a story that Cromwell and Henry Marten playfully splashed each other's faces with ink after the warrant was signed. 
Ewer's foot regiment was selected by lot for Ireland on 20 April 1649, prompting him to draw up his will on 1 August, 'not knoweinge whether God maie ever bring mee backe againe' (PROB 11/215, fol. 149'v'). His regiment distinguished itself at Drogheda, and on 26 March 1650 Ewer was instrumental in Cromwell's capture of Kilkenny. He was at Clonmel on 9 May, and served under Ireton at Waterford, which fell on 6 August. He is last heard of marching towards Kilkenny on 31 October 1650; he died of plague in Ireland in either the final months of 1650 or in the first two months of the new year, and was buried at Waterford. His will was proved on 25 February 1651 by John Thurloe, who became guardian to his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 9016


Ewer, John (1703-1774), bishop of Bangor, was born at Belchamp St Paul, Essex, in March 1703 and baptized there on 16 March. He was the son of Edward Ewer, who came from a whig Hertfordshire family distantly connected with Lord Shaftesbury and the duke of Rutland, and his wife, Susannah. His brother, William, was governor of the Bank of England between 1781 and 1783. Ewer was educated at Eton College, where he was elected as a king's scholar in 1716, and proceeded to King's College, Cambridge, in 1723. He graduated BA in 1728, MA in 1732, and DD in 1756; he was elected to a fellowship in 1727 but in 1756 failed in a bid for the provostship as the duke of Newcastle's candidate. In June 1728 he returned briefly, as an assistant master, to Eton where he was tutor to the marquess of Granby. His reward for this service came in 1735 with his presentation to the living of Bottesford, the church being the closest to the Manners's seat at Belvoir Castle. He was ordained priest on 1 June 1735. In 1738 the duke of Rutland obtained a canonry of Winchester for Ewer, though Ewer's attempt to gain the income from the preceding vacancy in the canonry failed. In 1741 Ewer accompanied Lord Granby on the grand tour, which included Europe and Asia Minor. In September 1743 Ewer married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Barnardiston of Suffolk; they had two daughters. 
In 1751 Ewer was presented to the living of West Ilsley, Berkshire; later that year he was collated to the prebend of Moreton-cum-Whaddon in Hereford Cathedral. In January 1761 the duke of Rutland unsuccessfully sought the vacant bishopric of St David's for Ewer. However later that year Ewer was nominated to the see of Llandaff, though he may have delayed his consecration in the hope of a better appointment. He was consecrated at Lambeth on 13 September 1761 by Archbishop Thomas Secker and other bishops. He was permitted to retain his living of West Ilsley and his canonry of Windsor 'in commendam'. In the absence of an episcopal residence at Llandaff he lived principally in Berkshire. Ewer's primary visitation at Llandaff was held in 1763 and a further visitation in 1768. It was during Ewer's episcopate that the cathedral choir was repaired. On 20 December 1769 he was translated to Bangor, where he held a visitation in 1771, taking care to send out visitation questions in English and in Welsh. He died on 28 October 1774 at his home near Worcester. He was survived by his wife and one of his daughters, Margaret Frances. Two years later his large library was sold in London. 
Ewer's published sermons include those delivered on 12 March 1762, before the House of Lords, and on 10 April 1766, before the president and governors of the London Hospital at Whitechapel. His third published sermon, before the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts at St Mary-le-Bow on 20 February 1767, sparked a major controversy; one historian has claimed that 'no Anglican prelate of the eighteenth century committed as great an indiscretion' (Bridenbaugh, 293). Ewer attacked the 'scandalous neglect' of the American colonies by the government in denying them a resident episcopate. He also argued that the British had placed the American colonies under the great burden of having to travel to England for ordinations. Ewer was as firm in condemning the colonists for failing to use episcopally ordained ministers and claimed that this was contrary to the royal charter of those colonies. Bishop Warburton was to repeat Ewer's claims some months later. Ewer's sermon was attacked in the 'St James's Chronicle' and the 'London Chronicle'. The pamphlet war that followed, in both England and America, focused on whether Anglican episcopacy would be a benefit or a hindrance for American colonists. Those colonists who rejected Ewer's arguments included John Devotion, who termed them 'Llandaff's Whines', and William Livingstone, who viewed Ewer as a 'haughty prelate'. The significance of Ewer's sermon was that it formed part of the growing unease at British policy towards the American colonies among the Anglican episcopate. 


@@@@@


doc= 9017


Ewin, William Howell (bap. 1731, d. 1804), usurer, was born in Cambridge, where he was baptized on 3 February 1731 at St Sepulchre's. He was the son of Thomas Ewin, formerly a grocer, and later a brewer in partnership with a Mr Sparks, and Susanna, 'nee' Howell, the daughter of a Cambridge coal merchant. He had a sister named Sarah. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, which he entered on 15 March 1749, and graduated BA in 1753, MA in 1756, and LLD on 11 June 1766. He is said to have received a diploma of LLD from Edinburgh in or about 1778, but his name does not occur in the 1858 catalogue of graduates. At the death of his father Ewin inherited his share of the brewing business and a substantial fortune, which he largely increased by private usury. He joined the commission of the peace for the town and county of Cambridge, and in 1769, along with his former college tutor, William Samuel Powell, delayed the implementation of an act for better paving, lighting, and public order in the town. The antiquarian William Cole wrote: 'My friend, Dr. Ewin, by being much of his father's turn, busy and meddling in other people's concerns, got the ill will of most persons in the town and university.... The gownsmen bore him a particular grudge for interfering much in their affairs.... They often broke the doctor's windows, as they said he had been caught listening on their staircases and doors.... Dr. Ewin, as did his father, squinted very much' which resulted in him receiving the nickname of Dr Squintum (BL, Add. MS 5804, fol. 68'b'). 
In January 1777 it was reported that Ewin had loaned money to William Bird, a scholar at Trinity College, at a high rate of interest. Between 1775 and 1776 Bird, then a minor without a father, had been lent $750 and was required to repay Ewin a total of $1090; failure to do so had led to Bird's imprisonment in a sponging-house for debtors. This 'usurious affair', as Cole terms it, came to light at a very unlucky time, for Ewin had been promised the chancellorship of the diocese of Ely, which was to fall vacant in the following May. However, eighteen months elapsed before the university took action. The trial took place at the vice-chancellor's court on 14 October 1778, and on 21 October Ewin was sentenced to be suspended from all degrees taken, or to be taken, and expelled from the university. The delegates on his appeal confirmed the suspension, but revoked the expulsion. He thereupon applied to the court of king's bench for a mandamus to restore him to his degrees. After lengthy discussions the court awarded the writ in June 1779, on the ground that, as no university statute expressly forbade usury or the lending of money to minors, the vice-chancellor's court had no jurisdiction in the case. Lord Mansfield, however, censured Ewin's conduct in the strongest terms, and stigmatized him as 'a corrupter of youth and an usurer'. He suggested that Ewin be removed from the commission of the peace and that a statute should be passed to meet such cases in the future (Cooper, 4.388-9, 392). On 20 October 1779 Ewin was restored to his degree of LLD, but two years later was dismissed from the county commission. 
Eventually Ewin settled at Brentford where, according to his obituary, 'his strict attention to the administration of parochial concerns' and his readiness to 'condemn every species of idleness and imposition, created him many enemies, particularly among the lower orders of people' ('GM'). He died at Brentford Butts on 20 or 29 December 1804, aged seventy-three, and was buried in the chapel of New Brentford, with a monument by John Flaxman. He is thought to have left property amounting to over $100,000 to his sister Sarah, who died in 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 9018


Ewing, Greville (1767-1841), Congregational minister, the youngest son of Alexander Ewing, a teacher of mathematics, and his wife, Jacobina, was born on 27 April 1767 in the parish of Old Greyfriars, Edinburgh. He studied with considerable distinction at the high school and university there, and then decided, much against his father's wishes, to prepare for the ministry of the Church of Scotland. He was ordained in 1793 as associate minister of Lady Glenorchy's Chapel, Edinburgh, where he soon acquired wide popularity as a preacher. Missions attracted much of Ewing's attention, and in 1796 he took an active part in the formation of the Edinburgh Missionary Society, becoming its first secretary. He was also co-founder of the 'Missionary Magazine', which he edited for three years from its foundation in 1796. When Robert Haldane of Airthrey planned a mission to India, Ewing was appointed to go out, but the directors of the East India Company refused to sanction the undertaking, and it was abandoned. His association with the Haldanes involved him in an itinerant mission during the winter of 1798 on behalf of the newly formed Society for Propagating the Gospel at Home, and subsequently in the establishment of preaching centres in many parts of Scotland. 
Finding the Church of Scotland inflexible, Ewing resigned his ministry at Lady Glenorchy's Chapel in 1798 and left the church. In July 1799 he became minister of the Glasgow Tabernacle, which connection he retained until 1836. Ewing embraced Congregational principles wholeheartedly and engaged in disputes with the Haldanes over church order and baptism. He defended his position in print in 1807 and 1809, and published 'An Essay on Baptism' in 1823. 
Ewing assisted in the foundation of the Glasgow Theological Academy in 1809 and of the Congregational Union of Scotland in 1812. He remained a tutor at the academy until 1836, training the first generation of Scottish Congregational ministers in moderate Calvinism. He did much to promote the study of the 'Bible' in the original languages, publishing in 1801 a Greek grammar and lexicon for students of the 'New Testament' which ran to several editions. In 1821 he was awarded a DD by Princeton College, New Jersey. 
Ewing married three times. His first wife, Anne Innes of Gifford, whom he married on 13 November 1794, died nine months later. In 1799 he married Janet Jamieson, who died on 18 January 1801, having borne a daughter, Ewing's only child. He married third, on 15 November 1802, Barbara, daughter of Sir James Maxwell, sixth baronet, of Pollok, and Frances Colquhoun; she died on 14 September 1828 as the result of an accident at the Falls of Clyde. Ewing published a memoir of her, which reached a second edition in 1829. 
During the last few years of his life Ewing was in poor health, and had to discontinue his regular work. He died suddenly on 2 August 1841 in Glasgow, and was buried on 6 August at Eastwood. 


@@@@@


doc= 9019


Ewing, Juliana Horatia (1841-1885), children's writer, was born in the vicarage at Ecclesfield, near Sheffield, on 3 August 1841, the second of eight children of Alfred Gatty (1813-1903), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Margaret Gatty, nee Scott (1809-1873). Educated primarily by her mother, Juliana (Julie) was the leader in the children's botanical, theatrical, and literary activities, and their chief story-teller. She was known as Aunt Judy not only to her family but to the readers of her mother's works: 'Aunt Judy's Tales' (1859), 'Aunt Judy's Letters' (1862), and 'Aunt Judy's Magazine' (1866-82). In the parish as well as the vicarage, she and her three sisters were as good as curates -- better, because unpaid -- but she was enthusiastic in this work, and was responsible for establishing the Ecclesfield village library. Her first stories appeared in Charlotte Yonge's 'Monthly Packet', and in book form in 1862 ('Melchior's Dream and other Tales'). Apart from one youthful Gothic tale, she concentrated her professionalism and perfectionism on children's stories and verse, eventually making an eighteen-volume SPCK series. Most of her work appeared first in 'Aunt Judy's Magazine'. After their mother's death, she and her sister Horatia assumed the editorship, but after two years her sister continued as sole editor. 
In 1866, Juliana Gatty renewed acquaintance with Major Alexander (Rex) Ewing (1830-1895) of the army pay department. His church connections, talents, and tastes suited a family where books, music, and animals were abundant, but his financial prospects were poor, and she was deemed too delicate for army life. Despite initial discouragement, they married with the Gattys' blessing on 1 June 1867, and embarked within days for Canada. They spent two years in Fredericton, New Brunswick, as the colony adjusted to its new status as part of the Canadian confederation. Juliana Ewing's reassuring letters home are full of lively details and sketches; she and her husband were a happy couple, sharing many interests. They studied with John Medley, the bishop, and were stalwarts of the cathedral, where her husband played the organ and composed hymns. Juliana Ewing continued to contribute to 'Aunt Judy's Magazine', concluding 'Mrs. Overtheway's Remembrances' (1866-8; 1869) from Canada, and sending the first of a series of 'Old-Fashioned Fairy-Tales' (1869-76; 1882), in emulation of the oral folk-tale. Only when they were ordered home did her homesickness become evident, and their return to Ecclesfield, accompanied by a rescued dog and innumerable botanical specimens, was a triumphal occasion. 
Alexander Ewing was posted next to Aldershot, where they lived very happily until 1877, although Ethel Smyth's impressions of Juliana at this time are not entirely sympathetic. Her admiration for military life grew, although it was never wholly uncritical; 'Jackanapes' (1869; 1883) celebrated military honour in the face of a civilian standard of judgement she thought increasingly material and commercial. 'The Story of a Short Life' (1882; 1885) similarly presented a military ethos as a source of great strength and goodness. In addition to short stories, the Aldershot years saw three longer works: 'A Flat-Iron for a Farthing' (1870-71; 1872), 'Six to Sixteen' (1872; 1875), and 'Jan of the Windmill' (1872-3; 1876). The second of these, a novel about an orphan girl growing up, Rudyard Kipling claimed to have known almost by heart. It drew upon her husband's knowledge of India, and her own early memories of her Ecclesfield home. 
Juliana Ewing's Anglican faith and practice were a source of great strength to her; unlike her mother, she felt no need to preach it explicitly, though the values of service, self-denial, and generosity are frequent themes in such stories as 'The Brownies' (1865), 'Lob-Lie-by-the-Fire' (1874), and 'Madam Liberality' (1873). The Baden-Powells borrowed the idea of the brownies for the younger branch of the Girl Guides; in the person of Madam Liberality her family recognized Julie herself. 
After Aldershot, the Ewings entered an unsettled period, living briefly near Manchester and York, before Alexander Ewing was posted to Malta in 1879. Despite ill health, Juliana planned to follow in the autumn, but got no further than Paris before breaking down. She returned to England, where she stayed with relatives and friends, hoping for better health. William Jenner diagnosed neuralgia of the spine; she continued to be unable to travel, and frequently exhausted herself with work. Her husband was posted to Ceylon in 1881, and his remittances to his wife were often insufficient. Disappointed that she made so little from her books, she almost took Ruskin's advice to declare herself independent of a commercial publisher, but she gave 'Daddy Darwin's Dovecote' (1881; 1884) to Bell as usual. In an attempt to reach a broader audience, she republished poems in illustrated shilling books. Herself a talented visual artist, she habitually took great pains in discussions with her illustrators, among them George Cruikshank and Randolph Caldecott. 
Alexander Ewing returned in 1883, and they settled outside Taunton in Somerset, where Juliana Ewing established a garden and wrote 'Mary's Meadow' (1883-4; 1886) and letters on gardening for 'Aunt Judy'. Her 'neuralgia' (probably cancer) grew worse; she went to Bath, underwent two operations, and died there on 13 May 1885. Her grave in the Trull churchyard, near Taunton, where she was buried on 16 May, was so heaped with flowers from admirers that no soil was visible. Realistic and rarely over-sentimental, her books were greatly admired by E. Nesbit, and they retain their attraction for the reader who appreciates humour, country life, happy but interesting families, and a sensibility distinctly but not dismally Victorian. 


