@@@@@


doc= 9020


Exeter, Walter of (supp. fl. 1301), supposed writer, is said by the sixteenth-century bibliographer John Bale to have written a 'Life of Guy, earl of Warwick', in 1301 at the instance of one Baldwin, a citizen of Exeter. Bale saw this work, which does not survive, in the bookshop of Gerbrand Harkes in Oxford. It is likely to have been a version of the medieval romance of Guy of Warwick. Bale conjectures that Walter was a mendicant friar, though he gives the place at which Walter wrote his work as St Caroc, Cornwall, which was in fact a cell of the Cluniac house of Montacute, Somerset. Another Walter of Exeter listed by Bale is a ghost, created by Henry Kirkestede by misreading a reference to Walter Map, archdeacon of Oxford, in a copy of Higden's 'Polychronicon'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9021


Exeter, William (d. 1359), physician and theologian, probably came from Newton Abbot, Devon, but nothing is known of him before 28 July 1318, when he was provided to the rectory of Stoke in Teignhead, Devon, at the request of Walter Stapeldon, bishop of Exeter (died 1326), except that he had already studied arts at Oxford. He was MA by 1319 and proceeded to study medicine, becoming doctor of medicine by 1327, and of theology by 1336. He was a fellow student of John Grandison (died 1369), later bishop of Exeter and his patron, while in 1327 he was one of the delegates of the university at the confirmation of the election of a new chancellor by the bishop of Lincoln. His determination against the views of William Ockham and other friars on church property was probably an Oxford theological lecture given in or shortly before 1336. However his real practice seems to have been medicine; he was a king's clerk, perhaps in that capacity, in 1330, and physician to Queen Philippa, the foremost patron of the profession, in 1336, still in 1344, and probably as late as 1354. Through her patronage and that of Edward III he was amply rewarded: canon of Exeter in 1331, canon and then subdean of York (1336-43); precentor, then chancellor of Lincoln (1337-44) and prebendary of North Kelsey (1337-59); and finally rector of Great Brington in Northamptonshire (1344- 'c'.1359). Perhaps Exeter's vacation of his most lucrative benefices in the mid-1340s, closely followed by his acceptance of a rectory with cure of souls, marked a decision to retire from medical practice into the country; if so, he was disappointed, since Queen Philippa insisted on his presence for at least another five years, and probably for longer. He was also one of Edward III's representatives in a mission to Philippe VI of France in January 1340, and had protection for going overseas on his service on 16 January 1354. Presumably his connection with Queen Philippa explains his bequest of books to her college at Oxford in 1359, the year of his death. 
The only literary evidence of Exeter's medical practice occurs in a remedy for deafness attributed to him in the fifteenth-century 'Liber de diversis medicinis', which used Oxford sources. Bale saw his 'Determinatio contra Ockham et alios fratres pro ecclesiae proprietate' and another of his works, 'De generatione Christi' at Queen's College, presumably his own copies; the 'Determinatio' is extant in a Paris manuscript. 
William Exeter the physician is not to be confused with the 


@@@@@


doc= 9023


William of Exeter (fl. before 1220) who was author of a treatise on the eight beatitudes in a Laudian manuscript at Oxford (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 368). This author, of whom nothing further is known, must have lived before 'c'.1220, the date of the manuscript, and was possibly a monastic writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 9024


Exley, Thomas (1775-1855), natural philosopher and scriptural commentator, was born in Gowdall, Yorkshire. Little is known of his first thirty years. He is sometimes described as an MA, but it is not known if he attended a university. However, it is certain that he maintained an interest in a wide spectrum of academic and literary disciplines, for in 1812 he co-authored, with the Revd William Moore Johnson, the four volume 'Imperial encyclopaedia, or, Dictionary of the sciences and arts; comprehending also the whole circle of miscellaneous literature'. About the time of this publication Exley was employed as a mathematics instructor in a Bristol school, a situation he retained until his retirement in 1847. During the first half of his life he was also involved in a variety of theological disputes, especially concerning the eternal Sonship of Jesus. In 1817-18 he joined forces with his brother-in-law, Adam Clarke, to answer a number of pamphlets which maintained that even after his ascension into heaven, Jesus was not the equal of the Father. 
Exley is best remembered for his controversial scientific speculations. As a natural philosopher he explicitly rejected the complex series of attractive and repulsive spheres which he insisted corrupted the matter theories of Newton and Boscovich, and instead proposed a system of subtle and gross particles for which there were no eighteenth-century precedents. This system was developed in many works, including his 'Principles of Natural Philosophy' (1829) and his 'New Theory of Physics' (1841). In particular he posited the existence of four types of matter: common or tenacious, electric, ethereal, and microgenic. He first proposed the existence of microgen, 'exceedingly small atoms', at the 1838 meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. Although his account fared poorly in the philosophical market place, he contended that their presence could account for 'miasmata of marshes, infections, odiferous effluvia, and other phenomena' (Exley, 34), as well as animalcules and their ova. 
Exley employed his conception of matter and forces to tackle a multitude of other problems in chemistry and optics. In chemistry he produced novel formulations of atomic combinations, gaseous vapours, and specific gravities. In addition, he exploited his conception of common matter, ether, and short-range attractive and repulsive forces in order to develop a sophisticated account of optical phenomena such as flexion, refraction, and polarization. In his 'Physical Optics, or, The Phenomena of Optics Explained According to Mechanical Sciences' (1834) he supposed that light was caused by high-speed ether particles and, as one of the last supporters of the projectile theory of light, sided with David Brewster, Henry Brougham, Richard Potter, and John Barton against G. B. Airy, William Whewell, and John Herschel. However, Exley's explanations of optical phenomena met with vehement opposition. At the 1836 meeting of the British Association in Bristol he suffered an energetic assault by John Dalton, who ridiculed his explanation of the aurora borealis. 
Exley was married to Hannah Clarke, but the date of their marriage is not known. A son, John Thomas, was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1834. Towards the end of his life Exley toiled hard to reconcile the latest scientific work with scripture. In 1844, the same year that Robert Chambers's 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation' was published, Exley brought out his 'Commentary on Genesis', which attempted to elucidate the Mosaic account of creation and the tale of the deluge in terms of modern concepts such as the electric fluid and caloric. Returning to Hebrew texts, and utilizing his own conception of the ether, microgen, and recent geological facts, Exley developed astonishing explanations for the chaos, the creation of the animal kingdom, the flood, the Holy Ghost and God's superintending providence. Despite the remarkable nature of the narrative, little attention was paid to the text. Exley died at his home in Cotham Park Road, Bristol, on 17 February 1855 in relative obscurity. 


@@@@@


doc= 9025


Exmew, William (c.1507-1535), Carthusian monk, was apparently born in London about 1507, probably the son of Sir Thomas Exmew, goldsmith, alderman of London from 1506 onwards and lord mayor in 1517, the year in which he was also knighted. After Sir Thomas's death, on 6 February 1529, his stepson, John West, a friar observant at Greenwich, wrote to Cardinal Wolsey concerning the estate of his mother, Lady Elizabeth Exmew, who had died on 14 February in the previous year. Exmew apparently studied at Christ's College, Cambridge, though no degree is recorded. Maurice Chauncy, a fellow monk of the London Charterhouse, who greatly admired Exmew, attests his competence in both Latin and Greek. An Elizabeth Exmew, who may have been William Exmew's sister, a Dominican nun at Dartford, remained faithful to her vocation even after the suppression, dying in a Dominican convent near Bruges as late as 6 February 1585. In 1522 Sir John Thurston, goldsmith and alderman of London, left W. Exmew the substantial legacy of $100. 
The date of Exmew's entry into the London Charterhouse is unknown, but Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall's register records his ordination in 1529. Exmew was soon made vicar despite his youth, and acted also as confessor to his prior, John Houghton. Some time after 29 May 1534 he was appointed procurator in place of Humphrey Middlemore, who then became vicar. During Prior Houghton's imprisonment in the Tower for initially refusing the oath to the succession in 1534, and after the prior's martyrdom in 1535, the onus of running the house fell on the vicar and the procurator. The efforts of Cromwell's agent Thomas Bedyll to persuade Exmew, Middlemore, and Sebastian Newdigate to acknowledge Henry VIII as supreme head of the church in England, made on 4 May 1535, the very day of the martyrdom of Prior Houghton, were unsuccessful. On 25 May the three were summoned to Cromwell's house in Stepney and, after examination, were imprisoned, first, according to Chauncy, in the Marshalsea, then in the Tower, where they were chained upright, being offered only meat, which their rule forbade them to eat. After being tried at Westminster, they were hanged in their habits at Tyburn on 19 June 1535. All three were beatified in 1886. By a misunderstanding of the colophon (fol. 95'v') to the copy which he made of 'The Cloud of Unknowing', which is today preserved at St Hugh's Charterhouse, Parkminster, William Exmew has sometimes been credited with the authorship of that anonymous fourteenth-century mystical treatise. 


@@@@@


doc= 9026


Exshaw, Charles (d. 1771), painter and art dealer, was born in Dublin, the son of John Exshaw (died 1746). He trained there under Francis Bindon, who may have encouraged him to travel abroad. Exshaw left Dublin in 1747 to study in Paris and Rome; he presumably went straight to Paris as he was awarded a medal at the Academie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture in 1749. This had distinct resonance back home where the international success of a local youth was greeted as a great triumph. 
After his stay in France, Exshaw went on to Flanders and then Italy, where one 'Carlos Exshaw' is recorded as passing through Capua in the company of the artist Richard Hayward on 27 September 1753. During his travels Exshaw assembled a large collection of paintings and on his return to Dublin in 1755 hired Geminiani's rooms to auction this 'curious and valuable collection of paintings, statuary and drawings' (Strickland), the first of a number of sales Exshaw was to hold. The catalogue announced that the artist would soon return to Italy to continue collecting for the Dublin market. True to his promise, Exshaw departed for the continent soon after, but went first to France to continue his studies under Charles Van Loo before returning to Italy. In the first years of the 1760s Exshaw divided his time between making and buying art. In Amsterdam, for example, he etched several sensitive plates after Rembrandt, notably 'St Peter's Bark in a Storm'; he also purchased the art collection of Count Colloredo. After his return to Ireland, this block purchase formed the basis of his next two sales at Geminiani's auction rooms. 
Evidently Exshaw had some skill as an entrepreneur but apart from his sales of foreign art he had few notable successes. In 1762 he attempted to establish a drawing academy at his London lodgings in Maiden Lane. The comment by Edward Edwards on the 'pompous advertisement announcing... drawing in the manner of the Caracci' is, no doubt, indicative. Only two pupils subscribed to Exshaw's academy and so the venture failed. With his painting 'Edward the Black Prince at the Battle of Cressy', Exshaw was also unsuccessful in his attempt to win the Society of Arts' premium for history painting in 1764. 
The rest of Exshaw's career appears uneventful. Living in London at Mr Rummer's in Denmark Street, Soho, he exhibited two paintings at the Society of Arts in 1764 including 'A View of Salisbury from Harnham Hill'. Charles Exshaw died early in 1771, probably in London, and his drawings and pictures were sold in April 1771 at Exeter Change. 


@@@@@


doc= 9027


Exton, John (c.1600-1668), civil lawyer and judge, is of obscure origins. He was admitted a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, in July 1617, and migrated to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in March 1619. He graduated BA in 1620 and MA in 1623. Exton married on 18 June 1623 Thomasina, daughter and coheir of Ralph Brooke, York herald, of London. He received the degree of LLD in 1634, and was admitted to the court of arches on 31 June 1635. On 13 February 1636 he entered Doctors' Commons, being active as an advocate in London courts 1638-40. In 1647 he served as treasurer of Doctors' Commons. 
Exton may have been an admiralty judge as early as 1647, serving with William Clark, and continued by patent from parliament in 1649. He was certainly an admiralty judge in 1651, when together with Clark he was appointed by act of parliament until 1 December 1651, but he was not one of those appointed by the act of 1653. At the Restoration the post was under the nomination of the lord high admiral and went to the pre-war incumbent Robert Zouche, who died almost upon taking office. His successor Thomas Hyde soon followed him to the grave, so on 26 October 1661 Exton was appointed. 
Samuel Pepys heard Exton give a charge on 17 March 1663, which he found 'somewhat dull, though he [Exton] would seem to intend it to be very rhetorical' (Pepys, 4.76). Admiralty jurisdiction had been much curtailed by the encroachment of the common law. In 1664 Exton published 'The Maritime Dicaeologie, or, Sea-Jurisdiction of England', which made the case for a wider jurisdiction. Although it had little practical effect, it was later reprinted three times in the mid-eighteenth century because it offered a good history of the court. 
Exton was buried on 22 October 1668 in St Benet Paul's Wharf, London. His will, with a codicil dated 12 October 1668, gives his residence as St Margaret's, Westminster. He left two-thirds of his estate to his elder son, Sir Thomas Exton, also an admiralty judge, and one-third to his younger son, Everard. 


@@@@@


doc= 9028


Exton, Sir Thomas (bap. 1631, d. 1688), lawyer and politician, was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 2 June 1631, the first surviving son of John Exton (c.1600-1668), admiralty judge, and his wife, Thomasina (died in or before 1667), daughter of Ralph Brooke, York herald. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1637 to 1643 before matriculating from Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1647. He entered Gray's Inn on 28 December 1649. He became a fellow of Trinity in 1651, graduating LLB in 1652. In 1659 he was called to the bar at Gray's Inn and in 1662 received his LLD. In 1663 Exton resigned his fellowship and was named chancellor of the diocese of London. He married on 19 January 1664 Isabella (1625/6-1673), daughter of Robert Hore, apothecary, of London, the widow of Thomas Prujean of Hornchurch, Essex. They had a son and a daughter. On 22 June 1664 he became an advocate at Doctors' Commons. He succeeded his father in 1668 and received two-thirds of his estate, the remaining third going to his brother Everard, a proctor. 
Exton was knighted on 23 November 1675, and on the following day took office as advocate-general. On 10 November 1676 he was admitted master of Trinity Hall. He was elected to all three Exclusion Parliaments for the University of Cambridge, being noted as 'vile' by the first earl of Shaftesbury. In his first parliament he made several recorded speeches and voted against the 'Exclusion Bill'. In 1680, together with Sir Richard Lloyd, he printed 'The Case of the Merchants Concerned in the Loss of the Ship Virgin'. Exton was reappointed advocate-general on the accession of James II and re-elected to parliament for Cambridge University. On 6 July 1686 he was promoted to judge of the Admiralty, and he also succeeded Sir Richard Lloyd as dean of arches. No sooner had he become a judge than he became embroiled in the controversy over the suspension of Dr Sharp for preaching sermons against Catholicism. He reputedly advised King James in favour of suspending the divine, and then advised Bishop Compton that he could safely refuse to comply with the order from the ecclesiastical commission. As a result Exton himself was hauled before the ecclesiastical commissioners in November to justify his conduct, and he lost his Admiralty judgeship in December. In 1688 he gave evidence that the handwriting on the petition of the seven bishops was that of Archbishop Sancroft. 
Exton died on 5 November 1688: 'his heart was broke through cowardice, for he never looked up after he was put forth of the Admiralty and reprimanded by the commissioners' ('Downshire MSS', 1.305). He was buried on 8 November in St Benet Paul's Wharf, London. His will, made on 20 March 1688, reflected on his 'several losses in my estate', and thus his inability to add to the portion of his daughter Bridget following her recent marriage to Sir John Sudbury. Most of his estate went to his son, John, who followed the same profession as his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 9029


Eyre, Charles (1784-1864), writer, was the son of John Eyre of Sherfield, Hampshire, and was educated at Dr Valpy's school in Reading before proceeding in 1803 to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he proceeded BA in 1807. He afterwards took orders in the Church of England, but finally attached himself to the Unitarians. He took considerable interest in the movement that led to the 'Reform Bill' of 1832, and on that matter published a 'Letter Addressed to the Dukes of Norfolk and Grafton' (1831). He was for some time the proprietor of three liberal newspapers printed at Colchester. His religious bent found expression in such publications as 'An Illustration of the Epistles of St Paul' (1832) and 'The Fall of Adam' (1852), an amended edition of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. In later life he managed a large farm, but agreed to part with it at the solicitation of some members of his family. Before he had signed the transfer, however, he committed suicide by hanging himself at his residence, Upper Park, Dedham, Essex, on 28 September 1864. An inquest ruled that he had been temporarily insane. He left two daughters: Elizabeth, who married George Gretton and went to live in Boulogne, and Mary Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 9030


Eyre, Edmund John (1767-1816), playwright, was born on 20 May 1767, the son of Ambrose Eyre (1739/40-1796), rector of Leverington and Outwell, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, the sister of the Revd Mr Underwood, rector of East Barnet. Eyre was sent to the Merchant Taylors' School when he was ten years old, and in 1785 he was appointed exhibitioner -- first on Parkin's and afterwards on Stuart's foundation -- at Pembroke College, Cambridge. He left the university without graduating to join a theatrical company, and on 28 May 1791 his play 'The Dreamer Awake' received its second (and last) performance at Covent Garden, with Eyre in the role of Standfast. This was to be his only London role until 1806, when he appeared at Drury Lane. The interim period was spent at theatres in Bath, Bristol, and Edinburgh, where Eyre gained considerable experience as a comedian, although he is said to have been a 'respectable rather than a great actor' (Baker). 
Eyre's personal life was complicated and is shrouded in some mystery. He was married to Mrs Elizabeth Bolton on 22 January 1793 in Birmingham; she was an actress with the Bath company, and continued to act as Mrs Eyre up to the 1799-1800 season. Eyre is said to have left her in 1804, when he eloped with another actress, a Miss Smith, whom he is reported to have married in July of that year at Stratford-le-Bow. Genest claims that 'he either gave his name or was married [to Miss Smith], upon the frivolous pretence of some irregularity with which his first marriage was attended' (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 8.202). Whether or not this second marriage was legal, she was presumably the Mrs Henrietta Eyre who performed in Edinburgh from the spring of 1805, and who acted there with Eyre until his death. 
As a writer, Eyre was industrious and versatile. He was the author of two poems, 'A Friend to Old England' (1793), and 'The Two Bills' (1796), and of a volume entitled 'Observations Made at Paris during the Peace' (1803), but his reputation rests on his dramatic pieces. These include a tragedy, 'The Maid of Normandy' (1793); comedies such as 'Consequences' (1794) and 'High Life in the City' (1810); 'The Lady of the Lake' (1811), a dramatization of Sir Walter Scott's poem; and 'The Tears of Britain, or, Funeral of Lord Nelson' (1805). 
Eyre died in April 1816, leaving his second wife and their numerous children in some financial difficulty. A theatrical benefit held for his family was very successful, and Henrietta Eyre remained a member of the Theatre Royal company at Edinburgh until at least 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 9031


Eyre, Sir Giles (bap. 1635, d. 1695), judge, was the eldest son of Giles Eyre ('bap'. 1608, died 1685) of Brickworth, Whiteparish, Wiltshire, and Anne ('bap'. 1617), daughter of Sir Richard Norton, first baronet, of Rotherfield, East Tisted, Hampshire. He was baptized on 28 May 1635 at Downton, Wiltshire. Eyre may have attended Winchester College in 1647, and was admitted to Exeter College, Oxford, in 1653. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 19 October 1654 and was called to the bar on 7 November 1661. Meanwhile he had been elected to parliament for Downton in 1660, and proceeded to join the opposition grouping under Lord Wharton. On 2 August he moved to lay aside the debate on the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and may have been a moderate dissenter in favour of comprehension. After a double return at the general election of 1661 he abandoned his seat. On 18 November 1662 Eyre was licensed to marry Dorothy ('b'. 1644/5), daughter of Sir John Ryves of Ranston, Shroton, Dorset. She died on 15 January 1668, aged twenty-three, having borne three sons. By July 1673 (when their first child was born) Eyre had married Christabella ('b'. 1654/5), daughter of John Wyndham of Tale Payhembury, Devon. Their daughter Dorothy (1678/9-1725) married the physician Richard Frewin (1680/81-1761). 
Eyre seems to have collected local offices, serving as recorder of Newport, Isle of Wight, 1675-84 and 1688-95, and Southampton 1681-90. He also held the office of deputy recorder of Salisbury in 1675, and actively exerted himself in procuring a new charter, receiving a tankard worth $10 in recognition of his services. He succeeded as recorder on the death of the incumbent in 1681, but he was in turn replaced when the corporation charter was surrendered in October 1684. James II's agents had high hopes that Eyre, sympathetic to dissent, would be returned to the parliament expected in 1688; in 1687 he was described as 'a lawyer, a strong dissenter; he manages my Lord Arundell of Warders ['sic'] concerns' (Duckett, 208). Arundell was a Roman Catholic peer, which they felt augured well for support for James II's religious policies: he 'hath been very violent, but ambitious of honour, and supposed he will be right to reconcile himself to your majesty' (ibid., 224). When James II restored the corporation in October 1688 Eyre returned to the recordership. He represented Salisbury in the convention of 1689, spoke in favour of retaining the word 'abdicated' in the resolution declaring the throne vacant in the conference with the House of Lords, and supported the bill declaring the convention a regular parliament. He also played a minor role in the committee and debates which led to the 'Bill of Rights'. Indeed, he may have been the author of 'Reflections upon the late great revolution: written by a lay-hand in the country for the satisfaction of some neighbours', which was a defence of the settlement. 
Eyre's parliamentary career came to an end upon his appointment as judge of king's bench on 4 May 1689, and its concomitant creation as a serjeant-at-law. He was knighted on 31 October 1689. When called upon to give his opinion to the Lords on the surrender of charters Eyre believed that they could be surrendered if there was agreement within the corporation, and that surrender was possible because 'otherwise it is to set up a perpetuity, which the law always avoids' (Halliday, 274, 276n.). One of his judicial tasks was to preside over the trial of several suspected Jacobites at Manchester in October 1694, at which the defendants were found not guilty. Eyre died on 2 June 1695 at his London home in Red Lion Square, and was buried ten days later with his first wife in Whiteparish church. His widow married, on 27 March 1699 (aged forty-four), Lord Glasfoord, a needy Scottish Catholic, although she apparently abandoned him in the Fleet prison that same year. Her will was proved in February 1711. 


@@@@@


doc= 9032


Eyre, Sir James (bap. 1734, d. 1799), judge, was baptized at Wells, Somerset, on 13 September 1734, the son of the Revd Thomas Eyre (1686/7-1753), of Wells, prebendary of Salisbury from 1733 until his death. He was a scholar of Winchester College in 1747, and matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 27 October 1749. He entered Lincoln's Inn, without a degree, on 26 November 1753 and moved to Gray's Inn on 8 November 1755. He was called to the bar on 25 November 1755, under the patronage of Sir Thomas Parker, chief baron of the exchequer; he later was a bencher of Gray's Inn. 
Eyre began practice as one of the four counsel for the corporation of London, a position that he purchased on 20 January 1755 for $63, practising in the inferior courts of the City for some years. He was appointed deputy recorder on 17 February 1761, on the recommendation of Sir William Moreton, the recorder, and was himself elected recorder by the court of aldermen in April 1763, on the death of Moreton. He now occupied a highly visible post, with large responsibilities and the right to wear silk. On the bench at the Old Bailey he met the chief justices and almost all the other high-court judges, who took turns in that court. As recorder Eyre pronounced the sentence at the end of the sessions and reported in person to the cabinet and the king on Old Bailey convicts being considered for pardons. His other duties involved him in constitutional controversies, including the rights of the chartered City and of the wider metropolitan electorate. In October 1763 the common council unanimously voted an increase in his salary of $280 over the ancient one of $120. He became one of the counsel for John Wilkes, notably in 'Wilkes v. Wood', in December 1763, in which he attracted attention with an impressive speech against general warrants. Four years later the common council again raised his salary, by another $200. 
By the end of the decade, however, Eyre was finding favour with the government, a prerequisite to any higher judicial appointment. In 1769, at government request, he issued a warrant to the sheriffs to hang John Doyle and John Valline (condemned for cutting silk in the loom) near Bethnal Green church, part of the government's attempt to repress riots by the Spitalfields weavers. Eyre, as recorder, had sentenced the men to death without mention of the place of execution, and John Sawbridge and James Townsend, the Wilkesite City sheriffs, strongly resisted the change from Tyburn as an unconstitutional innovation, expanding prerogative powers, and raising the danger of secret executions. They condemned as equally unconstitutional the deployment of troops in Spitalfields to ensure that the executions were carried out. Eyre's power to issue such a warrant was upheld ('Re Doyle and Valline') but an increasingly Wilkesite common council now opposed him. The following year he decisively joined the government side when he refused to present a remonstrance by the corporation to the king respecting Wilkes's exclusion from parliament. The common council voted by a large majority that he 'be no more advised with, retained or employed in any of the affairs of this Corporation, he being deemed by this Court unworthy of their future trust or confidence' (common council journals, vol. 65). He continued to sit as recorder until October 1772. 
Eyre was created serjeant-at-law, knighted, and made a baron of the exchequer on 6 November 1772, ultimately becoming chief baron on 26 January 1787. His first wife, of whom nothing further is known, died on 5 July 1787, and a forthcoming second marriage was announced in 'The Times' on 7 April 1788. 'The Times' reported persistent rumours in 1787-9 that Eyre might be made lord chancellor of Ireland. In 1789 he prevailed on Gray's Inn, where he had been a bencher, to accommodate the court of exchequer out of term-time, an arrangement that continued well into the nineteenth century. Alexander Wedderburn, first Baron Loughborough, having been made lord chancellor, Eyre followed him in the post of chief justice of common pleas, on 11 February 1793. Before this appointment he had served as chief commissioner of the great seal from 15 June 1792 to 21 January 1793. In civil cases he sometimes opposed innovations by William Murray, first earl of Mansfield, lord chief justice of the king's bench. In 'Cocksedge v. Fanshaw' (1776-7, unreported), a case in which corn factors were opposed to the City, Eyre was the only judge hearing the appeal in exchequer chamber not to agree with the initial judgment of Mansfield, who favoured the merchants. In 'Matthews v. Lewis and another' (1792) he resisted the trial in common pleas of issues best tried at equity, observing that it was dangerous 'to confound the jurisdictions of the different Courts'. Other judgments include 'Nicholson v. Chapman' (1793), where inconvenience to the public was a basis for decision; 'Waugh v. Carver, Carver, and Giesler' (1793), in which he imposed the liabilities of partnership on a profit-sharing arrangement to protect its creditors from fraud; and 'Bush v. Steinman' (1799), on the liability of an employer for the torts of a contractor. 
On assize Eyre usually went on the Norfolk circuit, or the western, where he had many relatives. Years after his death he was remembered by John Townsend, the Bow Street runner, for inflicting capital punishment with unremitting severity at one assize on the home circuit. The average ratio of executions to death sentences for all the years and places where he sat at assizes is greater than that of most other judges of the period. 
Eyre with other judges sought to expand the law of treason at the end of the century. He sat with Chief Baron Archibald Macdonald on the trials of members of the London Corresponding Society in October 1794, having attended the privy council in May when the prisoners were first questioned. The judges' role there has been defended on the narrow ground that it was magisterial not prosecutorial: to advise the law officers on whether the evidence justified committal and on what charge. Eyre, according to the attorney-general, Sir John Scott, expressed the view that the accused were guilty of treason. When the special commission opened at the Old Bailey in October Eyre began by addressing the grand jury on the dangers of 'a traiterous and detestable conspiracy... formed for subverting the existing laws and constitution, and for producing the system of anarchy and confusion which have so fatally prevailed in France'. Admitting that the law applicable to the case was unclear (and doing little to clarify it) he suggested that 'men who assemble to procure a Reform in Parliament may involve themselves in the guilt of High Treason'. Overawing parliament could destroy constitution and monarchy, 'that glorious fabric, which it has been the work of ages to erect... cemented by the best blood of our ancestors' ('The Times', 3 Oct 1794). The cases, he said, would establish the reach of the law of treason. 
Eyre's charge was printed in several versions, widely circulated, and provoked several replies, including a famous one by William Godwin, whose close friend Thomas Holcroft was among those indicted. 'Cursory Strictures on the Charge Delivered by Lord Chief Justice Eyre to the Grand Jury October 2, 1794' appeared in the 'Morning Chronicle' and as a pamphlet on 21 October, a few days before the trials began. Godwin castigated Eyre's 'many new and extraordinary doctrines on the subject of treason', his 'contemptible' play on words, and his 'sanguinary' conjectures on the probable guilt of the accused, 'worthy of the judicial ministers of Tiberius or Nero'. He accused Eyre of prejudice and ignorance and of inventing a new offence. A defence of Eyre, attributed to Sir Francis Buller, judge of king's bench, appeared in 'The Times' on 25 October, calling for Godwin's prosecution. Daniel Isaac Eaton republished this attack, together with Godwin's 'A Reply to an Answer to Cursory Strictures, Supposed to be Wrote by Judge Buller', of 23 October, which the 'Morning Chronicle' refused, fearing prosecution. Eyre reiterated some of his assertions in his summation of the case against Thomas Hardy, and on the whole summed up against him. In the trial of Horne Tooke, however, he allowed the defendant unusual liberties and summed up for an acquittal, although still proposing an expansive definition of treason. In the trials Eyre cautioned Thomas Erskine, counsel for the defence, for (among other issues) asking leading questions during cross-examination, a practice tolerated in king's bench but not in exchequer. Erskine is reported to have challenged the judge to a duel once the trial was over. Hardy, Tooke, and Thelwall were acquitted, and the other charges dropped. Godwin wrote to Eyre privately, praising his conduct of the trials while still objecting to his doctrine of treason, although also apologizing for his own warmth of expression. The only other treason trial that came before Eyre was that of Crossfield in 1796. 
After his death, on 6 July 1799, Eyre was celebrated in obituaries principally as a sound judge, not given to citing precedent but learned in the law, and exceptionally astute at instructing juries. He left the proceeds of his estate -- which included the lease of a house in Great George Street, Westminster; his seat, Ruscombe House, Berkshire; and the manor and two farms in the parish of Ruscombe, which he had purchased in 1787 -- as life estates to his wife, Mary, and his two surviving sisters, then to his brother Dr Thomas Eyre (died 1812) BCL, DCL (Oxon.), treasurer and canon residentiary of Wells Cathedral. Eyre was particularly concerned that his trustees should hire a proper person to maintain his timber plantations. He appears to have had no children. He was buried in Ruscombe parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9033


Eyre, James (1748-1813), philologist, was the son of John Eyre, of Coventry. He was educated at Trinity College, Oxford, obtaining his BA degree in 1775 (his MA degree was incorporated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1802, which has given rise to some confusion over the university of his undergraduate attendance). Eyre was ordained deacon at Oxford on 11 June 1775, and priest at Worcester on 15 September 1776. He embarked upon a life of teaching about 1783, when he became headmaster of Solihull grammar school, a post he was to hold for thirty years. On 9 April 1790 he married Charlotte Harding, and they had six girls and four boys, all of whom were baptized in Solihull. In addition to his teaching duties, Eyre was the vicar of Winterbourne Stoke, Wiltshire, from 1801 to 1813, and vicar also of Nettleton, Wiltshire, from 1802 until his death. 
Eyre is best known for his manuscript annotations of Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary of the English Language'. He died at the Solihull schoolhouse on 10 March 1813, however, before his research could be completed or published. His notes mostly consisted of citations from recent publications, and were incorporated by H. J. Todd in his 1818 edition of Johnson's dictionary. Eyre was summed up by one obituarist as having been 'equally distinguished by the solidity of his understanding and the benevolence of his heart' ('GM'). 


@@@@@


doc= 9034


Eyre, Sir James (1792-1857), surgeon and physician, the eldest son of William Eyre (1753/4-1830), vicar of Padbury and Hillesden, Buckinghamshire, was born on 14 February 1792. In October 1811 he began his medical education at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, where he was a pupil of John Abernethy. In 1813 seventy-five students subscribed to give a great silver cup with cover to Abernethy, and Eyre was chosen to present the piece. 
Eyre became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1814 and in the same year began to practise in Hereford, where he attained some local celebrity. He was elected mayor in 1829, and was knighted by William IV the next year. Drinkwater, mayor of Liverpool, was the only other mayor knighted; referring to these honours, a remark of Abernethy to a patient preserves the correct pronunciation of Eyre's name: 'Go away', said Abernethy, 'and have always in your thoughts the names of the mayors who have just been knighted, Eyre and Drinkwater, and you will soon recover your wind, and your shape too, I promise you'. 
Soon after being knighted, Eyre decided to qualify also as a physician. He studied in Paris for a year, and graduated MD at Edinburgh in 1834 with a thesis on pneumonia. In 1836 he became a member of the Royal College of Physicians, in London, where he set up in practice in Lower Brook Street. He was physician accoucheur to St George's and St James's Dispensary from 1834 until 1851, when he was appointed consulting physician. Eyre published several medical works mainly intended for a popular audience. Although never having a very extensive practice, 'He was a cheerful companion and a kind hearted man; fond and proud of his profession' ('The Lancet', 27 June 1857, 651). 
After practising for several years, Eyre retired to nearby Brompton. He died suddenly while visiting a friend at Lauriston House, Clapham, on 19 June 1857, having attended the queen's levee the night before. 


@@@@@


doc= 9035


Eyre, John (1754-1803), evangelical and Church of England clergyman, was born in January 1754 in Bodmin, Cornwall, the son of John Eyre, who was in business, and his wife, Grace White. He was baptized on 25 February. Eyre was educated in classics by the Revd John Fisher, master of Bodmin grammar school, and in mathematics by the Revd Joseph Thorpe, rector of Forrabury and Trevalga, Cornwall, in his private school at Forrabury. Despite his childhood education, Eyre was apprenticed by his parents to Mr Oliver, a clothier of Tavistock, at the age of fifteen. 
While living in Tavistock, the young man engaged in a life of revelling until he experienced a profound religious conversion and began to preach. For two years Eyre and his evangelical associates conducted revival meetings. At the expiration of his term of apprenticeship, his father persuaded him to return to Bodmin to go into business. When not employed, the young man secured the town hall and preached to all who wished to hear. 'The rich and the poor flocked to hear him' (Collison, June 1803, 229). Such activity infuriated his father, who commanded him to give up preaching. Unwilling to comply, Eyre was driven from his father's home. 
After taking refuge with a friend in Plymouth, Eyre applied and secured admission to Trevecca College, the countess of Huntingdon's college in south Wales, in 1777. Under the patronage of the countess, he ministered at Tregony and St Agnes, Cornwall, Lincoln, Worcester, and Mulberry Gardens Chapel, London. Eyre's abilities exceeded those of many of his fellow students and he grew frustrated with the countess's decision to take him away from his studies in favour of itinerant preaching in England and Wales. He desired to take orders in the Church of England, and he matriculated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1778. On 30 May 1779 he was ordained deacon by Dr Robert Lowth, bishop of London; and he received priest's orders from the bishop of Lincoln on 19 December 1779. In the following years he held curacies in Weston, Lewes, Reading, and Chelsea. In November 1785 Eyre married Mary Keene (1757/8-1827), from near Reading, and the following month he was appointed minister of Homerton, or, as it was often called after its founder, Ram's Chapel, and he opened a school at Well Street, Hackney. 
Eyre was active in his ministerial duties and particularly committed to the young and the poor of his parish. He sometimes admitted lay preachers to his pulpit, and occasionally shortened the liturgy. His congregation imitated his 'generous and enlarged views, his humble Christian temper; and, like him, devoted large portions of their property to the cause of Christ' (Morison, 30). Still his most renowned achievements centred on national evangelical institutions. He conceived and initiated the 'Evangelical Magazine', a joint venture of the Church of England and dissenting ministers, the first number of which appeared in July 1793. He edited and contributed largely to its volumes until 1802. 
In 1792 Trevecca College moved from its home in the Welsh mountains to a more central location at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire (where it took the name Cheshunt College). Upon this occasion Eyre and the Revd Anthony Crole conducted the service to commemorate the event. The proceedings, including Eyre's sermon, were published as 'The Order Observed at the Opening of the Countess of Huntingdon's College', in 1792. Eyre was one of the founders of the London Missionary Society (1794-5) and the Village Itinerancy Society. He was instrumental in the establishment of Hackney Theological College (1803) and an academy in Idle, Yorkshire ('c'.1800). After a long illness he died at Homerton on 28 or 29 March 1803, and was buried in a vault on the south side of the communion table in Homerton Chapel on 5 April. His funeral sermon was preached by the Revd Rowland Hill. His wife died at Well Street, Hackney, on 20 June 1827, aged sixty-nine, and was buried by her husband's side on 29 June. An extended memoir of Eyre by the Revd George Collison, president of Hackney Theological Seminary, appeared in the 'Evangelical Magazine' for June and July 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 9036


Eyre, Sir Robert (1666-1735), judge, was the son and heir of Sir Samuel Eyre (bap. 1638, d. 1698) of Newhouse, Wiltshire, and Lincoln's Inn, and his wife, Martha, daughter of Francis Lucy, of the family of Charlecote in Warwickshire. Several generations of Eyres had been members of Lincoln's Inn, and both Robert's father and his cousin Sir Giles Eyre (d. 1695) were judges of king's bench. Robert likewise entered Lincoln's Inn in 1683, became a barrister in 1690, and followed the western circuit. The family had considerable interests in Salisbury, where in 1696 he succeeded Sir Giles as recorder. He subsequently served as MP for Salisbury from 1698 to 1710, and was one of the country (or 'whimsical') whigs who sponsored the place clause of the 'Regency Bill' in January 1706; ultimately, however, he became known as one of the moderate whigs associated with the lord treasurer Godolphin. As such he shared in the promotion of the Marlborough-Godolphin faction in government, becoming queen's counsel in May 1707 and solicitor-general in October 1708. 
Although he had argued against impeaching Dr Henry Sacheverell, Eyre was a manager of the doctor's trial in 1710, speaking to the Commons' first article (charging Sacheverell with impugning the legitimacy of the revolution by asserting the high-church doctrine of non-resistance) and effectively undermining the defendant's answer. Like his fellow manager Sir Thomas Parker, who was subsequently made lord chief justice, he made a good impression at the trial, and when a second judicial vacancy occurred in the court of queen's bench, the most politically sensitive of the common law courts, the whigs were able to recommend him to it. Having been knighted a week earlier, Eyre replaced Sir Henry Gould as puisne justice on 13 May 1710, in the dying days of the administration, and over the next four years of tory rule he acted with Parker to sustain the whig interest in cases which related to the parliamentary corporations and the press. 
This party service was the main foundation of Eyre's future promotion, and at the accession of George I he was reappointed to the bench and made chancellor to the prince of Wales, with a patent allowing him to advise the prince and take fees in spite of his judicial place. But in 1718, when the breach between the prince and the king resulted in legal questions about prerogative power over the education and marriage of the royal children, Eyre was one of two judges who gave opinions in favour of the prince regarding their education. Thereafter doubts about his political reliability rendered him ineligible for the chief justiceship of king's bench, and in 1718 he was passed over in favour of his junior, Pratt. Instead he was made lord chief baron of exchequer, on 21 November 1723, following pressure from the prince: 'a Situation, where by his great skill in the law he might be of great service to the king, and could not possibly do any hurt of any kind' (Newcastle to Townshend, 1 Nov 1723, BL, Add. MS 32686, fols. 385-6). In 1725 he became lord chief justice of common pleas upon Sir Peter King's promotion to the woolsack, and presided for ten years in that court. Despite his acknowledged legal ability, Eyre was not immune from the charges of corruption which embroiled the Walpole regime, and in 1729-30 he was one of the judges suspected of 'screening' the prison gaolers who were being investigated by the House of Commons committee of inquiry into the state of prisons. Although Eyre was singled out as a primary target, being accused of collusion with Thomas Bambridge, the warden of the Fleet prison, before presiding at his trial, he was defended by the government and ultimately exonerated by the committee. He died on 28 December 1735 and was buried in St Thomas's Church, Salisbury, on 7 January 1736. With his wife, Elizabeth, who was the daughter of Edward Rudge of Warley Place, Essex, and who had died in 1724, he had three sons and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 9037


Eyre, Sir Samuel (bap. 1638, d. 1698), judge, was baptized on 16 March 1638 at St Edmund's Church, Salisbury, Wiltshire, the fourth of the five children of Robert Eyre ('c'.1610-1655) and his wife, Anne Eyre (1612/13-1681), daughter of Samuel Aldersey, merchant and haberdasher of London, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Philip van Oyrle of Nuremberg and Antwerp. His grandfather was Robert Eyre (1569-1638), a bencher of Lincoln's Inn and prominent puritan. Samuel was brought up in Salisbury by his parents, also puritans. In November 1646 his uncle William Eyre, a bencher of Lincoln's Inn, left him some valuable lands and tenements called Bonhams in South Newton near Salisbury, plus a library of law books provided he took up a legal career when the time came. On 9 December 1653 Eyre matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford. The following June he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. His father died in March 1655, leaving moveable possessions worth $251 and about thirty properties yielding rental income, including the Blue Boar, Talbot, and Bell inns in Salisbury. 
In June 1661 Eyre qualified at Lincoln's Inn as a barrister. On 21 October 1661, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, he married Martha, third daughter of Francis Lucy, and received her $1800 portion. The couple lived at Newhouse Redlynch, a few miles from Salisbury, which Eyre had purchased the previous year, and had four sons including Sir Robert Eyre, judge of the queen's bench, and two daughters. For over thirty years Eyre followed his profession in Lincoln's Inn and Westminster Hall. In 1677 he had access on four occasions to the earl of Shaftesbury, imprisoned in the Tower, to whom he was reputed to be confidential adviser. By 1678 he was legal guardian of his lunatic sister Margaret, widow of Thomas Hassell of London, merchant tailor. He was active in Lincoln's Inn affairs, being called to the bench (1675), keeper of the black book (1685), and treasurer (1688). In 1685 he was asked to consult Sir Christopher Wren about repairing the chapel. As the executor of his aunt Margaret Blechinden, whose will was proved in 1684, Eyre built Blechinden's Almshouses, for six poor widows over the age of fifty, in Winchester Street, Salisbury. At some point after 1683 he was involved in a dispute about lands which he held as trustee on behalf of Whiteparish church, Wiltshire. He can probably be identified with the Samuel Eyre, esquire, who was one of the two candidates elected to represent Salisbury in the convention of 1689 but who was displaced when it was decided that the right to choose representatives lay with the city's mayor and corporation. 
Eyre's puritan background and association with Shaftesbury probably precluded his promotion until after the revolution of 1688. He was made a serjeant on 21 April 1692. On 6 February 1694 he was knighted and appointed one of the four judges of the king's bench at a salary of $250 per term. In 1694 Eyre was one of the judges who decided in favour of Charles Knollys, charged with murder, and liberated him because the indictment should have named him as earl of Banbury. During this case Eyre remarked, 'The House of Lords could no more deprive one of a Peerage than they could confer a Peerage' (Salkeld, 510). Eyre's cases were quite often in the news. It was reported in June 1694 that the case between the king and the bankers had been argued in the exchequer court by Eyre and his cousin Sir Giles Eyre, both of whom were of opinion against the king. That this was only four months after his appointment demonstrates his courage and impartiality. In September 1694 it was reported that he and three other judges formed a special commission of oyer and terminer that was visiting Lancashire and Cheshire to try the prisoners of state who were in custody there. Eyre was one of the judges at several trials for high treason, perhaps the most notorious case being the assassination plot of 1696, when Ambrose Rookwood and his fellow conspirators were sentenced to death for plotting the king's death. However, not all of Eyre's cases were so dramatic. He was often on circuit and he was required to report back to Whitehall on cases involving such diverse offences as horse-stealing, Jacobite meetings, housebreaking, disorders, and forgery. Among the places he visited for these trials were Norwich, Oxford, Maidstone, Kingston, Worcester, and Stafford. 
In February 1698 the House of Lords asked Eyre and Chief Justice Holt to give reasons for the decision they had made four years earlier in the case of the earl of Banbury; both courageously refused and were threatened with the Tower, but the matter was dropped a few days later. Eyre's speech to the House of Lords committee at this critical juncture included the following: 'The King intrusts me with the administration of justice. I have ever given my opinion upon the greatest consideration and upon my conscience' ('State trials', 12.1180). We can accept this as a true statement of how he approached his judicial duties, and indeed his whole life, reflecting his early upbringing and his honesty and integrity. Eyre died on circuit at Lancaster of colic on 12 September 1698, and a monument was erected to him there. His body was removed to St Thomas's, Salisbury, and reburied on 2 July 1699. Martha, his 'ever dear and faithful wife' (as his will described her) survived until 1728. 


@@@@@


doc= 9038


Eyre, Thomas (1670-1715), Jesuit, was born on 23 December 1670, the son of Thomas Eyre and his wife, Mary Bedingfield, of Eastwell, Leicestershire. He studied at the English College at St Omer, was admitted into the Society of Jesus in 1687, and was professed of the four vows on 8 March 1706. Ordained priest in 1696, he served for a time as chaplain to the court of James II at St Germain. He was professor of theology at Liege from 1701 to 1704, and in 1712 was socius to the provincial of his order. He died in London on 9 November 1715. According to one authority he was the author or editor of a biography of James II (Kirk, 198). 


@@@@@


doc= 9039


Eyre, Thomas (1748-1810), Roman Catholic priest and college head, was born at Glossop, Derbyshire, the fourth son of Nathaniel Eyre, steward to the duke of Norfolk at Worksop, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Jane Bromhead. Like his brothers, he went to the preparatory school at Esquerchin, Douai, from 1758 before moving to the parent English College at Douai in 1762. In 1775, some months after his ordination, he accepted an invitation from his kinsman of the same name who had just inherited Stella Hall, near Ryton, co. Durham, to take charge of the mission which covered the area west of Newcastle as far as Hexham. He stayed seventeen years, during which time he translated and published several of the spiritual works of John Gother in addition to 'The Instruction of Youth in Christian Piety' (1783), a translation of the work of Charles Gobinet. 
Appointed to Pontop Hall, near Consett, in 1794, Eyre was soon asked by Bishop William Gibson to take charge of a small number of student refugees from Douai while a temporary college was being prepared for them at nearby Crook Hall. Inevitably he was called upon to preside over the new college. During the course of 1795 the Revd John Daniel, the president of the Douai college, paid a visit to Crook Hall, and was persuaded by Bishop Gibson to become its president in order to establish a continuity. Within a day or two, Daniel resigned and Eyre was reinstated. Under his direction the infant college surmounted many hurdles and was eventually transferred in 1808 to the much larger building at Ushaw, 4 miles from Durham. There Eyre died on 7 May 1810, and was buried in the adjoining cemetery on 9 May. His memorial rightly described him as 'benefactor munificus', for he left his entire fortune of $8640 to the college. His portrait by Alexander Rossi at Ushaw reveals Eyre as a somewhat 'cribbed and confined' gentleman. A stern disciplinarian, he was notoriously parsimonious, making use of the litter that others dropped and using the correspondence he received to compose his own draft letters. But there can be little doubt that he was the right man for the task given him by his bishop. Invariably at loggerheads with him, his diplomacy prevented a permanent breakdown of their relationship, which would have immeasurably damaged the educational prospects for northern Catholics of the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 9040


Eyre, Sir Vincent (1811-1881), army officer in the East India Company, was born at Portsdown, near Portsmouth, on 22 January 1811, the third son of Captain Henry Eyre, of an old family of Derbyshire cavaliers, and Mary, daughter of J. Concannon of Loughrea, co. Galway, Ireland. He was educated at Norwich grammar school under the Revd E. Valpy. Eyre attended Addiscombe College (1827-8), and passed into the Bengal artillery in December 1828. He landed in Calcutta on 21 May 1829. After eight years he was promoted first lieutenant, and appointed to the horse artillery. In 1833 Eyre married Emily, daughter of Colonel Sir James Mouat, bt, Bengal Engineers. They had three sons and a daughter, and his wife died in 1851. 
In 1839 Eyre was appointed commissary of ordnance to the Kabul field force. He took to Kabul a large quantity of ordnance stores, arriving in April 1840. On 2 November 1841 the rising took place in which Sir Alexander Burnes was killed. The British-Indian force was soon besieged in the cantonments by the Afghans. They made desperate sallies, in one of which, on 13 November, Eyre was severely wounded. A treaty for evacuation was ratified on 1 January 1842. Eyre, still suffering from his wound, and accompanied by his wife and child, started with the column but they were taken as hostages by Akbar Khan. They spent nearly nine months in captivity, with other British captives, moved to different forts, and suffered many privations. The climate, however, was healthy; the captives held public worship and established a school for their children. Eyre kept a diary and sketched the officers and ladies. The manuscript was smuggled to a friend in India then published in England as 'Military Operations at Cabul' (1843). In August the captives were hurried off towards Bamian in the Hindu Kush, under threat of being sold as slaves to the Uzbeks of Turkestan. They were saved by Pottinger, who on 11 September bought over the Afghan commanding their escort. 
Eyre was then again posted to the horse artillery. While quartered at Meerut he founded a club for European soldiers, possibly the first such. In December 1844 he was appointed to command the artillery of the newly formed 'Gwalior contingent' and made it efficient, as its mutiny service proved. While at Gwalior he attempted to found a settlement for Goan families left destitute after the defeat of the Maratha armies in 1803-18. He obtained land for this which, at his wish, was called Esapore (the abode of Christians). It failed because of its unhealthy location. Eyre undertook the duties of engineer, architect, and road maker to the station, and erected an attractive little church. 
In 1854 Eyre became major, and in May 1855 visited England on furlough. Inventive, he published in 1856 a pamphlet 'On Metallic Boats and Floating Waggons for Naval and Military Service'. In February 1857 he returned to India, and was posted to a horse artillery battery in Burma, but was recalled to India at the mutiny. In July he was sent up the Ganges for Allahabad. On 28 July he reached Buxar, where he learned that a force of mutineers was besieging a fortified house at Arrah, 40 miles from Buxar. Eyre took the responsibility of disembarking 160 men of the 5th foot, who were travelling up the Ganges to Allahabad, and with them and his own force relieved Arrah and destroyed the mutineers' stronghold at Jagdispur. This brief campaign, undertaken on his own responsibility, restored British control of the area, secured communications by the Grand Trunk Road, revived British prestige, and drew from Outram the highest praise and recommendation for the Victoria Cross. Eyre now joined at Cawnpore the force advancing under Outram and Sir Henry Havelock to the relief of Lucknow. This reached Lucknow after four days' fighting. Eyre succeeded to the command of the artillery on the death of Brigadier Cooper. He was mentioned in dispatches, and in December 1857 was made lieutenant-colonel and CB. He became brevet colonel in December 1858. 
After the suppression of the mutiny Eyre was appointed to superintend the powder works at Ishapore, near Calcutta. There in 1860, he married his cousin, Catherine Mary, daughter of Captain T. Eyre RN; they had no children and she survived him. In 1861 Eyre was selected by Lord Canning as a member of the commission on the amalgamation of the company's and queen's armies, and in 1862 was appointed inspector-general of ordnance in the Bengal army. In April 1863 he was ordered home on sick leave, and retired with the rank of major-general in October 1863. In 1867 he was made KCSI. He happened to be in France on the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, and organized an ambulance service under the rules of the English National Red Cross Society. He formed a local committee in August at Boulogne, and for the next eight months he and Lady Eyre were the moving spirits in a most valuable organization. In 1874 he published 'Lays of a Knight-Errant in Many Lands'. 
Eyre wintered at Rome during his later years. In the summer of 1880 he was attacked by a spinal disease, and died at Villa des Acacias, Aix-les-Bains, Savoie, on 22 September 1881; his remains were buried in London at Kensal Green cemetery. Eyre was a man of noble character. Handsome, courteous, accomplished, daring, and resourceful, he combined literary and artistic talent with his military qualities. 


@@@@@


doc= 9041


Eyre, Sir William (1805-1859), army officer, was born at Hatfield on 21 October 1805, the younger son of Vice-Admiral Sir George Eyre (1769-1839) and Georgina, daughter of Sir George Cooke, bt, of Wheatley. He was educated at Rugby School, where he remained from 1817 until commissioned ensign in the 6th regiment on 17 April 1823. He was promoted lieutenant in that regiment on 5 November 1825, and to a half-pay captaincy on 20 November 1827. He remained unemployed until 21 May 1829, when he received a company in the 73rd regiment, with which he continued nearly twenty-five years. The 73rd was stationed in the Mediterranean from 1829 to 1839, in which year Eyre was promoted major, serving in Canada from 1839 to 1841 and at home from 1841 to 1845. On 16 February 1841 he married Georgiana Lucy (1808-1898), fourth daughter of the Hon. John Bridgeman Simpson (son of the first Baron Bradford); they left one son. 
After a detour to fight at Montevideo, Eyre and his regiment reached the Cape of Good Hope in July 1846 and fought in the Cape Frontier War of 1847, with Eyre in command; he was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 12 November 1847. Eyre's fitness for irregular warfare in difficult terrain was recognized by the generals under whom he served, Sir Peregrine Maitland, Henry Somerset, and Sir George Berkeley. When the next frontier war broke out in 1851, he was at once ordered to the front, and placed in command of a column, consisting of his own regiment and some light infantry, by Sir Harry Smith. With this force he accomplished many important feats. On 16 April 1851 he defeated the enemy at Quibigui River, and on 10 September at Committees Hill; on 14 March 1852 he commanded the right column in the attack on Macomo's stronghold, and on 7 April he captured over 800 cattle in an independent expedition into the Amatola country. 
When Sir George Cathcart succeeded Sir Harry Smith, he maintained Eyre in command of his independent column, and under the new commander-in-chief Eyre co-operated throughout the final operations of the war with the greatest credit. After the war Eyre was selected for the command of the 2nd brigade of the army, which Sir George Cathcart led in person to punish Moshesh, the Basuto chief. At the battle of Berea he commanded on the right, and did much to win the victory. Nevertheless, in private letters, later published, Cathcart blamed Eyre for thinking more of seizing cattle than of his military duties, which the latter denied in a letter to the 'Morning Herald' (23 October 1856). In Fortescue's history of the British army Eyre is described as 'a highly accomplished bush-fighter' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 12.560). In his public dispatches Cathcart had nothing but praise for his subordinate, and Eyre was made CB and an aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria, and promoted colonel on 28 May 1853. 
Eyre shortly afterwards returned to England, and was then given command of the 2nd brigade of the 3rd division under his former chief, Cathcart. At the head of this brigade during the Crimean War he was present at the Alma, and was honourably mentioned for his command of the trenches during Inkerman. After that battle he succeeded to the command of the 3rd division, although he was not promoted major-general until 12 December 1854, in succession to Cathcart. He remained in the Crimea throughout the terrible winter of 1854-5, and it was partly in recognition of this conduct that Lord Raglan gave him the command of the force which was directed to threaten the dockyard creek on 18 June 1855. Eyre was wounded in the face during the operations. He remained in the Crimea until the end of the war, and was made a KCB on 10 July 1855, and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur and a knight of the Mejidiye in 1856. 
In July 1856 Eyre was appointed to command the forces in Canada, but the privations of the Crimean winter had destroyed his health, and he had to resign in June 1859. He retired to Bilton Hall, near Rugby, where he died on 8 September 1859. A window was erected to his memory in Bilton church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9042


Eyston, John (1627-1709), Franciscan friar, was a son of Thomas Eyston, esquire (1588-1669), of Finchampstead, Berkshire, a councillor-at-law and representative of an old recusant family settled at East Hendred, Berkshire, and Mary (died 1671), daughter of Thomas Yate of Lyford, Berkshire. He entered the English Franciscan recollects at St Bonaventure's, Douai, was professed in 1644, and was ordained priest in 1651. After studying in the University of Douai he taught there for eighteen years as professor of philosophy and theology, taking his doctorate of divinity in 1668. In 1693 he became prefect of studies at Douai. On a number of occasions he acted as spiritual director and confessor to the English nuns of the third order regular of St Francis at Aire (1668-71, 1683-6, 1691-5, 1700-06) and Princenhoff, near Bruges (1674-7, 1687-91, 1696-7) in the Spanish Netherlands. While at Aire he published in 1684 'The Christian Duty Composed by B. Bernard Francis Student in Divinity', a commentary on the creed, the virtues, the commandments, and sacraments, of which there were a number of Irish editions at the end of the eighteenth century. It is reputed to have been the first book published in that town. He went as a missionary to England in 1677 but, because of lameness and the persecution occasioned by the Popish Plot, he returned to the continent where he acted as definitor to the general chapter (1680-83, 1686-9), holding the title 'Jubilat doctor'. He retired to Douai in 1708 and died suddenly on 28 May 1709 of an apoplectic fit during mass at St Bonaventure's Friary. He was buried in the south cloister at St Bonaventure's near the door. 


@@@@@


doc= 9043


Eyston, Charles (1667-1721), antiquary, was born on 22 September 1667, the eldest son of George Eyston (1636-1691), landowner, of East Hendred, near Wantage, Berkshire, and Anne (1631-1712), daughter of Robert Dormer of Peterley, Buckinghamshire. His family were ardent Catholics and both his father and brother were educated at Douai and St Omer. Of his own education, possibly abroad, no record is extant. The manor house at East Hendred, owned by the family since the fifteenth century, had a private chapel, where services were resumed after its desecration in 1688. In 1690 Eyston was arrested for alleged Jacobite activities and held in custody for some time. In 1692 he married Winifrid Dorothy Fitzherbert (died 1753), daughter of Basil Fitzherbert, of Swinnerton, Staffordshire, and Norbury, Derbyshire. They had four sons and six daughters. Their sons were educated at Douai and St Omer, and one, Basil, became a Benedictine monk and was a professor at Douai in 1733. Several of their daughters became nuns. Their descendants are still seated at East Hendred. 
Eyston became distinguished as an antiquary, and was a great friend of Thomas Hearne, who published some fragments from his collections. To Hearne, 'he was a man of a sweet temper and... an excellent scholar, but so modest that he did not care to have it at any time mentioned' ('Remarks and Collections', 7.294). In 1716 he completed 'A little monument to the once famous abbey and borough of Glastonbury' (MS Hendred House). It was published anonymously by Hearne in his 'History and Antiquities of Glastonbury' (1722) and for some time wrongly attributed to Richard Rawlinson. Richard Warner republished Eyston's essay in 1826. Eyston also composed 'A Poor Little Monument to All the Old Pious Dissolved Foundations of England', which, together with related studies and correspondence, is preserved at Hendred House. Eyston died of diabetes on 5 November 1721 at Hendred House, and was buried on 8 November 1721 in the Eystons' chapel in the parish church of East Hendred. 


@@@@@


doc= 9044


Eyton, Robert William (1815-1881), historian, born at Wellington vicarage, Shropshire, on 21 December 1815, was the fourth son, and seventh of ten children, of the Revd John Eyton (1778-1823) and his wife, Anna Maria (1787-1825), only child of Edmund Joseph Plowden (1756-1838), of Plowden, and his wife, also Anna Maria, 'nee' Burton. The Plowdens were Roman Catholic, but the future Mrs John Eyton was brought up in her mother's faith, that of the Church of England. Eyton thus descended from two of Shropshire's oldest families; his father's family, seated at Eyton upon the Weald Moors by the mid-twelfth century, he considered to be a probable cadet branch of the Norman Pantulfs, barons of Wem. 
Orphaned young, Eyton lived at first with his Plowden grandfather (who left his grandchildren very well provided for), probably at Tong Castle in Shropshire and later at Haughton Hall near Shifnal, also in Shropshire; after 1830 he was generally with his great-uncle Robert Burton, of Longner near Shrewsbury. He was entered at his father's school, Rugby, in 1829; the following year, however, he was moved to Bridgnorth grammar school, then flourishing under Thomas Rowley. In 1835 he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, where he was a Fell's exhibitioner; having graduated BA (with second-class honours in 'literae humaniores') in 1839, he proceeded MA in 1845. Also in 1839 he was ordained deacon, became curate of Morville and Aston Eyre, Shropshire, with Tickwood House as his residence, and on 26 September married Mary Elizabeth, also known as Eliza (died 1883), daughter of the Revd James Watts, vicar of Ledbury, Herefordshire. Eyton was ordained priest in 1840, and in 1841 he was instituted to Ryton rectory, near Shifnal, a good living in his own patronage. Between 1840 and 1850 he and his wife had three sons and four daughters, and in 1844-5 Eyton built a very large new rectory at Ryton. 
Eyton was assisted in his small parish by successive curates; one, appointed in 1852, stayed until about 1861. Those years saw the appearance of his 'Antiquities of Shropshire', issued to subscribers in forty-eight parts between 1853 and 1860 and forming twelve octavo volumes. With Eyton's brother Walter as business manager, the work paid its way. Its quality was quickly recognized. Sir William Hardy placed Eyton far ahead of all county historians, and Chester Waters acknowledged that he stood alone in their company. Among them Eyton was pre-eminent in the critical use of original records to trace the descent of feudal estates and delineate the genealogies and public lives of their lords. 'Antiquities of Shropshire' remains 'the most important single work ever devoted to the history of Shropshire' (Mason), and Eyton's single-handed completion of it was ensured in part by the practical elimination of topographical and architectural description but mainly by his limitation of the work to the 250-odd years between the conquest and the reign of Edward II, a period of which he 'was peculiarly the master' ('VCH Shropshire', 1.xxi). Eyton corresponded widely with scholars and others who shared his interests: Hardy and Colonel George Wrottesley may be instanced, and also Sir Thomas Phillipps, whose invitation to Middle Hill he adroitly avoided. In 1857 he wrote disinterestedly -- not wishing to do the work himself -- to suggest materials for inclusion in the 'Rolls Series'. 
Eyton left Ryton in 1863, disposed of the advowson there, and spent his remaining years in the south of England. He had sold his library (which he was later to regret), but he kept his manuscript collections (most of which, after his death, were bought by the British Museum) and soon returned to his favourite studies, which claimed him until a few weeks before his death. Important works appeared, notably the 'Itinerary' of Henry II (1878) and 'Domesday Book' studies of Dorset, Somerset, and Staffordshire (1877-81); and there were contributions to the 'Transactions of the Shropshire Archaeological Society' (a full list of his works is in volume 10, 1887, 6-7) and the William Salt Archaeological Society's 'Collections'. A Lincolnshire Domesday study remained unpublished. In his leisure Eyton bred pheasants; 'his notes', according to his grandson, 'on their pedigrees and performances are as painstaking and meticulous... as any on the fortunes of FitzAlan or Le Strange'. He also produced fine petit point pictures. All his occupations were consistent with frequent moves: after residing at Calehill Park, Ashford, Kent (1863-7), Eyton lived at Ripple Court near Dover (1867-71) and then at Albury House near Guildford, Surrey (1871-3). He lived from 1873 until about 1877 at Iwerne Minster, Dorset, and then until 1879 at Cattistock rectory, Somerset. Thereafter he lived at Winchfield House, near Basingstoke, Hampshire, where he died on 8 September 1881, having suffered from cancer and asthma for some time. He was buried on 13 September at Winchfield parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9045


Eyton, Stephen (fl. c.1320), Augustinian canon and supposed chronicler, is known only from the writings of John Leland and later antiquaries, who attribute to him a 'floruit' in the reign of Edward II. He is described as having been a canon of the Augustinian priory of Warter, a few miles east of York, on the edge of the Yorkshire downs, and it is possible that he took his name from the village of Etton, east of Warter and north-west of Beverley. Leland records Eyton as the author of a history of the reign of Edward II, a copy of which he saw at Fountains Abbey. To this John Bale adds that Eyton's work, of which he claims to have seen a copy in the library of All Souls College, Oxford, had the incipit 'Post mortem mundo deflendam'. However, this incipit is strikingly similar to that of the account of Edward II's reign in Thomas Walsingham's 'Historia Anglicana', which begins with the words 'Post mortem toti mundo deflendam Edwardi primi inclyti regis'. It is therefore possible either that the text Leland saw was in fact that of part of Walsingham's chronicle, and that Eyton was only its later scribe or owner, or that Bale, coming upon the relevant section of Walsingham's chronicle in a version detached from the rest, assumed that this was identical with the account of Edward II's reign noted by Leland at Fountains, and attributed Walsingham's work to Eyton in error. There is nothing inherently improbable about a canon of Warter composing a historical text: the writing of chronicles flourished among the Augustinians in the fourteenth century. But no evidence survives that might now shed light on either the quality or, indeed, the existence of the work attributed to Eyton. 


@@@@@


doc= 9046


Eyton, Thomas Campbell (1809-1880), naturalist and agriculturist, was born at Eyton Hall, Wellington, Shropshire, on 10 September 1809, the son of Thomas Eyton (1777-1855), recorder of Wenlock, and later high sheriff of Shropshire, and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1780-1817), daughter of Major-General Donald Campbell. Eyton is mainly known as an ornithologist, having become interested in natural history at an early age. Admitted pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1827, he matriculated the following year, but left without taking a degree. He became the friend and correspondent of Charles Darwin, John Gould, Louis Agassiz, Alfred Russel Wallace, Richard Owen, and Sir William Jardine, and many other naturalists of the time. 
On 13 May 1835 Eyton married Elizabeth Frances (1813?-1870), daughter and coheir of Robert Aglionby Slaney (1792-1862) of Walford and Hatton, MP for Shrewsbury for twenty-three years; they had seven children. 
In 1836 Eyton published the first volume of his 'History of the Rarer British Birds', with woodcuts by a local engraver, Mark, which have been compared with Thomas Bewick's for fidelity. In the same year appeared his second volume, 'Catalogue of British Birds'; for this he was patron to Edward Lear, employing him for the illustrations. In 1838 Eyton published his elaborate 'Monograph of the Anatidae, or Duck Tribe', which included descriptions of several new ducks to science. On coming into possession of the family estate on the death of his father in 1855, Eyton built a spacious museum at Eyton Hall, in which he formed one of the finest collections of skins and skeletons of birds in Europe. The skeletons were mostly prepared and mounted by his own hands. In 1867 (with supplements in 1869 and 1873-5) Eyton employed Mr Hobson of Wellington as publisher for 'Osteologia avium' (1867), a voluminous work on the skeletons of birds, illustrated from the specimens in his own museum. He also compiled 'Eyton's Catalogue of Species of Birds in his Possession' (1858), 'A Synopsis of the Duck Tribe' (1869), and a catalogue of the skeletons of birds in his museum. His last publication was a final supplement to his fine work 'Osteologia avium' in 1878. 
Although the contents of his museum were sold after Eyton's death, many of his specimens (both skeletons and cabinet skins) have survived in museums such as the Natural History Museum (Tring), the Liverpool Museum, Cambridge University Museum of Zoology, and the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia. Many of these specimens are of great importance to zoology and in several cases are the 'types' (or standards) on which that species is based. Eyton named several birds himself, including 'Arachnothera flavigaster', the spectacled spiderhunter from Indo-China, and 'Dendrocygna eytoni', the plumed whistling duck from Australia, which is often alternatively called Eyton's tree duck. Several species of bird were named after Eyton, notably a Brazilian woodcreeper ('Xiphorhynchus guttatus eytoni') by Philip Lutley Sclater, the first editor of 'Ibis', in 1853. 
Eyton spent most of his life on the family estates in Shropshire, and did much to improve the Hereford cattle breed. About 1842 he instituted and conducted the 'Herd Book of Hereford Cattle', and continued its publication to 1860 when Mr T. Duckham became its editor. 
Eyton took especial pleasure to help fellow students in natural science, as many of his letters show. A friend of Darwin's since Darwin's Cambridge undergraduate years, Eyton went on to help Darwin prepare the descriptions of the birds collected on the 'Beagle' voyage, even though these numbers as part of Darwin's 'Zoology' were officially credited to John Gould. Though he was a firm opponent of the Darwinian theory, his friendship with its author continued to his death, but he was much chagrined at finding some of his own observations on the habits of pigeons used by Darwin in support of the hypothesis of natural selection. Eyton's interest in natural history was not confined to birds, and in his own yacht and at his own expense, he conducted an investigation for the government into the oyster fisheries of the British islands, the results of which he published in 'A History of the Oyster and the Oyster Fisheries' (1858), which was illustrated by finely drawn lithographs from his own dissections. Eyton also wrote pieces on 'Fishing literature', 'Fox-hunting literature', 'Observations on ozone', and 'Notes on scent' (1870), and made catalogues of the drawings, engravings, and portraits at Eyton Hall. 
Eyton was a keen sportsman, and hunted with the Shropshire hounds for several seasons. Throughout his adult life he was an active magistrate; he held a commission in the yeomanry cavalry, and in 1859 was the pioneer of the volunteer movement in Shropshire. Eyton died at the family seat, Eyton Hall, Wellington, Shropshire, on 25 October 1880. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas Slaney Eyton (1843-1899). A daughter, Charlotte Eyton, was author of several works on scientific subjects, including 'The Rocks of the Wrekin' (1862) and 'By Fell and Flood' (1872). 


@@@@@


doc= 9047


Ezekiel, Ezekiel Abraham (1757-1806), engraver and printmaker, was born at Exeter, the eldest of the six sons (there were also at least four daughters) of Abraham Ezekiel (died 1799), silversmith and watchmaker, who with his brother Benjamin had come from the Rhineland about 1745, and who founded Exeter synagogue in 1763-4. His mother, whose name is unknown, died in June 1806. 
Ezekiel was apprenticed at the age of fifteen to Alexander Jenkins, goldsmith, and published his first engraving, a view of Bideford, in 1779. Portraits, topographical prints, and maps for bookplates formed a considerable part of his output, but in the 'Flying Post' of February 1784 he advertised that he executed perspective and ornamental copperplate engraving for various types of stationery, copperplate printing, and jewellery work in general with 'curious devices in hair'; by 1795 he claimed to have studied optical science, and to dispense spectacles, microscopes, and telescopes. He never married, and resided all his adult life with his unmarried siblings Henry, a watchmaker, Kitty, and Amelia at their shop in 179 Fore Street. 
By 1805 Ezekiel was too ill with dropsy to be considered for military service in the war with France, and he died on 13 December 1806, leaving an estate of under $600 to be distributed between the synagogue and his family. He was buried in the Magdalen Street cemetery. Ezekiel had many friends in Exeter, within and outside the Jewish community of which he was a staunch member, and his obituarist in the December issue of the 'Flying Post' referred to his skills as an engraver, unequalled outside London, and his portraits of several distinguished Exeter characters, admired for their faithful execution. His work survives in Exeter in the Royal Albert Museum and the Devon and Exeter Institution, and in London at the Jewish Museum, British Museum, and Victoria and Albert Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 9048


Ezekiel, Solomon (1781-1867), tinsmith and writer on Jewish matters, was born at Newton Abbot, Devon, on 7 June 1781, probably the grandson of Abraham Ezekiel (died 1799), a silversmith who had come from the Rhineland about 1745 and settled in Exeter, where he had founded a synagogue in 1763-4. Ezekiel settled at Penzance, where he advertised as a plumber and tinsmith, living with his wife, Hannah ('b'. 'c'.1776). In January 1820 he published a letter to Sir Rose Price, bt, chairman of a branch of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews, who had asked for a conference with the large and wealthy Hebrew community at Penzance. In consequence of Ezekiel's letter Sir Rose Price made further researches and came to the conclusion that the Jews were not yet prepared to adopt the Christian faith. 
A rigid observer of the rites and ceremonies of the Jewish religion, Ezekiel also translated a pamphlet written in Hebrew by the Revd Hart Symons, containing censures of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. A reply to this, by John Rogers, canon of Exeter, was published in 1822. Two other works by Ezekiel, 'The Life of Abraham' and 'The Life of Isaac' (1844-5), were based on a series of lectures on the lives of the patriarchs, which he delivered before the Penzance Hebrew Society for Promoting the Diffusion of Religious Knowledge. His lecture on the Hebrew Festivals, delivered at the Penzance Literary Institute, was also published in 1847. Solomon Ezekiel died at 29 Mount Street, Penzance, on 9 March 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 9049


Fabell, Peter (fl. 15th cent.), supposed magician, was popularly known in the folklore of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as the Merry Devil of Edmonton. The earliest known sign of Fabell's legend was a poem in 'ottava rima' called 'Fabyl's Ghoste', printed by John Rastell in 1533. Thomas Warton described this poem in 1781, dismissing it as 'of no merit', but it is no longer extant (Warton, 3.81). John Norden briefly notes in his 'Speculum Britanniae' (1593) that Fabell is buried in Edmonton's church, and 'is said to have beguiled the Devell by pollicie for money, But the Devell is deceit it selfe, and hardly deceived' (Norden, 18). 
Several literary works of the early seventeenth century expand on Norden's description. An anonymous comedy featuring Fabell, 'The Merry Devil of Edmonton', was written before 1604 for the King's Men and became one of the most popular plays of the century. The prologue calls Fabell a 'renowned Scholler' who had studied at Cambridge, and claims that '
In Edmonton yet fresh unto this day, 

Fixt in the wall of that old antient Church, 

His monument remayneth to be seene. 
('Merry Devil', sig. A2'v')' The play opens with Fabell tricking a demon to whom he has sold his soul, but for the rest of the play he takes a back seat to various comic characters and mismatched lovers. The play was first printed in 1608, with five more editions in the next fifty years. 
To capitalize on the play's success, a prose pamphlet called 'The Life and Death of the Merry Devil of Edmonton', by T. B., was written in 1608 and probably printed that year, though the earliest surviving edition dates from 1631. The author states that Peter Fabell was 'a man of good discent' and 'great learning' who was 'very pleasant, kinde, & free-hearted', and who was born, lived, and died in Edmonton in the reign of Henry VII (Abrams, 226-7). John Weever cites this pamphlet sceptically in his 'Ancient Funerall Monuments' (1631), adding that Fabell 'lieth interred under a seemelie Tombe without Inscription' in Edmonton church (Weever, 534). Thomas Fuller also mentions Fabell sceptically in his 'Worthies' (1662), writing that 'some make him a friar, others a lay gentleman, all a conceited person, who with his many devises deceived the devil' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.327). Fuller puts Fabell in the reign of Henry VI, rather than Henry VII. 
Despite the scepticism of these early accounts, Fabell probably was a real person, though his tricking of the devil is obviously fictional. He may be the 'Favell' who received a BA at Cambridge in 1469-70, given the claims about his education and dates (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.', 2.125). He is less likely to be the Peter Fabell who made his will in Cirencester, Gloucestershire, in 1526, given the distance from Edmonton (Phillimore and Duncan, 205). Alternatively, Bolton suggests that the magician was Peter Favelore, who built a chapel within the Edmonton church before his death in 1360, and who left lands in Edmonton, Enfield, Tottenham, and Kent (Bolton, 131). This man lived a century before the dates given by Fuller and T. B., but would have been entitled to a monument in the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9050


Faber, Frederick William (1814-1863), Church of England clergyman and Roman Catholic priest, was born on 28 June 1814, the fourth surviving son of Thomas Henry Faber (1779-1833) and his wife, Betty Atkinson (died 1829), daughter of Thomas Atkinson of Bradford, at Calverley vicarage in Yorkshire, the home of his grandfather the Revd Thomas Faber (1729-1821). Faber had a younger sister, Ellen, and there were three other siblings -- two older, who died in 1813, and one younger -- who died in infancy. These deaths seem to have intensified his mother's love for him. Faber's uncle, George Stanley Faber (1773-1854), was later the master of Sherburn Hospital near Durham and a prolific evangelical theologian. In December 1814 Thomas Henry Faber was appointed secretary to his brother's patron, Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham, and the family moved to Auckland Castle in Bishop Auckland. Frederick Faber was educated briefly at the grammar school in Bishop Auckland and privately by the Revd John Gibson at Kirkby Stephen, where he first learned his love of the upland moors and fells later expressed in his poem 'Sir Lancelot' (1844). In 1826 he was sent to Shrewsbury School, but moved in 1827 to Harrow School where, as he afterwards told Lord John Manners, he 'felt always quite wild -- wild with power of intellect' ('Selected Letters', 74), and was considered without intellectual rival. His mother died in 1829, and some of his later Marian hymns show the influence of her early death. He is said to have defied God to strike him dead in a thunderstorm in Harrow churchyard, but his incipient scepticism was arrested by the kindness of his headmaster, Charles Longley (1794-1868), later archbishop of Canterbury, and his faith was given a new turn by John William Cunningham (1780-1861), the evangelical vicar of Harrow and unofficial chaplain to the school. 
Faber matriculated at Oxford on 6 July 1832; he failed to win a Balliol scholarship, but came into residence in Balliol in spring 1833. Late in 1834 he was elected a scholar of University College, where he resided from early 1835. His friends included Roundell Palmer (1812-1895), later Lord Selborne, and the eccentric and gifted scholar John Brande Morris (1812-1880); Faber's letters to Palmer and Morris are important sources for his early life. Faber rejected Newman's influence in 1834 in favour of a position leaning towards evangelical Calvinism, but after Pusey's sermon on Septuagesima Sunday of 1836 he began to embrace Tractarianism, and was thoroughly convinced by what he said he had long wanted: the 'clear and positive statements of Anglican principles' (Bowden, 38) of Newman's 'Lectures on the Prophetical Office of the Church' of 1837. 
Having postponed his finals in Easter term 1836 until December, Faber graduated in 1836 with a disappointing second-class honours degree and failed to get a fellowship at University College. After a holiday in Germany with his brother Francis (1804-1876), he was elected a fellow of University in 1837 and won the Johnson divinity scholarship. He was made a deacon by Longley, then bishop of Ripon, on 6 August 1837, and ordained as priest by Bishop Bagot of Oxford on 26 May 1839. In summer 1839 he travelled in Belgium and Germany with Richard Church (1815-1890) and Arthur Penrhyn Stanley (1815-1881), but wrote of Romanism that 'it all will not do', expressing his disgust with the 'careless irreverence, the noise, the going in and out, the spitting of the priests on the Altar steps' (Bowden, 65). 
Between 1837 and 1842 Faber kept a cottage in the Lake District, and served as a curate in Ambleside. He befriended Wordsworth, the poet Thomas Whytehead (1815-1843), Lord John Manners (1818-1906), the founder of Young England, and George Smythe (1818-1857), later seventh Viscount Strangford. Faber had an intensely romantic if platonic relationship with Smythe in the fashion of its time, but put Smythe from him on scenting moral danger. Faber was a considerable influence on Manners, and figures as the Revd Aubrey St Lys in Disraeli's novel 'Sybil'. Faber's productions included 'The Cherwell Water-Lily' (1840), which earned him the nickname of Water-Lily Faber, a slur on his facial prettiness and charm of manner. One poem, 'First Love', of 1840, expressed his devotion to Dora Harrison, the twelve- or thirteen-year-old daughter of Benson Harrison of Ambleside, whose son, Matthew, Faber tutored from 1840. From February to August 1841 he travelled with Matthew to Italy, Greece, and Constantinople, returning through eastern Europe, Austria, and Germany, and gathering the materials used in 'The Styrian Lake, and other Poems' (1842) and 'Sights and Thoughts in Foreign Churches and among Foreign Peoples' (1842), which he dedicated to Wordsworth 'in affectionate remembrance of much personal kindness, and many thoughtful conversations on the rites, prerogatives, and doctrines, of the Holy Church'. The work asked the reader to look on Europe in the spirit of the middle ages, and showed an unsettled attitude to Anglicanism and a fascination with Roman Catholicism. 
In 1843 Faber was inducted into the University College living of Elton in Huntingdonshire. On another tour to the continent, also in 1843, he read Gabriello Chiabrera's epitaph at Savona, with its exhortation to choose Mount Calvary rather than Mount Parnassus, henceforward the motto of his life. In Rome he was received in audience by Gregory XVI, and acquired a devotion to St Philip Neri, whose life he translated at Elton, where he turned his household servants into a brotherhood, landscaped his garden on Wordsworthian principles, and opened it to his parishioners for Sunday evening promenades, cricket, and football. He acquired an adoring following among the young, restored the church, replaced the old village orchestra with an organ, fasted to the ruin of his health, and introduced confession. He translated the seven books of St Optatus on the Donatists for 'The Library of the Fathers', published a poem of nearly 11,000 lines on Sir Lancelot (1844; rev. edn, 1857), and provoked an outcry over his Romanizing 'Life of St Wilfrid' in Newman's 'Lives of the English Saints', for which he also wrote the lives of nine saints of Northumbria. 
Only Newman's influence kept Faber from the Roman Catholic church, and Newman's reception on 9 October 1845 removed that obstacle. A Catholic convert benefactor resident in Florence, F. J. Sloane, offered to pay the debts Faber had incurred in his parish, and on 17 November he left Elton, farewelled by weeping parishioners. With Francis Knox and ten other friends and servants, he was received into the Roman Catholic church at Northampton by Bishop William Wareing, vicar apostolic of the eastern district. Two adolescent followers, William and James Pitts, the former later the Brompton Oratory organist, resisted their father's pleas to come home. 
Faber leased a house in Birmingham for his new order, the Brothers of the Will of God of the Congregation of St Wilfrid or 'Wilfridians' (mischievously called by Dominic Barberi the Brothers of the Will of Faber). His 'Grounds for Remaining in the Anglican Communion' (1846) distressed Newman by its polemics, and was at first banned in Rome by censors misled by its title. On a visit to Florence with a rich young disciple, Antony Hutchison, Faber failed to persuade his benefactor, Sloane, to finance his monastery in Birmingham, but he was received again by the pope. He accepted from the earl of Shrewsbury Cotton Hall, near Cheadle, in Staffordshire, founded schools, built a church designed by A. W. N. Pugin and consecrated to St Wilfrid, and vigorously proselytized in the neighbourhood. He was ordained priest at Oscott on 3 April 1847 by Cardinal Wiseman, his carriage being dragged the last three-quarters of a mile home by local people amid fireworks, gunfire, and a brass band. 
But Newman's new Oratory at Birmingham was an irresistible attraction, and on 14 February 1847 Faber joined it with seventeen Wilfridians. Newman found a worshipping but difficult follower. In 1848 Faber had a stormy if comic confrontation at Cotton with Ambrose Phillipps (1809-1878) and Pugin over his own preference for the Italian style in religious architecture and worship over Gothic. He had, in 1846, projected a series of 'Lives of the Saints' (42 vols., 1847-56) of the modern era; the 'more than charnel horrors' (Chapman, 194) of the asceticism of St Rose of Lima provoked a violent attack by the Revd Edward Price in 'Dolman's Magazine'. The series was suspended, defended by Newman (against his later judgement), and then restarted under the auspices of the Oratory. Although Newman and Faber came briefly together at Cotton Hall in 1848, Newman's return to Birmingham in January 1849 left Faber at the hall as master of novices, and the temperamental difference between the two men was wisely resolved by the division of the community between London and Birmingham. 
In 1849 Faber became rector of the London Oratory in a former assembly room and whisky shop in King William Street off the Strand, and attracted a congregation of wealthy English aristocrats and bug-ridden pauper Irish. On 9 October 1850 Newman released the fathers from their obedience and on 12 October Faber became superior of the independent London Oratory. In the excitement over the 'papal aggression' of the restoration of the Catholic hierarchy in 1850, the black Oratorian habits and broad-brimmed hats made a metropolitan sensation, not least in 'Punch'. Faber expounded the character of his institute in 'The Spirit and Genius of St Philip Neri' (1850). A ticket system had to be introduced for the chapel, but in 1851 Hutchison opened a ragged school for 1000 poor children in Dunn's Passage, Holborn. 
Faber lost his looks in the late 1840s, when he became fat and suffered from periodic ill health. His trip to the Holy Land in 1851 was abandoned at Malta through illness, but he was received in audience on the homeward journey by Pius IX. From 1852 he could recuperate from his ailments at his community's rural retreat at Sydenham. In 1854 the Oratory moved to its permanent home in the Brompton Road. The gap between the London and Birmingham oratories, and between Faber and Newman, was widened by a row in 1855, ostensibly over the London Oratory's wish to hear nuns' confessions. It is difficult to see a higher principle at stake in this unhappy 'querelle des moines' between two good men, which was creditable to neither; it was exacerbated by Faber's inability to keep his mouth shut, and sent Newman on a mission of self-defence to Rome. Newman's difficulty in forgiving Faber remains the most signal objection to his canonization. 
Faber called the Virgin Mary 'Mamma', and his promotion of devotions to the Madonna, the saints, and the blessed sacrament, more common under skies of Mediterranean blue, also represented a return to the fervour of his early evangelicalism, as did his popular vernacular hymns, which transformed Catholic worship: they include 'Jesus, gentlest Saviour' and 'Hark, hark, my soul'. Despite their failures of taste and style, they represent the best of Victorian Catholic piety in their power to strengthen, to console, to warm, and to delight. Their stress lies on what Faber called the 'wideness in God's mercy', and in their teaching on purificatory suffering they widened the bounds of purgatory. 
Faber's eight religious treatises were long premeditated, but were poured out between 1853 and 1860, their manuscripts flowing on in the author's beautiful hand, almost without corrections. They were intended for his 'invalid souls' of the middle class and 'poor Belgravians' on the model of Victorian popular science (Chapman, 296), and are 'not pure theology, nor mere devotion... not explanatory apologetic, but a very individual mixture of the three', written in the light of the 'one large lucid philosophy' of God (Chapman, 292). 'All for Jesus, or, The Easy Ways of Divine Love' (1853), the most introductory of them all, was composed for the Confraternity of the Precious Blood, and had sold 100,000 copies by 1869. 'Growth in Holiness' (1854) maps out the middle way of the wilderness of 'temptation, struggle, and fatigue' which most religious men occupy, between the delight of spiritual beginnings and 'the beautiful, wooded, watered, yet rocky mountains' of 'the land of high prayer'. 'The Blessed Sacrament' (1855) treats its subject as the highest manifestation of God. It is dedicated to Newman, who thought that its argumentative manner would encourage scepticism. 'The Creator and the Creature' (1858) is Faber's greatest work in its vision of life as a work of the divine creative love. 'The Foot of the Cross' (also 1858) is based on the seven dolours of Mary, 'The Precious Blood' (1860) on the doctrine of redemption, and 'Bethlehem' (1860) on the infancy of Our Lord. His 'Spiritual Conferences' (1859) shows signs of tiredness. These books establish Faber's extraordinary knowledge of the mystical theology, hagiography and history of nineteen centuries, even if his emotive combination of romanticism and evangelicalism is a little strong for modern sensibilities. His 'Notes on Doctrinal and Spiritual Subjects' (1866) was edited by his biographer, John Edward Bowden, in 1866. His letters are a more accessible delight, being as racy and unbuttoned as the man. 
Criticism among Catholics of Faber's work was muted after Pius IX's award to him of a doctorate of divinity in 1854, and in his 'Devotion to the Pope' (1860) he defended the beleaguered papacy, along with Manning and his old Balliol friend William George Ward (1812-1882). Faber died of Bright's disease at the Brompton Oratory aged forty-nine on 26 September 1863 and was buried there on 30 September. More than any other figure, he defined the tone and temper of mid-Victorian ultramontane Catholicism. His legacy is the Brompton Oratory, with its continuing fusion -- in music, learning, art, and architecture -- of the Catholic faith with the form and spirit of the papal Rome of the high baroque, and of its genius, St Philip Neri. 


@@@@@


doc= 9051


Faber, George Stanley (1773-1854), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, the eldest son of the Revd Thomas Faber (1730-1821), vicar of Calverley, Yorkshire, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Traviss ('b'. 1745), was born at Calverley parsonage on 25 October 1773. Frederick William Faber, convert to Catholicism and founder of the London Oratory, was his nephew. He was educated at the Hipperholme grammar school, near Halifax, where he remained until he went to university. On 10 June 1789 he matriculated at University College, Oxford, and was elected a scholar of Lincoln College, Oxford, on 25 March 1790, where he was awarded his BA degree and elected a fellow and tutor in 1793. He proceeded MA in 1796 and BD in 1803, and became proctor in 1801. He came to general notice through his 'Two sermons before the University of Oxford: an attempt to explain by recent events five of the seven vials mentioned in the Revelations' (1799). As Bampton lecturer in the same year, he published a paper, 'Horae Mosaicae, or, A view of the Mosaical records with respect to their coincidence with profane antiquity and their connection with Christianity', on the 'Pentateuch'. 
On 31 May 1803 Faber married Eliza Sophia Scott-Waring (1776-1851), a philanthropist; they had five children. Since fellows of Oxford colleges were not allowed to marry, he resigned his fellowship and became assistant curate to his father at Calverley. After two years, in 1805, he was made vicar of Stockton-on-Tees. He later served as rector at Redmarshall (1809-11) and at Long Newton (1811-32). He became prebendary at Salisbury Cathedral in 1830, and Bishop van Mildert appointed him master of Sherburn Hospital in 1832. After resigning his post at Long Newton, he spent a good deal of his own income at Sherburn on the successful improvement of the hospital estates. 
Faber's brand of Anglicanism was strongly evangelical, and he stressed the protestant doctrines of the necessity of conversion, justification by faith, and the sole authority of scripture as the rule of faith. As a result of his opinions and his writings, he became friendly with Bishop Burgess, Bishop van Mildert, Bishop Barrington, the marquess of Bath, Lord Bexley, and Dr Routh. His writings on 'The Origin of Pagan Idolatry' (1816) attempted to demonstrate, mainly through the evidence of the 'Old Testament', that all pagan nations had worshipped the same gods who, he argued, were in fact men who had been deified by simple people. The origins of their errors stemmed from the Tower of Babel and Noah's three sons. He also gave his Bampton lectures on the so-called 'Arkite Egg', a subject which he also discussed elsewhere. His treatises on 'Revelation' and on the seven vials, prophetic interpretations which included predictions of the restoration of Napoleon in 1815, were old-fashioned approaches in the Church of England of his day. His books on the primitive doctrines of election and justification were noteworthy insofar as they stressed the evangelical view of these doctrines, in opposition to the opinion of contemporary writers of very different schools such as Vicesimus Knox and Joseph Milner. Faber's wife, Eliza, died at their home, Sherburn House, on 28 October 1851, and he died at Sherburn Hospital, near Durham, on 27 January 1854. He was buried in the chapel of the hospital on 1 February. 
Faber's less well-known works include 'A dissertation on the mysteries of the Cabiri, or, The great gods of Phoenicia, Samothrace, Egypt, Troas, Greece, Italy, and Crete' (2 vols., 1803), 'A dissertation on the prophecies relative to the great period of 1200 years, the papal and Mahomedan apostasies, the reign of Antichrist, and the restoration of the Jews' (2 vols., 1807; 5th edn, 1814-18), 'A general and connected view of the prophecies relative to the conversion of Judah and Israel, the overthrow of the confederacy in Palestine, and the diffusion of Christianity' (2 vols., 1808), 'A practical treatise on the ordinary operations of the Holy Spirit' (1813), and 'Remarks on the fifth apocalyptic vial and the restoration of the imperial government of France' (1815). Controversial works included 'The difficulties of infidelity' (1824), 'The difficulties of Romanism' (1826), 'A treatise on the origin of expiatory sacrifice' (1827), 'The testimony of antiquity against the peculiarities of the Latin church' (1828), 'Letters on Catholic emancipation' (1829), 'The apostolicity of trinitarianism: the testimony of history to the antiquity and to the apostolical inculcation of the doctrine of the holy Trinity' (2 vols., 1832), 'The primitive doctrine of justification investigated, relatively to the definitions of the Church of Rome and the Church of England' (1837), 'Christ's discourse at Capernaum fatal to the doctrine of transubstantiation on the very principle of exposition adopted by the divines of the Roman church' (1840), 'Letters on Tractarian secessions to popery' (1846), and 'Papal infallibility: a letter to a dignitary of the church of Rome' (1851). 


@@@@@


doc= 9052


Faber, John (c.1660-1721), draughtsman and engraver, was born about 1660 at The Hague. He lived in the Netherlands until at least 1696 and established a reputation in Amsterdam as a portrait miniaturist, working with pen and ink on vellum. He then moved to England and settled in London, where his earliest portrait, of Simon Episcopius, was dated 1698. Soon afterwards he started to work with black lead on vellum, in the manner of the celebrated English miniaturists David Loggan and Robert White, and began to experiment with mezzotint engraving. By 1707 he had established a printselling business at the Two Golden Balls, near the Savoy in the Strand, whence he moved about 1716 to the Golden Eagle by the Fountain tavern, near Essex Street. Developing his skill as a mezzotint engraver, Faber published a wide range of portraits between 1707 and 1719, some of them after his own drawings. Many of his subjects were clergy, among them high-churchmen such as Francis Atterbury, Henry Sacheverell, Henry Shute, Andrew Snape, and Philip Stubbs. He also engraved Jacobites, such as James Sheppard and the second duke of Ormond, and produced four portraits of Charles I, one version taken from Van Dyck and three others (1713) after Edward Bower's study made during the king's trial. However, Faber's output was not entirely partisan: he engraved portraits of Oliver Cromwell, George I, dissenting clergy such as Daniel Burgess and Samuel Rosewell, and various 'remarkable' characters, noted for their great age or eccentricity. In addition he produced several sets of portraits: 'Twelve Ancient Philosophers' (after Rubens), 'Twelve Caesars', 'Twenty-One Reformers', and 'The Four Indian Kings' (1710). In 1711 and 1712 Faber was at Oxford, working with George Vertue to engrave portraits in the picture gallery of the Bodleian Library: these included mezzotints of Geoffrey Chaucer, John Hevelius, Ben Jonson, and Duns Scotus. Between 1712 and 1714 he engraved forty-five portraits of the founders of Oxford and Cambridge colleges, a project that Vertue regarded as his 'most considerable work' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.73). The plates for these were reworked and republished throughout the eighteenth century. 
Faber died at Bristol in May 1721, having for some years worked with his son and pupil John Faber (c.1695-1756), whose prolific achievements eventually eclipsed those of his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 9053


Faber, John (c.1695-1756), engraver and portrait and miniature painter, the son of John Faber (d. 1721), also an engraver, was born in Amsterdam about 1695. His family settled in England at some time before 1698 and a drawing by his father, dated 1704 and now in the British Museum, shows Faber as a child. He learned drawing and mezzotint engraving from his father and subscribed to the academy in St Martin's Lane founded in 1720 by Louis Cheron and John Vanderbank, where he would have drawn from life and at the same time come to know many of the painters whose work he was to engrave. He also frequented the Rose and Crown Club of artists which met in a Covent Garden tavern on Saturday nights from the beginning of the eighteenth century to 1745. 
Until his father's death in 1721 Faber published mezzotints under the name John Faber Junior from addresses in London near the Strand: over against Essex Street, at the Blew Ball in Catherine Street, and at the Two Golden Balls near the Savoy. After 1721 he published at Fountain Court in the Strand ('c'.1721-1725), at the Green Door in the Great Piazza, Covent Garden (late 1720s), at the Green Door in Craven Buildings, Drury Lane ('c'.1731- 'c'.1734), and at the Golden Head in Bloomsbury Square, South Side ('c'.1734 onwards). In 1737, while living at the last address, a 'street robber at night attacked him near his own house, as he was going home, and shot him in the breast -- of which he was dangerously wounded -- but recovered' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.80). 
Faber produced more than 500 mezzotints: a full catalogue of his portraits can be found in John Chaloner Smith's 'British Mezzotinto Portraits' (1883). They were mainly portraits after contemporary and seventeenth-century painters. He engraved two important series after Godfrey Kneller -- twelve 'Hampton Court Beauties' (1727), and forty-seven portraits of members of the Kit-Cat Club (1735) -- and he helped to secure the international reputations of Thomas Hudson and Allan Ramsay with, respectively, forty-two and fifteen mezzotints after their portraits. In 1742 Vertue remarked that 'no sooner is a picture painted by any painter of any remarkable person but presently [Faber] has it out in print, also now or lately he has done some plates drawn from the life without the assistance of a painter' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.109). Among subjects other than portraits Faber made mezzotints after Philip Mercier's paintings of everyday themes in the manner of Chardin. Larger prints, which sold for the relatively high price of 5's'., included an equestrian portrait of Frederick, prince of Wales, after Bartholomew Dandridge (1740), dedicated to the masters and wardens of 'the Antient Society of Free and Accepted Masons... by their faithful Brother... Jno Faber'. 
Faber was undoubtedly the leading mezzotint engraver of his day, but his posthumous reputation has been eclipsed by those of James Macardell and other Dublin mezzotint engravers who dominated the medium from the 1750s. Among his apprentices were Andrew Miller and -- probably -- John Brooks. His wife, whose name is not known, was painted by Thomas Hudson and the portrait was executed in mezzotint by Faber; after Faber's death she married a lawyer named Smith. Faber died, of gout, on 2 May 1756. Fifteen of his plates, including the 'Hampton Court Beauties', were acquired by John Boydell and appeared in Boydell's sale of 2 June 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 9054


Fabyan, Robert (d. 1513), chronicler, is said to have been born in London. The son of John and Agnes Fabyan, he had at least one brother, John, who is mentioned in his will. Several other Fabyans are also recorded in London about this time, including John ('fl'. 1439-1477) and Stephen ('fl'. 1468-1469), but it is unclear whether any of these were relatives. Robert married Elizabeth Pake, daughter and heir of Johannes Pake, draper, and his wife, Elizabeth Stokker, and through his wife inherited lands in Essex at Theydon Garnon, including a mansion called Halstedys. With her he had sixteen children, only six of whom survived him. 
Robert Fabyan was made free in the Drapers' Company in 1476-7, having been apprenticed to William Holme about 1470, and took up the livery a year later. He was elected renter warden of the company in 1485 and acted as auditor of the city's accounts in 1486 and 1487. Elected sheriff in 1493 on the nomination of the lord mayor, he became alderman of Farringdon Without about December 1494. In 1495-6 he served as master of the Drapers' Company, and held this office again in 1501-2. In 1496 he was assigned to petition the king regarding levies on English cloth exported to Flanders, while in 1497 Fabyan was appointed with John Brooke and John Warner to keep the gates of Ludgate and Newgate against the Cornish rebels, and to accompany the king to Woodstock afterwards. In 1498 he was an assessor of the fifteenth for the Scottish war. In 1503 he resigned from the office of alderman, claiming that he did not have the financial backing to take on the mayoralty -- it is recorded that on 'the xxth day of Julii & feest of Seynt mergaret Robert Fabyan aldyrman that long beffore hadd labourid to be dyschargid, at that daye by auctoryte of a Court of aldyrmen was dysmyssid of that Charge' ('Great Chronicle', 325). Since Fabyan, who was the executor of his father-in-law's will, was then involved in a dispute with another alderman, William Welbeck, over payment of the orphan's portion overdue to Welbeck's wife, it is possible that his retirement was the result of both financial and social embarrassment. 
Although clearly a man at the forefront of civic affairs, respected by his peers and the king, Robert Fabyan is best known for the chronicle attributed to him, 'The Newe Cronycles of England and Fraunce', also known as Fabyan's chronicle. In the prologue to the work the author himself calls it the 'Concordance of Storyes', an indication of its uniqueness in presenting parallel histories of England and France. The chronicle exists in manuscript in two volumes, with Holkham Hall, MS 671, covering the period from Brutus to the death of Philip Augustus of France in 1223, and BL, Cotton MS Nero C.xi, continuing from 1223 to 1485. Like all London chronicle manuscripts, Holkham 671 and Cotton Nero C.xi are anonymous. Although these manuscripts are almost certainly not in Fabyan's hand, it is probable that the text was written or continued by Robert Fabyan. Stow states that Fabyan: 'gathered out of divers good Authors, as well Latin as French, a large Chronicle of England and of France, which he published in English, to his great Charges, for the Honour of this City, and common Utility of the whole Realm. (Stow, bk 1, 262)' Fabyan was certainly conversant with French and Latin, and is recorded as borrowing a French chronicle from the Guildhall Library for an extended period of time. 

'The Newe Cronycles' was first printed by Pynson in 1516, but was not attributed to Robert Fabyan until Rastell's edition in 1533, which was entitled 'Fabyans Cronycle Newly Prynted'. In the following year, 1534, the court of aldermen agreed that a copy of 'Mr. fabyans cronycles' should be held in the court. It would seem that the continuation to 1509 was also attributed to Fabyan. This is certainly the case in the 1548 Ipswich edition of John Bale's 'Illustrium maioris Britanniae scriptorum... summarium' (Bale, 209) where the chronicle and also the continuation are said to be Fabyan's work. John Stow attributes both 'The Newe Cronycles' and the great chronicle (London, Guildhall Library, MS 3313) to Robert Fabyan, sometimes confusing the manuscripts. This was easily done as the manuscripts of 'The Newe Cronycles' and that of the great chronicle after 1439 are all written largely in the same hand, and contain some similar styles of lettering and decoration. As the writer of the great chronicle records that he was apprenticed to Thomas Coke, there has been some speculation that Robert Fabyan may have been initially apprenticed to Thomas Coke and later changed to William Holme. This is a simple way of supporting the attribution of this manuscript to Fabyan. Because the Drapers' Company registers have been destroyed it is not known when Fabyan's apprenticeship commenced and so this association can be neither confirmed nor denied. However, much internal evidence suggests that the extant manuscripts of both 'The Newe Cronycles' and the great chronicle were all copied in the same workshop. Although the similarity of hand does not mean Fabyan wrote the great chronicle, it is evident that all three manuscripts were compiled by individuals with a thorough and personal knowledge of the administration of London. In the case of 'The Newe Cronycles' this is consistent with Fabyan's status and interests. It is notable, too, that these texts were perceived by contemporaries as valuable resources. 

'The Newe Cronycles' is written in seven parts, each celebrating a joy of the Virgin Mary. The first six books draw heavily on the 'Brut' as the basis of the English history, and also cite numerous medieval sources including Bede, William of Malmesbury, Ranulf Higden, and Henry of Huntingdon. Book 7 begins with the Norman conquest, and at 1189 the English history becomes a London chronicle, dating by mayoral years, and including the names of the mayors and sheriffs of the city of London. This text is clearly related to the London chronicle texts in BL, Cotton MS Vitellius A.xvi, and London, Guildhall Library, MS 3313 (the great chronicle), which, as noted above, has also been attributed, although somewhat dubiously, to Robert Fabyan, and is more distantly related to Bodl. Oxf., MS Gough London 10. 'The Newe Cronycles' is particularly important in reflecting a change in the perception of history. It is the first of the London chronicles to cite its sources and to extend a localized history to a more general account of England and France. Furthermore 'The Newe Cronycles' is unique in marking a shift from history as a literary representation of the visual (as it was in the earlier London chronicles), to history as a truly literary form. The comparison of different sources throughout the chronicle, and the importance placed on developing historical themes, are further indications of a changed perspective. It is through 'The Newe Cronycles' that the London chronicle tradition was transmitted to the later English renaissance writers. John Bale (died 1563) claims that the first edition of 'The Newe Cronycles' (1516) was burnt by Cardinal Wolsey, although there is no corroborating evidence for this, save the scarcity of this edition. The second edition, with a continuation, was printed in 1533 after Wolsey's death. Further editions with continuations appeared in 1542 and 1559. The modern edition was edited by Henry Ellis in 1811. 
At the time of his death Fabyan had property at Theydon Garnon as well as tenements within the parish of Benet Fink within Warde at Bradstrete, London, and tenements in the parish of St Michael Cornhill. He had other lands and tenements in East Ham, West Ham, and Leyton, and freehold copy in Lambourne, Theydon Bois, Theydon Garnon, Theydon Mount, and Stanford Rivers. He was survived by his wife, two daughters, Joan Haryat and Mary, and four sons, John, Robert, Thomas, and Antony. Also mentioned in his will are his cousin Dorothy and Robert Tate, the latter a mercer and former mayor of London. In his will (which was proved on 12 July 1513) he bequeaths a 'masse bok and a prymer', but does not explicitly bequeath any chronicles. Chronicles are bequeathed in the will of John Fabyan, written in 1541, perhaps a grandson of Robert. Robert Fabyan asked to be buried in Essex, although according to Stow he was buried at St Michael Cornhill. No trace of his monument remained there when Strype's edition of Stow's 'Survey' was published in 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 9055


Jean-Christophe Fatio of Duillier (1659-1720), was born at Belfort in 1659, and on 14 October 1708 married Catherine Gassaud (died 1752). He assisted Nicolas's natural philosophical investigations in and around Geneva, and corresponded extensively with him about gravity. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 3 April 1706, and published an account of an eclipse of the sun, observed at Geneva on 12 May of that year, in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. He made observations of the moon and of extremes of climate, which his brother communicated to the Royal Society. From 1709 to 1710 he worked on a map of Geneva and the surrounding area, and by 1712 had begun composing a philosophical treatise on matter, extension, void, and God. He managed his estates at Duillier, and a press and bookshop that his father had established there and in Geneva. He was skilled in mechanics, surveying, and mathematics, but, his father having neglected his education, knew only a little Latin. He died at Geneva on 18 October 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 9056


Fatio, Nicolas, of Duillier (1664-1753), mathematician and natural philosopher, was born at Basel on 16 February 1664, the second son and seventh child of Jean-Baptiste Fatio (1625-1708) and his wife, Catherine (died 1692), daughter of Gaspard Barbaud. 
Fatio was educated initially at home, where he learned Latin and Greek, and later at Geneva, where he was enrolled at the academy from 1678 to 1680 and learned some Hebrew, as well as following courses in philosophy, mathematics, and astronomy, probably under the direction of Jean-Robert Chouet. Disagreement between his father, who intended him for the church, and his mother, who wished him to serve in a protestant court in Germany, allowed Fatio to choose his own course. He applied himself to natural philosophy, and was not yet eighteen when he wrote to Jean Dominique (Giandomenico) Cassini about the rings of Saturn, the size of the sun and the moon, and their distance from the earth. With the help of Chouet and of the Abbe Nicaise, Fatio was able to travel to Paris in order to work together with Cassini. He stayed there between spring 1682 and October 1683, and witnessed Cassini's first observations of zodiacal light. Fatio carried out further work on this phenomenon during 1684, after his return to Geneva, and located its position in the plane of the ecliptic. His modifications to Cassini's ideas were first reported by Chouet in 'Les Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres' (March 1685), and published in full as 'Lettre a Monsieur Cassini touchant une lumiere extraordinaire qui paroit dans le ciel depuis quelques annees' (Amsterdam, 1686). He was keen to point out that the light that he and Cassini had observed need not be a transient phenomenon, but might be as old as creation, and was aware of the difficulty of resolving his findings about the refraction of the sun's light with Cartesian theory. 
Fatio's notebooks from this period demonstrate the precocious range of his interests in astronomy, mathematics, optics, fortification, and medicine, and his awareness of the work of Galileo and Descartes. They show him designing observatories, scientific instruments, and machines; studying the anatomy of the eye; describing insects; and devising remedies. Although they anticipated some of the philosophical concerns that continued to occupy Fatio for much of the rest of his life, they indicate his desire at this stage to place the study of nature within an orthodox and rational theological context. In addition to the scientific activities testified to by his notebooks, Fatio undertook a survey of Mont Blanc, along with his elder brother, Jean-Christophe ['see below'], taking trigonometrical measurements of the mountain between July and September 1685. 
While staying in Geneva during 1684 and 1685, Fatio became acquainted with Fenil, a renegade Piedmontese count who shared with him the secret of a plan that he had made to win back the favour of Louis XIV, whom Fenil had offended. This involved a daring plot to seize William, prince of Orange, by means of a raiding party that would land on the beach at Scheveningen, where the prince habitually took the sea air unguarded, kidnap him, and spirit him away in a boat to Dunkirk. Fearing for the life of the prince, and, no doubt, seeing an opportunity for patronage, Fatio resolved in the spring of 1686 to travel to the Netherlands in the company of Gilbert Burnet, whose acquaintance he had already made in Geneva, in order to give warning of the scheme. Between them, Burnet and Fatio duly convinced William and the states of Holland of the reality of the threat, so that a permanent guard was placed around the prince. Concrete rewards for Fatio's action were slow in coming, though his name was canvassed for a post at the University of Leiden and in connection with a planned mathematical professorship for the instruction of the nobility and gentry of Holland. 
Despite delays in finding a suitable position, Fatio's journey to the Netherlands was not entirely without fruit for him. While he was there he oversaw the publication of his letter to Cassini, and cultivated the acquaintance of Christiaan Huygens. Prompted by the receipt of several publications by Ehrenfried von Tschirnhaus, Huygens encouraged Fatio to begin work on the problem of calculating the tangents of curved lines, on which subject Fatio published an article in the 'Bibliotheque Universelle et Historique' in April 1687, initiating an exchange with Tschirnhaus. At the end of the spring, Fatio left for England, where, in June 1687, he attended a number of meetings of the Royal Society, to which he was introduced on the authority of Henri Justel. There he picked up rumours of a new book, Isaac Newton's 'Principia', which he soon communicated to Huygens, remarking that 'ils m'ont reproche que j'etois trop Cartesien, et m'en fait entendre que, depuis les meditations de leur auteur, toute la physique etoit bien changee' ('they have reproached me with being too Cartesian, and made me to understand that, following the meditations of their author, all physics has been completely altered'; letter to Huygens, 14 June 1687, 'Christiani Hugenii aliorumque seculi XVII virorum celebrium exercitationes mathematicae et philosophicae ex manuscriptis in bibliotheca academiae Lugdono-Batavae', ed. P. J. Uylenbroek, 2 vols., The Hague, 1833, 2.99). 
During the winter of 1687, Fatio retreated to Oxford, where he made the acquaintance of Edward Bernard, Savilian professor of astronomy, for whom he wrote an account of the bronze seal located in the temple of Solomon ('1 Kings' 7:23-6). The following year, Fatio was again in London, earning money by acting as a tutor, and on 2 May 1688 he was admitted as a fellow of the Royal Society. By now, he had corresponded extensively with Huygens on the subject of Newton's theories of gravity, and on 26 February 1690 he read his own account of the cause of gravity to the Royal Society. Fatio was thus already in contact with a number of English virtuosi, and was able to strengthen his reputation during Huygens's visit to London in the summer of 1689. He was also beginning to receive limited patronage from several leading whig politicians, notably John Hampden, as might be expected given his services to the house of Orange. With Hampden he worked to secure the employment of Swiss guardsmen, formerly in the pay of Louis XIV, in English and later in Dutch service. On 10 July 1689 Fatio joined Huygens and Hampden in recommending Newton for the headship of a Cambridge college, reinforcing his acquaintance with the author of the 'Principia'. For a while, Fatio continued to regard Huygens as his intellectual patron, and helped to distribute presentation copies of his 'Traite de la lumiere' in England in 1690. However, when he returned to England in the autumn of 1691, after a stay in the Netherlands as a tutor to Hampden's nephew, his friendship with Newton came to predominate. 
Fatio was Newton's closest friend in the eighteen months prior to the latter's breakdown in the summer of 1693, which, though it is unlikely to have been provoked by the intensity of their relationship, certainly led to a cooling between them. The two men collaborated extensively on alchemical investigations, and Fatio was able to introduce Newton to a range of literature in French, which he translated for him. Newton was certainly interested in Fatio's ideas about a mechanical cause of gravity, even if he later disparaged them in conversation with David Gregory, and he permitted Fatio free access to his mathematical papers. As a result, Fatio was able to communicate a list of corrections to the 'Principia' to Huygens, who sent them in turn to Leibniz, who allowed Johann Groening to publish them in 1701. Fatio had been one of the first attentive readers of the 'Principia', and, as early as March 1690, he had intended to add corrections from Newton's manuscripts to those that he had himself made in his own copy of the book. By the end of 1691, Fatio had despaired of convincing Newton to undertake a new edition of the work himself but entertained the thought of producing a corrected, folio version, with Newton's help, over the next two to three years. He appears to have worked extensively on this project between November 1691 and April 1692, intending to add a preface to the 'Principia' that would explain Newton's system of gravity, perhaps through the application of his own ideas. 
Newton also helped Fatio to develop his interests in biblical criticism, especially in the interpretation of the language of prophecy. He offered him financial support as well, and encouraged him to come to live in Cambridge, in order to mend his health. Yet Fatio, who was always proud of his own standing as a natural philosopher, was careful not to allow the relationship to become completely one-sided. He continued to seek academic preferment outside England, notably in Amsterdam, and to resist inducements that would have made him in effect Newton's amanuensis. By the summer of 1694, Fatio had found another patron, and was living at Woburn Abbey as a tutor to the duke of Bedford's son Wriothesley Russell, a position for which he had sought the backing of his friend John Locke. He remained in the duke of Bedford's service for some time, accompanying his pupil in his studies at Oxford and, 1697-8, in the Netherlands. 
By 1693 Fatio had also begun a long association with the watchmakers Peter and Jacob Debaufre, and showed a pendulum watch with a spiral spring of their manufacture at the Royal Society on 1 November. Together with the Debaufres, Fatio pioneered techniques for drilling precious stones, particularly rubies, and applying them to watch and clock mechanisms, for which he won a patent (no. 371) in 1704. Newton tested the accuracy of one of Fatio's watches, and its susceptibility to cold, in December that year. The watches were exhibited at the Royal Society in March 1705, and advertised as being accurate enough to determine latitude at sea. Opposition from the Clockmakers' Company, however, prevented the extension of Fatio's patent beyond its initial fourteen years. 
Fatio pursued other natural philosophical and practical endeavours alongside his activities as a tutor. Influenced by John Evelyn's translation of the writings of Jean de la Quintinie, Fatio explored the effects of the use of sloping surfaces to maximize the sun's heat for plants growing upon them. He directed the building of such a sloping wall for fruit trees at Belvoir Castle, and, in 1697, composed the text of 'Fruit-Walls Improved' (1699). Here he remarked on changes in the weather since 1683, which he attributed to a decline in the incidence of sunspots and the consequent dispersal of a mist between the sun and the earth. Fatio's interest in the physical processes by which the sun's heat could be transmitted was linked to his earlier explanations of zodiacal light, to his ongoing work on the cause of gravity, and to his later investigations, in the years around 1705, of the paths of comets and the nature and prophetic interpretation of the aurora borealis. For all of these phenomena Fatio offered a mechanical explanation in terms of the motion of tiny particles and their effects, yet he was also influenced by Newton's ideas about the importance of comets and other celestial bodies in providing nourishment to the earth. In particular he believed that God had constructed nature as a self-sustaining system, which demonstrated his general providence, an idea that also informed Fatio's work on the reduction of the effects of friction in clock movements and his long-standing interest in perpetual motion machines. 
A companion to 'Fruit-Walls Improved' was Fatio's 'Lineae brevissimi descensus investigatio geometrica duplex' (1699), a discussion of the attempts made to solve the problem of determining the curve linking any two points, not in the same vertical line, along which a body would most quickly descend from the higher to the lower point. The brachistochrone problem was originally posed in June 1696 by Johann Bernoulli, and was solved almost immediately by Leibniz, the marquis de l'Hopital, and, most successfully, Newton. In his book Fatio, as well as drawing attention to the significance of his own progress towards the calculus in 1687, stressed Newton's priority in reaching a full understanding of the technique, thus criticizing the claims of Leibniz. Along with several others, Fatio had pressed Newton to publish his work on the calculus throughout the 1690s; now he initiated a long-running controversy over priority. The first exchanges took place in the 'Acta Eruditorum'. There, in 1699, Bernoulli reviewed Fatio's book in a hostile manner; the following year, Leibniz attacked Fatio's interpretation of the history of the invention of the calculus; finally, in 1701, the editors printed an abbreviated reply by Fatio to his critics. The debate continued in letters between Fatio and Jakob Bernoulli, in which Fatio also passed on his ideas about gravity. Fatio's final contribution to the controversy came in a letter to his brother concerning the solid of least resistance, which was published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1713. 
Fatio travelled to Switzerland in 1699, and remained at Duillier, where he was reconciled to his father, until 1701. There he worked on his theory of gravity, refining his ideas about the effect that streams of fast-moving minute particles might have on larger bodies that were mainly composed of empty space. He also surveyed the mountains around Lake Geneva in company with his brother, Jean-Christophe, and deepened his knowledge of the prophetic texts of the 'Bible'. Following his return to England, he lived in London, working as a mathematical tutor in Spitalfields, where, in the summer of 1706, he encountered the Camisard, or French, prophets Durand Fage, Jean Cavalier, and Elie Marion. Fatio attended their assemblies and began acting as one of their scribes, recording during their periods of inspiration their words and actions, which carried a millenarian message of impending destruction and judgment. He reported on the motives and activities of the French prophets to both David Gregory and Newton. 
The French prophets aroused the suspicion of the more orthodox refugee churches in London, and various attempts were made to suppress their activities. These came to a head on 4 July 1707 with the trial at queen's bench of Fatio, Marion, and Jean Daude. On 22 November a second jury convicted the men of publishing a seditious work, and on 1 and 2 December they were paraded before the mob on the scaffold at Charing Cross. The duke of Ormond, to whose brother, the earl of Arran, Fatio had once been tutor, ensured that guards protected them from excessive injury. In March 1708 Fatio participated in the French prophets' mission to Colchester, and, in June 1711, he finally left London as one of their emissaries to the continent, seeking to establish a new series of protestant alliances and to warn of the coming apocalyptic struggle. He and his accomplices travelled to Berlin, and thence to Halle and Vienna. On a second mission in 1712-13 they visited Stockholm, Prussia, Halle, Constantinople, Smyrna, and Rome. 
Fatio then remained in the Netherlands for some time, completing accounts of the missions that he had undertaken with his companions and of the prophecies that had accompanied them. Several of these were published, in French and Latin, in 1714. Afterwards, he returned to London, where he continued to communicate material to the Royal Society, and to work on meteorological phenomena that could be assimilated to his prophetic schemes. In 1717 he gave a series of papers on the precession of the equinoxes and on climatic change. By the spring of that year he had moved to Worcester. He passed the remainder of his life in that city and nearby at Madresfield. 
Fatio continued to work on perpetual motion and to design watches (including one for Richard Bentley) in collaboration with Benjamin Steele. He also pursued his interests in alchemy and medicine, in conjunction with Francis Moult, and communicated his discovery of a salt that he hoped would prove to be 'the true Niter of the Ancients' to the younger Francis Hauksbee in 1737 (BL, Add. MS 28536, fol. 238). He developed his ideas on the use of jewelled watches to find latitude at sea in 'Navigation Improv'd' (1728), hoping to extend his work to longitude, and vainly seeking royal patronage for it. He advised John Conduitt on the design of Newton's monument in Westminster Abbey, and composed in Latin 'Ecloga' (1728) on Newton and his system, which returned to some of the themes of his own theory of gravity. He came to believe that his own work on gravity, on solar parallax, and on the relative sizes of the planets of the solar system corrected and surpassed that of Newton. In 1736 he published a series of articles in the 'Present State of the Republick of Letters' and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' on the proper interpretation of the poetry of the 'Psalms' and their translation. From 1737 to 1738 the 'Gentleman's Magazine' carried a series of letters from Fatio about his ideas in astronomy. Throughout this period, he continued to maintain contact with associates of the French prophets -- for example founding the unsuccessful York Buildings Company with some of them about 1730 -- and to record and interpret dreams and providences. He died at Worcester, and was buried there in the church of St Nicholas on 28 April 1753. 
His elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 9057


Fachtna mac Mongaig (fl. 6th cent.), bishop, at Ros Ailithir (Ross Carbery). According to 'Felire Oengusso' Fachtna's feast day was celebrated on 14 August. Little is known of the saint's background. His father is named Mongach, and is attached to the genealogical stem of Corco Loigde. According to the notes to 'Felire Oengusso' Fachtna was abbot of Dair-Inis. The latter was a church founded from Lismore by its abbot Mael Anfaid. The same source has Ciaran of Saigir, a saint with strong Corco Loigde links, foretell Fachtna's coming. Prominent and successful, Ros Ailithir had a noted school. The annals of Inisfallen record that its lector was captured by the vikings but ransomed by Brian Boruma in 990. At the Synod of Kells-Mellifont in 1152 Ros Ailithir became the episcopal see of the tiny diocese of Ross, a diocese that encompassed the territory of Corco Loigde. 


@@@@@


doc= 9058


Faed, Thomas (1826-1900), genre painter, was born on 8 June 1826 at Barley Mill, Gatehouse of Fleet, Kirkcudbrightshire. He was the fourth of six children of James Faed (1777-1843), engineer and millwright, and Mary McGeoch (1790-1866). Two of his elder brothers, John Faed (1819-1902) and James Faed (1821-1911) ['see under 'Faed, John], also became painters. Thomas attended Girthon School as a boy and showed early talent as a painter; his first oil painting, 'Interior with Figures', which was executed on a linen apron when he was twelve years old, is now in Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum. In 1842 he became an apprentice draper in the nearby town of Castle Douglas. However, after the death of his father in the following year Faed was invited to join his brother John in Edinburgh. There he assisted in painting miniatures and was admitted to the Trustees' Academy. He studied under Sir William Allan and, more importantly, under Thomas Duncan, who took the colour class. He enjoyed much success and in 1847 he won the life class prize with his oil painting 'A Life Study of John Mongo' (1847; 'The Punka-Walla', National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh). On completion of these studies he attended the Royal Scottish Academy life school from 1849 to 1852. 
Even as a student Thomas Faed was a successful exhibitor at the Royal Scottish Academy annual exhibitions, his first accepted work being a watercolour entitled 'Scene from the Old English Baron' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1844). In common with his Scottish contemporaries, many of Faed's early subjects were drawn from literary sources: he painted a series of incidents from Sir Walter Scott's novel 'The Heart of Midlothian' in the late 1840s, and in 1849 he produced a major work, an imaginary group portrait entitled 'Sir Walter Scott and his Friends at Abbotsford' (Scot. NPG). In recognition of his early success Faed was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1849 at the tender age of twenty-three. In 1851 he sent three works to the Royal Academy in London: all were hung and from then on he was a regular exhibitor there until 1893. The following year his painting of Scottish rural life, 'The Patron and Patroness's Visit to the Village School' (1852, exh. RA, 1852; Dundee Museums and Art Galleries), was hung well in the Royal Academy. It demonstrated the popularity of Faed's paintings based on Scottish rural life and drawing heavily on his own childhood memories. At this stage in his career he laid emphasis on narrative, detail, and the fine qualities of light, contrasting with his later Scottish subjects, which were very heavily laden with sentiment, even poignancy. 
In 1852, evidently encouraged by early success and following in the footsteps of other ambitious Scottish painters, Faed moved to London, where he was based for the rest of his life. He continued to paint subject pictures on Scottish themes, both individual figure subjects and also themes dealing with wider, serious issues. His painting 'The Mitherless Bairn' (1855, exh. RA, 1855; National Gallery of Australia, Melbourne) was a great success in its day. It appealed to Victorian sentiment with its portrayal of an orphan child being taken in by poor cottagers; its depiction of anecdote from Scottish rural life followed in the popular tradition of Sir David Wilkie. During this middle period of Faed's career he also painted a series of works on the theme of Scottish emigration: his 'Sunday in the Backwoods' (also called 'The Scottish Emigrants' Sunday in the Backwoods', 1859, exh. RA, 1859; Museum of Fine Arts, Montreal), for example, portrays the emigrants' struggle to honour the sabbath in the wilderness. This series culminated in 'The Last of the Clan' of 1865 (exh. RA, 1865; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), which portrays the old and infirm remnants of the clan MacAlpine sadly watching all its young members sail away to the New World. 
In 1861 Faed became an associate of the Royal Academy. Since moving to London he had resigned his associateship of the Royal Scottish Academy but, in recognition of his success in London, he became an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1862. In 1864 he was elevated to the rank of academician in London and deposited a figure subject, 'Ere Care Begins', as his diploma work (1865; RA). 
Shortly after his arrival in London Faed married, on 9 November 1852, Frances Mary Rand ('b'. 1829/30); they had a son and a daughter. There are many portraits of Faed, in which he cuts a dash as a dark, handsome, and well-dressed man; John Ballantyne's 1865 portrait 'Thomas Faed in his Studio' (Scot. NPG) catches him 'in situ'. As a successful artist Faed enjoyed prosperity not only through the sale of his works but also from the judicious sale of the copyright on many of his most popular paintings; published as prints, they were particularly successful in North America. Towards the end of his life Faed's eyesight deteriorated. He was forced to rely on exhibiting earlier paintings and gradually he ceased to appear at the Royal Academy altogether. He died at 20 Loudoun Road, St John's Wood, London, on 17 August 1900, and was survived by his two children, John Francis and Beatrice. 


@@@@@


doc= 9059


Fagan, Robert (1761-1816), art dealer and portrait painter, the son of Michael Fagan (1728-1783), was born on 5 March 1761. The Fagans were from Cork, but his father had a successful bakery business at Long Acre, London, which was probably Fagan's birthplace. Reputedly a pupil of Bartolozzi, he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools in 1781, though in the same year, with his fellow student Charles Grignion, he also went to Rome. He returned to London, presumably because of his father's illness, but by 1784 he was back in Rome, where he soon began to deal in pictures and to paint portraits, in the neo-classical style, of fashionable English visitors. On 23 April 1790 he married Anna Maria Aloisa Rosa Ferri (1773-1800), evidently the daughter of an employee of the powerful Cardinal Rezzonico. Some British residents, such as the writer Cornelia Knight and her mother and the sculptor Joseph Nollekens, are reported to have found his social climbing most objectionable. His surviving portraits of that period (now in priv. coll.) include those of Sylvia Cotton (later Lady Mainwaring), Sir Corbet Corbet and his wife, and Elizabeth Webster (later Lady Holland) -- which Lord Bristol, bishop of Derry, rather naughtily kept at the foot of his bed. According to the Irish sculptor Christopher Hewetson, Fagan also copied old masters and had commissions for these from 'William Penn of Pennsylvania'. Seventeen of his 'trompe-l'oeil' grisailles were bought by the second Lord Berwick and are now at Attingham Hall, near Shrewsbury. Fagan's narcissistic self-portrait ('c'.1803, Limerick Museum, Eire), with his bare-breasted and adoring second wife, reveals a handsome man, regular-featured with arched eyebrows and wavy hair, carefully arranged. 
In 1792 Fagan was excavating at Gabii with Gavin Hamilton, and by 1794 at Laurentum and Ostia in alliance with Sir Corbet Corbet and Prince Augustus Frederick, later duke of Sussex. There were rich rewards from these diggings; some of them were bought by the prince of Wales, including the 'Venus Campo Iemini' (now in the British Museum), while others were destined for the Vatican and Lateran museums. Among other items, Fagan found two important busts -- of the fourth-century BC priestess Corinna and of Licinius Sura, one of Trajan's generals; both are now in the Munich Glyptothek. Fagan is also credited with having discovered the first mithraeum at Ostia. 
The French invasion of Italy in 1796 and Napoleon's intention of confiscating works of art caused panic among Roman princes. Fagan bought two landscapes by Claude Lorrain at bargain prices from Prince Altieri, and with Charles Grignion smuggled them out of Rome, an exciting Scarlet Pimpernel-type story involving Fagan's temporary imprisonment in Castel Sant'Angelo and a near shipwreck. For a while the pictures were owned by William Beckford; they are now at Anglesey Abbey near Cambridge. Fagan managed to return to Rome, where he set about excavating at Tor Boaccina and elsewhere -- only to have many of his treasures (valued at $3000) seized by the French. He fled to Sicily, but was persuaded by Sir William Hamilton to go to Florence, in effect as a spy. After more adventures he returned to Rome, once again making shipments of important princely heirlooms and antiquities: one of these, 'Titian's Schoolmaster' by Giovanni Battista Moroni, is now at the National Gallery of Art at Washington. Fagan's much neglected wife died in 1800, and immediately he married Maria Ludovica Francesca Geltrude Flajani, the beautiful fifteen-year-old daughter of a surgeon. From 1800 to 1807 he was mainly in Naples, the pope having forbidden indiscriminate excavations around Rome; here he continued with his portrait painting, and -- needless to say -- some lucrative excavating at Pompeii. Among the works painted at this time is his fine portrait of a Polish lawyer, Gabriel Taszycki, and his wife (now in the Warsaw National Museum). In 1807 Fagan and his family had to emigrate to Palermo; meanwhile, rich young William Baker, heir to Bayfordbury in Hertfordshire, had fallen in love with Estina, the daughter of Fagan and his first wife. 
Having failed to prevent the marriage, Baker's father persuaded the foreign secretary, George Canning, to appoint Fagan consul-general for Sicily and Malta, a post for which he had for long been pestering Nelson and Sir William Hamilton; this was confirmed on 7 June 1809. Sicily by now was occupied by the British and the many political complications appear to have been well handled by Fagan, leading to a reconfirmation of the appointment in 1811. He still found time to excavate at Tyndaris and to make shipments of antiquities to England. He again painted portraits of English aristocrats, including the children of Lord Amherst (National Gallery of Ireland), and Lady Acton and her children (priv. coll.); these works were in a harsher style than hitherto and not so successful. He charmed the unhappy Queen Maria Carolina and became her confidant in her quarrels with the minister-plenipotentiary, Lord William Bentinck (her outpourings in letters to Fagan are in the British Library). Thanks to the queen, he obtained new permits for excavating at Tyndaris and Selinunte. 
Baker died in 1813, and in consequence Fagan, in 1814, had permission to return to England. Instead he stopped in Rome, in order to recover property and hoping to become consul there. Social life obviously went to his head, and the pope even asked his advice on political matters. Fagan, however, became seriously ill, but recovered and instead of returning to London went to Naples, again behaving grandly and indiscreetly. He was also in serious financial trouble. Ordered by the British government to return to Sicily, he nevertheless did at last visit London in 1815, but by January was back in Rome, once more ill. On 26 August 1816 he committed suicide, by throwing himself out of a window. He was buried in Rome. His widow was left in some difficulty, but eventually remarried. In 1817 she sold to the Vatican a colossal mask of Neptune that Fagan had excavated at Hadrian's villa, and in 1818-20 several objects to the archaeological museum in Palermo, all now on view. Their daughter Emilia, Maria Carolina's goddaughter, died young; their son George became a diplomat in Naples and South America. The widowed Estina Baker later married Francis Acton, nephew (and brother-in-law) of Sir John Acton, prime minister of Naples. 


@@@@@


doc= 9060


Fagge, Sir John, first baronet (1627-1701), politician, was born on 4 October 1627, the only son of John Fagge (died 1645) of Rye and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Barnaby Hodgson. In 1644 he was (probably) admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and (certainly, in July) to Gray's Inn, although he did not graduate (r apparently matriculate), nor does he appear to have been called to the bar. Fagge's father was a successful merchant in Rye, and a prominent local puritan who served as the town's mayor, stood unsuccessfully for election to parliament in 1640, and supported the parliamentarians during the civil war. Following his father's death Fagge junior came under the political tutelage of his parliamentarian kinsmen, most obviously Harbert Morley, who was emerging as a political Independent of growing importance. Morley was Fagge's guardian and on 19 March 1646 Fagge married Mary Morley (died 1687), Harbert's sister, the daughter of Robert Morley of Glynde. 
In many ways the interest in Fagge's career consists in how it reveals the existence and nature of clientage within the House of Commons, and Fagge's parliamentary career was nothing without Morley. It was Morley's influence which helped to ensure that Fagge was elected to parliament as recruiter MP for Rye in 1645, at the age of only eighteen. The aim was probably to prevent the return of a rival presbyterian candidate, and thereafter Fagge made little impact on the Commons, other than possibly as lobby fodder for Morley and his allies. It was undoubtedly Fagge's association with the increasingly prominent Morley which resulted in his nomination as a commissioner for the trial of Charles I in January 1649. Although he was present at some of the preparatory meetings, Fagge, like Morley, attended little of the trial, and refused to sign the king's death warrant. Similarly, association with Morley probably underlay Fagge's unsuccessful candidature for election to the council of state in November 1652, despite his having played little significant role in the Commons during the preceding years. Fagge probably opposed the dissolution of the Rump, and secured election to Cromwell's parliaments in 1654 and 1656 as an opponent of the protectorate. This was blatantly apparent to the regime, as was Fagge's dependence upon his patron. Major-General William Goffe claimed that Fagge would 'not stir a hair's breadth without Colonel Morley' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 4.161), and both men were excluded from parliament in 1656, although Fagge was subsequently allowed to take his seat. 
During 1659, both as knight of the shire for Sussex in Richard Cromwell's parliament and as a member of the restored Rump (May-October), Fagge emerged as a more prominent figure, and as an activist for the civilian republicans and the 'good old cause'. When the army interrupted the sittings of the Rump, Fagge and Morley briefly flirted with the idea of suing for a pardon from Charles II and of working for his restoration. Once George Monck declared in favour of parliament, however, Fagge joined with Morley, Sir Arthur Hesilrige, and Valentine Walton in trying to secure Portsmouth for the Rump, and military support in Sussex. Although Fagge was briefly arrested, their cause was successful, and their efforts contributed to the recall of the Rump once again in December 1659. Fagge was subsequently named to the council of state, although he was prevented from taking his seat for refusing to take an oath abjuring the Stuart dynasty. 
Although relatively inactive after the secluded members had been readmitted in February 1660, Fagge was elected to the Convention Parliament for Steyning in Sussex in the following April, indicated his support for Charles II, and secured both a pardon and a baronetcy upon the Restoration. Thereafter Fagge gained election to every parliament during the remainder of the century, almost exclusively representing Steyning. His continued influence at Rye, however, ensured that he was one of the townsmen selected to attend the king's coronation in April 1661, and to carry the royal canopy. Having greatly extended his estate during the 1650s, he remained a substantial gentry figure, whose seat at Wiston was one of the great estates in the region. His abiding friendship with Harbert Morley was evident from his nomination as executor of Morley's will and guardian of his young children. 
For the remainder of his life Fagge was reckoned to be a whig sympathizer, but he never again assumed the political prominence he had achieved during the 1650s. However, he did become the focus in 1675 for a famous and acrimonious dispute concerning parliamentary privilege between the Commons and Lords. It was occasioned by a legal dispute over Fagge's estate, and resulted in his being briefly imprisoned in the Tower. The matter twice threatened parliamentary deadlock, and to prevent this sessions had to be prematurely curtailed. In later years he was considered an ally by the earl of Shaftesbury, and a supporter of the exclusion of James II, and the succession of the duke of Monmouth. He was certainly prepared to patronize religious nonconformists. Fagge's first wife, Mary, died on 20 November 1687. His second wife, Anne, daughter of Philip Weston of Newbury in Berkshire and widow of one Thomas Henshaw of Billingshurst in Sussex, lived until 11 May 1694. Fagge died on 18 January 1701 (and was buried the following day), and was succeeded by his son, Sir Robert Fagge, the eldest surviving son of John's and Mary's family of nine sons and five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 9061


Fagge, Charles Hilton (1838-1883), physician, son of Charles Fagge, medical practitioner, and nephew of John Hilton, was born at Hythe in Kent on 30 June 1838. Fagge entered Guy's Hospital medical school in October 1856, and in 1859 at his first MB examination at the University of London he gained three scholarships and gold medals, a rare distinction. In 1861 at the final MB examination he gained scholarships and gold medals for medicine and for physiology, and a gold medal for surgery. In 1863 he graduated MD, and he became a member (1864) and a fellow (1870) of the Royal College of Physicians. After being demonstrator of anatomy from 1862 to 1866, Fagge became medical registrar of Guy's in 1866, assistant physician in 1867, and physician in 1880. He was variously demonstrator of morbid anatomy, lecturer on pathology, and curator of the museum at Guy's. For over five years he was joint editor of 'Guy's Hospital Reports', and at the time of his death he was examiner in medicine to the University of London. 
As a consulting physician Fagge had been rapidly rising to the front rank, owing much to his painstaking investigation of cases. His original papers and his 'Principles and Practice of Medicine', published posthumously in 1886, mark out his significant contribution to medicine. The latter was described by 'The Lancet' as 'one of the most scientific and philosophical works of its kind, being in truth a mine of clinical and pathological facts' ('The Lancet', 1, 1886, 20). He was an accomplished clinical physician and pathologist, a patient researcher, and a clear and concise teacher. Fagge was also physician to several insurance companies, and examiner to the Bournemouth Sanatorium. He published widely on a variety of medical topics, and he translated the first volume of Hebra's work on cutaneous diseases into English for the New Sydenham Society. He also classified and catalogued the series of models of skin diseases in the museum of Guy's Hospital. 
Fagge and his wife, Emily Mary Christiana, had two daughters. He was quiet and unassuming in manner. He was fond of alpine climbing and in his early years had been a keen mountaineer. For the last year and a half of his life he suffered from an aortic aneurism. Having difficulty breathing, he died at midnight on 18-19 November 1883, at his house in Grosvenor Street, London. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9062


Fagius, Paul (c.1504-1549), protestant reformer and Hebraist, was born in Rheinzabern in the Rhine Palatinate, son of Peter Buchelin, schoolmaster and city clerk in Rheinzabern, and Margarethe Hirn of Heidelberg. At the age of eleven he went to the Neckarschule in Heidelberg, where he studied under Johann Brentius and Martin Frechtus. In 1521 he matriculated at the University of Heidelberg and graduated MA the following year. In 1522 he moved to Strasbourg to study Hebrew with Wolfgang Capito. He worked as a schoolmaster in Strasbourg from 1522 until 1527, developing a close friendship with Martin Bucer. In 1527 Fagius (the Latinate form of his German surname Buchelin) went to the imperial free city of Isny (in the Allgau, near Lake Constance) as director of the Latin school there, a position he held until his return to Strasbourg during 1536-7 to complete his pastoral training for the ministry. From 1538 until 1543 he was the principal minister in Isny, becoming renowned for his preaching and, crucially, for setting up the first Hebrew printing press in Germany. With the patronage of the Isny magistrate Peter Buffler, Fagius was able to bring the celebrated rabbi Elias Levita from Venice, and the two men published more than twenty Hebrew texts. The press in Isny was invaluable to the growing community of protestant Hebrew scholars. 
Fagius left Isny in 1543 to take up the position of minister in Constance following the death of Johannes Zwick. But he remained in Constance for less than two years, as Bucer persuaded Fagius in the summer of 1544 to return to Strasbourg to assume both the position of preacher in St Peter's and the chair of 'Old Testament'. This proved to be another short stay, for in 1546 he moved to Heidelberg at the invitation of the elector palatine, Friedrich II, to serve as an adviser in the establishment of Lutheranism and in the reform of the university. Fagius, who still held his position in Strasbourg, published several works while in Heidelberg. Following the defeat of the Schmalkaldic League by Charles V in 1547, Fagius, like Bucer, refused to accept the compromise settlement embodied in the following year's Interim, and was dismissed from office in Strasbourg by council in March 1549. Archbishop Thomas Cranmer so esteemed these two men that he risked the anger of Charles V by inviting Bucer and Fagius to England with promises of university posts. The two men arrived at Lambeth Palace in April 1549. Troubles within the English government meant that neither man could be offered positions immediately, and Bucer and Fagius lived in the archbishop's house. William Benson, dean of Westminster, who was a friend of Cranmer, made a generous grant to Fagius and Bucer to support them until posts could be obtained. 
Cranmer's plans for the Strasbourg refugees centred on a definitive Latin edition of the 'Bible' which would serve as the basis for a new English translation. Fagius was clearly daunted by the task, and the young Edward VI was enlisted to persuade the two scholars to take up this project. Fagius's correspondence from England reflected his concern that the Edwardian Reformation was proceeding too cautiously, and he was outraged by the misuse of church property following the death of Henry VIII. But his contribution to the English Reformation was brief, as he fell ill from plague in the autumn of 1549. He moved to Cambridge in November, having been appointed reader in Hebrew, but he died on 13 November in the arms of Martin Bucer. He was buried in St Michael's Church in Cambridge, but his remains were exhumed during Mary's reign and publicly burnt, a posthumous humiliation likewise inflicted upon Bucer. His honours were restored publicly in July 1560, following Elizabeth's accession. Like Bucer, Fagius was moderate in his theological positions; he was more concerned with scholarship and pastoral care than with doctrinal distinctions. His early death shocked and saddened the protestant world, in which he was regarded as an outstanding Hebrew scholar. 


@@@@@


doc= 9063


Fahey, James (1804-1885), watercolour painter, was born on 16 April 1804 at Paddington, near London; he can probably be identified with the James Fahey, son of Patrick and Jane, who was baptized on 19 August 1804 at St Mary's, Marylebone Road, Marylebone, Middlesex. He trained as an engraver with his uncle, John Swaine, before studying watercolour painting with George Scharf the elder. He then went to Paris, where he worked as a surgical draughtsman, making anatomical drawings. He may have been the James Fahey who married Eliza Pepper on 26 August 1831 at St Clement Danes, the Strand, London. 
Fahey first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1825, showing 'Portrait of a Young Gentleman'; this was followed in 1827 by drawings of the church of St Jacques in Dieppe and the cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris. Until 1836 he contributed several portraits and watercolour landscapes to the exhibitions of the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and the Society of British Artists, but he later devoted himself entirely to landscape painting, joining the New Watercolour Society in 1834, where he exhibited 127 times. He was secretary from 1838 to 1874, when he resigned because of a financial misdemeanour. Queen Victoria bought some of his watercolours in 1844. He continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy until 1857. He also sometimes painted in oils, and exhibited at the British Institution in 1861 and 1862. From 1856 to 1883 he was drawing-master at the Merchant Taylors' School in London. Fahey died at his home, The Grange, 51 Shepherd's Bush Green, London, on 11 December 1885. One of his sons, Edward Henry Fahey (1844-1907), was also an artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 9064


Fahie, Sir William Charles (1763-1833), naval officer, came from an Irish family settled at St Kitts, West Indies, where his father was judge of the vice-admiralty court. He entered the navy in 1777, on board the 'Seaford', with Captain Colpoys, and was afterwards in the 'Royal George'. In October 1779 he was appointed to the 'Sandwich', bearing the flag of Sir George Rodney, and was present at the defeat of Langara off Cape St Vincent, and in the several actions with De Guichen on 17 April and 15 and 19 May 1780. In August 1780 he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Russell', in which he was present in the action off Martinique on 28 April 1781, and at St Kitts on 26 January 1782. On account of his local knowledge he was afterwards sent by Hood to communicate with the garrison of Brimstone Hill, and on the second occasion, being unable to regain his ship, he gave himself up to the French general, but was permitted to depart. He rejoined the 'Russell' at St Lucia, and was present in the actions to leeward of Dominica on 9 and 12 April. 
In January 1783 Fahie was confirmed in the rank of lieutenant, but he remained with his family at St Kitts until the outbreak of the war with France in 1793, when he was appointed to the sloop 'Zebra', Captain Robert Faulknor, in which he took part in the brilliant assault on Fort Royal. Sir John Jervis consequently appointed him to the flagship, the 'Boyne', and on 5 August 1793 promoted him to be commander of the 'Woolwich'. On 2 February 1796 he was posted to command the 'Perdrix' (22 guns), in which he continued until she was paid off in August 1799. In 1804 Fahie was again sent out to the West Indies, in command of the 'Hyaena', from which in 1805 he was moved into the frigate 'Amelia', and again in 1806 into the 'Ethalion', in which he assisted at the capture of the Danish West Indian islands by Sir Alexander Cochrane in December 1807. In November 1808 he was appointed to the 'Belle Isle' (74 guns), one of the squadron that captured Martinique in February 1809. He afterwards exchanged with Commodore Cockburn into the 'Pompee', another line-of-battle ship, employed in April 1809 in the blockade of three French ships which had anchored in the roadstead of the Saintes. On the night of 14 April they put to sea, closely followed by the sloops 'Hazard' and 'Recruit' and the 'Pompee', the rest of the squadron being at a considerable distance. The chase continued during the following day. At nightfall the French ships separated; the 'Pompee' and the sloops attached themselves to the 'Hautpoult', and, mainly through the persistent gallantry of Captain Charles Napier of the 'Recruit', assisted towards the close by the frigate 'Castor', brought her to action about four o'clock on the morning of the 17th, and captured her after a sharp combat lasting an hour and a half. The following August Fahie was appointed to the 'Hautpoult', which had been commissioned as the 'Abercromby'; in November he was ordered to wear a broad pennant, and in February 1810 assisted in the capture of Guadeloupe, from which he was sent by Cochrane to take possession of St Martin's and St Eustatius. In June he sailed for England in charge of a valuable convoy, and after the 'Abercromby' had been refitted, in December he joined the flag of Sir George Berkeley at Lisbon. During the three following years he commanded the 'Abercromby' in the channel and the Bay of Biscay, and in 1815 was appointed to the 'Malta', which, on the escape of Napoleon from Elba, was sent out to the Mediterranean, where Fahie was employed for some months as senior officer on the coast of Italy, for which the king of the Two Sicilies nominated him a commander of the order of St Ferdinand and Merit. In 1815 he was made a CB. 
Fahie attained flag rank on 12 August 1819, and in January 1820 was appointed commander-in-chief on the Leeward Islands station, from which in the following year he was sent to Halifax. With the close of his command, in September 1824, his active career terminated. In October he was nominated a KCB, and on 22 July 1830 he became a vice-admiral. In his intervals of half pay, and on his retirement, he lived almost entirely in the West Indies. He was twice married: first, to Elizabeth Renie Heyliger, daughter of Mr William Heyliger of St Eustatius; and second, to Mary Esther Harvey, daughter of the Hon. Augustus William Harvey, member of council of Bermuda. He died at Bermuda on 11 January 1833. Fahie was an officer with an unusually local career; his ideas on discipline were firm, and his promotions secured by merit. 


@@@@@


doc= 9065


Fairbairn, Patrick (1805-1874), theologian, was born at Hallyburton in the parish of Greenlaw, Berwickshire, on 28 January 1805, the second of five children of John Fairbairn, farmer, and his wife, Jessie Johnston (died 1861). He was educated locally before entering Edinburgh University in November 1818, although this proved rather too early and Fairbairn did not reveal the extent of his mental powers at this stage. He proceeded to the study of divinity and was licensed by the presbytery of Duns on 3 October 1826. During his time in Edinburgh Fairbairn was greatly influenced by the preaching of Dr Robert Gordon. In 1827 he became tutor in the family of Captain Balfour of Balfour, a large Orkney proprietor. Balfour's influence was no doubt instrumental in Fairbairn's presentation to the parliamentary chapel on North Ronaldsay, the most northerly of the Orkney Islands, where he was ordained on 28 July 1830. Fairbairn was credited with the spiritual transformation of his congregation, whose bad habits were said to include shipwrecking. However, the tiny and remote island also provided a perfect setting for a programme of study in German and Hebrew, which Fairbairn laid down for himself. It was during this period that he translated the first of many works from German. 
On 27 March 1833 Fairbairn married Margaret Pitcairn (died 1837), with whom he had three children. Her death following childbirth was soon followed by that of their infant daughter and one of their sons. By this time Fairbairn had moved to the church extension charge of Bridgeton, in the east end of Glasgow, to which he was translated on 16 March 1837. On 23 July 1839 he married, second, Mary Playfair (died 1852), with whom he had four children. From Bridgeton Fairbairn was translated and admitted to the pleasant East Lothian parish of Saltoun, whose attractions included a ministerial library endowed by Gilbert Burnet, on 25 June 1840. While he had not taken a prominent role in events leading up to the Disruption in the Church of Scotland, Fairbairn was a staunch supporter of the Free Church of Scotland and took most of his congregation with him into the new denomination. 
The appearance of his 'Typology of Scripture' (1845-7) established Fairbairn's credentials as a scholar. His translation of E. W. Hengstenberg's 'Commentary on the Psalms' appeared, in three volumes, between 1844 and 1848, and was followed by 'Jonah' (1849) and 'Ezekiel, and the Book of his Prophecy' (1851). As the Free Church considered the expansion of its theological training, it became clear that Fairbairn would be at the centre of those plans. In 1852 he was appointed to assist Dr Maclagan at Aberdeen and Fairbairn succeeded to the professorship on Maclagan's death in 1853. In 1854 Glasgow University honoured him with the degree of DD. When the Glasgow theological hall was established in 1856 Fairbairn transferred there as its first professor and, the following year, its first principal. The wisdom of the choice was underlined by the fact that Fairbairn not only had the intellectual weight commensurate with his position, but he was also a very capable administrator. 
Following the death of his second wife Fairbairn travelled extensively in the company of John Elliot Wilson. Wilson was with Fairbairn on several continental trips and was in Germany when they had a meeting with Hengstenberg which Fairbairn found rather disappointing. On 21 September 1861 Fairbairn married again; his third wife was Frances (Fanny) Eliza Turnbull (1817/18-1903). They had no children. Fairbairn maintained his published output with 'Prophecy' (1856) and his 'Hermeneutical Manual' (1858). A project long in preparation came to fruition under his editorship as the 'Imperial Bible Dictionary', to which he contributed many of the articles himself. In 1864 he was made moderator of the general assembly of the Free Church of Scotland and in 1868 he was Cunningham lecturer, his lectures being published as 'The Revelation of Law in Scripture'. In 1867 he was one of a deputation sent to the United States by the Free Church of Scotland. Fairbairn supported the movement towards union with the United Presbyterian church, and he was a natural choice to serve on the committee to revise the 'Old Testament'. His last enthusiasm was for the revivalism of Moody and Sankey and it was at an evangelistic convention in Glasgow in April 1874 that he became unwell. A heart condition was diagnosed and while he appeared to make some recovery, he died shortly after retiring to bed on 6 August 1874 at his home, 13 Elmbank Crescent, Glasgow. He was buried in the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh, on 13 August. His third wife survived him. 
Fairbairn was a tall man of good humour, majestic presence, and robust constitution who managed to avoid the controversy and personal animosities that often went with the status of Free Church leader. His knowledge of German scholarship might easily have brought him under the suspicion of colleagues, but while his sympathies were liberal, his orthodoxy was never impugned. 


@@@@@


doc= 9066


Fairbairn, Sir Peter (1799-1861), mechanical engineer, youngest son of Andrew Fairbairn, a farmer, and brother of Sir William Fairbairn, was born at Kelso, Roxburghshire, in September 1799. He left school at eleven to work in the Percy Main colliery near Newcastle upon Tyne. At fourteen he was apprenticed to John Casson, a millwright and engineer, in Newcastle. 
After completing his apprenticeship, Fairbairn worked for Henry Houldsworth of Glasgow, a cotton spinner and machine maker, first as foreman, later as traveller. He then spent five years broadening his experience in millwrights' and machine-making firms in England and France, including spells with his brother William in Manchester, and at the works of John Rennie (1761-1821) in London. He returned to Glasgow as a partner of Houldsworth. 
Fairbairn's first wife, mother of his only son, Andrew, and two daughters, was Margaret, daughter of Robert Kennedy of Glasgow; she died in 1843. In 1855 he married Rachel Anne, fourth daughter of Robert William Brandling, of Low Gosforth, Newcastle, and widow of Captain Charles Bell RN. 
Armed with ideas for improving flax and woollen machinery, Fairbairn moved to Leeds about 1826, where he set up in business in a small rented room. Lack of capital did not long hold him back, for he was assisted by John Marshall, the flax spinner, who had seen potential in Fairbairn's improved and simplified flax machinery. Marshall helped Fairbairn to move to larger premises, and for a time bought as many machines as Fairbairn could produce. Fairbairn's innovations included applying differential motion to the roving frame; introducing a rotary gill which was used widely on tow machinery; developing the screw gill motion into usable form; and increasing flax-spinning frames from forty spindles to eighty, as well as producing machines for preparing and spinning silk waste, and improvements in machinery for making rope yarn. 
Fairbairn's designs were praised for their classical neatness, and they revolutionized flax and hemp preparation, enabling spinners to produce a far superior yarn at lower cost. He soon grew independent of Marshall's support, expanding his Wellington foundry to employ 550 men and boys by 1841, 850 a decade later, and 1400 in 1861. Fairbairn had been asked by the government to make special machine tools for armament production at Woolwich and Enfield during the Crimean War, and general engineering tools subsequently made up a large share of his business. 
A Liberal of moderate views, Fairbairn served on the town council from 1836 until 1842, and in 1854 was elected an alderman. A Leeds and West Riding magistrate, Fairbairn was mayor of Leeds in 1857-8 and 1858-9. A new town hall was opened by the queen in 1858 and Fairbairn was knighted during the royal visit. Besides the energy, resolution, and business acumen which had brought him commercial success, he was admired for his integrity. He supported educational and religious causes, and had a broad interest in the arts, including music and drama. 
Peter Fairbairn died on 4 January 1861, at Woodsley House, Clarendon Road, Leeds, and was buried in Adel churchyard, Leeds, after a public funeral attended by 700 of his workpeople. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 9067


Fairbairn, Sir William, first baronet (1789-1874), engineer, was born at Kelso, Roxburghshire, on 19 February 1789. He was the son of Andrew Fairbairn, a farmer. After serving in the navy during the American War of Independence, his father returned to Scotland, and married the daughter of a Jedburgh tradesman, a Miss Henderson, with whom he had five children, another of whom was Peter Fairbairn (1799-1861), engineer and inventor. Fairbairn learned to read and do arithmetic at a parish school, and began to build boats and little mills. He had further schooling at Mullochy, and studied bookkeeping under an uncle who kept a school at Galashiels. In 1799 his father began to farm 300 acres at Dingwall, in the north of Scotland, but moved back to Kelso in 1801, and subsequently to Knaresborough, in Yorkshire. Aged fourteen, Fairbairn got employment on a bridge being built by John Rennie, until he was injured by an accident. 
Towards the end of 1803 Fairbairn's father moved to a farm near Newcastle upon Tyne belonging to the Percy Main colliery, and William got a job in the colliery. On 24 March 1804 he was apprenticed to John Robinson, a millwright, but continued his mathematical and other studies. Because of his technical ingenuity he was appointed to look after the engines at the colliery, and became acquainted with George Stephenson. 
At the end of his apprenticeship, in March 1811, Fairbairn obtained employment as a millwright at Newcastle. He then sailed for London in December 1811 and secured an introduction to the Society of Arts and to Alexander Tilloch (1795-1825), the founder of the 'Philosophical Magazine', who employed him in the construction of a steam engine for digging. Fairbairn subsequently moved to Manchester and on 16 June 1816 he married Dorothy Mar (1788/9-1882), youngest daughter of John Mar of Morpeth; they had seven sons and two daughters. His heir, Thomas Fairbairn, became a successful art administrator and patron. In 1817 Fairbairn had a disagreement with his employer about a new Blackfriars Bridge over the River Irwell at Manchester, and this led to his setting up in partnership with an old shopmate, James Lillie. They soon acquired a good reputation by providing the machinery for a cotton mill, and their business rapidly increased. In 1824 Fairbairn went to Zurich to erect two watermills. By an ingenious contrivance he surmounted the difficulties due to the irregular supply of water, and constructed wheels which worked regularly whatever the height of the river. By 1830 Fairbairn and Lillie had cash in hand of $40,000, and were employing three hundred workers. 
The firm began to construct light iron steam passenger boats, but Fairbairn and Lillie lost heavily in a cotton mill venture, which crippled their resources as millwrights and led to a dissolution of the partnership in 1832, Lillie setting up in opposition. Fairbairn subsequently devoted his energies to shipbuilding. He first built his ships in sections at Manchester, but in 1835 decided to establish his works at Millwall, on the Thames in east London, in partnership with an old pupil, Andrew Murray. He subsequently found the strain too great and in 1844 abandoned the Millwall establishment, where two thousand men were employed. At Manchester he undertook many engineering schemes, experimented on the properties of iron, and, to meet a strike of his workmen, introduced the riveting machine, which was a great advance in the manufacture of boilers. 
In 1839 Fairbairn inspected the government works at Constantinople, and was decorated by the sultan, who also appointed him as 'chief fabricator' of machinery for the Turkish government in England. He was consulted in 1840 on the drainage of the Haarlem Lake. In 1841 he gave advice to the British government on the prevention of accidents by machinery. In 1842 he took out a patent (no. 9409) for improvements in the construction of iron ships, but this proved too troublesome for general application. Fairbairn assisted Robert Stephenson with the design of the tubular bridge over the Menai Strait. The bridge was successfully raised in April 1848, but there was later a controversy over Fairbairn's contribution. In order to put the record straight he published his own version of events, 'An account of the construction of the Britannia and Conway tubular bridges, with a complete history of their progress' (1849). He and Stephenson had also in October 1846 jointly taken out a patent for the new principle of wrought-iron girders that had been devised for the bridge. 
Fairbairn declined a knighthood in 1861, but accepted a baronetcy in 1869. In 1840 he bought the Polygon, Ardwick, near Manchester, where he lived until his death, and where he received many distinguished visitors. He often spoke at the British Association and similar meetings, and served as juror in the London exhibitions of 1851 and 1862, and at the Paris Exhibition of 1855. Made a member of the Legion d'honneur in 1855, he also became a foreign member of the Institut de France. He received the gold medal of the Royal Society in 1860, and was president of the British Association in 1861. He received the honorary LLD degree of Edinburgh in 1860 and of Cambridge in 1862. 
Fairbairn was elected president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1854, and was president of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society from 1855 to 1860. He made numerous contributions to the 'Transactions of the Royal Society' as well as to the proceedings of other learned societies. He also made many investigations into the properties of the earth's crust in conjunction with William Hopkins, the Cambridge mathematician, and was an authority upon a wide range of mechanical and engineering problems. He published a number of works, including a handbook for engineers (1856), an examination of the properties of iron (1861), and a treatise on mills (1861-3), all of which went through further editions. 
Fairbairn caught a chill, from which he never recovered, at the opening of the new buildings of Owens College in Manchester in 1870. He died of a severe bronchial cold on 18 August 1874 at the house of his son-in-law, a Mr Bateman of Moor Park, near Farnham in Surrey. He was survived by his wife, and was buried at Prestwick, Northumberland. A giant water-wheel, designed by Fairbairn for a mill at Pateley Bridge in Yorkshire, was restored and reintegrated at Quarry Bank Mill at Styal in Cheshire in the 1980s by the National Trust. It is one of the few surviving examples of Fairbairn's contribution to water-wheel technology. 


@@@@@


doc= 9068


Fairborne, Sir Palmes (1644-1680), colonial administrator, was a son of the royalist Colonel Stafford Fairborne of Newark. In his teens he fought as a mercenary for the Venetians in the defence of Candia (Crete). He returned to England in 1661, when he became a captain in the newly raised Tangier regiment of foot. In January 1662 this was shipped to Tangier, where in 1664 Fairborne was promoted major. He was back in England briefly in the winter of 1665-6 for a recruiting tour of the west country. By this time he had married Margaret or Margery Devereux (died 1694); their eldest son, Stafford Fairborne, was born about 1666. In March or April 1675, shortly before his return to Tangier after another spell in England, Fairborne was knighted. In May 1676 he became deputy governor in the absence of William O'Brien, earl of Inchiquin, and in January 1677 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel. After two years in effective sole command of Tangier he returned to England, in 1678, and in the same year he served as commissary-general of the army in Flanders. He returned to Tangier on 8 April 1680 and became governor 'de facto' in June when Inchiquin went home and his intended successor, Thomas Butler, earl of Ossory, died before he could set out. Only a fortnight before Fairborne's return, the Moors had begun their most ambitious attempt yet to reconquer the colony, the siege continuing through the summer and into the autumn. On 24 October Fairborne rode out to inspect the defences and was hit by a 'chance shot', according to the epitaph, penned partly by John Dryden, erected in Westminster Abbey by Fairborne's widow. He lingered long enough to see the successful counter-attack by his deputy, Colonel Sackville, which raised the siege, and died on the evening of 27 October 1680. 
Throughout the 1660s and 1670s Fairborne's own (invariably forthright) letters, and a number of detailed accounts by others, give a vivid picture of his time at Tangier and of the life of the English garrison. Fairborne's hot temper often got him into trouble with his superiors and equals. He fought a number of duels; in 1671 he threw a bucket of water over a Mrs Pope, who had been swearing at his wife; and in 1674 he was sentenced to be shot for insubordination to the governor, the earl of Middleton, and was kept under restraint until eventually pardoned. Much of Fairborne's brashness stemmed from deep financial insecurity. He had a rapidly growing family that was always on 'the verge of poverty', according to the historian of Tangier (Routh, 155), and his career displays ample evidence of concern to obtain as much money as possible from legitimate, and sometimes other, sources. He regularly sent presents to successive secretaries of state Henry Bennet, earl of Arlington, and Sir Joseph Williamson; he was implicated in 1672 in the theft of jewels belonging to the Moorish ruler, Guylan; and he worried in 1680 that as a result of Ossory's appointment over his head, 'the small pittance of $500 per annum allowed him as commander-in-chief might not be taken away... as things at Tangier are three times as dear as in England, and he had not received a farthing of pay' (Davis, 1.158-60). His willingness to go behind the backs of his superiors by writing directly to England hardly endeared him to them. Nevertheless, Fairborne was far from being entirely selfish and corrupt. In 1676-7 he paid for improvements to the fortifications at his own expense, and he was just as persistent in pressing for payment of the entire garrison's arrears as he was for his own. He saw clearly the link between lack of pay and lack of discipline, but came down hard on the latter: one potential mutiny was stymied when he summarily shot the ringleader. 
During his time in the colony Fairborne fought frequent skirmishes against the Moors. In September 1675 he commanded a sortie ordered by Inchiquin, but this was revealed to be a Moorish trap and Fairborne bitterly criticized the governor to the authorities in London. On 7 January 1678 he led out the relief force to forts Henrietta and Kendal, which had been attacked by the Moors on the previous day. In the final attacks in 1680, as throughout his career, Fairborne proved himself to be a competent and cautious tactician, always aware of the limitations imposed on him by a relatively small garrison, an effective organizer, and above all a highly professional soldier of undoubted courage. Only a few days before his death, he reiterated his oft-expressed opinion that Tangier 'could never be made steadable to the king in no fashion' (Halkett, 12): three years after his death, the colony he had fought so hard to defend was evacuated, and its buildings blown up. 
Fairborne's death left his widow and their seven children in the poverty he had always feared: the pension of $500 per annum, granted to her by Charles II in 1681, was already $1500 in arrears in 1685. On 1 April 1683 at St Marylebone, Middlesex, she married Jasper Paston, a son of the earl of Yarmouth; she died in 1698. Fairborne's eldest son, Stafford, entered the navy, and became a knight and an admiral. 


@@@@@


doc= 9069


Fairborne, Sir Stafford (c.1666-1742), naval officer, was the eldest son of Sir Palmes Fairborne (1644-1680), governor of Tangier, and his wife, Margery, 'nee' Devereux (died 1694). He received a series of army commissions from 1678 onwards, holding these simultaneously with his naval posts, the first of which was as a 'king's letter boy' in 1681. In June 1685 Fairborne was lieutenant of the 'Bonadventure' at Tangier, and during the illness of his captain commanded the ship in a successful encounter with some Sale vessels at Mamora. On 12 July 1686 he was promoted to command the 'Half Moon', a Sale prize, and in August 1688 he was appointed to the 'Richmond' fireship, from which, after the revolution, he was moved successively to the 'Phoenix' and the 'Warspite' (70 guns); he commanded the latter at the battle of Beachy Head on 30 June 1690. At the siege of Cork, in the following September, he served on shore under the duke of Marlborough. Thus far his rapid rise can be attributed largely to the patronage of Arthur Herbert, earl of Torrington, an old friend of his father. 
In 1692 Fairborne commanded the 'Elizabeth' (70 guns) at the battle of Barfleur, and in 1693 the 'Monck' (52 guns) in the fleet under Sir George Rooke, which on 19 June, while escorting the Smyrna convoy, was disastrously scattered by the French off Cape St Vincent. Between 1693 and 1697 he commanded, in quick succession, the 'Grafton', 'Vanguard', 'London' (twice), 'Victory' (twice), 'Defiance', and 'Albemarle', a rate of turnover which gave Fairborne great difficulty when pursuing his arrears of pay. During this period, and indeed throughout his career, he was always jealous of pay and promotion. For many years he regularly pressed his claims to advancement on influential political figures such as the dukes of Ormond and Shrewsbury, the earl of Oxford, and Lord Godolphin, attempting to reclaim the arrears allegedly due on his late mother's pension, and trying to obtain additional employment ashore to supplement his naval income. In May 1699 he was appointed to the 'Torbay', but as she was not ready, he was transferred to the 'Suffolk', which he commanded until the end of the year as senior officer in the Downs or at Spithead. In January 1700 he was appointed to the 'Tilbury', in which he went to Newfoundland with a convoy, and to clear the coast of pirates. He then took the convoy to Cadiz and into the Mediterranean. By March 1701 he was back at Cadiz, and soon after that he returned to England. In June he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, and on 3 November he was knighted in a ceremony which occurred aboard ship as he carried William III back from the king's last-ever visit to the Netherlands. 
In 1702 Fairborne was appointed, with his flag in the 'St George', to a command in the fleet under Rooke, which failed in its attempt on Cadiz, despite Fairborne's adroit handling of the inshore squadron. He had strenuously supported a more immediate attack than the one which took place. During the later victory at Vigo he moved into the 'Essex', a ship of lighter draught. He was afterwards left under Sir Cloudesley Shovell to bring the prizes home, a service which, in spite of exceptionally bad weather, was safely accomplished by 17 November 1702. In February 1703 Fairborne refused to take command of the West Indies squadron, and, believing that in consequence the Admiralty had refused to employ him again, he tried to challenge George Churchill -- the first commissioner he happened to meet -- to a duel, which was averted only by the arrest of both men. Shortly afterwards, Fairborne returned to favour and was made vice-admiral of the red, flying his flag in the 'Association' and joining Shovell in the Mediterranean before returning with him to England in November. From the Downs the squadron was ordered into the Thames, and on the evening of 25 November anchored for the night off the Gunfleet. There the great storm of 1703, which broke out the next day, found them. They were unable to weigh, but in the early morning of 27 November the 'Association' was blown violently from her anchors, and, with the wind at WSW, was driven helplessly across the North Sea to the coast of the Netherlands. After many dangers and narrow escapes she reached Goteborg, underwent refitting, and was finally able to return to the Thames. 
In 1704 Fairborne hoisted his flag on board the 'Shrewsbury', in the fleet under Shovell at Lisbon, and, when Shovell went to the Mediterranean, he remained in command of the ships in the channel with his flag in the 'Exeter'. He accompanied Shovell to the Mediterranean in 1705, and was present at the siege and capture of Barcelona in September and October. In 1706 he was again employed on the home station, commanding the squadrons sent against La Rochelle and Rochfort in May, and at the capture of Ostend in June. Fairborne distinguished himself in both actions by moving to smaller craft to take personal command of dangerous inshore operations; as the historian of Queen Anne's navy said of his cavalier attitude to such operations, and his unwillingness to delegate authority, 'Fairborne courted danger like a mistress' (Owen, 10). 
Fairborne was MP for Rochester from 1705 to 1710, usually supporting the whig administration; and in February 1706 he was appointed a member of the council of the lord admiral, a post from which he retired in June 1708. Following Shovell's death in October 1707 he was promoted admiral of the white on 7 January 1708, and on 21 December 1708 he became admiral of the fleet; but the return to office in the Admiralty of his adversary, Edward Russell, earl of Orford, in 1709 effectively ended his prospects of further naval service. In 1713 he declined the position of commissioner for disbanding the marine regiments in the hope of returning to the Admiralty. His long-standing financial concerns were, finally, addressed by the award in 1715 of a pension of $600 p.a. in lieu of half pay. 
Fairborne had married first, on 24 June 1694, Dorothy Fane (died 1707), and second, on 20 October 1708, Rebecca, daughter of Colonel Thomas Paston. Fairborne died on 11 November 1742, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. His younger brother, William, who served with him in the 'Victory' as a lieutenant, had died on 5 October 1708, in command of the 'Centurion' at Leghorn. 


@@@@@


doc= 9070


Fairchild, Thomas (1667-1729), gardener, was born about May 1667, the son of John Fairchild of Alwine, or Allane, Wiltshire, farmer. He was apprenticed to a clothmaker in 1682, but decided to become a gardener, and established himself about 1690 as a nurseryman and florist at Hoxton in the parish of St Leonard, Shoreditch, London. In 1704, as well as receiving the freedom of the Clothworkers' Company, he took up the freedom of the City in the Worshipful Company of Gardeners. 
Fairchild's gardens, known as the City Gardens, were said to have extended from the west end of Ivy Lane to the New North Road, and to have been greatly resorted to, as much for their delectable situation as for the curious plants there. The vineyard, one of the last to be cultivated in England, was famous, and Richard Bradley, in his 'General Treatise of Husbandry and Gardening' (1726), lists fifty varieties of grape grown there. Fairchild's plants included a number of American plants grown from seeds and plants sent from Virginia, by Mark Catesby, including tulip trees, which he distributed widely; Fairchild was probably responsible for introducing the catalpa and was also one of the first to grow bananas in England. He corresponded with Linnaeus, and in 1719 he was the first person to produce an artificial hybrid of the Caryophyllaceae family: 'Dianthus barbatus', a cross between a sweet william and a carnation pink, known as 'Fairchild's mule'. He also introduced 'Pavia rubra', 'Cornus florida', and other plants, and grafted the evergreen oak of Virginia on to the common English oak. 
In 1722 Fairchild published 'The City Gardener', which described the trees, plants, shrubs, and flowers which would thrive best in London. He stated that pear trees still bore excellent fruit in the Barbican, Aldersgate, and Bishopsgate areas, that in Leicester Fields there was a vine producing good grapes every year, and that figs and mulberries throve very well in the city. He was the first to concern himself with the increase in smoke pollution and the problems caused by this for gardeners in London. He suggested flowers suitable for growing in city squares, courtyards, and balconies, and also listed suitable houseplants. In 1724 Fairchild read a paper to the Royal Society entitled 'Some new experiments relating to the different and sometimes contrary motion of the sap in plants and trees' ('PTRS', 1724, 33.127). 
About 1725 the Society of Gardeners was founded for gardeners residing in the neighbourhood of London, and Fairchild was a founder member. Meeting every month at Newhall's Coffee House in Chelsea or some similar place, members compared plants they had grown. After a time they produced the first and only part of 'A catalogue of trees and shrubs both exotic and domestic which are propagated for sale in the gardens near London'. This was copiously illustrated by Jacob Van Huysum, but it did not appear until 1730, some months after Fairchild's death. 
Fairchild died on 10 October 1729, in Hoxton. At his wish he was buried in Poor's Ground, St Leonard's churchyard, Hackney Road, Shoreditch. He bequeathed $25 to the trustees of the charity school and to the churchwardens of St Leonard's, for the endowment of an annual Whitsun sermon on either the wonderful works of God or the certainty of the creation. From 1873 the administration of the trust was handed over to the Worshipful Company of Gardeners, and the lecturers were appointed by the bishop of London. Fairchild left the bulk of his property to his nephew, John Bacon of Hoxton, who was a member of the Society of Gardeners; but his daughter-in-law, Mary Price, was also a beneficiary. 


@@@@@


doc= 9071


Fairclough, Richard (1621?-1682), clergyman and ejected minister, was the eldest son of Samuel Fairclough (1594-1677), lecturer at Clare, Suffolk, and his first wife, Susan Blackerby (died 1638); Samuel Fairclough (1625-1691) was his younger brother. Admitted in 1637 to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, he graduated BA in 1641 and proceeded MA and became a fellow in 1644. The year before he had accompanied Benjamin Whichcote, another Emmanuel fellow, to Somerset when the latter was presented to the college living of North Cadbury, and he remained to serve the parish after his friend's recall to Cambridge. About this time, at the request of Sir John Horner, the presbyterian sheriff of Somerset, Fairclough preached an assize sermon which so impressed Horner that he offered the young minister the living of Mells. On 24 September 1647 Fairclough was admitted to the rectory, where he quickly established his reputation as a diligent, loving pastor. Besides Sunday sermons, he regularly preached five weekday lectures. He found time not only to visit the sick, 'but also... all the families within his charge', striving 'to understand the present state of their souls'. His 'almost incredible' labours reportedly transformed 'an obscure country village' into a 'most noted place', and his parishioners into a 'much enlightened... seriously religious people' (Howe, 52, 51). But Mells was no dark corner before Fairclough's arrival. The cloth towns of north-eastern Somerset had emerged during the previous generation as hotbeds of popular puritanism; indeed, at Mells parish elites had vigorously resisted the ceremonial innovations of their Laudian rector, Henry Ancketyll. Fairclough signalled his commitment to presbyterian discipline in 1648 by endorsing the Somerset 'Attestation', and was named an assistant to the county's commission of ejectors in 1654. He also took an active role in Somerset's voluntary clerical association. Despite his partisan sympathies he attempted to steer a moderate course and aligned himself with the most conciliatory godly clergy -- men such as William Thomas of Ubley, John Chetwind of Wells, and John Humfrey of nearby Frome. 
Unable to accept the terms imposed by the 'Act of Uniformity', Fairclough was ejected in August 1662. Along with his father, brother Samuel, and two brothers-in-law, Richard Shute and George Jones, who had all lost their livings at the Restoration, he retired to his sister's house in Finchingfield, Essex. This 'little Colledge of Divines' lived together for several years before Richard left for London (Clark, 175). In May 1672 he took out a licence as a presbyterian teacher in Thames Street, and he later served a congregation in Newman Street. Although he had returned west to Bristol by April 1681, he continued to visit his London flock once a fortnight. Like his father Fairclough allegedly refused payment for his preaching after 1662. Along with his own extensive charity, this ultimately left him dependent upon the financial assistance of unnamed London benefactors. 
Fairclough's fame certainly does not rest on his published works. To the collection 'Suffolk's Tears' (1653), edited by his brother Samuel, he contributed an elegy on the death of his father's patron, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston. His anonymous 'Pastor's Legacy' (1663) is an abridgement, based on the notes of one of the congregation, of fourteen farewell sermons preached at Mells. An exhortation to practical piety, it is a far cry from his ponderously learned sermon in defence of the doctrine of assurance, published in the 'Morning-Exercise Against Popery' (1675). He also wrote several passages in the popular 'Life and Death of... Joseph Alleine' (1672) and, with John Chetwind, edited William Thomas's posthumous 'Scriptures Opened' (1675). 
Fairclough was married to a 'most pious, prudent matron', of whom nothing more is known (Howe, 57). She must have died before he made his will in April 1681. The couple had no surviving children. Fairclough died in London on 4 July 1682, probably aged sixty-one, and was buried six days later in Bunhill Fields. Some 500 people, including such prominent conformists as John Tillotson and Edward Stillingfleet, attended his funeral. As this suggests, Fairclough's moderation was celebrated: 'In the substantials of religion, no man was more fervently zealous; about the circumstantials, none more cool and temperate' (ibid., 56). 


@@@@@


doc= 9072


Fairclough, Samuel (1594-1677), clergyman and ejected minister, was born on 29 April 1594 at Haverhill, Suffolk, the youngest of four sons of Laurence Fairclough (died 1603), vicar of Haverhill, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Cole, the 'chief lord' of that town (Clark, 153). He was educated by Edmund Robotham, 'the most famous schoolmaster of that age' (ibid., 154), who pronounced him the best scholar he had taught in thirty years. After an episode of pear-stealing with a fellow student, a sermon by Samuel Ward awakened Fairclough to 'the terrours of the Law... sincere repentance... and an effectual faith', and 'he became a true and sincere 'Convert'' (ibid., 154-5). 
Sent to Queens' College, Cambridge, before his fourteenth birthday, Fairclough lived strictly, refusing on principle to take a woman's part in the comedy 'Ignoramus', presented before James I. About 1610, while still an undergraduate, he was appointed sub-tutor to Spencer, Lord Compton, eldest son of the earl of Northampton, taking responsibility for his 'civil' and 'moral' education even before Compton was admitted to the college in 1614. The appointment brought Fairclough $30 a year and potentially valuable connections. Other connections made at Cambridge were less orthodox: he was taken up by leading puritan divines such as John Preston and John Davenant and began to question the value of church ceremonies. Having delayed graduation in order to read more widely, he took his BA in 1615. 
Shortly afterwards Fairclough refused with regret Northampton's invitation to travel to France and Italy with Lord Compton, deferring to his mother's fear that, like his brothers who had served as soldiers in the Low Countries, he would die there. He was also offered a living in Suffolk, and although under age to receive priest's orders, occupied it as a curate to the nominal rector with great success. After two years he declined the rectory, choosing instead, after consultation with 'his spiritual 'Father', Mr Ward' (Clark, 159), to pursue his studies with Richard Blackerby of Ashen, Essex, who was famous for his holiness and learning. While there Fairclough concluded that, although naturally inclined to learning, he was called to 'publick 'use' and 'service'' (ibid., 159). 
In 1619 Fairclough accepted, after some hesitation, an offer on good terms of a lectureship at King's Lynn, Norfolk. 'His popularity', relates Edmund Calamy, 'stirred up the envy of the other ministers, and he was openly opposed by the keepers of public houses, &c. whose business declined from the decrease of drunkenness' ('Calamy rev.', 3.275). He aroused the ire of Bishop Samuel Harsnett of Norwich, who cited him to his court, declaring that Fairclough had 'grown to be a 'popular' man, and therefore he must be 'nipt in the bud'' (Clark, 160). 
Fairclough retired and accepted a similar but less conspicuous position at Clare, Suffolk, where he had often preached while at Ashen. At this time he married Richard Blackerby's eldest daughter Susan (died 1638); they were to be 'a most 'happy' couple... 'rejoicing' in each others love' (Clark, 161). On 20 June 1623 Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston presented him to the rectory of Barnardiston, which was close enough to his seat at Kedington, Suffolk, for both Barnardiston and his wife to be Fairclough's constant auditors. Although the living was a poor one it came with the promise of better and was the beginning of a partnership, ended only by Barnardiston's death, which wrought a moral and religious transformation in their south-west corner of Suffolk. None the less Fairclough soon met with further opposition. One Sunday he preached in place of a sick minister at Sudbury and repeated his sermon in the house where he lodged. An envious colleague exhibited articles against him in Star Chamber as a factious and seditious man. He was convened before the court of high commission and spent two years in intermittent attendance at the court, so that journeys and fees swallowed up all his income, leaving him in debt. Finally his counsel, Sir Nathaniel Brent, secured the transfer of the case to Norwich, where 'a certain lady' obtained a discharge from Bishop Harsnett (ibid., 162). 
Barnardiston afterwards presented Fairclough to the rectory of Kedington, near Haverhill, and obtained his institution on 26 January 1630 'without his personal attendance [upon the bishop], taking the oath of canonical obedience, or subscribing the three exceptionable articles' ('Calamy rev.', 3.276). Here 'Sholes and Multitudes of People' came as much as 20 miles to hear Fairclough, arriving hours early to secure a place inside the church, while the churchyard was 'barricadoed with [their] horses' (Clark, 187). Fairclough preached four times a week and gave Thursday lectures, 'Conciones ad clerum', similarly well attended by local ministers and Cambridge scholars. He had two levels of preaching, for the learned and for the people (with whom he avoided speculation and controversy), but both, though delivered without notes, were marked by clarity, learning, scriptural knowledge, and plainly delivered 'gospel truths'; unlike those of some of his famous contemporaries, his sermons were not histrionic. As a pastor he catechized, examined before monthly communion, visited and counselled his parishioners, acted as peacemaker, and engaged in practical charity, from regular almsgiving to distribution of large-print bibles to the aged. He was often cited to appear before the archdeacon at Bury for failure to read the 'Book of Sports' or accept innovations in the church, but he managed to evade attendance on the grounds of inability to ride owing to a providential accident. 
Fairclough's first wife died in childbirth in 1638, leaving him with seven young children. She was a ''non-such'' for beauty and character, and his ''over-sorrow'' provided fuel for hostile criticism (Clark, 171). Three years later he married the widow of a fellow clergyman named Folke or Folkes, the mother of a young daughter who later married one of his sons. This marriage too was happy, although relatively short. On 4 April 1641, on Barnardiston's initiative and at a key point in the proceedings against the earl of Strafford, Fairclough delivered a fast sermon to MPs calling for 'the execution of penall Justice upon publicke offenders' and in particular upon 'this execrable person that fights against our peace, and welfare' ('The Troublers Troubled', 1641, 2, 8-9). During the civil war, however, he chose to be passive rather than active, deploring warfare between protestants and attributing much to the divisive designs of the Jesuits, and showed little sympathy with the presbyterians or any other doctrinaire reformers. He was nominated to the Westminster assembly but, dismayed by its divisions, excused himself from attending. 
In 1645 Fairclough was a member of the commission appointed to try the Suffolk witches. Although in his sermons he accepted the reality of witchcraft, he insisted that the strict letter of the law be followed, thus making conviction more difficult, and condemned those who would convict 'without 'plain convincing' evidence' (Clark, 172). He signed the petition of Suffolk ministers in 1646, but refused to take the engagement, 'which his Soul abhorred' (Clark, 173), and also declined the mastership of Trinity College, Cambridge. 
On 28 September 1648 Fairclough preached a public thanksgiving sermon at Romford, Essex, celebrating the surrender of Colchester to Fairfax's army and the release of members of the Essex parliamentary committee, who had been prisoners in the town, later published as 'The Prisoners' Praises' (1650). This rare intrusion into national affairs was probably the consequence of Barnardiston's active part in the siege and Arthur Barnardiston's presence among the prisoners. Fairclough thoroughly rejected the regicide, and on its first anniversary preached on 'Hosea' 1:4, 'I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel'. It is clear from his last venture into print, his funeral sermon for Barnardiston, ''Hagioi axioi', or, The Saints Worthinesse and the Worlds Worthlesnesse' (1653), that both Barnardiston and Fairclough were deeply disillusioned with the religious, political, and moral state of the kingdom. The latter was resolute in his preference for a private life and although he was appointed a trier to examine ministers' qualifications in 1654 he seldom attended the committee's meetings in London. When he did so he was honoured for his political and religious impartiality. 
Although he was overjoyed at the return of Charles II, in 1662 Fairclough refused to conform and was ejected from his Kedington living, while remaining constant to his principle of passive obedience, and refusing to condemn those who had conformed. Although he and his sons lost collectively more than $1000 a year for their nonconformity, his greatest sorrow was that he was forced to leave his spiritual children. He lived for four or five years in Sculpins, the house of a married daughter in Finchingfield, Essex, with his third wife, Mary Brooke, 'nee' Sorell (died 1669/70), widow of another minister, two of his sons, Richard Fairclough (1621?-1682) and Samuel Fairclough (1625-1691), and his two sons-in-law, George Jones and Richard Shute. They formed 'a little Colledge of Divines' and 'a most happy Family' (Clark, 175-6); as the Fairclough and Barnardiston households had apparently always done, in their practices and relationships they represented something close to the puritan domestic ideal. Father and sons preached by turns 'and the neighbours came in' ('Calamy rev.', 3.278). 
Sculpins proved unhealthy, however, and the family dispersed. Fairclough went to live with his youngest son, a conforming minister at Kennett, Cambridgeshire, and then with his daughters, first at Heveningham, Suffolk, and finally, about 1673, at Stowmarket. He kept his full powers, and preached, until he was over eighty, but then began to fail. He died at Stowmarket on 14 December 1677 after a remarkably healthy and happy life and was buried in Stowmarket church. The conforming minister who contributed a eulogy to Samuel Clark's biography of Fairclough regretted that no formula had been sought by which such 'useful and sober-spirited' men could be retained in the Church of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 9073


Fairclough, Samuel (1625-1691), clergyman and ejected minister, was probably born at Barnardiston, Suffolk, the third son of Samuel Fairclough (1594-1677), rector of Barnardiston, and his wife, Susan (died 1638), eldest daughter of Richard Blackerby. Dedicated to the ministry at birth, Fairclough, like all his siblings, 'had the knowledge of... scripture in [him] from the very breasts' (Clark, 179). In May 1643 he followed his brothers, Nathaniel and Richard Fairclough, to Emmanuel College, Cambridge. After graduating MA in 1650, he held a fellowship at Gonville and Caius College until 1656, when he left Cambridge to take the rectory of Houghton Conquest, Bedfordshire. On 25 October of the previous year he married his stepsister, Frances (died 1670x1681?), the only daughter and heir of William Folkes of Kirtling, Cambridgeshire, whose widow had married the elder Fairclough in 1641. In 1660 Fairclough was ejected to make room for the sequestered incumbent, Edward Martin, president of Queens' College, Cambridge, and retired to his eldest sister's manor at Finchingfield, Essex. There he joined his father, brother Richard, and brothers-in-law Richard Shute and George Jones, who had all lost livings at the Restoration, though the latter two subsequently conformed. After four or five years Fairclough resumed preaching in London, although it is not clear that he ever undertook a settled pastoral charge. In November 1672 he obtained a licence as a congregationalist teacher in Chippenham, Cambridgeshire, where he planned to lease the house of the vicar, Isaac Archer, before deciding instead to live 'among relations near Norfolk' (Storey, 148). By 1681 he had returned to London and in 1690, at least when in town, was living in Hatton Garden. 
Besides editing 'Suffolks Tears' (1653), a collection of elegies upon the death of Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston, Fairclough wrote a short account of the exemplary life and death of the young Anne Barnardiston, which was published in 1682 with her funeral sermon by John Shower, and reprinted in Shower's 'Mourner's Companion' (1692). He also added a preface to Samuel Hudson's funeral sermon for Richard Shute, 'David's Labour and Rest' (1689). Fairclough died in London, aged sixty-six, on 31 December 1691, and was buried in the vault he had built for his wife in the church at Heveningham, Suffolk, where George Jones had ministered since 1670. Fairclough arranged for the annual payment of 20's'. to the rector to help ensure that the vault would not 'be broken open or our bones... disturbed' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/410 fol. 386). Having no children of his own he divided most of his considerable property, in Suffolk and Cambridgeshire, among the children of his brothers, John and Nathaniel. He also made a number of charitable bequests. In addition to conveying his house and lands at Kedington, Suffolk, to the rectors of that parish, and establishing a scholarship at Gonville and Caius College, he left $10 each to five presbyterian divines -- Richard Stretton, Richard Mayo, Samuel Stancliffe, Nathaniel Vincent, and Edward Lawrence. Preaching his funeral sermon the rector of Yoxford, Suffolk, echoed what had earlier been said of Fairclough's illustrious father: 'it had been alone worth an act of comprehension, to have included this one so valuable man' within the Church of England (Parkhurst, 23). 


@@@@@


doc= 9074


Blackerby Fairfax (bap. 1669, d. in or after 1730), physician and author, was baptized at St Mary's, Woodbridge, on 16 February 1669. He entered Woodbridge School in 1677 and followed his father to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1686, where he graduated BA in 1690 and proceeded MA in 1693. He left Cambridge to study at Leiden, where he was admitted MD on 18 April 1696. He was then appointed a physician in the navy, retiring in 1717. In 1728 he was created MD 'comitiis regiis' at Cambridge. He published works in the fields of history, politics, botany, and medicine including 'A Discourse upon the Uniting Scotland with England' (1702) and 'In laudem botanices oratio: on the praise of botany, a speech to which is added a prefatory discourse for establishing a lecture on botany' (1717). He also published 'A Treatise of the Just Interest of the Kings of England, in their Free Disposing Power' (1703), a tract attributed to Sir Matthew Hale, to which he added 'a prefatory discourse in answer to a discourse on grants and resumptions', and 'The letter which Pope Gregory XV wrote to Charles I of England concerning his marriage to the infanta of Spain, and that prince's answer'. This work drew forth some 'Observations' (1729) from William Matthews, perpetual curate of St Margaret's, Ipswich. Fairfax is last heard of in his sister Sarah Hall's will dated 27 January 1730. 


@@@@@


doc= 9075


Fairfax, Brian (1633-1711), scholar and courtier, was born on 6 October 1633 in the rectory at Newton Kyme in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the third and second surviving son of Henry Fairfax (1588-1665), the rector, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1593-1650), daughter of Sir Henry Cholmley of Whitby and Roxby and his wife, Margaret. He was educated at Coxwold School from about 1644 to 1647 and was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 8 April 1648. He graduated BA in 1652, proceeded MA in 1655, and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 10 May 1654. He attended the marriage of Mary Fairfax, daughter of his cousin, the third Baron Fairfax, to the duke of Buckingham on 15 September 1657. When Cromwell imprisoned Buckingham in the Tower, Brian accompanied Lord Fairfax to Whitehall to demand his release. Shortly after, Lord Fairfax sent him to France with the earl of Kildare and his return to England the following year was delayed by a scuffle with a privateer in the channel. On 20 December 1659 he went to Nun Appleton to visit Lord Fairfax, who entrusted him with delivering the verbal message to General George Monck in Scotland that Fairfax would appear in arms on 1 January 1660. He started out on 21 December, disguised by Buckingham as a 'young country clown' (Bell, 2.154), and travelled unarmed save for a swordstick supplied by his brother. Having fended off an attack from a moss-trooper, he reached Monck at Coldstream near midnight on 25 December. He returned to find Fairfax raising the Yorkshire gentry on 1 January. On 6 January he was sent to London with a letter to Speaker Lenthall, and he returned to witness Monck's interview with Fairfax at Nun Appleton. On 18 May 1660 he accompanied the parliamentary commission led by Lord Fairfax to The Hague to invite Charles II's return. Having been called to the bar in 1661, he became Lord Fairfax's private secretary; he warned him of the northern risings conspiracy of 1663 and later attended him in his dying days. 
Fairfax served with Buckingham aboard 'The Prince' during the Second Anglo-Dutch War and on 21 January 1670 he was appointed equerry to Charles II. He accompanied Buckingham on embassies to the Netherlands and France in 1673, and on 22 April 1675 he married at Westminster Charlotte (died 1709), daughter of Sir Edmund Carey. The couple settled at Westminster, residing in a 'little pritty house in the Mews, as private as a colledg' (Markham, 'Life of Robert Fairfax', 145). Their third son, Charles Brandon Fairfax became dean of Down. Fairfax was created DCL at Oxford in 1677. With the king's death on 6 February 1685 he resigned his post of equerry, later reflecting: 'I left Whit-hall when the Mass came into it, I saw a new King who would not know me nor did I desire to wayte on him' (ibid.). 
With the death of Buckingham two years later, on 16 April 1687, Fairfax also lost his patron, of whom he warned his sons: 'I came to be related to the duke of Buckingham as a servant and kinsman, and I thank God to none of his vices' (Markham, 'Life of Robert Fairfax', 142). In 1689 William III reinstated him as equerry, and in 1692 he became secretary to John Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury. On Tillotson's death in 1694 he retired to reside at Bishophill, York, and devoted himself to literary pursuits. In 1699 he edited and published Lord Fairfax's 'Short Memorials' of the civil wars, omitting some passages for fear of offending royalists. That July he wrote an account of his adventurous ride to General Monck at Coldstream, entitling it 'Iter boreale' (Bell, 2.151-74). He completed a memoir of the duke of Buckingham and translated the life of the Huguenot political philosopher Philippe du Plessis-Mornay. His poems are preserved in the British Library (some are printed in Johnson, ed., 'The Fairfax Correspondence', 1.cxxii-cxxv). He died on 20 September 1711. 
Fairfax's eldest son, 




@@@@@


doc= 9076


Brian Fairfax the younger (1676-1749), antiquary and scholar, was born in The Mews, Westminster, on 11 April 1676. He was educated at Westminster School and accompanied his father to The Hague in 1688 to visit the prince of Orange. He was admitted on 28 June 1693 to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became a fellow and graduated BA in 1697 and proceeded MA in 1700. He was employed as commissioner of customs from 1723 to 1749. He lived with his younger brother, Ferdinando, in Panton Square and Savile Street, London, where he collected a large library and gallery of pictures. Sold after his death, it contained some 2343 volumes, including a first edition of the Coverdale 'Bible' and ten early books printed by Caxton. He died, unmarried, on 7 January 1749. 


@@@@@


doc= 9077


Fairfax, Sir Charles (d. 1604), soldier, was the fourth son of Sir Thomas Fairfax (1521-1600) of Denton and Nun Appleton, Yorkshire. Like his elder brother Edward Fairfax he was illegitimate (his mother may have been Dorothy Gale); their inclusion in their father's will was secured by the lobbying of their legitimate eldest brother, Thomas Fairfax (later first Lord Fairfax of Cameron). He matriculated from Clare College, Cambridge, in Easter term 1584 and probably accompanied his brother Thomas to the Netherlands in 1585. By 1599 he had been promoted captain, in time to fight at the battle of Nieuwpoort (1600), where he rallied the English troops at a critical juncture. 
Fairfax's company was then posted to Ostend and he was an important figure in the heroic defence of the town, christened 'the new Troy' for the length and bitterness of the siege. In early 1602 he and Sir John Ogle volunteered to act as hostages in the Spanish camp during capitulation 'negotiations', which they knew were actually designed to win time. When this was done successfully and talks were broken off, both men were returned unharmed, but could easily have been executed. In the massive Spanish attack which followed Fairfax fought bravely defending the breach and, as he informed the earl of Northumberland, 'was badly wounded in the right arm' (Markham, 329-30). 
In common with Vere, Ogle, and other English troops Fairfax was withdrawn from Ostend and spent the rest of 1602 in garrison duties in Holland. He was in England in May 1603, when he was knighted. Twelve months later he won a sharp action near Sluys. Doubtless this helped lead to his recall to Ostend as commander of the English regiment there in June 1604. Fairfax helped conduct a vigorous defence but the city was now doomed. He was killed after 14 September (the date of his last dispatch), probably on the following day. Ostend capitulated on 20 September 1604. 
Secondary sources have sometimes been uncertain about the date and manner of Fairfax's death, on occasion suggesting a date as late as 1607. It is worth emphasizing, therefore, that Sir Thomas later stated that his brother, Sir Charles Fairfax, 'was slain at the siege of Ostend, and left no estate' ('CSP dom.', '1611-18', 106), while Dudley Carleton fixed the approximate date, writing on 21 September 1604 that Ostend had surrendered on honourable conditions and that Sir Charles Fairfax had been slain there (ibid., '1603-10', 68). A new captain was commissioned 'as [his] successor' on 12 October 1604 (Japiske and Rijperman, 136), while in April 1605 the states general voted 900 florins in back pay to Fairfax's 'heirs' (Algemeen Rijksarchief, Den Haag, Collectie Aanwinsten 879, fol. 63'v'). Fairfax had made his will in May 1602, describing himself as 'Charles Fairefax of Brocket in the Countie of York' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/104, fol. 308'v'). He evidently died a bachelor, dividing his land in Badsworth, Yorkshire, equally between his nephew Henry, his brother Edward, and William Baynton of Hunslet; the rest of his goods were to go to Baynton, who as his executor proved the will on 19 November 1604. 
It is quite clear, then, that Fairfax was slain at Ostend, on the eve of the capitulation that would have brought him momentary safety. Given his military record, however, and the death of two of his nephews fighting for the Dutch in 1620, Charles Fairfax was probably unlikely ever to have died in his bed. 


@@@@@


doc= 9078


Fairfax, Charles (1597-1673), antiquary and genealogist, was born at Denton Hall in the parish of Otley in the West Riding of Yorkshire on 5 March 1597, the seventh and third surviving son of Thomas Fairfax, first Lord Fairfax of Cameron (1560-1640), and his wife, Ellen (died 1620), daughter of Robert Aske of Aughton, esquire, and his wife, Elizabeth. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 5 October 1611, and on the 27th of the same month was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, from where he was called to the bar on 9 March 1618. His father allegedly commented, 'I sent him to the Inns of Court, and he is a good divine, but nobody at the law' (Markham, 'Life of the Great Lord Fairfax', 149n.). About 1627 he married Mary Breary (died 1657), daughter and sole heir of John Brearey of Scow Hall and Menston. They had fourteen children, including Henry Fairfax, later dean of Norwich, establishing their residence at Menston Hall, also in the parish of Otley. He became a governor of Otley grammar school in January 1642. 
Fairfax was taken prisoner by the royalists during the civil war, but his elder brother, Ferdinando Fairfax, second Lord Fairfax and parliament's general of the northern counties, negotiated his exchange at Street Houses, near York. Shortly before the battle of Marston Moor, Oliver Cromwell stayed with him at Menston. After the siege of York, he searched through the rubble of St Mary's Tower with his fellow antiquary, Roger Dodsworth, recovering several ancient relics and documents. Appointed a JP in 1645, he led the initiatives of his fellow magistrates to relieve the poor suffering from plague, and was among the most active West Riding JPs of the interregnum. In 1646 Ferdinando appointed him to intervene in a dispute between Lady Pembroke and Lady Cork over the Clifford estates, in which he spent seven weeks examining evidences at Skipton Castle. He wrote to his brother explaining, 'I am the ill instrument of their unhappy differences betwixt the ladies' (Bell, 1.303). Ferdinando later secured for him the stewardships of the courts at Cawood, Otley, and Ripon. 
Fairfax celebrated the victories of the New Model Army, commanded by his nephew Sir Thomas Fairfax, reflecting: 'The giving all unto God (of which he has an honourable testimony) is the most thriving way' (Bell, 1.243). He was commissioned as a colonel himself in time for the second civil war, and his regiment fought at the battle of Preston. In 1649 he supported the creation of a radical chapel at Bramhope, in Otley parish, and was among the five trustees who appointed the minister. Between 1652 and 1660 he wrote the 'Analecta Fairfaxiana', containing detailed pedigrees of all branches of the Fairfax family, with about fifty anagrams, epigrams, and elegies in Latin concerning different members of the family. The work was never printed and only two manuscript copies are thought to exist, one of which is held by the Brotherton Library at Leeds. Along with Roger Dodsworth, he was responsible for the collection and preservation of the valuable Dodsworth MSS volumes, which went to the Bodleian Library at Oxford. 
During the 1650s Fairfax's regiment served in Scotland under General George Monck; its colours were deep blue and bore the motto 'Fideliter faeliciter' (C. H. Firth, 'Cromwell's Army', 4th edn, 1962, 46). His regiment had been 'a hotbed of sectarian enthusiasm' (Woolrych, 'Yorkshire and the Restoration', 499n.), but he was personally trusted by Monck and he accompanied him into England in January 1660. His regiment was left behind to garrison York and he also became the military governor of Hull on 12 March. Shortly afterwards he resigned this post to Lord Belasyse, and was granted a pension of $100 a year for himself and his heirs by Charles II out of the customs at Hull. After a long retirement, he died at Menston in 1673. His will, which bequeathed to Lincoln's Inn 'Twoe of my Choysest Manuscripts of Law, one beinge the Analls of kinge Edw[ard] the 2nd' (will), directed that he should be buried 'without needles Ceremony'. He was interred beside his wife in the Fairfax transept in Otley parish church on 22 December 1673. 


@@@@@


doc= 9079


Fairfax, Charles Brandon (1684-1723), dean of Down, was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, on 18 September 1684, the third son of Brian Fairfax (1633-1711), scholar and courtier, and Charlotte Cary (died 1709). Educated at Westminster School, where he was a king's scholar in 1697, he entered Christ Church, Oxford, on 12 June 1702, at the age of seventeen. There he was exposed to the powerful influence of the dean, Henry Aldrich, who persuaded him to undertake a Latin translation of Palladio's 'Antichita di Roma'. This was published in Oxford in 1709 and marked out Fairfax as a member of the cultivated set which, under Aldrich's tutelage, interested itself in architecture as in the other arts. Fairfax's translation was evidence of the growing dissatisfaction with the baroque style of architecture associated with Wren, Vanbrugh, and Hawksmoor, and a harbinger of the neo-Palladian revival that would soon gather momentum. 
Fairfax graduated BA in 1707 and proceeded MA in 1709. Thereafter, having been ordained, he secured preferments in Suffolk, first at Barnham and then, in 1718, at Euston. The latter incumbency suggested the patronage of the local grandee, the duke of Grafton. The duke's backing explained the unexpected removal of Fairfax to Ireland (of which Grafton was lord lieutenant), as dean of Down, in 1722. The emoluments of the deanery were estimated variously to be worth $1000 to $1300 annually -- more than many Irish bishoprics. This appointment may also have owed something to the intervention of Edward Southwell, the absentee owner of Downpatrick, the location of Fairfax's cathedral. Southwell, an Oxford graduate, retained strong connections with the university and also a lively interest in the arts, including architecture. Fairfax was rumoured still to sympathize with the Jacobites and was also suspected to be part of a clerical combination to embarrass the whig bishop of Down and Connor, Francis Hutchinson. 
Although, as dean, Fairfax lacked any permanent residence in the town he attended assiduously to his duties, entertaining the young and poor of the district at Christmas 1722. He may already have been qualified in one regard for the post, being -- reputedly -- skilled in Old Irish. Less welcome was his treatment of the numerous Presbyterians in the area. He revived the controversy from the 1690s about the validity of marriages performed by Presbyterian ministers when he had some who had been married in this way presented in the ecclesiastical courts for fornication. However, the impact of Fairfax was limited by his premature death, in London, on 27 July 1723. He was unmarried. His short tenure of the deanery also prevented his introducing his architectural tastes into Downpatrick. The building there, shortly afterwards, of almshouses and a court house in a provincial classical style owed more to the Southwells than to the cultivated dean. 


@@@@@


doc= 9080


Fairfax, Edward (1568?-1632x5?), translator, was the third of the four sons of Sir Thomas Fairfax (1521-1600), of Denton, Yorkshire. Edward's birth date of 1568 rests on nineteenth-century sources; he was probably born at Denton or Leeds. The records of his birth, baptism, marriages, and burial were presumably destroyed in the 1696 fire in Fewston church. Both he and his younger brother, Charles Fairfax, are attested as illegitimate in Brian Fairfax's 'Analecta Fairfaxiana' ('c'.1705) and Thoresby's 'Ducatus Leodiensis' (1715), but this was too much for some Victorian editors to swallow. We know nothing about his education, but he may be the Edward Fairfax who matriculated at Clare College, Cambridge, in 1581. From 1595 to 1600 he managed the Fairfax property. As his father's favourite son he was left the bulk of his father's estate and his eldest brother, Thomas Fairfax (1560-1640), received 'divers legacies of good valew' ('Godfrey of Bulloigne', 5). Edward received a licence to marry Catherine Calverley, a widow from Otley in 1597, but there is no record of the marriage. 
Early in January 1600 Thomas, whom his father had banished from the estate, led a gang of armed men into Denton Hall and forced his father to redraw his will. Edward was left only $150 and Newhall at Fewston which the family had acquired in 1597. Edward's attempts to gain legal redress came to nothing. In 1600 came Fairfax's 'Godfrey of Bulloigne, or, The Recoverie of Jerusalem', a translation of Tasso's 'Gerusalemme liberata'. Fairfax translated with an eye to Carew's version of the first five cantos (1594), Harington's version of 'Ariosto', and Spenser's 'Faerie Queene'. 'Godfrey' is shot through with echoes of Homer and Virgil's 'Aeneid', most of them developed from hints in Tasso. Fairfax's command of the telling phrase and wide-ranging and aptly used scholarship established his reputation. There were several seventeenth-century reprints, that of 1624 being at the order of James I. It is supposed to have been a solace to Charles I during his time in prison. Robert Alott included 50 passages from it in 'England's Parnassus' (1600). The poem strongly influenced the development of English poetry from Webster to Dryden. Waller, for instance, 'derived the harmony of his number from 'Godfrey of Bulloigne', which was turned into English by Mr Fairfax' (J. Dryden, 'Fables Ancient and Modern', 1700, preface). However Fairfax's Elizabethan verve fell foul of the eighteenth century, and of nineteenth-century critics who admired his style while doubting his fidelity. Also in 1600 he married Dorothy Laycock (died 1648) of Copmanthorpe, the sister of Walter Laycock, the chief aulnager of the northern counties. Fairfax made peace with his elder brother, assisting him with the education of his children. Between 1600 and 1619 he moved backwards and forwards between Leeds and Newhall. He is recorded as resident in Kirkgate, near St Peter's, Leeds. He was interested in local antiquities and took a hand in parish affairs. In 1618 Fairfax was one of the signatories of a bill of complaint concerning the purchase of the advowson (the rights to assign the benefice) of Leeds parish church. He finally settled at Newhall the next year. There he lived the quiet life of a scholarly country gentleman, assisted his brother-in-law in checking the quality of locally made cloth, and owned the local flour mill. Fairfax also wrote twelve eclogues imitating Virgil and Theocritus. Only three of them have been published. He also wrote 'History of the Black Prince' and an epitaph for James I. 
After the death of Fairfax's youngest daughter, Anne, in October 1621, his eldest daughter, Ellen, reported seeing visions, and she, her sister Elizabeth, and a friend finally accused some local women of witchcraft. Edward took the matter to the assizes in August 1622. His case collapsed when the girls' friend confessed that the whole thing had been a hoax devised by her father and agreed to by the Fairfax girls who treated it as a bid for their father's attention. The friend's father was sent to prison, and the judges roundly criticized Fairfax's common sense. Fairfax recorded the whole affair in his 'Daemonologia', which never casts doubt on his daughters' story and ascribes Anne's death to witchcraft. In that account Fairfax describes himself as 'neither a fantastic Puritan nor superstitious Papist, but so settled in conscience that I have sure ground of God's word to warrant all I believe, and the commendable practices of our English Church to approve all I practise' ('Godfrey of Bulloigne', 4). He corresponded on religious matters with John Dorrel (Darrel), a Roman Catholic priest imprisoned in York Castle. According to the 'Analecta Fairfaxiana' Fairfax died 'about 1632'. Morley claims he died in January 1635 and was buried at Fewston on 27 January. His widow was buried at Fewston on 21 January 1648. His eldest son, William, was grammatical tutor to Thomas Stanley, a noted editor of Aeschylus. 


@@@@@


doc= 9081


Fairfax, Ferdinando, second Lord Fairfax of Cameron (1584-1648), parliamentarian army officer, was born on 29 March 1584 at Denton Hall, in the parish of Otley, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the eldest son of Thomas Fairfax, first Lord Fairfax of Cameron (1560-1640), and his wife, Ellen (died 1620), daughter of Robert Aske of Aughton and his wife, Elizabeth. The warlike Thomas had been a soldier in the Low Countries and France, and was to purchase the peerage for $1500 in 1627. He reportedly said that he sent Ferdinando 'into the Netherlands to train him up a soldier, and he makes a tolerable country justice, but is a mere coward at fighting' (Markham, 'Lord Fairfax', 12). Having been admitted to Gray's Inn on 3 May 1602, Ferdinando was knighted at Theobalds on 30 January 1608. One commemoration of his funeral recounted: 'in his younger yeares he was given to the study of Arts and Sciences, that must make him usefull and serviceable to his Countrey, and not to Dogs, Hawkes, &c.' ('A Perfect Narrative', 4). 
In 1607 Fairfax married Mary Sheffield (died 1619), daughter of Edmund Sheffield, first earl of Mulgrave, lord president of the council of the north, and his first wife, Ursula. Mary died in childbirth at Steeton in 1619, and Fairfax remained a widower for twenty-seven years. He was MP for Boroughbridge in the parliaments of 1614, 1621, 1624, 1628, and the Short Parliament of 1640. He entered the West Riding's commission of the peace in 1611 and was a particularly active justice, defending the authority of the post against interference from the council of the north. Fairfax was of Calvinist sympathies and by the early 1640s was mildly presbyterian. During the 1629 parliament he reported to his father with evident sympathy the sense of the House of Commons that 'the danger by the growth of Arminianism and countenancing of [its] professors' threatened the very 'subversion of the religion now established' (Johnson, 1.155). During the 1630s he assisted godly ministers in trouble with ecclesiastical authority, while the influence of Richard Neile, archbishop of York, intruded onto his estates and, as a principal governor of Otley grammar school, he resented Neile's intervention over the choice of headmaster. He came to desire that episcopal power should be limited and sponsored presbyterian preaching in the West Riding. However, in March 1641 he expressed his opposition to altering the liturgy, 'which many shoot at' (ibid., 1.180). 
Fairfax remained loyal during the bishops' wars, commanding a regiment of trained bands in the royal army, but on 10 September 1640 he helped organize the petition of Yorkshire gentry calling for a parliament. In October he was returned to the Long Parliament as knight of the shire for Yorkshire, where he joined the opposition to royal policies. He assisted in the trial of the earl of Strafford and was among the committee that presented the grand remonstrance to the king. When the king established himself at York in March 1642 Fairfax was among the five parliamentary commissioners who arrived on 8 May to observe his actions. While in York on 17 June he fell from his horse and broke two ribs; he withdrew to Denton to patronize godly sermons and prepare his neighbourhood for armed resistance. He headed the declaration at Otley on 29 August condemning the king's raising of forces, and on 7 September he wrote to request arms from parliament's governor of Hull, Sir John Hotham. He was proclaimed leader of Yorkshire's parliamentarians at Leeds on 19 September, provoking Hotham's animosity by concluding a treaty of neutrality with leading royalists at Rothwell on 29 September. Parliament condemned the treaty and encouraged Fairfax to abandon it. 
On 21 October 1642 Fairfax repelled a royalist attack on his headquarters at Bradford and, joining with forces sent from Hull, blockaded the royalists in York. On 3 December he received his commission as general of parliament's forces in the northern counties, but he was forced to retreat as the earl of Newcastle's larger royalist army marched southwards. On 6 December he successfully defended Tadcaster from that army, but he was forced to retreat that night to establish new headquarters at Selby. In January and February 1643 he engaged in a propaganda battle with the earl of Newcastle, accusing him of invading Yorkshire with an army largely officered by Roman Catholics. On 5 February he was hailed during John Shaw's sermon to his army as 'our new Joshua of the North' ('Yorkshire Diaries and Autobiographies in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries', ed. C. Jackson, Surtees Society, 65, 1877, 367). The motto on his standard, the only one in Spanish on either side, read 'Viva el rey y muerra el mal govierno' ('Long live the king and death to bad government'; I. Gentles, 'The iconography of revolution: England, 1642-1649', 'Soldiers, Writers and Statesmen of the English Revolution: Essays Presented to Austin Woolrych', ed. I. Gentles, J. Morrill, and B. Worden, 1998, 109). 
The defection of Sir Hugh Cholmley and doubts over Hotham's continued allegiance led Fairfax to move his headquarters to Leeds on 30 March, and 'en route' his rearguard was defeated at Seacroft Moor. In April he resisted Newcastle's attacks on Leeds, but on 30 June he was severely defeated at Adwalton Moor, near Bradford. He fled through Leeds to Selby and then by boat to Hull where he found that Hotham had just been arrested for conspiracy to betray the town. Fairfax was welcomed and appointed governor on 22 July. Within weeks he raised a new force which provoked Newcastle's army into besieging Hull on 2 September. A decisive sally on 11 October 1643 ended the siege, and he spent the winter regaining control of the East Riding for parliament. On 11 April 1644 his army captured Selby, Fairfax himself leading one of the storming divisions, and so Newcastle's army was forced to return to defend York. Joining forces with the Scots and parliament's eastern association army, Fairfax besieged York. After the siege was broken by Prince Rupert he commanded the infantry on the right of the victorious allied army at Marston Moor on 2 July, where his younger son, Charles, was slain. After the city's surrender on 16 July Fairfax was appointed governor of York, where, along with his elder son, Sir Thomas Fairfax, he protected the minster from iconoclasm and preserved the library and archives. Sir Thomas had served as his general of horse in the northern campaigns, and despite their early defeats of 1643, the Fairfaxes' tenacity and powers of recovery contributed a great deal to frustrating the royalist war effort. 
Fairfax resigned his command when the self-denying ordinance was passed but remained influential on the parliamentary committee at York established to govern the northern counties. On 21 January 1645 Sir Thomas Fairfax was appointed general of parliament's New Model Army. Ferdinando's pay arrears amounted to $13,480, of which he had received only $2,069 by August 1646. At St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, on 16 October 1646, he married Rhoda Hussey (1616/17-1686), daughter of Thomas Chapman of London and widow of Thomas Hussey of Lincolnshire. Part of Fairfax's pay arrears had been assigned from the composition fine of her late husband's royalist father, Sir Edward Hussey. 
Fairfax died at Denton Hall on 13 or 14 March 1648 from a fever caused by a gangrenous foot. He was survived by his second wife, and was succeeded by his son Sir Thomas. His will directed that his funeral should be 'without much pomp or ceremony' (Johnson, 1.xc), and on 15 March he was buried beside his first wife at All Saints' Church, Bolton Percy, where a monumental inscription remains to his memory. His library is now held by York Minster and consists of about 400 volumes, some of which had been owned by Sir John Hotham. 


@@@@@


doc= 9082


Ferdinando Fairfax (1678-1749), scholar, was born in The Mews on 11 June 1678. He was educated at Westminster School and in 1694 entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1698. He died, unmarried, on 12 February 1749. 


@@@@@


doc= 9083


Fairfax, Sir Guy (d. 1495), justice, came of a Yorkshire family, the third son of Richard Fairfax of Walton and his wife, Anastasia, daughter of John Carthorpe. From his father he inherited the manor of Steeton in the West Riding of Yorkshire, where he built a castle. At first he seems to have been occupied with purely local business, and in April 1451 was granted an annual fee by the powerful Percy family. He was a commissioner of array for the West Riding in 1435, a justice of the peace there from 1456, and in 1460 he was commissioned to inquire into lands in that riding possessed by the recently attainted Richard, duke of York (died 1460). One of his colleagues was Sir William Plumpton (died 1480), whose counsel he was in 1469, and in 1483 he acted as an arbitrator in the great dispute over the Plumpton inheritance (as he had done earlier for Durham Priory in 1431). Common serjeant of London (1456-9), under-sheriff (1459-60), and counsel to the City (1460), he was retained by the London mercers in 1455-6 and 1457-8, by the goldsmiths in 1468-9 and 1472-3, and by St Augustine's, Canterbury, in 1468-9. During the 1470s he became a member of the northern affinity of Richard, duke of Gloucester, serving him in a legal capacity. He first appears in the year-books in Michaelmas term 1463 as a serjeant and member of Gray's Inn. On 28 April 1467 he was appointed king's serjeant and in 1476-7 served as recorder of York. Regularly a justice of assize in the palatinate of Durham from 1457, and a justice of the peace in a number of counties from 1471, he also developed a close association with the duchy of Lancaster -- as second justice at Lancaster in 1471, deputy chief steward and a member of duchy council in 1476, and chief justice at Lancaster in 1480. In these capacities he became actively involved in determined efforts to restore law and order in Lancashire. 
In 1477 Fairfax was appointed a justice of the king's bench. In this office he won an honourable reputation, and on 8 October 1482 received a grant of 100 marks yearly in addition to his salary. He continued to serve as a justice of the king's bench and chief justice of Lancaster under Edward V, Richard III, and Henry VII. He certainly enjoyed a long and highly successful legal career, whether the reigning monarch was of the house of Lancaster, York, or Tudor, and he firmly established the fortunes of his family. On numerous occasions he served on commissions of oyer and terminer, in counties ranging from Yorkshire to Cornwall, and during his last decade figured particularly as a justice of assize in the midlands. On at least six occasions between 1470 and 1495 he was summoned by writ to attend parliament, while in his native county of Yorkshire he was much in demand as a trustee for, and executor of, the wills of neighbouring landed families. With his wife, Isabel, a daughter of Sir William Ryther, Fairfax had four sons and two daughters. He died in 1495. Two of his sons -- William, the eldest, who became a justice of common pleas in 1510, and Thomas, a serjeant in 1521 -- ensured the family's continuing prominence in the legal profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 9084


Fairfax, Henry (1588-1665), Church of England clergyman, was born on 14 January 1588 at Denton Hall, in the parish of Otley in the West Riding of Yorkshire; he was the fourth but second surviving son of Thomas Fairfax (1560-1640), later first Baron Fairfax of Cameron, and his wife, Ellen (died 1620), daughter of Robert Aske, esquire, of Aughton and his wife, Elizabeth. Henry's warlike father had been a soldier in the Low Countries and in France, and purchased the peerage for $1500 in 1627. From 1602 Henry was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge. Tutored by a Dr Duckett, he was awarded the degrees of BA and MA and was a fellow of the college from 1608 to 1616. He was a close friend of George Herbert, orator of the university until his death in 1634. Ordained a deacon in 1614 and a priest in 1616, Fairfax served briefly as rector of Newton Kyme in Yorkshire, a living in his father's gift, before Sir George Booth procured his appointment as rector of Ashton under Lyne, Lancashire, in 1619. 
On 4 February 1627, at St Helen's in York, Fairfax married Mary ('c'.1593-1650), daughter of Sir Henry Cholmley of Whitby and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir William Babthorpe. Noted for her zeal, Mary committed to writing her pious meditations on 'Matthew' 6. The couple returned to Yorkshire in 1633, when Fairfax was reinstated as rector of Newton Kyme. He was active in attempts to establish a university in the north, either at York or at Manchester. On 20 March 1641 he wrote to his brother Ferdinando, second Baron Fairfax, requesting his aid in the design, enclosing in his letter a petition advocating the choice of Manchester. His son Brian Fairfax recalled that during the civil wars Fairfax was brought before Prince Rupert at York in 1644 and asked if he had taken the covenant; having replied that he had not he was released and sent home with a note of protection. Brian remarked that his parents' house at Newton Kyme was 'a refuge and sanctuary to their friends and relations on both sides'. He further recalled of his father: 'I have heard say that King James bid my Grandfather make him a Scollar, and he would make him a Bishop: but the storme that fell upon Church and State made him incapable of that dignety, liveing quietly like Lot in Zoar, from whence he saw Sodome all in flames. (Markham, 'Life of Robert Fairfax', 134-5)' Fairfax had inherited estates in nearby Oglethorpe, and in 1646 he was made rector of the larger and more prosperous living at Bolton Percy. He was also a canon of York and prebendary of Fridaythorpe from 1615 to 1665. 
Mary Fairfax died of pleurisy on 24 December 1649 and was buried the following day in Bolton Percy church. Fairfax mourned for her so passionately, it was said, that he lost the sight in one of his eyes. His son recalled his religious zeal and how he 'was ever lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven' (Markham, 'Life of Robert Fairfax', 135-6). Among his parishioners during the 1650s was his nephew the retired general Thomas, third Baron Fairfax. At the Restoration Fairfax resigned as rector in favour of Mr Wickham, and in 1662 he retired to his estate at Oglethorpe. His recreations included the study of antiquities and heraldry, while he spent much time meditating, reading the 'Bible', and taking notes. His brother, the antiquarian Charles Fairfax, frequently quoted from these notes in compiling his 'Analecta Fairfaxiana', where some of Henry's anagrams and epigrams may be found. 
Having enjoyed good health throughout his life Fairfax died 'of a kind of lethargy' at Oglethorpe on 6 April 1665 (Markham, 'Life of Robert Fairfax', 138). He was buried two days later, beside his wife, under a flagstone within the altar rails of Bolton Percy church, where a monumental inscription remains. His eldest surviving son, Henry, succeeded as fourth Baron Fairfax in 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 9085


Fairfax, Henry (1634-1702), dean of Norwich, was born at Menston in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and was baptized on 28 October 1634 at Otley, the sixth son of Charles Fairfax (1597-1673), antiquary and genealogist, and Mary Breary ('bap'. 1609, died 1657), and a grandson of Thomas, first Lord Fairfax (1560-1640). He was a cousin of Thomas Fairfax, the parliamentarian general. Fairfax clearly took some pride in his family, as he wrote a panegyrical Latin poem to his cousin (Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 32). He matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 21 July 1653, graduating BA in 1657 and MA in 1659, and in 1659 was elected a fellow of Magdalen College, from where he graduated BD in 1666 and DD in 1681. Within Magdalen, Fairfax took his due share of college duties, acting as bursar, dean of divinity, and vice-president, and in 1683 was presented to the college living of Tubney, Berkshire. He evidently remained a Yorkshireman at heart: Henry Clerke, president of Magdalen (1672-87), once described Fairfax as speaking 'very bluntly (and with too much shew of his northern humour)' (Magd. Oxf., MS 427, fol. 59'v'). 
Fairfax's unexceptional career was transformed by the death of Clerke in March 1687, and the subsequent efforts of James II to impose a president of his choice on the college, when (perhaps mindful of his older cousin's stand against excessive royal authority) Fairfax achieved a national reputation through the leading role he took in the fellows' struggle against the crown to elect their own candidate, John Hough. By now senior fellow of Magdalen, Fairfax showed his courage best on two occasions when he was brought before commissioners sent to investigate Magdalen. At the first of these, held in London on 13 June, Fairfax put his 'northern humour' to good effect when he told the lord chancellor, George Jeffreys, that he did not recognize the commission's jurisdiction. According to one source (Magd. Oxf., MS 432), an infuriated Jeffreys told Fairfax that he should have been 'brought to me in the Chancery, as a Lunatiq', and that 'the room is too light for you, you are mad', and on 22 June Fairfax was suspended from his fellowship. At another commission, held in Oxford in October, he was the only fellow to refuse outright to accept James's candidate as president, and was finally expelled from the college. Most of the other fellows, perhaps emboldened by Fairfax's resistance, eventually also refused to co-operate with the commissioners, who therefore expelled them all and, in December 1687, banned them and Fairfax from receiving any post within the church. 
On 25 October 1688, as James's power ebbed, Fairfax and the other fellows were restored to their emoluments. After his courageous behaviour his preferment was only a matter of time, and on 23 September 1689 he was appointed dean of Norwich, a post he held until his death. Fairfax was not a successful dean. Perhaps promoted beyond his ability, he acquired a reputation for being high-handed with the cathedral prebendaries, for excessive drinking, and for taking little or no interest in his duties. He died at Norwich on 20 May 1702 (thus his memorial; his tombstone says it was 10 May) and was buried in the cathedral, where his nephew and heir, Thomas, erected a memorial to him. Fairfax never married, and no portraits of him are known to survive. He is thought to have written the pamphlet entitled 'An Impartial Relation of the Proceedings Against St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxford' (1688; 2nd edn, 1689), which, despite its title, none the less subtly defends the fellows' cause through its judicious selection of documents quoted. 


@@@@@


doc= 9086


Fairfax, John (1623/4-1700), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Norfolk, the second son of four sons and six daughters of Benjamin Fairfax 
(or Fayerfaxe; 1592-1675/6)
and his wife, Sarah Gallard (died 1671). Benjamin was the son of John Fairfax, master of the Great Hospital in Norwich, and was from 1626 minister of Rumburgh, near Halesworth, Suffolk. Sarah was the daughter of Roger Gallard, rector of Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk, and his wife, Joane, whose sister Abigail married the sabbatarian writer Theophilus Brabourne. The East Anglian Fairfaxes sprang originally from Yorkshire: both John and the parliamentarian general Sir Thomas Fairfax were seventh-generation descendants of Sir Richard Fairfax, lord chief justice in the time of Henry VI, John in the senior branch. 
John Fairfax claimed that his spiritual conversion followed from an incident when he was ten, the apparently sudden death of a baby sister in her cradle, which put him in a great fear and trembling about his own mortality and eternal welfare. At Easter 1640 he was admitted a sizar at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where, after graduating BA in January 1645, subscribing to the solemn league and covenant, and undergoing an examination by the Westminster assembly, he was admitted by the earl of Manchester to the fellowship vacated by the ejection of Thomas Briggs. Fairfax proceeded MA in 1647 but was ejected from his fellowship in 1650 for refusing to subscribe to the engagement of loyalty to the republican government. In 1649 he was vicar of Swaffham Bulbeck, Cambridgeshire. By the following year he was rector of Barking with Needham Market in Suffolk, a living worth $140 per annum. He served as an assistant to the Suffolk commission of triers. Fairfax was ejected from Barking for his refusal to conform in 1662. His father, described by Edmund Calamy as 'a very lively preacher, [who] had great success in converting souls to the love of God and true goodness', was ejected from Rumburgh at the same time (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.648). 
About 1650 Fairfax had married Elizabeth (died 1695), daughter of William Cowper of Mosborough, Derbyshire, and over a dozen years they had five sons and a short-lived daughter, Elizabeth. A second Elizabeth was born to complete their family in 1668. They continued to live in Barking, in their own house, Spalding Hall, where by mixed livestock and arable farming they helped to support themselves. In addition they had two generous friends. One was Dame Elizabeth, widow of Sir Robert Brooke of Yoxford; although 'separation was grievous to her, and she thought it unreasonable', she 'relieved many sober nonconformists with great bounty, and most earnestly desired to have seen them legally settled in a publick ministry' (Parkhurst, 71-2). John and his father desired the same end quite as much as their benefactress. John Meadows, ejected from Ousden, near Newmarket, who later moved to Stowmarket and married Fairfax's niece, was the other friend. The Fairfaxes could afford to educate Benjamin ('b'. 1654) and Thomas ('b'. 1656) under Philip Candler at Woodbridge School, whence they entered their father's college at Cambridge, the former studying at Leiden after graduating. The more practical youngest son, Nathaniel, eventually ran the farm, which he inherited on his father's death. 
Fairfax continued to take every opportunity to preach, which more than once led him into difficulties with the authorities. In April 1665 the archdeacon of Suffolk reported how he had been informed the previous year that Fairfax was preaching constantly in his old parish; despite being told to desist, Fairfax had repeated the offence. It is a measure both of his standing among nonconformists and of his skill as an orator that he was chosen to preach the memorial sermon at Dedham, Essex, on 16 September 1669 for Matthew Newcomen, the former lecturer there, who had recently died at Leiden. It was reported to Archbishop Sheldon how the large congregation, an 'outragious conventicle', heard Fairfax's 'dangerous words' (Gordon, 261). Two themes were contentious, to judge from the text as it was published ten years later by John Collinges as 'The Dead Saint Speaking', under Fairfax's initials but without his permission. Fairfax dwelt on Newcomen's rejection by the England which had nurtured him and which he had loved. Worse, and given more edge by the time it was published by protestant fears stirred by the Popish Plot, there is the providentialist ring to Fairfax's warning that 'some dreadful Judgement may hang over the head of England, and this righteous man may be taken away from the evil to come' (Fairfax, 'Dead Saint Speaking', 21). 
Perhaps the stir created by the preaching of this sermon led to the severe consequences of another apparently harmless affair. On Tuesday 5 July 1670 Fairfax and other ministers attended service at Walsham-le-Willows church. After the liturgy was read by the incumbent, the sermon was delivered by the presbyterian Stephen Scandrett of Haverhill, who held no licence to preach. Six local magistrates arrived and, arresting Scandrett, Fairfax, and four other ministers, committed them to the county gaol at Bury St Edmunds. They were bailed at quarter sessions to appear at the next assizes before Sir Richard Rainsford, a judge noted for his severity to nonconformists. Fairfax was one of those who on 'a general suggestion' of the JPs who had committed them that they were 'persons dangerous to the public peace', were sent to prison until 'they should find sureties for their good behaviour' (Taylor, 131). When Fairfax had spent five months in gaol, during which time he suffered fever and fainting fits, a writ of habeas corpus was applied for. This the judges felt unable to grant, advising instead a petition to the king. The following March, John's sister, Priscilla Fairfax, then in the service of Edward Reynolds, bishop of Norwich, wrote urging her brother, unavailingly, to conform. Fairfax was probably set free at the following assizes, and on the issue of the king's declaration of indulgence (15 Mar 1672) took out a licence as a presbyterian teacher ministering at the house of Margaret, widow of the clothier Simon Rozier, in Needham Market, thus resuming the pastoral care of the nonconformists of his own parish. Here he was assisted by Margaret Rozier's brother, Timothy Wright of Ipswich. 
Throughout the 1680s and 1690s Fairfax continued his ministry, preaching 'seven times in a fortnight', besides frequent 'occasional sermons' (Bury, 36). When his energy waned or his health failed him he found preaching the ideal remedy. He prepared his sermons by meditation rather than in writing, but they were always pertinent and well structured. A sermon he delivered on 6 January 1688, in the shadow of James II's Catholicizing policies, had a similar warning tone to that he had preached at Newcomen's funeral. Much of the sermon contained warnings that were at most implicit, but he opened by reminding his hearers that 'Jeremiah' had prophesied 'against the people in Generall as appears throughout all his Prophessys and he Prophesyed in perticuler in the 22d. chapter against the Royall family' (DWL, MS 24.13, fol. 35'r'). Fairfax actively encouraged younger ministers, who were needed to replace the ageing ejected men. When Owen Stockton died in 1680, he preached and published the funeral sermon ('The True Dignity of St Paul's Elder...'), and took on Stockton's congregation in Greyfriars House in Rose Lane, Ipswich, as well as his own at Needham. The family continued to live at Barking, where he buried his wife on 22 November 1695. 
The Ipswich Independents formed a separate congregation in 1686, and with the coming of toleration Fairfax hired another building for public presbyterian worship in St Nicholas parish. Swelled by a number of Huguenots sent to Ipswich by Thomas Firmin to staff a linen manufactory, the congregation needed better provision. Timothy Wright joined Fairfax as his assistant in 1698 just as plans were made to build a new meeting-house in the same parish, at the opening of which on 26 April 1700 Fairfax preached 'Primititiae synagogae'. Daniel Defoe described the meeting-house in 1724: 'as large and fine a building of that kind as most on this side of England, and the inside the best finished of any I have seen, London not excepted' (Defoe, 64). It is now Unitarian. 
Fairfax's preface dedicating the printed 'Primititiae synagogae' to his patron Sir Thomas Cuddon, chamberlain of the City of London, is valedictory: 'I have so much satisfaction in what my congregation hath done tho' at their great charge, in building such a convenient and decent Synagogue for the solemn worship of god, that I was willing to leave behind me, now that I am going out of the World being in my 77th year, something that might be a memorial of this building to posterity in the next generations.' He wrote this on 3 June and died at Barking on 11 August 1700, aged seventy-six. Permission was given for his funeral sermon four days later to be preached in the parish church at his burial, by his fellow presbyterian Samuel Bury, who gave another funeral sermon to the Ipswich congregation on 23 August. Fairfax was succeeded at Needham by his great-nephew John Meadows, and at Ipswich by Timothy Wright, who died a year later aged only forty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 9087


Fairfax, John (1804-1877), newspaper proprietor and politician in Australia, was born at Warwick on 25 October 1804, the second son of William Fairfax of Birmingham and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Jesson. He was reared a Congregationalist. After a short time spent at school he was apprenticed, at the age of twelve, to William Perry, printer and bookseller in Warwick. Having served his time he went to London and from 1825 worked briefly on the 'Morning Chronicle'. His next step was to set up as printer and bookseller in Leamington, near his home and friends. On 31 July 1827 he married Sarah, daughter of James Reading of Warwick; they had three sons and one daughter. In 1828 he founded, with James Sharp, the 'Leamington Spa Courier' (Sharp soon dropping out). In 1835 he became part owner of the 'Leamington Chronicle and Warwickshire Reporter'. In 1836 he successfully defended a libel action, but the costs bankrupted him. He and his family emigrated, arriving at Sydney, New South Wales, in September 1838 with $5. 
Fairfax became librarian to the Australian Subscription Library in April 1839 and soon resumed his journalistic activities. In February 1841, with Charles Kemp, he bought the 'Sydney Herald' (for which he was already writing), changing its name in 1842 to the 'Sydney Morning Herald'. It was soon established as the leading paper of eastern Australia. In 1851 Fairfax visited Britain, paid off his debts, and became something of a celebrity in Warwickshire. He returned to Sydney with the first steam press to be used in Australia. In 1853 he bought out Kemp's interest in the 'Herald' and took on his eldest son, Charles Fairfax, as his partner. He broadened his base, developing interests in insurance, banking, and utilities. A deeply religious person, he was president of the Young Men's Christian Association in Sydney, and was a deacon in the Congregational church. He stood unsuccessfully in 1856 for election to the legislative assembly but accepted nomination in 1874 to a seat on the legislative council. 
In 1858 Fairfax built Ginahgulla in Bellvue Hill, Port Jackson. He died there on 16 June 1877, and was buried in Rookwood cemetery; his wife predeceased him. His two surviving sons carried on the 'Herald', by then one of the best-known newspapers of the British empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 9088


Fairfax, Nathaniel (1637-1690), physician and antiquary, was born on 24 July 1637 at the rectory of Rumburgh in Suffolk and baptized in the parish on 30 July, the fourth and youngest son of Benjamin Fayerfaxe (1592-1676), rector of Rumburgh, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Roger Gallard, rector of Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk, and his wife, Joane. The family were originally from Yorkshire. Nathaniel matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1655, graduating BA in 1658 and proceeding MA three years later in 1661. Ordained deacon that year, he was presented to the perpetual curacy of Willisham, Suffolk, but was ejected a year later on refusing to conform. Turning to medicine, he was licensed to practise at Norwich on 10 June 1665, and in 1670 took an MD at Leiden, where he published his inaugural dissertation, 'De lumbricis'. 
Having moved to Woodbridge in Suffolk, Fairfax established a medical practice where he cared, according to his Latin epitaph, 'equally for the needy and [the wealthy]' (Dallenger, 69). However, this still left time for his many literary, topographical, and heraldic interests. Much in sympathy with the aims of the newly formed Royal Society, although never a fellow, Fairfax corresponded regularly with the secretary, Henry Oldenburg. His contributions to the first volumes of the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' included one giving 'instances of peculiarities of nature both in men and brutes' (vol. 2, 1667, p. 549) and others on the size of hailstones, and bodies dead of unusual diseases. They show that he was on familiar terms with Sir Thomas Browne of Norwich, the physician and author. About 1668 he married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1640, died 1680), daughter of Thomas and Elizabeth Blackerby of St Michael's, Cambridge, and widow of Samuel Richardson. They had four sons and four daughters, of whom one son, Blackerby Fairfax ['see below'], and three daughters survived him. 
In 1674 Fairfax published 'A treatise of the bulk and selvedge of the world. Wherein the greatness, littleness, and lastingness of bodies are freely handled', notable for its unvarnished expression and freedom from words borrowed from other languages. This was in line with the Royal Society's then current concern to describe scientific observations plainly. In his foreword Fairfax refers to the interregnum as the 'late dayes of Blame, and years of Topsie-turvy'. In the final part of the book, his 'Answer to 'Tentamina de Deo', by S[amuel] P[arker], DD', Fairfax was concerned to refute Henry More's belief in a boundless universe, and Parker's in the coextension of body and soul. He believed in the optimistic faith engendered by contemplation of the natural world, from which there were political as well as religious lessons to be learned. 
Having lost his first wife in October 1680, on 3 August 1683 Fairfax married, at St Margaret's Church, Ipswich, Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1633, died 1723), widow of Francis Willard, and daughter of Nathaniel Bacon and Susanna Holloway, his second wife; there were no children of the marriage. During the 1680s Fairfax made antiquarian collections for Suffolk, notable for his own observations added to works copied from earlier topographers. In Peter Le Neve's hands they were cut up and pasted, by parish, into Hengrave MSS 2-19 in Cambridge University Library. As his last task, Fairfax gathered a 'Catalogue of Suffolk arms of many authors' in a thick folio volume now in private hands, drawing on the armories of twenty earlier collectors, many of them his friends: Blois, Candler, Leverland, Ryece, Staveley, and Tyllotson. He died at Woodbridge on 12 June 1690, and was buried there two days later on 14 June in the central aisle of the nave of St Mary's Church. There on 21 April 1723 his aged widow finally joined him under a slab which also commemorates and probably covers his first wife, their children, and two sons-in-law. 
Nathaniel's son 


@@@@@


doc= 9089


Fayrfax, Robert (1464-1521), composer and church musician, was born on 23 April 1464 at Deeping Gate, Northamptonshire, the sixth of at least twelve children of William Fayrfax (died 1498) and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Robert Tanfeld. The Fayrfaxes were typical minor gentry of the period, intermarrying with other armigerous families and creating ties of respect and obligation with their neighbours. The list of godparents and sponsors chosen by William and his wives for their children includes local worthies such as an abbot of Peterborough, an archdeacon of Leicester, and members of one of the richest mercantile families in the district. It also reveals sustained relationships with their landlord, Margaret Beauchamp, dowager duchess of Somerset, her children, and her household, who frequently resided at Maxey Castle nearby. When Margaret Beauchamp died in 1482 Maxey passed to her daughter Margaret Beaufort, who had often stayed there as a child. Three years later Margaret Beaufort became the first lady of the kingdom through her son's victory at Bosworth and accession as Henry VII. It seems likely that Fayrfax's career prospered by means of the patronage of this extremely influential family. 
As the fourth son in a large brood, Fayrfax had little prospect of playing a leading role within his own family; he would have been expected to enter a profession befitting his status. A career as a church musician was evidently not considered demeaning for the son of a gentleman. Fayrfax may have received his musical training at one of three major collegiate churches in the neighbourhood: Fotheringhay, about 11 miles south-west of Deeping Gate, founded and lavishly maintained by the house of York; Higham Ferrers, some 16 miles further to the south-west; and Tattershall, about 30 miles to the north-east, recently created by Ralph, Lord Cromwell, but destined to pass into the hands of Margaret Beaufort in 1487. 
Nothing is known of Fayrfax's early career. At his first recorded mention he is already in his mid-thirties and among the elite of his profession. Letters patent dated 6 December 1497, granting him the chaplaincy of Snodhill Castle, Herefordshire, describe him as a gentleman of (that is, a singer in) the royal household chapel. Clerks in royal service were often rewarded with chaplaincies and other benefices, and these seem to have been traded as commodities. Fayrfax resigned this chaplaincy after less than a year, doubtless because he had no intention of entering holy orders, and on 16 November 1498 it was reassigned to Robert Cowper, an ordained priest and probably later master of the choristers in Margaret Beaufort's household chapel. Like other favoured members of the royal household, Fayrfax sought and obtained nominations to corrodies or pensions from religious houses. On 29 March 1498 he was awarded a corrody in the monastery of Selby, Yorkshire, and on 4 December 1501 he was granted another in the monastery of Stanley, Wiltshire; he surrendered the latter in favour of another gentleman of the chapel, John Fyssher, on 21 February 1513. 
Several membership lists of the royal household survive from the later years of Henry VII and the reign of Henry VIII, and Fayrfax appears among the gentlemen of the chapel in all of them until his death. In the earliest list, recording allocations of livery for the funeral of Prince Edmund (died 19 June 1500), third son of Henry VII, he is named thirteenth out of fifteen gentlemen; in the next, for the funeral of Queen Elizabeth (23 February 1503), wife of Henry VII, he is named ninth out of eighteen; in the next, for the funeral of Henry VII himself (9 May 1509), he is named fifth out of eighteen. Since existing gentlemen's names move up these lists as names above them drop out and names of new gentlemen are added at the bottom, that Fayrfax's name moves up four places between June 1500 and February 1503 suggests that he cannot have joined the chapel long before the first mention of him in December 1497; otherwise there would probably have been more than two singers below him in 1500. 
In 1502 Fayrfax became a member of the Confraternity of St Nicholas, a guild of London parish clerks which had many professional musicians among its members. He is probably the Robert Fairfax who leased property belonging to the chapel of St Thomas, London Bridge, between 1501 and 1506. Whatever may have happened earlier in his career, he certainly had dealings with Margaret Beaufort towards the end of her long life: on 4 December 1504 he was remunerated for unspecified services, and on 11 August 1507 she paid him 6's'. 8died for 'a newe masse'. 
The accession of Henry VIII seems to have brought Fayrfax significant advancement. In the livery list for the new king's coronation (24 June 1509) he is named first among the gentlemen of the chapel, above four senior colleagues (including the master of the choristers, William Newark) whose names had preceded his in the list for the funeral of the king's father seven weeks earlier. He also heads the gentlemen in the livery list for the funeral of the infant Prince Henry (27 February 1511), when for the first time he is styled M. Doctor Farefax, and in the attendance list at the Field of Cloth of Gold in the summer of 1520. Between December 1509 and December 1513 he was paid for the board and teaching of two chapel choristers, William Alderson and Arthur Lovekyn, described as 'the king's scholars'. 
Fayrfax also received considerable financial rewards from Henry VIII. On 20 June 1509, four days before the coronation, he was awarded a lifetime annuity of $9 2's'. 6died (being 6died per day); from 16 November 1513 he shared this annuity with one Robert Bithsey or Blithsee. On 10 September 1514 he was appointed a poor knight of the King's Alms at Windsor and granted 12died a day for life. On each new year's day from 1516 to 1520 inclusive Fayrfax gave the king a present and had a generous payment in return: $13 6's'. 8died 'in Reward for a boke'; $20 'for a boke of Antemys'; $20 'for a pricksonge boke'; $20 'for a balet bok lymned'; and $13 6's'. 8died for an unspecified item. Gifts of this nature and on this scale, worth about double a singing-man's annual salary, suggest that his position at court was not that of a run-of-the-mill chapel musician. 
Fayrfax seems to have been the first composer to hold degrees in music from both universities; he graduated BMus at Cambridge in 1501, took the MusD there in 1504, and was incorporated DMus at Oxford in 1511. At this time music degrees were usually awarded in recognition of compositional skill demonstrated in a test-piece. The heading 'Doctor ffeyrfax for his forme in proceadinge to bee Doctor' in one copy of his mass 'O quam glorifica' probably refers to the Cambridge doctorate; his exercise for the baccalaureate has not been identified. 
For much of his life Fayrfax maintained an association with the Benedictine abbey of St Albans, the precise nature of which has yet to be established. Anthony Wood states that he was 'informator chori' there. If this was the case, the choir in question is likely to have been that of the abbey's lady chapel rather than that of the monastic community itself, and Fayrfax can hardly have served as a full-time choirmaster at St Albans after joining the royal household chapel. The continuance of a more informal relationship could, however, have been facilitated or even encouraged by the royal family's own patronage of the abbey. Fayrfax was evidently in St Albans on 28 March 1502, when he received 20's'. from Queen Elizabeth for 'an Anthem of oure lady and Saint Elisabeth', almost certainly the votive antiphon 'Aeternae laudis lilium'. His antiphon 'O Albane Deo grate' (which survives only in a Marian version, 'O Maria Deo grata') and mass 'Albanus' must also have been composed for the abbey, but their style suggests that these are not among his later works. 
For some weeks during what was to be the last year of his life Fayrfax was seconded to the service of Cardinal Wolsey, who held 'in commendam' the abbacy of St Albans. Fayrfax had a residence in the parish of St Andrew, immediately adjacent to the north perimeter wall of the abbey, and it was in the abbey church that he was buried. A seventeenth-century sketch of the brass long vanished from his grave-slab shows him standing with his wife above the inscription: 'Pray for the soules of Master Robert ffayerfax doctor of music and Agnes his wife the w[hi]ch Robert decessed the xxiiii day of October the yeare Mo. vc. xxi on whose soules Jh[es]u have mercy amen.' Agnes outlived her husband, being granted letters of administration of his estate 'while he lived in the parish of St Andrews' on 14 November 1521; nothing more is known of her. A grave-slab in the abbey church with indents roughly matching the brasses shown in the sketch of 1643 also has indents for two smaller brasses which probably depicted two sons and two daughters, but there seems to be no other evidence that Robert and Agnes had any children. Although this grave-slab was restored to mark the quatercentenary of Fayrfax's death in 1921, there is no conclusive evidence that it is his. 
The esteem in which Fayrfax was held is attested by the surviving musical sources, which contain more music by him than by any other composer of his generation. Furthermore, some of his compositions were still being copied early in the seventeenth century, long after those of his contemporaries had been entirely forgotten. This implies something more than the respect owed to a famous composer; if Elizabethan and Jacobean musicians made copies of works by Fayrfax but ignored those of his contemporaries, it must surely have been at least partly because his style seemed less dated. The sobriety, lucidity, and persuasiveness of much of his music are indeed untypical of the period. 
The extant works by Fayrfax comprise six masses, two settings of the 'Magnificat', ten votive antiphons, eight partsongs, and three textless pieces probably intended for instruments. Several other compositions, including some sequences copied for King's College, Cambridge, in 1508-9, and a setting of the 'Nunc dimittis', are known only from contemporary references. Almost all of the sacred works are for five voices; Fayrfax's avoidance of more extravagant textures accords with his predominantly reticent style. The earlier compositions include the 'Magnificat' 'Regale' and the antiphons 'Ave lumen gratiae' and 'Salve regina', which had been copied into the Eton choirbook 'c'.1502-4 ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. 'Salve regina' could be the earliest of his known works; it is much more ornate than most of his music and contains examples of clumsy part-writing. The stiffness and rather aimless melodic style of the antiphon 'O Albane Deo grate'/'O Maria Deo grata' and the mass 'Albanus' could also imply a relatively early date of composition, perhaps antedating Fayrfax's entry into the royal household chapel. 'Aeternae laudis lilium' was probably in existence by March 1502; the anonymous mass 'Regali ex progenie' copied for King's College, Cambridge, in 1503-4 may have been his; and the mass 'O quam glorifica' (a prodigious demonstration of numerical virtuosity) is almost certainly his exercise for the Cambridge doctorate awarded in 1504. Fayrfax's other compositions cannot be dated except on grounds of style, but the superb craftsmanship and sense of timing evident in the mass 'Tecum principium' and the antiphon 'Maria plena virtute' suggest that these are among his most mature works. The eloquence of 'Maria plena virtute' is unprecedented in English music; it is hard to believe that he could have created such a perfect marriage of words and music without some knowledge of the music of Josquin. 
Fayrfax's masses are especially important in view of the great scarcity of works in this form surviving from composers of his generation. Five of them use the traditional method of composition upon a 'cantus firmus' that had been established in English masses of the 1420s and was to continue as late as the reign of Mary Tudor. His 'cantus firmus' treatment is quite varied: the very long 'cantus firmus' of 'O quam glorifica' is given only once in each movement, whereas 'Albanus' states its nine-note 'cantus firmus' forwards, backwards, upside down, and upside down and backwards thirty times. The mass 'O bone Jesu' is not based on a 'cantus firmus', but shares musical material with Fayrfax's antiphon 'O bone Jesu' (only one voice of which survives) and 'Magnificat' 'O bone Jesu'; the fragmentary state of the antiphon makes it impossible to explore the relationship exhaustively, but he seems here to have introduced to England the concept of the parody, or derived, mass. 
Fayrfax was apparently unusually fond of linking works with each other: apart from the 'O bone Jesu' mass, 'Magnificat' and antiphon, the 'Albanus' mass and the antiphon 'O Albane'/'O Maria' share the same 'cantus firmus', and the antiphon 'Gaude flore virginali' (whose bass voice alone survives) seems to have been written on the same 'cantus firmus' as the mass 'Regali ex progenie'. These groups of musically interrelated works for mass, vespers, and the evening devotion may perhaps be the ancestors of the services written by English composers after the Reformation. 
Fayrfax's English songs resemble his church music in many respects: they are true partsongs, in which all of the (usually three or four) voices share the melodic material, and they show a careful attitude to word-setting and a concern for formal clarity. They are, however, generally a little more florid than the sacred compositions and they tend to exploit imitative writing more thoroughly. Most of them are contained in the Fayrfax manuscript (BL, Add. MS 5465), a collection of songs by composers associated with the court of Henry VII, which belonged to a Yorkshire branch of the Fairfax family in the early seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 9090


Fairfax, Robert (1666-1725), naval officer, was born in February 1666, and baptized on the 23rd of that month at Steeton Chapel, the second son of William Fairfax (1630-1673) of Steeton and Newton Kyme in Yorkshire, and his wife, Catherine Stapleton (died 1695). He was a grandson of Sir William Fairfax, colonel in the parliamentary army, killed at the relief of Montgomery Castle in 1644. Robert first went to sea in 1681, in a merchant ship, the 'Mary', commanded by Captain Bushell, with whom he made two voyages to the Mediterranean. On his return in December 1685 his friends wanted him to enter the Royal Navy, but it was not until January 1688 that he was received as a volunteer on board the 'Mary', the flagship of Sir Roger Strickland. A few weeks after the accession of William and Mary, Fairfax was promoted to be lieutenant of the 'Bonaventure', commanded by Captain Thomas Hopson. In her he was present at the battle in Bantry Bay (1 May 1689) and afterwards at the relief of Londonderry (28 July). In June of the following year Hopson was relieved in the command of the 'Bonaventure' by Captain Hubbard, but Fairfax, remaining in her, was present at the battle of Beachy Head on 30 June 1690. On 15 November he was promoted to command the 'Conception' prize, and for the next two years was stationed at Boston, Massachusetts, cruising against French privateers. In June 1693 Fairfax was moved into the 'Pembroke' (60 guns) and, returning in her to England, was appointed to command the 'Ruby' (48 guns) and ordered to cruise on the coast of Ireland for the protection of trade. While on this service he captured, after a hard-fought action, the 44-gun 'Entreprenante', a larger French privateer. In recognition of this service he was promoted, on 24 December 1694, to the command of the 'Newark' (80 guns) in which, and afterwards in the 'Cornwall', he was employed in convoy service in the channel, the Bay of Biscay, and on the coast of Portugal, until the treaty of Ryswick. 
On the death of Fairfax's elder brother (20 January 1694) he had succeeded to the Steeton and Newton Kyme estates, and on 20 November of that year he married Esther ('c'.1655-1735), the sister of Captain Bushell and widow of Charles Tomlinson of Whitby. She was ten years older than Fairfax, but had befriended him in his youth, and he had continued to be deeply attached to her during her first marriage. A register ticket from this time describes Fairfax as a tall and well-set man of fair complexion, an image which corresponds with the first of three portraits painted at the ages of thirty and forty-two, and shortly before his death. 
In May 1699 Fairfax commissioned the 'Severn', which in the following year was one of the fleet sent under Sir George Rooke to maintain the treaty of Altona as between Denmark and Holstein. On returning from the Baltic he was appointed to the 'Cambridge', and in January 1702, on the eve of the declaration of war, was transferred to the 70-gun 'Restoration', one of the squadron which sailed under Sir John Munden in May. After failing to intercept the French squadron off Corunna, Munden and his ships returned to Spithead, and in the following autumn Fairfax was sent out to reinforce the Grand Fleet, which he joined at Vigo on 18 October, too late to share in the glory or the treasure, but in time to take part in the labour of refitting the prizes and bringing them to England. The 'Restoration' was then paid off and in January 1703 Fairfax was appointed to the 'Somerset', from which in May he was transferred to the 'Kent' as flag captain to Rear-Admiral Thomas Dilkes, with whom he served during the summer, most notably in the wholesale capture or destruction of French merchant ships at Granville on 26 July, a service for which Fairfax and the other captains, as well as Dilkes, received a gold medal. Early in 1704 Fairfax commissioned the 'Berwick', a 70-gun ship, in which he sailed in March to join Rooke and the Grand Fleet at Lisbon; remaining with the fleet through the summer. The 'Berwick' was one of the six ships which vainly chased a French squadron off Cape Palos on 8 May, a failure for which Fairfax and the other captains were tried by court martial, but fully acquitted; and was one of the division actually engaged under George Byng at the capture of Gibraltar (23 July), for his share in which exploit 'the queen afterwards presented Fairfax with a silver cup and cover bearing a suitable inscription' (Markham, 181). The 'Berwick' also fought in the battle of Malaga (13 August), where her masts, rigging, and sails were shattered and torn, and she had sixty-nine men killed and wounded. The fleet afterwards returned to England for the winter, and in the following February the 'Berwick' was paid off at Chatham, although Fairfax was immediately appointed to the 'Torbay'. In her he again went to the Mediterranean, under the command of Shovell, and participated with the fleet in the capture of Barcelona. After the capture of Monjuich the prisoners were sent on board the 'Torbay' which supplied guns to arm the fort, and sailors to haul them up the hill. Her marines were landed for service in the trenches, and Fairfax commanded seven bomb vessels, whose fire cowed the garrison, and enabled the marines' approach. When the town capitulated on 4 October the season was already far advanced, and the fleet at once returned to England. 
In March 1706 Fairfax was appointed to the 'Barfleur' as commander-in-chief in the Thames and Medway, but in May he was ordered round to Spithead to join Shovell, then preparing to carry over an expeditionary force intended to raid the coast of France. After vainly waiting for a promised Dutch squadron until the summer was past, a westerly gale forced the fleet to take shelter in Torbay, where it was detained for several weeks, and the original idea of a landing in France had to be given up. After a storm the 'Berwick' sprang a leak, was found to be unseaworthy, and returned with difficulty to Portsmouth. In December Fairfax, with his ship's company, was turned over to the 'Albemarle', and during the early part of 1707 he was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. In August, however, he was superseded, Sir John Leake having chosen the 'Albemarle' as his flagship. 
Following the death of Sir Cloudesley Shovell (22 October 1707), a promotion of flag officers was made on 8 January 1708. Fairfax, by his seniority, was properly included, and a commission as vice-admiral of the blue was made out for him, signed by the lord high admiral, and gazetted. It was then cancelled, and Lord Dursley, who was much his junior, was, by the political interest of his family, made vice-admiral of the blue in his place, with seniority of 10 January. Fairfax, indignant at this treatment, refused all further service. The queen's consort, Prince George, obtained for him a commission as rear-admiral, and half pay equal to that of the rank which he had been deprived of; and on 20 June 1708 had Fairfax nominated a member of the council of the lord high admiral. However, the appointment came to an end with the prince's death (28 October), whereupon Fairfax retired from naval life. At a by-election in 1713 he was returned to parliament for the city of York, but lost his seat in the general election after the accession of George I. He had meantime been elected an alderman of York, and was elected lord mayor in 1715. He spent the rest of his life in these and other local duties, and in the management and development of his property. He died at Newton Kyme on 17 October 1725 and was buried in the church there, where he had been baptized sixty years before. He was survived by his wife, who died aged eighty in 1735, and by two children: a daughter who married Henry Pawson, the son of an alderman of York, and a son, Thomas, whose descendants long held the estates of Steeton, Newton Kyme, and Bilbrough. 
Fairfax gained a posthumous reputation arguably out of proportion to his achievements, primarily because of the chance survival of his papers (now in the National Maritime Museum) when those of many more prominent and interesting officers disappeared, and the subsequent decision by Sir Clements Markham to make these the basis of a slight and fanciful biography, published in 1885. Fairfax attracted more mixed opinions from contemporaries. The antiquarian Le Neve damned every line of his monument in Newton Kyme church, saying of Fairfax's alleged 'piety, courage and simplicity, the first two are generally denied, but as to the last 'convenit inter omnes'', before condemning him as a parsimonious husband, a false friend, and a dishonourable hypocrite. Rather than investigating the charges, Markham dismissed them as 'garbage' emanating from Le Neve's 'small mind' (Markham, 280-81). 


@@@@@


doc= 9091


Fairfax, Thomas, first Lord Fairfax of Cameron (1560-1640), diplomat, soldier, and horse breeder, was born at Bilbrough, near York, the eldest son of Sir Thomas Fairfax (1521-1600) of Denton and Nun Appleton, Yorkshire, and Dorothy (died 1596), daughter of George Gale, goldsmith and lord mayor of York, and widow of John Rokeby of Sandal. In the Easter term of 1577 he matriculated from Queens' College, Cambridge, and on 22 October 1579 was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. In 1582 he married Ellen (died 1620), daughter of Robert Aske of Aughton, and they had nine sons and two daughters. Their seventh son, Charles Fairfax, became an antiquary and genealogist. 
Fairfax's early career was diplomatic. During the 1580s he undertook several government missions to Scotland which earned him a reputation for loyalty and discretion. King James offered him a peerage which he wisely refused, no doubt aware of Queen Elizabeth's disapproval of other people's collars for her dogs. In 1588 he was back in Scotland to help James suppress Maxwell's pro-Spanish rising there. Yet Fairfax seems to have lacked political ambition. Although he sat for Lincoln in 1586-7, for Aldborough in 1589, and for the county of Yorkshire in 1601, he made no mark in the House of Commons. However, he was a JP in Cumberland and Westmorland from about 1583, as well as in the West Riding of Yorkshire from about 1592. 
Fairfax's political activity may have been curtailed by his love of soldiering. Probably in 1589 he went to the Netherlands to serve under Sir Francis Vere, and after brave conduct at the siege of Rouen in 1591 he was knighted by the earl of Essex. After the deaths of four of his sons in foreign wars and his disappointment with the others, his hopes of military glory centred on his eldest grandson, the future general, to whom in his will he left his best arms and his best horse. After his father died he built, on the strength of his substantial and increasing income, a fine mansion house at Denton, near Ilkley, in Wharfedale, yet even at home he demanded military discipline from his servants and every event of the day was timetabled precisely. His greatest pleasure was in horses and horsemanship: his stud at Denton was one of the best in the country and among his many treatises was one entitled 'Conjectures about Horsemanship' and another on Yorkshire cavalry. 
Although from 1599 Fairfax, in succession to his father, had a seat on the council of the north, he seemed content to live in the shadow of other Yorkshiremen. In 1607 Ferdinando Fairfax, his heir, married Mary, daughter of his friend and patron Lord Sheffield, the council's president. Later, Fairfax associated himself with his younger neighbour Thomas Wentworth, and together they successfully contested with the Saviles for Yorkshire's two seats in the infamous election of 1625. King Charles's need for ready money and his activity in collecting the forced loan of 1627 explain why Fairfax was created Lord Fairfax of Cameron in the Scottish peerage on 4 May of that year on down payment of $1500 in gold. Fairfax died at Denton Hall on 1 May 1640 and was buried the next day in the south transept of All Saints' Church, Otley, Yorkshire, next to his wife, who had died on 23 August 1620. 


@@@@@


doc= 9092


Fairfax, Thomas, third Lord Fairfax of Cameron (1612-1671), parliamentarian army officer, was born at Denton, Yorkshire, on 17 January 1612, the first son of Ferdinando Fairfax, second Lord Fairfax of Cameron (1584-1648), and his first wife, Mary Sheffield (died 1619), the daughter of Edmund Sheffield, first earl of Mulgrave. He matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1626, and entered Gray's Inn in 1628. 
Between 1629 and 1632 Fairfax travelled in France and the Low Countries, where he learned the art of war under Horace Vere, Baron Vere of Tilbury. Present at the siege of Bois-le-Duc in 1629, he then visited France and elsewhere, returning to England in 1632 in the vain hope of obtaining his grandfather's permission to join the Swedish army in Germany. On 20 June 1637 he contracted an arranged (but in the event happy) marriage with Anne Vere (died 1665) ['see 'Fairfax, Anne, Lady Fairfax], the second daughter and coheir of his old commander and his widow, Mary. With her he had two daughters: Mary, born in 1638, and Anne, who was born in 1640 and died two years later. 
Fairfax fought for Charles I in the first bishops' war against the Scots in 1639, commanding a troop of 160 Yorkshire dragoons. He also participated in the second bishops' war, commanding 150 horse under Lord Conway. According to Burnet, after the English defeat at Newburn, Fairfax, as he freely admitted, shared in the general panic of the fleeing army: 'all were put in such great disorder, that the whole army did run with so great precipitation, that sir Thomas Fairfax... did not stick to own, that till he passed the Tees his legs trembled under him' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.51). Half a year later, on 28 January 1641, the king knighted him, perhaps in the hope of cementing his allegiance to the crown. 
However, the humiliating defeat at the hands of the Scots had completed the undermining of Charles's government, and compelled him to summon parliament once again. When civil war broke out in 1642, Fairfax, in spite of the honour recently bestowed on him, was prominent among the supporters of parliament in Yorkshire. On 3 June the freeholders and farmers of the county assembled at Heworth Moor near York, in obedience to a royal proclamation. Those gentry and freeholders who wanted the king to reconcile himself to parliament had drafted a petition to Charles, which Fairfax was selected to present. At the meeting Fairfax had to force his way past royal courtiers, who attempted to block him, but at last he reached the king's side and placed the petition on the pommel of his saddle. Charles refused to accept it, and pressed his horse forward, nearly trampling Fairfax underfoot. 
Fairfax also signed the protest of the Yorkshire parliamentarians on 29 August 1642, which prompted John Rushworth to write to Ferdinando, 'the House is much contented with Sir Thomas Fairfax's noble carriage of Thursday last' (Bell, 3.18). He was also among the negotiators of the Yorkshire treaty of neutrality of 29 September. When parliament annulled the treaty, he became second in command to his father, and general of horse. Accompanied by his wife, he distinguished himself in minor battles at Wetherby and Tadcaster at the end of 1642. With scarcely 1000 men in the northern parliamentary army, however, Fairfax and his father were no match for the earl of Newcastle and his well-equipped royalist army of 9000 men. Nevertheless, on 23 January 1643 Fairfax won his first notable victory, driving the royalists out of Leeds, forcing Newcastle to take refuge in York, and leaving the country open between Selby and the west. But two months later (30 March 1643) Lord Goring delivered a severe defeat on Seacroft Moor, as Fairfax was engaged in covering the retreat of his father and the main body of his army from Selby to Leeds. Despite being completely routed, Fairfax did achieve his main objective of enabling his father's larger force to effect its retreat. Writing to Prince Rupert about this episode, Secretary Edward Nicholas termed Fairfax 'the man most beloved and relyed upon by the rebells in the north' (BL, Add. MS 18980, fol. 33'v'). 
The position of the northern army was now precarious. With the impetuosity of youth Fairfax conceived the idea of attacking Wakefield, which he believed was occupied by no more than 800 or 900 royalist troops. By the time he found out that they in fact numbered 3000 it was too late, and he had to press ahead, leading the assault on the town from the front. He personally took several prisoners, was himself almost captured, but in the end was completely victorious. Among the 1400 royalist prisoners was General Goring himself. No victory against such heavy odds was won by any other general during the whole civil war. 
Fairfax was allowed only a short time to savour his success. The weakness of the northern army meant that he had to abandon Wakefield and rejoin his father at Leeds. Newcastle was now advancing on Bradford with about 12,000 men. On 30 June the Fairfaxes rode out to meet them on Adwalton Moor with a quarter that number. Leading the right wing of cavalry, Sir Thomas initially repulsed the royalist horse, but the left wing was completely overthrown, and in the end the royalists' superior numbers carried the day. Fairfax personally brought off a number of his troops safely into Halifax, returning during the night to take charge of the besieged town of Bradford. Coming under extreme pressure the next day, he cut his way through the besieging army with about fifty horse, and rejoined his father at Leeds. 
After the disaster at Adwalton Moor, Leeds could not be defended for long; in the first week of July, therefore, the Fairfaxes retreated to the one remaining parliamentarian garrison in Yorkshire: Hull. Sir Thomas took charge of the rearguard, was shot through the wrist, and suffered a serious loss of blood before he finally reached safety. 
While Ferdinando maintained the defence of Hull, Sir Thomas Fairfax took the cavalry, which were of no use in the besieged town, to join Cromwell and Manchester in Lincolnshire. There he contributed to the parliamentary victory at Winceby on 11 October 1643. In the face of a large body of royalist cavalry Fairfax was reported to have cried, 'Come let us fall on; I never prospered better then when I fought against the enemy three or four to one' ('Scotish Dove', 13-20 Oct 1643, 5). In his letter to the House of Lords Manchester eulogized him as 'a person that exceeds any expressions as a commendation of his resolution and valour' ('The Parliamentary or Constitutional History of England', 12.423). 
Fairfax was now beginning to be recognized as one of parliament's most valuable commanders, and further exploits were just around the corner. On 20 December, in the company of Sir John Meldrum, he retook Gainsborough by storm. His great accomplishment in 1643, in combination with his father, was to keep Lord Newcastle and his army, which had swelled to 12,000 or more, pinned down in the north, so that they could not march south and join forces with the king. According to his nineteenth-century biographer Markham, the most striking quality of the Fairfaxes was their 'inability to understand that they had been beaten... no odds [were] too great for the enterprising spirit of Sir Thomas Fairfax' (Markham, 123). 
At the end of 1643 parliament decided that Fairfax's services were required on the other side of the country, where Nantwich had come under siege. The royalist build-up in Cheshire was now all the more menacing thanks to the addition of reinforcements from Ormond's army in Ireland. Crossing the Pennines in the dead of winter, Fairfax brought to Nantwich a relief force of 2800 horse and 500 dragoons, to which he added 3000 foot from Lancashire and Cheshire recruited on the way. In conjunction with Sir William Brereton and the governor of Nantwich, Sir George Booth, he attacked the royalist army under Lord Byron. The action, on 29 January 1644, was a complete success. All the royalist colonels and 1500 prisoners were taken. It furnished a tremendous boost to parliamentary morale. 
By March Fairfax was back in Yorkshire joining forces once again with his father. Newcastle by now had his hands full trying to keep the Scottish army under Lord Leven at bay in Durham. The parliamentarian plan was for Sir Thomas and Ferdinando to rendezvous at Selby and march from there to link up with the Scots in Durham. When the royalist governor of York, John, Lord Bellasis, got wind of the plan, he decided to intercept the Fairfaxes at Selby. The engagement there on 11 April 1644 was a shining parliamentarian victory, to which the younger Fairfax's cavalry contributed greatly. Fairfax's stock at once rose higher at Westminster, and parliament proclaimed a day of public thanksgiving. Clarendon, unaware of his previous feats, believed that Selby 'was the first action Sir Thomas Fairfax was taken notice for' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.310). 
Selby led directly to the battle of Marston Moor and the destruction of royalist power in the north. When the news of it reached Durham, both Newcastle and Leven hastened to bring their armies into Yorkshire. Newcastle occupied York with 6000 troops, while Leven's Scots and the Fairfaxes' northern parliamentarian army, together now 20,000 strong, besieged the city. By the beginning of June the earl of Manchester had arrived with over 6000 troops from the eastern association, and the city was completely encircled. Meanwhile Charles I had sent Prince Rupert on a recruiting expedition in Lancashire, and on 30 June he arrived at York with 14,000 men intending to raise the siege. The allied parliamentarian and Scottish forces withdrew to Marston Moor, 7 miles beyond the city, and prepared for the largest battle ever to be fought on English soil. On the fateful day (2 July 1644) Fairfax commanded the horse on the right wing, consisting of fifty-five troops of Yorkshire cavalry, and twenty-two of Scots -- about 4000 men in all. While his own regiment charged successfully, the rest of his division was routed; it was with difficulty that he made his way, wounded, at the head of his own regiment, through the ranks of the enemy to the parliamentarian left, who were victorious. Although his contribution to the battle itself was not distinguished, he and his father had laid the groundwork for the victory by holding out for more than a year against overwhelming odds, and by their decisive conquest of Bellasis at Selby, which had triggered the siege of York, and the ensuing battle beyond its walls. 
At the siege of Helmsley Castle the following month Fairfax was dangerously wounded by a musket ball, which broke his shoulder. It was not the last of the many wounds he suffered during a long military career. 
While Fairfax was slowly convalescing from this wound the political struggle against the existing parliamentarian commanders in the south was nearing its climax. In December the Commons passed the resolution for a self-denying ordinance to exclude the members of both houses from all commands. Though rejected by the Lords, the Commons majority proceeded as if it had been passed. The three existing armies were amalgamated, and by a Commons vote of 101 to 69 Fairfax was named commander-in-chief of the new entity, soon to be known as the New Model. The choice of Fairfax was the product of several factors. At the age of thirty-two he had already chalked up an impressive military record. A stranger to political manoeuvre, he had few enemies at Westminster. Perhaps he was already seen as politically malleable. At any rate, the men with whom he and his father corresponded in the early 1640s show that he had important friends in the war party, of which Oliver Cromwell was an increasingly prominent member. Looking back later, Fairfax declared that he was overwhelmed by the burden placed on his shoulders. 'I was so far from desiring it that had not so great an authority commanded obedience, being then unseparated from the royal interest, besides the persuasions of nearest friends not to decline so free and general a call, I should have hid my self to have avoyded so great a charge. ('Short Memoriall', Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 36, fol. 3'v')' At first the Lords were unwilling to allow Fairfax to appoint his own officers. At length a compromise was worked out with the Commons by which the commander-in-chief was to appoint his officers in the first instance, but submit their names to parliament for final approval. In the event the two houses attempted to change a third of Fairfax's list. Almost all the changes were suggested by the Lords with the aim of eliminating or demoting radicals and promoting moderates and presbyterians. In the end the Commons majority browbeat the Lords into accepting, by the narrowest of majorities, the list that Fairfax had submitted. Political wrangling was even more bitter over the wording of his commission. The Lords baulked at the attempt by the Commons war party to exempt Fairfax from the obligation to preserve the king's safety on the battlefield. Only by dint of persistent bullying was Fairfax, unlike his predecessors, relieved of the pretence that he was fighting the king's evil counsellors and not the king himself. 
It was not just Charles I who scoffed at the new army and its 'brutish generall' ('The Kings Cabinet Opened', 1645, 3). Friends as well as foes would shortly be compelled to revise their opinions. In April Fairfax was engaged in reorganizing the New Model. In May he left Reading, under instructions from the committee of both kingdoms to relieve Taunton. But before he could get there, he was redirected to besiege the royalist headquarters at Oxford. Meanwhile the king was in the field recruiting his army. 'I am very sorry', Fairfax wrote to his father, 'we should spend our time unprofitably before a town, whilst the king hath time to strengthen himself, and by terror to force obedience of all places where he comes' (Bell, 3.228). 
When the king's sack of Leicester cruelly exposed the strategic ineptitude of the committee of both kingdoms, Fairfax was finally given the free hand he sought to direct his own field operations. On 14 June, with close to 17,000 soldiers at his command, he met a royalist army of less than 9000 at Naseby. To Cromwell belongs the credit for the battle formation and the successful charge of cavalry on the right wing, but contemporaries were agreed in awarding the laurels for the day's victory to Fairfax. When he saw the rout of the left wing of cavalry, and the distress of the infantry in the middle, he commanded Cromwell to wheel about and divide his forces. The two generals then charged from opposite sides into the royalist infantry, bringing relief to their own beleaguered regiments. Fairfax then re-formed the whole army for a second advance on the royalist lines. This time he was careful to ensure that the horse did not leave the ranks of the foot exposed by too impetuous a charge. Sighting the monolithic approach of the New Model and overawed by its crushing superiority of numbers, the remnant of the king's army now turned tail and fled. The genius that Fairfax revealed at Naseby did not lie in his strategic capability, but in his popularity with his men, his flawless courage, and his ability, reinforced by years of experience, to respond to the unpredictable fluidity, the breathtaking rush of events during the two hours when the outcome of the English civil war was decided. 
Once he had recaptured Leicester, Fairfax marched to the south-west to confront Goring, who commanded the only remaining royalist field army of any importance, at Taunton. On Fairfax's approach Goring withdrew from Taunton, and the two armies met at Langport. Staging an audacious charge across a swollen stream and up a steep hill, Fairfax quickly destroyed Goring's cavalry. This follow-up to Naseby was decisive. There he had struck the king a mortal blow. Then swinging round to face the only other army in the field, he lunged at Goring. The war was effectively over, although the participants were not yet aware of this fact. Ahead lay eleven more months of sieges, pitched battles, cold, hunger, sickness, and anxiety. Bridgwater, Bath, and Sherborne were taken in quick succession. Bristol was a tougher nut to crack. The second port in the realm, protected by 15-foot-thick walls, it was the main distribution point for the king's weaponry, ammunition, and materials. The letter in which Fairfax summoned Prince Rupert to surrender the city contains an interesting exposition of his political creed at that time. He assured the prince that neither he nor parliament harboured any animus against the institution of monarchy. Rather, they were fighting 'to maintain the rights of the crown and kingdom joyntly; a principal part whereof is, that the king... is... to be advised... by his Parliament, the great Counsel of the Kingdom, in whom... he hears all his people as it were at once advising him; and in which multitude of councellours lyes his safety, and his peoples interest' (Sprigge, 98). It was similar to the political philosophy that his father had proclaimed on his own battle flag: 'Long live the king, but death to bad government' (BL, Sloane MS 5247, fol. 20'v'). After a three-week siege and heavy artillery bombardment which failed to open a breach in the walls, the city was finally overrun on 10 September in a lightning assault. Showing great daring, Fairfax's infantry scaled the walls as withering fire was poured down upon them. 
By the time of the winter respite the remaining royalists were mostly bottled up in Devon and Cornwall. It did not take long to reduce Tiverton, Dartmouth, Torrington, Exeter, and the remaining Cornish strongholds. Hopton's small army capitulated on 14 March. At Torrington Fairfax had a narrow escape when eighty barrels of gunpowder were blown up in the royalist magazine. Writing afterwards to his father, he expressed gratitude for 'God's great mercy to me and some others that stood where great webs of lead fell thickest, yet, praised be God, no man hurt' -- apart from the 200 royalist prisoners who were killed by the explosion (Bell, 3.285). Fairfax's last task was to invest Oxford. As his 3000 cavalry approached, Charles slipped out of the city in disguise and surrendered himself to the Scots, leaving Sir Thomas Glemham the distasteful task of yielding up the royal headquarters. Wishing to spare Oxford's intellectual and aesthetic treasures, Fairfax granted generous terms, and the city was handed over on 24 June 1646. Aubrey later hailed him as the saviour of the Bodleian for putting a strong guard around the library to stop the thieving and vandalism of books that had been tolerated by the royalists during their occupation. 
The fifteen months culminating in the surrender of Oxford were the most glorious period of Fairfax's life. Out of the remnants of three older armies he had welded together a supremely effective fighting force. After his initial stunning success at Naseby he had driven the royalists before him in a long string of victorious battles, sieges, and storms. Under his leadership the New Model Army never lost so much as a skirmish. At all times until the beginning of 1647 he was in control of this army, first of all shaking off the irksome interference of the committee of both kingdoms, and then several times bringing his council of war around to his way of thinking, or on occasion simply overruling it and ordering the implementation of strategies he had decided upon. 
In July Fairfax and his wife, both unwell after the rigours of more than a year's intensely active service, fled to Bath to take the waters there and restore their health. All his life Fairfax was a sickly individual, notwithstanding his physical courage and his boundless energy on the battlefield. The 'infirmities' of his body to which Sprigge alludes (Sprigge, 323) were many. In the autumn of 1645 it was rheumatism; by mid-1646 he was afflicted with kidney stone; two years later he was suffering from gout. Yet ill health never seemed to stop him from being present at the scene of military action when he was needed. It did, however, give him a ready-made excuse for absenting himself from the army's councils when awkward political issues were being contested. Thus, in the second civil war he threw himself into the thick of the battle at Maidstone (2 June 1648) despite the pain of a terrible fit of the gout. By contrast, in the spring of 1647, as the army became politically turbulent, Fairfax excused himself, pleading illness. When he went to London in April for medical treatment, Holles angrily accused him of merely pretending to be sick so as to let the army revolt boil out of control. He was said to be sick when the army seized the king, and again throughout the autumn of 1647, when the Leveller challenge was being debated in the general council. He fell sick once more around the time of Pride's Purge in December 1648. On the 20th of that month he was too ill to meet sixteen of the imprisoned members of parliament who had been summoned to his lodging in Whitehall. 
Apart from the brief interval of the second civil war, the three years from spring 1646 to winter 1649 were the most painfully embarrassing of Fairfax's life. The logic of events obliged him to tread paths he would sooner have avoided and to implement decisions that had been made by others. In the world of subtle intrigue and political manoeuvre he was out of his depth, and helpless to thwart the efforts of men far more adept than himself. The political crisis burgeoned in the late winter of 1646-7, when the peace party led by Holles persuaded the Commons to send part of Fairfax's army to Ireland and disband most of the rest with only a fraction of their arrears of pay. The soldiers petitioned for all their arrears, and an indemnity act to protect them from prosecution for whatever they had done while in the army. Parliament instructed Fairfax to suppress the petition, and he did so, but ineffectually. When parliament heard that petitioning was continuing, Holles got it to approve a declaration that those who persisted in this illegal activity would be regarded as 'enemies to the state and disturbers of the public peace' ('JHL', 9, 115). Conscientiously Fairfax strove to effect a rapprochement between the parliamentary commissioners and the officers, most of whom sympathized with the rank and file. When his efforts failed, he threw up his hands and retreated to London for a month (21 April to 20 May 1647) for medical treatment, though he did take the precaution of ordering all other officers to repair to their commands. 
At the end of May parliament issued its final offer and ordered Fairfax back to the army. He communicated the offer to a meeting of officers at Bury St Edmunds, but it fell on deaf ears since the regiments had already begun to organize resistance to disbandment. The officers instead advised their commander to appoint a general rendezvous of the army to discuss the situation. Fairfax wrote back to parliament imploring them to back off. 'I intreat you that there may be ways of love and composure thought upon. I shall do my endeavours, tho' I am forced to yield something out of order, to keep the army from disorder or worse inconveniences' ('The Parliamentary or Constitutional History of England', 15.390). In the meantime he shifted his headquarters from Saffron Walden to the agitators' meeting place at Bury St Edmunds, but then fell ill once again. The collapse of Fairfax's control at this point was starkly exposed when on 2-3 June, with Cromwell's covert support, Cornet George Joyce seized the king, and later without authority removed him from Holdenby. In his 'Short Memorialls' Fairfax writes that he immediately dispatched Colonel Whalley with two regiments to reverse Joyce's flagrant disobedience. But Charles turned down Fairfax's efforts to get him to return, saying, 'Sir, I have as great an interest in the army as you' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 36, fol. 5'v'). A further rebuff to Fairfax came when the council of war rejected his proposal to punish Joyce. Nevertheless, writing to the House of Lords, he assured them 'as in the presence of God... that [Joyce's] remove of his Majesty from Holdenby was without any design, knowledge, or privity thereof on our parts; and a thing altogether unexpected to us' ('The Parliamentary or Constitutional History of England', 15.410). 
Between June 1647 and the outbreak of the second civil war Fairfax was marginal to the army's political mobilization, its negotiations with the king, and its debates on the future constitution of England. He later disingenuously confessed, 'the power of the army (which I once had) was usurped by the forerunners of confusion and anarchy... the arbitrary and unlimited power of this new counsel would act without a General, and all that I could doe could not prevaile against this streame... For now the officers of the army were placed and displaced by the will of the new agitators who with violence so carried all things as it was above my power to restraine it.' Again, 'I must needs say, from the time they declared their usurped authority at Triplo Heath [5 June 1647] I never gave my free consent to anything they did but (being then undischarged of my place) they set my hand by way of course to all their papers whether I consented or not. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 36, fols. 4, 4'v', 6'v')' He twice tried to resign his commission but was prevented. He did, however, claim credit for one political achievement. He managed to delay the march on London to purge eleven leading presbyterian MPs long enough to allow those targets of the army's wrath to flee. Thus he 'diverted this humor of the army from being statesmen to their more proper dutye of soldiers', and postponed the purge of parliament by over a year (ibid., fol. 5). 
There is, however, other evidence that Fairfax was rather more active in these months than he later acknowledged. At the general rendezvous of the army near Newmarket on 4-5 June he personally visited and addressed each regiment, to the rapturous joy of the soldiers. On 3 August he conducted the speakers of both houses and the MPs who had been forced to flee parliament by counter-revolutionary violence, on a review of the New Model Army, and three days later escorted the MPs back to their seats at the Palace of Westminster. He also vetoed several proposals in September to promote Cornet Joyce, John Wildman, and other radicals (minute book of the committee of general officers, Worcester College, Oxford, MS 66, fols. 6, 12, 15'v'). 
If ill health prevented Fairfax from playing any part in the Putney debates on the 'Agreement of the People', it did not stand in his way when the time came to return to the battlefield in 1648. While Cromwell rode west to suppress the insurrection in Wales, and Lambert was dispatched to the north to check the march of the Scots, Fairfax, who had recently inherited his father's Scottish baronage of Cameron, took responsibility for the south. At the end of May he led a force of 4000 to attack the royalist stronghold at Maidstone. In agonizing pain from gout he led his men on horseback, his right foot wrapped in a bandage, and was 'one of the first in all this action' (Whitelocke, 2.324). On 13 June he pursued the fleeing royalists to Colchester and settled down to a seventy-five-day siege. While Fairfax was at Colchester, Milton addressed a sonnet to him, summoning him to the 'nobler task' of settling the kingdom and cleansing the land of avarice and rapine. 
On 27 August, reduced to starvation and despair, the garrison surrendered, the rank and file to 'quarter', and the superior officers to 'mercy'. The former term implied that their lives would be spared, but the latter meant that they would be at the mercy of the lord-general, who, as he explained ahead of time, would be 'free to put some immediately to the sword, if he see cause' (Rushworth, 7.1247). Using the discretionary power he had thus reserved himself, he tried Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle by court martial and had them shot to death. Norwich, Capel, and Hastings he turned over to parliament because they were peers. The justifications for the executions were several. First, according to the rules of war, officers who continued to hold an untenable position, thereby causing unnecessary bloodshed, forfeited their right to quarter. Second, an officer taken prisoner and then released broke his parole if he again bore arms against the enemy who had released him. At the beginning of the siege Fairfax had written to Lucas pointing out that he had broken the parole he had given when released at Marston Moor, and that he would therefore be excepted from mercy. The case against Lucas was clinched when two private soldiers testified that at Stinchcombe, Gloucestershire, he had ordered that over twenty captured prisoners be put to the sword in cold blood. '[I]n this distribution of Justice', explained Fairfax in his 'Short memorials', 'I did nothing but according to my Commission and the trust vested in mee' (T. Fairfax, 'Short memorials', William Andrews Clark Memorial Library, fol. 24'v'). 
At about this time Edmund Ludlow came to the camp and urged Fairfax to put a stop to the treaty that parliament was about to negotiate with the king at Newport. Fairfax equivocated, so the republican Ludlow turned to Ireton, who agreed with him but cautioned that they should wait to see what agreement king and parliament came to before moving against them. That autumn one regiment after another petitioned Fairfax against the Newport treaty, and urged that the king be called to account as a man of blood. The remonstrance of the army, framed by Ireton and adopted by the council of officers on 16 November, demanded that the treaty be broken off and the king tried for treason. At the time Fairfax wrote to parliament that the remonstrance had been approved by the officers unanimously, but much later he maintained, and royalist intelligence at the time reported, that he 'absolutely refused to concurre' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 31, fol. 312). 
Orders were issued in Fairfax's name for securing the king on the Isle of Wight and complaining to parliament for its laying aside of the remonstrance. Fairfax also put his name to a letter to the speaker of the House of Commons declaring that because of his failure to reply, 'we are attending and acting the providence of God, for the gaining of such ends as we have proposed in our aforesaid Remonstrance' (Worcester College, Oxford, MS 114, fol. 115). Nevertheless, it was almost certainly Ireton, not Fairfax, who was directing affairs at this moment. However, Fairfax strains credulity when he writes of Pride's Purge that the other officers planned the forcible exclusion of unfriendly MPs 'with that great secrecy as that I had not the least intimation of it till it was done... It was so secretly carried on that I should get no notice of it' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 36, fol. 6). He did not resign his command after this assault on the liberties of parliament, nor did he stop signing letters on behalf of the army, including a sardonic order to London to pay its assessment arrears, a rebuff of the Commons' demand to release their imprisoned members, and warrants for their confinement. 
When it came to the king's trial, Fairfax finally rediscovered his courage, and began to work against his fellow officers. Named to the court of high commission, he attended the first preliminary session, perhaps thinking that the trial might be an instrument for either deposing the king or intimidating him into unconditional surrender. When the truth came home to him that the revolutionaries were in deadly earnest, Fairfax attended no further sessions despite strenuous efforts to secure his presence. On the first day of the trial, when his name was read out, his wife shouted from behind her mask in one of the galleries, 'he had more wit than to be here' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.486). On the day of sentencing (27 January), when the president of the court, John Bradshaw, declared that they were trying the king in the name of 'the commons and people of England', she intervened a second time, calling out, 'not half, nor a quarter of the people. Oliver Cromwell is a rogue and a traitor' (Hargrave, 1.370). The next day Fairfax hosted a meeting of officers at his house to hear a last-minute appeal from the Dutch ambassadors to save the king's life. On the 29th he summoned a council of war, where he implored his fellow officers to postpone the execution. Afterwards he wrote admitting his ineffectuality, but pleading 'my afflicted and troubled minde for it and my earnest endeavours to prevent it will, I hope, sufficiently testify my abhorrance of the fact' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 36, fol. 6). According to his cousin Brian Fairfax, on the eve of the execution, 'when some of his friends proposed to him to attempt the next day to rescue the king, telling him that twenty thousand men were ready to join with him; he said, he was ready to venture his own life, but not the lives of others against the army united against them' (B. Fairfax, 32). On the day itself he continued his efforts right up to the moment of beheading, in prayer or conversation with the officers in Colonel Thomas Harrison's apartment near the long gallery of the Banqueting House. When Bishop Juxon and Thomas Herbert were escorting the king's corpse back through the long gallery, they bumped into Fairfax, who to their amazement enquired 'how the king did', and 'seemed much surprised' to learn that he was already dead (Herbert, 194). The episode was a poignant comment on the commander-in-chief's political irrelevance. 
Fairfax later underlined his disapproval of the king's death by the reservations that he made in his engagement to be faithful to the Commonwealth. Like the other peers who became members of the council of state, he declared that he had served the parliament faithfully, and was willing to do so again, since there was no longer any power but that of the House of Commons, but could not sign the engagement because it was retrospective. Besides sitting in the council of state Fairfax was also elected MP for Cirencester (7 February 1649), although he appears not to have taken his seat. He was also reappointed commander-in-chief of all the forces in England and Ireland (30 March 1649). 
As commander of the army Fairfax was personally involved in suppressing a mutiny in Colonel Whalley's regiment at the end of April 1649. Against Cromwell's plea for clemency, Fairfax insisted that the ringleader, Robert Lockyer, be executed. Lockyer instantly became a Leveller martyr. A little over two weeks later Fairfax had to cope with much more serious Leveller-inspired mutinies against the forthcoming Irish expedition: at Banbury, Burford, and Northampton. Leading a force of nearly 4000, he swiftly overtook the main body, 900 strong, and crushed their resistance in a late-night surprise attack at Burford. Once again Fairfax showed severity by pronouncing them all liable to the death penalty. In the end three mutineers were executed in Burford churchyard, and were added to the Leveller pantheon. 
After this accomplishment Fairfax visited Oxford and was created a DCL on 19 May 1649, while many of his fellow officers were made honorary MAs. He remained in England during Cromwell's expedition to Ireland, but in summer 1650 he was nominated to lead the invasion of Scotland. Willing to oppose the Scots if they invaded England again, he could not in conscience invade their territory. 'Human probabilities are not sufficient grounds to make war upon a neighbour nation, especially our brethren of Scotland, to whom we are engaged in a solemn league and covenant' (Whitelocke, 3.209). A committee of the council of state including Cromwell, Whitelocke, and Harrison tried to change his mind, but he would not budge. In his letter of resignation he cited infirmities of mind and body, but commentators at the time agreed that it was the influence of his wife and the presbyterian clergy that had caused him to baulk at invading Scotland. 
For the rest of the interregnum Fairfax lived quietly at Nun Appleton, Yorkshire, where he nursed his health and devoted himself to literature and religion. Though elected for the West Riding of Yorkshire in the first protectorate parliament of 1654, he seems again not to have taken his seat. His energies were directed to building up a collection of coins and engravings, translating Vegetius from the Latin, and Mercurius Trismegistus from the French, and producing a metrical version of the 'Psalms', as well as translating the 'Song of Solomon' and other books of the 'Bible'. He was perhaps inspired by Andrew Marvell, the tutor whom he engaged for his daughter in 1651-2, and who is thought to have written much of his best poetry at Nun Appleton. While Fairfax's own poetry has no literary merit, his writing shows a sensuous appreciation of natural beauty that was at war with a puritan estrangement from the attractions of this world. His three volumes of sermon notes which he took during the twenty years before his death provide insight into his deeply religious nature. A non-sectarian puritan, he had a strong, simple belief in the dynamic role of divine providence in his life. At the same time that he had become politically passive he retained a millenarian hope. The 'gravious conflict' of this world was but a preparation for 'a glorious conquest in the next' (Folger Shakespeare Library, MS V.a.14, unfoliated). As a Calvinist he believed in the 'originall corrupcion' of his soul, which could be saved only by 'the meritts of the precious blood of Jesus Christ' (will, fol. 1). For Fairfax there was no contradiction in protecting the Bodleian Library and intervening to save the largest collection of medieval stained glass in England at York Minster on the one hand, while on the other holding that the appetite for material things was one of the devil's snares. During his retirement from public life he also found time to write a treatise on horse breeding and a history of the church up to the Reformation. 
As the heir to the ancestral estates of his family Fairfax was one of the leading gentry of Yorkshire. At the beginning of the civil war he had invested heavily in the war against the king. After 1645 that investment was amply repaid. As commander-in-chief of the New Model Army he was paid $10 a day, and unlike every other officer in the army he was paid promptly and in full. Over the five-year period of his supreme command he garnered a salary of $19,000 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 32, fol. 173). As an additional expression of gratitude parliament voted him a jewel worth $800 at the beginning of his generalship, as well as $1000 worth of horses. Near the end of his generalship he was voted York House in the Strand and lands worth $5000 per annum from the estates of the second duke of Buckingham. This was subsequently converted to a cash grant of $10,000 and Buckingham estates to the value of $4000 per annum. 
The last thing parliament would have expected was that these very lands would revert to their original owner, as they did on 7 September 1657, when Fairfax married his daughter Mary to Buckingham. The marriage was said to have been arranged by Fairfax's mother-in-law, Lady Vere, and his cousin Major Robert Harley, a prominent presbyterian leader. The government regarded it with suspicion, partly as 'a Presbyterian plott' (Thurloe, 6.617), and partly because Buckingham was still regarded as a cavalier. When Cromwell ordered Buckingham to be arrested and thrown in the Tower, Fairfax at his daughter's behest went to Whitehall to demand his release. Cromwell was unyielding, and upbraided his former comrade-in-arms for not sticking with his old friends and taking their advice. Infuriated, Fairfax terminated the interview, 'turning abruptly from him in the gallery at Whitehall, cocking his hat, and throwing his cloak under his arm, as he used to do when he was angry' (B. Fairfax, 31). Later, after Cromwell died, Fairfax appealed to parliament for Buckingham's release. Several MPs spoke in favour, citing Fairfax's trustworthiness, and Buckingham was freed on 21 February 1659. But Fairfax was affronted by the requirement that he put up $20,000 bail, and was reported to have said in private that 'since the dissolving of the [Long] parliament, which was broke up wrongfully, there was nothing but shifting and a kind of confusion; and that he knew not but he might chuse by his old commission as generall to appear in armes on behalf of the people of these nations. (Thurloe, 6.706)' 

In Richard Cromwell's parliament Fairfax sat for Yorkshire, and intervened rarely but effectively. He attracted particular admiration for opposing military rule. On one occasion he declared that parliament must not give the militia 'out of our hands to any single person, but that it must be intrusted where it may be serviceable to... the people' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 273). He was seen as a man devoid of ambition, who 'sides with republicans and carryes a name above Lambert' (Thurloe, 7.616), and some thought would make an excellent general once again. A sign of his high reputation was his election to the council of state on 19 May 1659, but he declined to serve. 
By summer 1659, with the protectorate having collapsed and the struggle between the army and the Rump having ended in stalemate, the government was in disarray. By September General Monck had issued his call from Scotland for an end to military interference in politics. This was the break for which Fairfax had been waiting. Ever since his resignation as commander-in-chief he had scrupulously abstained from any involvement in royalist intrigue. But after Lambert's expulsion of the Rump in November he opened negotiations with Monck, employing his friend and former New Model Army chaplain the Yorkshire presbyterian Edward Bowles and Monck's brother-in-law Thomas Clarges as intermediaries. 
At the same time that he declared his support, Fairfax also signalled his disapproval of Monck's apparent unwillingness to go any farther than recalling the Rump parliament. Monck responded that his hands were tied for the moment by his fear that his army would not support him. This was good enough reassurance for Fairfax, who sent back word that he would raise the county for Monck. By 30 December, so racked by kidney stone and gout that he had to travel to the rendezvous in a carriage, he mustered 450 supporters at Knaresborough. On new year's day the force, now swollen to 1800, besieged York, where Lambert had installed Robert Lilburne to hold the garrison against Monck and Fairfax. But the city was taken without a blow, and the next day Monck crossed the Tweed. Fairfax's raising of Yorkshire to neutralize Lambert's army was the key factor in the timing of Monck's march into England. Thanks to his preparatory work not a single unit of the English army opposed Monck. Fairfax thus deserves much of the credit for the achievement of a restoration without bloodshed. He alone was able 'to embody the moderate parliamentary gentry's revolt against military tyranny without either scandalizing the army or creating a premature breach between Presbyterians and commonwealthsmen' (Woolrych, 505). It was a fitting symbol of Fairfax's role in bringing back the king that the chestnut-brown horse which Charles II rode at his coronation was a gift from Fairfax's own stable. 
Fairfax's conduct just prior to Charles's return proved that he was not an unqualified royalist. In April 1660 the cavaliers were startled to hear that he had joined Manchester and the presbyterians in an attempt to impose terms on Charles. But Monck made it clear that he alone would negotiate with the king. Nevertheless, Fairfax was honoured by being selected for the interim council of state on 3 March, by being elected member for Yorkshire in the same month, and by being chosen to head the commissioners of the two houses sent to the king at The Hague. 
With Charles back on the throne Fairfax retired again to Nun Appleton. He was upset by the Cavalier Parliament's exclusion of regicides from the 'Act of Oblivion'. If Ludlow can be believed, he candidly acknowledged 'that if any person must be excepted, he knew no man that deserved it more than himself, who being general of the army at that time, and having power sufficient to prevent the proceedings against the King, had not thought fit to make use of it to that end' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.268). Illness blighted the remaining years of his life. He filled them with reading, religious duties, and composing autobiographical accounts of his service in the northern army and the New Model. 
Lady Fairfax died on 16 October 1665, Fairfax himself on 12 November 1671. Both were buried in Bilbrough parish church, near York. In his will he left his Denton estate for the use of his daughter during her lifetime, with the reversion to his cousin Henry Fairfax after her death. He thereby kept it out of the grasp of his profligate son-in-law. His pious and generous nature was displayed in his bequest of half a year's wages to each of his servants, and $100 to 'twenty poore ministers' (will, fol. 4). Other beneficiaries included a maimed soldier, and his cousin John Rushworth, who had been secretary to the New Model Army. 
Many contemporaries vouched for the attractiveness of character that is reflected in Fairfax's will. To Joshua Sprigge, historian of the New Model, he was a man of 'the best piety' (Sprigge, 321) who neither played favourites nor let passion govern his acts. Charles I pronounced him 'a man of honour, faithfull to his trust, and one that ever kept his word with him' ('Speech to the Commissioners', 3). While a correspondent of Clarendon called him 'a slow beast and inconstant' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 57, fol. 129'v'), the royalist secretary Edward Nicholas had to admit that he was 'most beloved' (BL, Add. MS 18980, fol. 33'v'), and the parliamentary diarist Sir Simonds D'Ewes echoed the opinion of many when he called him 'very gallant' (BL, Harley MS 165, fol. 107'v'). Fairfax was never noted for fluency of speech, but he was heard attentively when he chose to voice his opinion. Popular with his men, he was at the same time a strict disciplinarian, who did not shrink from imposing the severest punishments when he thought the army's integrity was at stake. He won his men's loyalty by his care for their safety and his carelessness for his own. When it came to political scheming he was like a lamb among wolves. As early as autumn 1645 the perceptive Thomas Juxon commented that Fairfax was 'wax which as often as melted receives impression' (Juxon, 94). Clement Walker later dismissed him as someone 'fitter to follow another man's counsel than his own' (C. Walker, 'The Compleat History of Independency', 4 vols., 1660-61, 1.29). Yet he knew his own mind well enough to present a petition to Charles I in 1642, and later to boycott the king's trial in 1649, the invasion of Scotland in 1650, and several royalist conspiracies prior to 1660. 
The life of a warrior was Fairfax's first love. An excellent battlefield commander, he was not a distinguished military strategist. His greatest achievement was to weld the New Model Army into a supremely effective fighting force. The nadir of his life occurred between 1647 and 1649, when he was manipulated by men much shrewder than himself. His autobiographical attempt to excuse the political failings of these years does not command respect. Yet in 1659-60 he chalked up his second most important achievement when he neutralized Lambert's army in Yorkshire, enabling Monck to march into England unopposed. One of the ironies of English history is that the man who as much as anyone was responsible for the ruin of Charles I was the same man who played an essential part in restoring that king's son to the throne. 


@@@@@


doc= 9093


Fairfax, Thomas (1655/6-1716), Jesuit, was born at Gilling in Yorkshire on 24 October 1655 or 1656 and was almost certainly the son of Nicholas Fairfax (1606-1657) and his wife, Isabella Beckwith. After his education at the English College, St Omer, he entered the noviciate of the Jesuits at Watten on 7 September 1675 and was ordained priest on 18 December 1683. In 1685 he was professing Hebrew at the Jesuit college at Liege and preparing himself to teach philosophy. With the accession of James II it was decided to try to obtain a footing for Catholics in Oxford and it was considered essential by the English Jesuit superior, John Keynes, that some who might lecture in the university should obtain academic degrees. Thus Fairfax was sent with one or two others to Treves, where they obtained doctorates 'after due examination and much expense' (Archivum Romanum Societatis Iesu, MS Literae Annuae, Anglia 35, fol. 110'v'). 
At Oxford Obadiah Walker had opened a Catholic chapel in University College and Dean Massey another at Christ Church but it was at Magdalen that the king hoped to obtain admission for Catholics and that they would be able to take degrees there. At the king's insistence, despite the opposition of the fellows, of whom twenty-five were expelled, Samuel Parker, bishop of Oxford, was elected president of the college. Fairfax and other Catholics (some of them priests) were by the king's instructions admitted as fellows on 9 January 1688 and Fairfax was nominated dean of arts. It was reported that he was appointed professor of philosophy and was teaching oriental languages. On the death of Bishop Parker in March 1688 Dr Bonaventure Giffard, one of the newly appointed vicars apostolic, was nominated president by royal mandate. 
In 1688 there was printed on Obadiah Walker's press at University College Fairfax's 'Some reasons tendred to impartial people, why Dr Henry Maurice, chaplain to his grace of Canterbury, ought not to be traduc'd as a licenser of a pamphlet entitled, A plain answer to a popish priest, &c'. It was subjoined to 'Twenty-One Questions Further Demonstrating the Schism of the Church of England' and was written in reply to the Revd Abednego Seller's 'Plain Answer to a Popish Priest, Questioning the Orders of the Church of England' (1688). To a second edition of this pamphlet Seller annexed 'An Answer to the Oxford Animadverter's Reflections' (1688). The revolution brought the controversy to an end. 
In July 1688 Fairfax wrote to a correspondent, probably Dr Nathaniel Johnston, of the resistance the expelled fellows had made to the king's demands on the grounds that they were against the statutes of the college. He remarked that in the past the statutes had not been observed in a number of ways. The king, in October, in view of the deterioration of affairs, instructed the bishop of Winchester, the visitor of the college, 'to settle that society regularly and statutably' (Bloxam, 252-3). The expelled fellows were returned at the end of October and Fairfax and his colleagues were removed. Fairfax narrowly escaped being murdered in the streets of Oxford and was imprisoned for about a year. On his release, after visiting his native Yorkshire, he returned to Liege to teach theology. He was professed of the four vows in 1693. For much of the rest of his life he was stationed in London managing the financial business of the English Jesuits. During these years he may have published translations of attacks on Jansenism; certainly his former colleague Bonaventure Giffard was among those who considered him among the first to introduce the controversy to English Catholicism. He may have translated 'The Secret Policy of the Jansenists' by Etienne Agard de Champs (or Deschamps), 'one of the most virulent attacks on Jansenism' (Blom, 6), of which an expanded edition was published in 1702, and 'A Case of Conscience' (1703). From about 1710 Fairfax was at Wardour Castle in Wiltshire and there, it is believed, he died on 2 March 1716. 


@@@@@


doc= 9094


Fairfax, Thomas, sixth Lord Fairfax of Cameron (1693-1781), landowner, was born on 22 October 1693 at Leeds Castle, Kent, the eldest son of Thomas, fifth Lord Fairfax (1657-1710), landowner and politician, and Catherine Culpeper (died 1719), heir of the great estates of Lord Culpeper, including Leeds Castle and the northern neck between the Rappahannock and Potomac rivers in Virginia. He was educated at Oriel College, Oxford, between 1710 and 1713. In 1710 he became sixth Lord Fairfax on the death of his father, whose legacy brought debts and required the sale of the Yorkshire estates in 1716. Three years later he inherited his mother's estates in Kent and Virginia. 
Fairfax was a talented and ambitious man who included Viscount Bolingbroke, Joseph Addison, and Richard Steele among his friends. He was deputy treasurer of the king's household until 1721, when he was dismissed and commissioned in the Horse Guards. He resided at Leeds Castle on retiring from the army, and in 1735 he made his first visit to Virginia, where his cousin William Fairfax acted as proprietary agent and collector of customs. 
In the following decade Fairfax was involved in negotiations to implement the recommendations of a survey ordered by the privy council to settle a dispute over territory on the western boundary of the northern neck. In 1745 the privy council upheld the survey's conclusions, enabling Fairfax to more than double his holding to 5 million acres. Two years later he moved permanently to Virginia, and for some time lived at his cousin's house at Belvoir. Here he made the acquaintance of the Washington family. 
Fairfax moved to the Shenandoah valley, where he built two properties, Leeds Manor and Greenway Court, near Winchester. George Washington, then a young man of sixteen, was asked to survey and map his property. At Greenway Court Fairfax combined a lifestyle befitting a country gentleman (his passion was for fox-hunting) with an active interest in improving his estate. He also assisted in the development of Winchester and Alexandria, and supported the construction of a Potomac River canal. 
Fairfax avoided having to take sides during the American War of Independence and was able to maintain his property intact when other estates were confiscated. At the time of his death he had amassed a considerable fortune ($47,377 3's'. 9died in Virginia currency), which made him one of America's richest men. Despite his wealth, Fairfax favoured a simple life and was known for his generosity. He died at Greenway Court on 9 December 1781, and was buried at the parish church of Winchester, Virginia. On his death he was unmarried and had no children, and the title passed to Robert Fairfax, his only surviving brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 9095


Fairfax, Sir William (bap. 1610, d. 1644), parliamentarian army officer, was baptized in Steeton Chapel, Bolton Percy, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the second son of Sir Philip Fairfax of Steeton ('bap'. 1586, died 1613), and his wife, Frances Sheffield (died 1615), daughter of Edmund, Baron Sheffield and earl of Mulgrave, and his wife, Ursula. Sir Philip's extravagance at court left the estate in debt, and William was raised by his grandmother, Mabel, Lady Fairfax, after the early death of both his parents. He was probably the William Fairfax who matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1625, graduated BA in 1628, and was created MA in 1633. In 1629 he married Frances Chaloner (1610-1692/3), daughter of Sir Thomas Chaloner of Guisborough in Cleveland, and sister of the regicide Thomas Chaloner. In appearance Fairfax was a very tall man with dark eyes and brown hair. 
Fairfax was knighted by Charles I at Whitehall on 1 June 1630. On the death of his elder brother Edmund in 1636 he succeeded to the family estates at Steeton and Newton Kyme, and he settled at Steeton in 1640. In July 1641 he accepted a captaincy in his uncle Ferdinando, second Baron Fairfax's regiment of trained bands and by October he was serving as a West Riding JP. He accompanied his cousin Sir Thomas Fairfax (later third baron) to confront the king with a parliamentarian petition on Heworth Moor outside York on 3 June 1642. 
William Fairfax probably already possessed considerable military experience, for in August 1642 he travelled south to assume command of an infantry regiment in the earl of Essex's parliamentarian army. He fought at Edgehill, where most of his regiment fled 'in despight of the officers' ('Two speeches of the Lord Wharton'). Accompanied by his officers, he joined Lord Fairfax's northern army at Selby in December 1642. Sir William raised a new regiment around Bradford, and commanded the parliamentarian infantry at the capture of Leeds on 23 January 1643. He was briefly governor there, before delivering Lord Fairfax's offer of protection to the queen at Bridlington. On his return his forces occupied Pontefract town, where they blockaded the castle during March 1643. He was among the victorious commanders at Wakefield on 21 May, where the royalist Sir George Goring was captured. Fairfax was in London questioning Goring on 11 August. In November he travelled to King's Lynn to persuade the earl of Manchester to advance against the royalists at Chesterfield, and wrote to his wife from Boston: 'for Thomas's partt and mine we rest neither night nor day, nor will willingly till we have done God some good service against his and our enimyes' (Markham, 'Life of Robert Fairfax', 14). He commanded a wing of cavalry at Nantwich on 25 January 1644, and was subsequently engaged in the siege of Lathom House. In May, recovering from a fever, he joined the allied army before York, and he commanded an infantry brigade on the allied right at Marston Moor on 2 July. 
In August 1644 Fairfax was sent into Lancashire with 2000 cavalry and was present at the siege of Liverpool. He was mortally wounded relieving Montgomery Castle on 18 September 1644, and died the following day. Lord Fairfax reflected: 'blessed be God, the victory obtained over our enemies doth abate my sorrow for any particular friends' ('CSP dom.', '1644', 529), while Sir William's widow 'grieved not that he died in the cause, but that he died so soon that he could do no more for it' (Markham, 'Life of Robert Fairfax', 23). In 1647 he appeared as third on a list of slain parliamentarian worthies (J. Ricraft, 'A Survey of England's Champions and Truths Faithful Patriots', 1647, 155). He died without making a will to provide for his children so parliament voted his widow $1500. On 7 September 1655 the council of state voted a further $2000 from his pay arrears. 


@@@@@


doc= 9096


Fairfax, Sir William George (1739-1813), naval officer, was born on 8 March 1739, possibly at Windlesham, Bagshot, the son of Joseph Fairfax, an officer of the Horse Guards, of Bagshot, Surrey, and grandson of Joseph Fairfax of Saxton, Yorkshire. Fairfax entered the navy in 1750 in the 'Centurion', under Augustus Keppel, in the Mediterranean and then served in the 'Mars' and the 'Garland' under Marriot Arbuthnot. He was promoted lieutenant on 20 December 1757 in the 'Duke'. From 1758 to 1760 he was in the 'Eurus' in North America with Captain John Elphinston in the operations in the St Lawrence. Fairfax had no further employment until June 1766, when he was appointed to the 'Greyhound', and from June 1769 to September 1776 he was again on half pay as a lieutenant. In May 1778 he was promoted to the command of the cutter 'Alert'. In the following month, while attached to the Grand Fleet under Keppel, and in company with the 'Arethusa', the 'Alert' captured the French lugger 'Coureur', at the same time that the 'Arethusa' was beaten off in her celebrated fight with the 'Belle Poule'. In August, however, the 'Alert' was herself captured by the frigate 'Junon' (40 guns), and Fairfax was detained as a prisoner during the greater part of the American War of Independence. In January 1782 he was promoted to post rank, and appointed to the frigate 'Tartar' in the West Indies, which he commanded until the peace in 1783. In 1793 he was appointed to the 'Sheerness' in which (and in the 'Repulse') he remained until 1796. He was then in the North Sea Fleet, and was appointed flag-captain to Admiral Adam Duncan, the commander-in-chief of the fleet. In the 'Venerable' with Duncan he shared in the difficulties of the mutiny of 1797 and the famous victory at Camperdown, where his services were rewarded by his being made a knight-banneret. He continued in command of the 'Venerable' until 1798. On 7 January 1801 he was promoted to flag rank, but though considered for the third post in the Baltic fleet of 1801, he appears to have offended George, second Earl Spencer, the first lord of the Admiralty, and had no further service. He was advanced to vice-admiral on 13 December 1806. He was twice married: first, in 1767, to Hannah (died 1770), daughter of the Revd Robert Spears of Burntisland; secondly, in 1772, to Janet Margaret, daughter of Samuel Charters, and cousin of Sir Samuel Greig, an admiral in the Russian service; the couple had four sons and two daughters, several of whom died young. The fourth and then only surviving son, Henry, was created a baronet in 1836 as a recognition of his father's services, while one of the daughters, Mary ['see 'Somerville, Mary], married first Samuel Greig the younger, and then William Somerville. William George Fairfax, who is generally referred to by both his Christian names, settled in Burntisland, Fife, where he had property, possibly derived from his first wife or her family. He died in Edinburgh on 7 November 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 9097


Fairfield, Charles (c.1759-1804), painter, of whose parents nothing is known, is best known as a copyist of the works of the Dutch and Flemish masters of the seventeenth century. These were extremely well done, and were eagerly sought after by dealers, who disposed of them as originals. A copy by him of Teniers's 'Le bonnet rouge' was 'of the most striking perfection of finish and tone, capable of deceiving any one could it have but age' (Anderdon). 
Fairfield did also produce original works of great merit. His small, brilliantly coloured landscapes have been compared in style to those of George Morland. Yet Fairfield was diffident, modest, and lived a secluded life, never really pursuing the full potential of his own talents. He etched a few plates, including 'Cavalier at the Door of an Inn', after Metsu. He is also known to have been employed painting figures into the landscapes of his contemporaries such as John Rathbone. He died in Brompton, London, in 1804 aged about forty-five. His obituarist noted that he sold his pictures: 'at a very low rate, and never represented them otherwise than as copies by himself. Notwithstanding Mr. Fairfield's great merit, he was never in easy circumstances, and for a great part of his laborious life was under the clutches of the griping and unconscientious picture-dealer, who gathered the fruits of his labours by practising deceits upon the world. ('GM')' 



@@@@@


doc= 9098


Fairholt, Frederick William (bap. 1813, d. 1866), artist and antiquary, was born in London and baptized on 18 July 1813 at St Anne's, Soho, the sixteenth and only surviving child of a Prussian immigrant, whose name, Fahrholz, was Anglicized when he settled in London, and his wife, Sarah, the daughter of a Spitalfields silk weaver of Scottish origin named Dugweel or Dugwell. Initially Fairholt worked in his father's trade as a tobacco manufacturer. He developed an early interest in literature and drama and, from the age of twelve, received regular drawing lessons. Intrigued by woodcuts in books of border ballads and Scottish legends, he contributed his first wood-engraving to 'The Mirror'. In 1831 he won the silver Isis medal of the Society of Arts for a watercolour copy of a landscape drawing. He became a drawing teacher, though he also gained employment as an assistant scene-painter. Illness led him to print colouring, for which he earned 10's'. a week. John Jackson employed him to copy Hogarth prints for $1 a week. In 1835 he became an assistant to the wood-engraver Stephen Sly (earning $3 to $6 weekly), through whom he began to draw and engrave for Charles Knight's publications, notably the 'Penny Magazine' and 'London'. 
Fairholt's first major commission was for around 200 drawings on wood for J. Jackson and W. A. Chatto's 'Treatise on Wood Engraving' (1839). From 1839 he was employed as artist and writer for the 'Art Union' (from 1848 the 'Art Journal'), for which he served as an assistant editor under Samuel Carter Hall. His fidelity as a draughtsman and his antiquarian knowledge, particularly of medieval art and customs, were much in demand for the illustration of learned publications. He drew and wrote regularly for the Society of Antiquaries (of which he was elected fellow in 1844), the British Archaeological Association (member), and the Numismatic Society (elected member in 1845). His illustrated antiquarian works include Charles Roach Smith's 'The Antiquities of Richborough' (1850), Thomas Wright's 'Archaeological Album' (1845), and 'Miscellanea graphica' (1854-7) by Lord Londesborough, whom he accompanied to southern France and Rome in 1856 and later to Egypt. Among Fairholt's best-known works as author and illustrator are 'The Lord Mayors' Pageants' (1843-4) and 'Costume in England' (1846), and, as editor, 'A Dictionary of Terms in Art' (1854). His dexterity enabled him to etch, coins especially, direct on the plate without preliminary drawing. 
A methodical worker, Fairholt signed his engravings 'F. W. F.' Kind, unassuming, and companionable, he had a wry sense of humour that was reflected in his caricature drawing. Since he strongly disliked the country, he spent his busy life chiefly in London, where he died from tubercular consumption on 3 April 1866, at 22 Montpelier Square, Brompton Road, Kensington. He was buried in Brompton cemetery. He bequeathed his Shakespearian collection to Shakespeare's birthplace in Stratford upon Avon and other material to the Society of Antiquaries and the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 9099


Fairland, Thomas (1804-1852), lithographer and engraver, took an interest in drawing at an early age and worked from nature in London's Kensington Gardens; later he studied under Fuseli at the Royal Academy, where he gained a silver medal for a drawing of a cast of Hercules which then stood in the academy's entrance hall. On leaving the academy he became a pupil of the line engraver Charles Warren, but in the late 1820s he was attracted to lithography, which was then challenging engraving in several fields of printmaking. About this time he exhibited a few works at the Suffolk Street Galleries (1828-33). Lithography seems to have suited his talents as a draughtsman, and he soon became one of the best-known reproductive lithographers in Britain, though he had no reputation at all as an original lithographer and therefore hardly figures in the literature of the subject. His reproductive lithography includes work after his British contemporaries, among them A. Cooper, R. Farrier, C. Hancock, and Edwin Landseer, and after major artists such as David, Matsys, and Raphael. A volume of 'Comic Sketches' (1844), after W. Hunt, is said to have been particularly popular, and his reproduction of a cartoon of the 'Virgin and Child' by Raphael attracted attention. He also lithographed many portraits, pictures of animals, and plates for drawing books. Though his work as a lithographic draughtsman was much admired in its day, it was also criticized. An anonymous contemporary writer referred to the comic pictures he lithographed after Farrier as done 'with great boldness and spirit', but noted that 'He does not succeed, however, in producing clear and brilliant tints and effects, and consequently his style appears heavy when it would otherwise be forcible' ('Library of the Fine Arts', 210). 
With the passing of time Fairland has come to be seen as one of the minor reproductive lithographic draughtsmen of the second quarter of the nineteenth century. In 1829 he lithographed two plates, as did his brother William, for Flaxman's 'Lectures on Sculpture', and by 1830 the two men were listed as working together as lithographic printers in London. From the late 1830s into the 1840s Fairland worked as a lithographic printer on his own account from 45 St John's Square, Clerkenwell, sometimes printing his own lithographs. As a draughtsman he appears to have had no firm allegiance to any one printer and his lithographs were printed by several firms: Hullmandel, Day, Graf, and M. and N. Hanhart. Nevertheless, in 1842 he submitted affidavits (as did William Day and Jeremiah Graf) in support of Charles Hancock in his dispute with Charles Hullmandel over the latter's lithotint patent. He also worked as a portrait painter, undertaking commissions for eminent people, including royalty. Despite a large output of reproductive lithography, he struggled to make a good living from his work; he was not helped by long-term health problems, which led to his premature death on 22 October 1852, at his home, 15 Aberdeen Place, Marylebone. 
His younger brother William Fairland ('b'. 1806), also an engraver and lithographer, took up lithography before him; among his earliest lithographs are some fine plates for the second volume of George Simpson's 'The Anatomy of the Bones and Muscles' (1825). 


@@@@@


doc= 9100


Fairless, Thomas Kerr (1825-1853), landscape painter, born at Hexham, Northumberland, was one of the sons of Joseph Fairless of Hexham, an antiquary. He showed an early talent for art, which was encouraged by his parents. He was a dedicated student of Thomas Bewick's vignette engravings, and for some time worked under Bewick's pupil, the wood-engraver Isaac Nicholson, in Newcastle upon Tyne. Dissatisfied with his progress, he went to London and devoted himself to landscape painting, executing works in a broad and vigorous manner with a keen eye for colour and the beauties of country scenery. From 1848 to 1853 he exhibited twenty-two paintings at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists. He also gave lessons in drawing and painting. As well as landscapes, he painted views of the sea and shipping scenes, and intended to practise his art in Scotland and on the continent. However, his health broke down, and in August 1851 he returned to Hexham, where he died on 14 July 1853, in his twenty-eighth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 9101


Fairlie, Robert Francis (1830-1885), civil and mechanical engineer, was born in Glasgow on 5 April 1830, the son of T. Archibald Fairlie, an engineer, and his wife, Margaret McCall. He gained practical experience of locomotive design and construction at Crewe and Swindon. His first appointment was in 1853 as engineer and general manager of the Londonderry and Coleraine Railway, but he did not stay long in Ireland before accepting a post with the Bombay and Baroda Railway of India. 
By the early 1860s Fairlie had returned to Britain and set up in business at 56 Gracechurch Street, London, as a railway consultant. On 5 January 1862 he married Eliza Ann (1844?-1907), daughter of the well-known New Cross builder of small locomotives, George England. The couple had five children. According to his 'Times' obituary, Fairlie had been married once before. 
In 1864 and 1865 Fairlie patented his ideas for an articulated locomotive intended to meet the problems of railway operation in mountainous areas, with sharp curves and steep gradients, at the same time reducing the need for heavy expenditure on civil works and permanent way. He was not the first to consider this concept, but earlier experiments in the United States and Belgium had not been successful, and Fairlie led the way in arriving at a practical solution. His first locomotive type consisted of two powered bogies pivoted at each end of a frame, which carried the boiler, together with fuel and water supplies. The boiler had two barrels back-to-back, with a central firebox and cab, and smokeboxes at the outer ends. Thus, the whole of the weight of the fuel and water, as well as that of the locomotive, was used for adhesion, while the pivoting of the bogies afforded a flexibility which a long fixed wheelbase could not provide. Initial difficulties in steaming were resolved by the provision of separate fireboxes, and problems in providing suitable steam and exhaust connections to the cylinders were also overcome. 
The first two locomotives built under the patents were for the Neath and Brecon Railway in 1865 and the Anglesey Central Railway in 1866. They were constructed by J. Cross of St Helens, Lancashire, who also built three locomotives for Queensland, Australia, which were, however, rejected because of defective construction and working. After this inauspicious start, the order for a double engine by the Ffestiniog Railway Company, placed with George England in September 1868, marked an important turning point. This was delivered in August 1869 from Hatcham ironworks, which was, by that time, being run by Fairlie and partners as the Fairlie Engine and Steam Carriage Company. 

'Little Wonder', as the locomotive was called, was designed to haul slate trains on the 1 ft 111/2 in. gauge Ffestiniog Railway in north Wales, a hilly line with tortuous curves. At several sets of trials it demonstrated its capacity to haul much heavier loads than previous locomotives. Its performance demonstrated the practicability of low cost narrow gauge railways to carry substantial loads in difficult country, a principle which was extended to many parts of the then developing world. 
Modifications of the original design were introduced in later years, some with single boilers and others featuring one powered and one trailing bogie. Many were built for overseas railways, notably in Australia, Brazil, New Zealand, and Russia. On the Moscow and St Petersburg line 'Fairlie's Railway' was so successful that the tsar had a special gold medal struck in Fairlie's honour. The concept was also taken up in America by the Mason Machine Works of Taunton, Massachusetts, who built some 150 locomotives known as Mason-Fairlies between 1871 and 1889, all except the first being to the single boiler design. Later, construction was carried on by the American Locomotive Company until 1914. 
Around the turn of the century attention began to be centred on the Kitson-Meyer and Beyer-Garratt types of articulated locomotive, in which steam for the powered bogies was supplied by a single large boiler; later Fairlie designs, known as 'Modified Fairlies', had many points of resemblance to these. Eventually, some fifty-two railways were to see Fairlie locomotives, which continued to be built into the 1920s, notable examples being three for Mexico, turned out in 1911 and weighing 138 tons. 
From 1870 onwards Fairlie secured orders for patent locomotives for railway development all over the world. However, he was more than a locomotive engineer, and offered a comprehensive design and construction package, including rolling stock, generally featuring his type of locomotive. He advocated narrow gauge lines (but of wider gauge than the Ffestiniog Railway) permitting the use of sharp curves and steep gradients. In 1872 he published 'Railways or No Railways', which developed his ideas. By the early 1870s Fairlie's business had become a design agency called the Fairlie Engine and Rolling Stock Company, with its locomotives being built by the Vulcan Foundry, the Avonside Engine Company, and Yorkshire Engine Company to virtually standard designs. Fairlie was a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 1857-72. 
In December 1873 Fairlie was commissioned to undertake a number of railway projects in the republic of Venezuela. He suffered sunstroke soon after landing at Trinidad, and this was followed by jungle fever while surveying the marshes near Puerto Cabello. Fairlie returned to Britain, but his health never fully recovered. However, he continued his business, selling patent locomotives. 
Fairlie died at his London home, Woodlands, 13 Church Buildings, Clapham, on 31 July 1885. His business interests were continued by his children, three of whom made their lives in Peru and Chile. One of them, Frank Archibald Fairlie, was locomotive superintendent of the Nitrate Railways (1911-20) and, as such, had the care of locomotives built to his father's designs. 
Fairlie's contribution to the development of the steam locomotive lay in the application of basic principles to a novel form of construction. His ideas were later improved upon but, on a number of railways in hilly terrain, his designs lasted until the steam locomotive itself was replaced by diesel or electric traction. 


@@@@@


doc= 9102


Faithorne, William (c.1620-1691), engraver, was apprenticed in the Goldsmiths' Company to the printseller William Peake for ten years from 9 October 1635, and the date of birth given here is deduced from this; the traditional date of about 1616 is derived from Buckeridge's assertion in 'An essay towards the English school' that he died aged near seventy-five. The entry records that his father was Daniel Faithorne of London, a lorimer (bridle maker for horses). Peake was the eldest son of Robert Peake, serjeant-painter to James I, and inherited his printselling and stationery business. He was not himself an engraver, and the statement of Faithorne's early biographer John Bagford that he was trained by John Payne is therefore entirely believable. On William Peake's early death in 1639, Faithorne was turned over to complete his apprenticeship with William's son Robert, who had taken over the business and was not an engraver either. The situation was hardly conventional, because in the early 1640s, while Faithorne was still notionally an apprentice, Peake published no fewer than sixteen portrait engravings signed with Faithorne's name. None gives the name of a designer, and they were evidently drawn by Faithorne himself from life or another picture. 
The ancestral connection of the Peake family with the royal court ensured that, when Charles I raised his standard at Nottingham in August 1642, Peake enrolled in the royalist army, and Faithorne went with him as an ensign. The two men served in the garrison of Basing House during its long siege and were both captured when it fell in October 1645. Faithorne was then imprisoned in Petre House in Aldersgate Street, but was evidently allowed to take up engraving again, for four plates were published by Peake's associate Thomas Rowlett. Three were of such arch-royalist subjects as the prince of Wales, Prince Rupert of the Rhine, and Endymion Porter, and were after paintings by William Dobson, who had also been apprenticed to William Peake. In style they imitate the manner of the then fashionable Claude Mellan, using parallel lines rather than cross-hatching to create tone. The fourth plate was of the parliamentary general Thomas Fairfax, a print collector himself, and it may have been through his intercession that Faithorne's imprisonment was commuted to banishment. The date of this is not certain, but was probably in 1647 or 1648. 
Faithorne went to France, where Bagford records that he was much helped by another great print collector, the Abbe Marolles, whose first collection was purchased by Louis XIV in 1667 and now serves as the foundation of the 'cabinet des estampes' in the Bibliotheque Nationale. During these years Faithorne earned a living by making plates for Parisian publishers, especially Herman Weyen. Under the influence of Robert Nanteuil he began to make his own finished portrait drawings in black chalk, both as objects in their own right and as the basis for engravings. He also altered his manner of engraving, which, as George Vertue noted, now reflected that of Antoine Masson. 
Faithorne was still in Paris in February 1651, when he signed a petition with twenty-seven of the leading figures of the French print world against a proposed tax on print production, but was back in London by November 1652, when he was made free of the Goldsmiths' Company, having completed his term of service 'long since'. His close links with the international print trade enabled him to establish his own print shop, first 'at the Sign of the Ship within Temple Bar' (by 1654) and then 'next to the Sign of the Drake without Temple Bar' (by 1662). There he took on the role of the old Peake shop as the main importer of foreign prints. He also dealt in artists' materials, and published in 1662 his own translation, 'The Art of Graveing and Etching', of the 'Traite des manieres de graver en taille douce' which had been written by Abraham Bosse in 1645; he dedicated it to his old master, Robert Peake. Its publication was linked with the appearance of John Evelyn's 'Sculptura' in the same year, and Evelyn abandoned his own translation of Bosse so as not to compete with Faithorne's work. 
Faithorne continued to engrave himself, and during the 1650s and 1660s made his finest plates, which are of high quality by any standards. His supremacy in London was challenged only by Pierre Lombard and later by David Loggan. These single-sheet portraits he published himself, but his output of this type was small. Most of his plates were made as frontispieces for booksellers, and their quality was much more ordinary. As a publisher, he expanded his range beyond an exclusive concentration on portraiture. A major undertaking was a twelve-sheet map of London published in 1658, which is now extremely rare. He also published many anonymous plates, often copied from continental originals, which he must have had made by apprentices in his shop. 
At the Restoration Faithorne was appointed (on 12 October 1660) engraver in copper to the king, doubtless in reward for his devotion to the Stuart cause. Curiously he made no mention of this on his plates, and the appointment remained unknown to his early biographers. He was elected to the livery of the Goldsmiths' Company in May 1660, and served as second warden in 1683 and 1684. In 1679 he declined the position of touchwarden and, in place of paying a fine, presented the company with a painting of Sir Martin Bowes that still hangs in the court room. A marked decline in his output and quality may be seen in the 1670s, and he must have been severely put out by the arrival of Abraham Blooteling and Gerard Valck in 1673 and of Peter Vandrebanc in 1674. At some point in the 1680s he left his shop and retired to a house in Printing House Yard, Blackfriars. Bagford says that he continued engraving there, but the surviving works from his last years are mostly portrait drawings, usually made in the fashionable medium of coloured crayons. 
Samuel Pepys and Robert Hooke record many visits to Faithorne's shop in their diaries. On 7 November 1666, for instance, Pepys went to buy some prints for his wife to copy, and saw there Faithorne's copy in coloured chalks from Peter Lely's painting of a countess, which he was using as the basis for his engraving. Pepys thought it the finest thing he had ever seen in his life and tried to purchase it, but Faithorne would not sell it until he had finished correcting his plate from it. 
Soon after his return from Paris, Faithorne married Judith, who was, according to Bagford, the sister of 'the famous Captain Grand' (despite his fame, his identity remains uncertain). She was buried in St Ann Blackfriars on 26 December 1690, and a few months later, on 13 May 1691, Faithorne too was buried there. He made bequests in his will to his two sons, William and Henry, and to a married daughter, Judith Thorpe. The elder son, William Faithorne (c.1670-1703), entered his father's trade. 
Faithorne was the finest native-born engraver working before the eighteenth century, and when the art of line engraving reached its apogee of critical esteem at the end of the eighteenth century this became of great importance. Horace Walpole elevated Faithorne into the English equivalent of Robert Nanteuil and the other great seventeenth-century French engravers, and this fed a collectors' frenzy that ensured that fine proofs of Faithorne's prints fetched extraordinary prices. In the sale of Sir Mark Masterman Sykes's collection in 1824, his Faithorne engravings fetched a total of $1271. These prices proved unsustainable, and in the inevitable reaction Faithorne and his work fell into an equally indefensible critical oblivion. 


@@@@@


doc= 9103


Faithorne, William (c.1670-1703), engraver, was the eldest son of the engraver William Faithorne (c.1620-1691), and his wife, Judith (died 1690), said to be the sister of Captain Grand. He was apprenticed to his father for eight years on 2 January 1683 in the Goldsmiths' Company. He never took up his freedom. As an artist Faithorne the younger is known only as the author of forty-three mezzotint plates. The earliest, datable 1688-9, were published by Grace Beckett, the widow of Isaac Beckett, and by William Beckett, who was probably Isaac Beckett's son. 
One further plate from the same years was published by Faithorne's father, who emerged from retirement to do so. This lends support to John Bagford who, in his biography of the father, says in his inimitable spelling that 'the misfortune of his eldest sonne mutch broke his sperits althou of a rabust and stron constitusion' (Colvin, 133). George Vertue noted that the younger Faithorne never published one of his own plates, and comments that 'he was somewhat negligent of his affairs that put him under a necessity of working for them [publishers]' (Vertue, 1.141). It was presumably this same incompetence that prevented his taking over his father's business. 
Faithorne was bequeathed two-thirds of his father's estate in 1691, and henceforth most of his plates were published by the leading London printseller Edward Cooper. His last datable plate is of the duke of Ormond, which was made in or shortly after October 1702. As a mezzotint engraver, in Vertue's opinion, Faithorne 'arrived to a considerable perfection' (Vertue, 1.141), but he has never been regarded as a major figure in the history of English mezzotint. Faithorne was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 7 February 1703. Vertue states that he died young, aged about thirty. This would place his birth around 1673, but this is probably a few years too late, given that he was apprenticed in 1683. 


@@@@@


doc= 9104


Falconbridge, Alexander (c.1760-1792), doctor and slavery abolitionist, whose family was associated with Bristol, where he grew up, spent twelve months in 1779-80 as a pupil in Bristol Infirmary. Too poor to start his own practice, he became a surgeon on board a slave ship -- a potentially lucrative employment since surgeons received, as well as their salary, 1's'. a head per slave landed, and the chance of eventually becoming a ship's captain. Between 1780 and 1787 he sailed on four ships which took him along the west coast of Africa, chiefly to the Niger delta, and to the Caribbean. On his first two voyages he served under a captain whom he later described as one of the best in the trade. Then, under a brutal captain named Mactaggart, he became sickened by its conditions. In 1787 he left it in disgust and went back to working as a pupil with a Bristol doctor. 
In spring 1787 Thomas Clarkson, one of the founders of the committee for effecting the abolition of the slave trade, went to Bristol to gather evidence. Falconbridge, alone among those he questioned, was courageously ready to testify publicly to the horrors of the traffic in slaves. He accompanied Clarkson to Liverpool to gather more information, and also to act as his bodyguard -- Clarkson called him 'an athletic and resolute-looking man' (Clarkson, 1.318) -- then to London to report his findings to the committee. He also gave evidence to a privy council committee, and underwent four days of hostile grilling by a House of Commons committee. With the help of Richard Phillips, an abolitionist lawyer, he reduced his voluminous material to a substantial pamphlet, published in 1790 as 'An Account of the Slave Trade, on the Coast of Africa', the first piece of published abolitionist propaganda. He sold the copyright to the abolition committee which printed 6000 copies, and with the proceeds set up as a doctor at Lodway, near Bristol. There on 16 October 1788 he married Anna Maria Horwood ('b'. 1769) ['see 'Falconbridge, Anna Maria]. 
In 1790 Clarkson recruited Falconbridge to go out to Sierra Leone on behalf of the St George's Bay (renamed later Sierra Leone) Company, a company that blended commercial profit with abolitionist philanthropy, to refound a colony of free black settlers, established there three years earlier, but dispersed after a quarrel with their Temne neighbours. His wife accompanied him, and in 1794 was to describe their experiences in her 'Narrative of Two Voyages'. A passionate abolitionist, he quarrelled with the local slave traders, but managed to reassemble the dispersed settlers, and to persuade Naimbana, the Temne ruler, to let them return. He and his wife then sailed home in a tiny boat, narrowly escaping shipwreck. 
The Sierra Leone Company was controlled by its chairman, Henry Thornton, a London banker. Realizing that Falconbridge, with his knowledge of the country, was indispensably necessary to the project, Thornton tempted him to return as commercial agent with a $300 salary, even though he knew he had no commercial experience. Falconbridge accepted, returned with his wife, and got Naimbana to approve the foundation of what was now named Freetown. The company's employees soon began quarrelling and all was in confusion until order was restored by Clarkson's brother John, a naval lieutenant, who arrived from Nova Scotia in 1792 with over a thousand black American loyalist settlers, and was eventually appointed governor. 
During the first months many settlers fell ill. Mortality was high and Falconbridge was active as a doctor. But he made no attempt, as commercial agent, to initiate trade with the neighbouring peoples. He had by now taken heavily to drink: even on the voyage out, at Tenerife, he had been noisily and publicly drunk. Thornton saw him as expendable and sent out a new commercial agent to replace him. A few days after the new agent's arrival at Freetown, Falconbridge, now in a state of almost permanent intoxication, died, on 19 December 1792, in Freetown, where he was buried. 
Falconbridge's reputation suffered posthumously. Thornton singled him out as a scapegoat in his published report on the colony (1794), making him responsible for its early misfortunes, while his widow presented him in her 'Narrative' in a most unfavourable light. Both thus diminished the memory of his courageous pioneer achievements in the campaign against the slave trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 9105


Falconbridge, Anna Maria (b. 1769, d. in or after 1802?), traveller and writer, was born in All Saints' Lane, Bristol, in July 1769, the daughter of Charles Horwood (died 1787), a watchmaker and goldsmith, and his wife, Grace Roberts (died 1774). After her parents' deaths, against her family's wishes, she married on 16 October 1788 Alexander Falconbridge, formerly a surgeon employed in the slave trade, who had turned violently against it and given crucial help to Thomas Clarkson at the outset of the abolition campaign. Soon after their marriage he left his medical practice at Lodway, near Bristol, to return to the campaign as an employee of the Sierra Leone Company, a commercial company founded by Clarkson and other abolitionists to sponsor a settlement of free black people in Sierra Leone. A previous attempt, sponsored by Granville Sharp in 1787, had ended abruptly when the settlers quarrelled with a neighbouring Temne ruler, who burnt their town. Falconbridge's task was to reassemble the surviving settlers and negotiate with the Temne authorities for a new settlement. 
Anna Maria accompanied her husband, and described her experiences in a series of lively, informative letters (witness to her good education) to a friend in Bristol, intended ultimately, she openly declared, for publication. Their port of destination was a slave-trading fort, Bance Island, in the Sierra Leone River, where they were politely received by the employees, whom she, coming from a family associated with the slave trade, found sympathetic. But Falconbridge, passionately opposed to the trade, refused to let her stay there, and forced her to live on board a tiny, filthy, single-masted boat. Protracted negotiations then began with Naimbana, styled king, though in fact regent, of the Koya Temne. Anna Maria accompanied Falconbridge on some of his visits, and recounted her experiences in her letters in a light-hearted way. Eventually it was agreed a new settlement might be founded, the former settlers were gathered, and a site was prepared. Once huts were built she moved in, making light of the difficulties, 'for I now find 'tis necessary to accommodate myself to whatever I meet with' (Falconbridge, 67). 
During her stay Anna Maria observed all she could of the country and its people, their customs, religion, and economy, and wrote about what she saw with obvious enjoyment ('there is such a variety here as to afford a continual zest to the sight'; Falconbridge, 72) in a dispassionate, uncensorious way. As the heavy rains approached she and her husband embarked for England on the tiny boat. It took six weeks, through constant storms, to reach the Cape Verde Islands. Then, after nearly being shipwrecked, they were blown to the Azores, and finally reached Penzance in September 1791, seventy-eight days after embarking. 
Meanwhile the directors of the Sierra Leone Company were investing heavily in the new settlement, and had sent Clarkson's naval officer brother John to Nova Scotia to recruit settlers among the self-liberated black American loyalists located there. Falconbridge was appointed commercial agent, and in December he and his wife set out again. On arrival they found confusion, with a governing council of eight, appointed by the directors, quarrelling and giving contradictory orders. Clarkson arrived soon after with more than a thousand settlers, who began laying out Freetown. But they had arrived at the start of the rainy season. Living without shelter, hundreds fell ill and died. Anna Maria, who had kept her health, wrote, 'It is quite customary of a morning to ask 'how many died last night?'' (Falconbridge, 148). Then she too became ill with a violent fever but recovered. Falconbridge, who knew nothing about commerce and had taken heavily to drink, was dismissed by the directors, fell ill, and died on 19 December 1792. 'I will not be guilty of such meanness as to tell a falsehood on this occasion', wrote Anna Maria, 'by saying I regret his death, no! I really do not' (ibid., 169). 
Within a fortnight, on 7 January 1793, Anna Maria had remarried, celebrating with a 'convivial gala... garnished with comfort and pleasantry' (Falconbridge, 200), with her brother-in-law Captain Morley, the captain of a passing slave ship, present. Her new husband, Isaac DuBois, was one of the company's employees, a ruined and uncompensated white American loyalist from North Carolina. Meanwhile mismanagement and acrimonious party strife, which Anna Maria reported in her letters in entertaining detail, continued. Clarkson went home on leave and was dismissed by the directors, who laid all the blame on him and the late Falconbridge. Anna Maria and DuBois then left for England, travelling via Jamaica on board Morley's slave ship. 'Having heard such a vast deal of the ill treatment of slaves,' she wrote, 'I did not omit to make the nicest observations in my power, and... I had not the slightest reason to suspect any inhumanity or mal-practice was shown towards them' (ibid., 232-3). 
Having arrived in London, Anna Maria demanded from the directors money she claimed was due to Falconbridge. Her claims were summarily refused, so she published her letters denouncing the company, in particular the chairman, Henry Thornton. Three editions of her 'Narrative of Two Voyages to the River Sierra Leone during the Years 1791-1792-1793' appeared during 1794 and 1795, but the directors remained obdurate. A further edition was issued in 1802 with a new title-page which mentioned the 'improbability' of the total abolition of the slave trade, thus placing it firmly in the anti-abolitionist camp. All appeared under the name Falconbridge: DuBois's name appears nowhere in the book. 
In 1807 parliament belatedly awarded DuBois some compensation for his losses as a loyalist. The subsequent careers of him and his wife have not been traced. Anna Maria's book, the first Englishwoman's narrative of a visit to Africa, remains as her memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 9106


Falconer, Alexander, Lord Falconer of Halkertoun (1593/4-1671), judge, was the eldest son of Sir Alexander Falconer of Halkertoun (or Halkerton), Kincardineshire (died 1645/6), and Agnes (died 1634), daughter of Sir David Carnegie of Colluthie and Kinnaird and his second wife, Euphame Wemyss, and sister of David Carnegie, first earl of Southesk (1574/5-1658). He married, about April 1619, Anne, daughter of John, Lord Lindsay of the Byres (died 1609), and Anne, daughter of Lawrence Oliphant, master of Oliphant; they had two sons and a daughter. He and his wife separated in 1627 by agreement approved by the privy council. 
Falconer was appointed a lord of session on 9 July 1639, at the beginning of a turbulent period in the court's history, taking the judicial title of Lord Halkertoun. According to Fountainhall he gained office by paying his predecessor, Lord Woodhall, 7000 merks to stand down. He was reappointed 'ad vitam aut culpam' on 13 November 1641, but was removed from the session in the purge of 1649 for 'malignancy' in supporting the engagement. He was reappointed at the Restoration and remained in office until his death. Falconer was commissioner to the convention of estates in 1643-4, and commissioner to parliament in 1644-6, representing Kincardineshire. He was also a commissioner for the loan and tax in 1643; commissioner of treasury in 1645; on the committee of estates in 1645, 1646, and 1648; and on the committee of war for Kincardineshire in 1643, 1644, 1646, and 1648. He was a commissioner of supply for Kincardineshire in 1656 and 1659. He was created Lord Falconer of Halkertoun on 20 December 1646 and a privy councillor in 1661. Falconer died in Edinburgh on 1 October 1671. 
A brother, Sir David Falconer of Glenfarquhar, was also a member of the committee of war, and assented for Kincardineshire to the English parliament's tender of union in 1652, being one of twenty-one deputies elected to treat in London with the parliament. Another brother, Sir John (died 1670), was master of the (Scottish) mint to Charles I and Charles II. 


@@@@@


doc= 9107


Falconer, Sir David (1638/9-1685), lawyer and judge, was the second son of Sir David Falconer of Glenfarquhar (died before 1682), one of the commissaries of Edinburgh, and Margaret, daughter of Sir Robert Hepburn of Bearford. His elder brother was Sir Alexander Falconer of Glenfarquhar (died 1717), who was created a baronet in 1670. Falconer received an MA from Edinburgh University on 26 July 1657, studied law 'under the eye of his father' (Brunton and Haig, 405), and was admitted an advocate on 29 June 1661. He became a commissary of Edinburgh in 1661 and was knighted. Falconer married, probably around this date, Elizabeth (1635-1676), daughter of Robert Nairn of Muckersy, Kincardine, and sister of Robert Nairn, advocate, created Lord Nairn in 1681. They had one son, born on 6 August 1663, who died young. His wife was buried on 20 January 1676. 
Falconer was nominated a lord of session on 24 May 1676, and took his seat on 12 June. On 16 February 1678 he married Mary ('bap'. 1654), daughter of George Norvell, advocate, of Boghall, Linlithgowshire. They had three sons and four daughters, including Catherine, the mother of the philosopher David Hume. All Falconer's children survived him. On 2 March 1678 he became a lord of justiciary, and on 24 September 1679 he was admitted a burgess of Edinburgh. On 5 June 1682 he became lord president of session. In this capacity 'he introduced regulations tending to enlarge the attendance of judges' (Brunton and Haig, 405), which did not earn him the approbation of his fellow judges. In 1684 he was made a privy councillor of Scotland, and he was reappointed in 1685 following the accession of James VII and II. In the parliament of 1685 he sat for Forfarshire, was chosen a lord of the articles, and was nominated to the commissions on trade, the plantation of kirks and the regulation of inferior jurisdictions. 
After four days' illness Falconer died in Edinburgh on 15 December 1685, aged forty-six, and was buried on the 21st in Greyfriars churchyard in Edinburgh, where a monument was erected to his memory. His widow remarried John Hume of Ninewells. Falconer had been assiduous in collecting legal materials until the last day he sat in court. These were published by John Spottiswood in 1705 as 'Decisions of the Court of Session November 1681 to December 1685'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9108


O'Rourke, Edmund (c.1814-1879), actor and playwright, was born in Dublin about 1814, and entered the theatrical profession in 1835, playing utility parts for many years in the provinces. In 1850 he undertook the lead role in the Worcester circuit, and his last provincial engagement was in the autumn of 1854 at the Adelphi Theatre, Liverpool, where he acted Hamlet and Three-fingered Jack on the same night. While working in the country, he published a volume of poems, 'Man's Mission' (1852). 
Falconer's career as a London dramatist began with 'Heart for Heart', his first full-length verse play, which was brought out at the Lyceum Theatre under Charles Dillon's management on 6 December 1856, with much success. 'The Athenaeum' commented 'the dialogue is remarkable for noble sentiment, although the verse is not always correct' (13 Dec 1856). His next piece was 'A Husband for an Hour', produced at the Haymarket on 1 June 1857. 
Falconer had translated Victor Hugo's 'Ruy Blas', which was performed at the Princess Theatre late in 1858. During that year, he began his profitable collaboration with Michael Balfe by writing the libretto for Balfe's much-loved opera 'The Rose of Castile'. He was later to write librettos for several of Balfe's most successful productions, including 'Satanella, or, The Power of Love', first produced at Covent Garden on 20 December 1858, and the popular song 'Killarney', which remained a concert-hall favourite well into the twentieth century. During this period, his first marriage was dissolved and he married secondly a daughter of John Neville, the widow of Weston the actor. On 26 August 1858, in partnership with Webster, he opened the Lyceum, and put on the stage his own play, 'Extremes', a comedy of manners. 'The Times' commented 'The characters are sharply defined and exactly of a kind to be perfectly intelligible to a large audience' (27 Aug 1858). He followed this with another piece, 'Francesca', on 31 March 1859. 
Later that year Falconer moved to the Princess's Theatre, London, writing 'The Master Passion', first played on 2 November 1859. In the first production of Boucicault's 'The Colleen Bawn', at the Adelphi on 18 July 1860, Falconer played Danny Man, which he continued to perform throughout the original run of the piece, a period of 231 nights. 
In 1861 Falconer resumed the management of the Lyceum, and brought out on 19 August his comedy 'Woman, or, Love Against the World'. His most popular play, 'Peep o' Day', first acted in London on 9 November 1861, which was adapted from John Banim's novellas 'John Doe' and 'The Nolans', enjoyed an uninterrupted run until December 1862. Meanwhile, he contributed two comedies to the Haymarket, 'Family Wills', and 'Does He Love Me?', both starring Amy Sedgwick. In 1862 Falconer invested the $13,000 he had made at the Lyceum in a joint lease with Frederick Balsir Chatterton of the Drury Lane Theatre, for which between 1863 and 1865 he wrote and produced 'Bonnie Dundee', 'Nature's above Art', 'Night and Morning', and 'Love's Ordeal, or, The Old and New Regime'. In addition he wrote 'The O'Flahertys' and 'Galway-go-bragh', a dramatization of Lever's 'Charles O'Malley', in which he took the part of Mickey Free. As the lessee of Drury Lane, and later as the manager of the Haymarket from 1866, Falconer attempted to popularize Shakespeare, and he directed productions of 'Macbeth', 'Cymbeline', 'As You Like It', 'Henry IV', and 'Romeo and Juliet', among others. Although he employed the best contemporary actors, his Shakespeare revival was not popular, and audiences were small. 'Nothing drew good houses', remarked Edward Stirling (p. 274). In June 1864 Falconer's second wife died. By September 1866, he had lost all his investment, and resigned the lease to his partner Chatterton, who discharged his own and Falconer's liabilities. 
While at Drury Lane, Falconer had attempted to establish himself as a poet, publishing 'Memories, the Bequest of My Boyhood' in 1863, and 'O'Ruark's Bride: the Blood Speck in the Emerald' in 1865. Both collections drew heavily on his childhood in Ireland, and on traditional Irish legends, but they did not meet with any great success. After the Drury Lane disaster, Falconer attempted to revive his fortunes with his five-act drama 'Oonagh, or, The Lovers of Lisnamona', which was performed at Her Majesty's Theatre on 19 November 1866, but was such a failure that its season suddenly terminated ten days later. 
Falconer then went to America, where his play 'Peep o' Day' had won him a popular following. He toured the continent, finding special success in New York and Boston, where publications of his plays went through several editions. He remained in America for about three years, marrying an American wife and writing three new dramas. During his absence, 'A Wife Well Won' was successful at the Haymarket, which encouraged him to return to London about 1871. On his return, he produced at the Princess Theatre 'Eileen Oge', an adaptation of Balfe's light opera 'Inisfallen' on which Falconer had collaborated, and which was otherwise known as 'Killarney' from its most popular song. It was his swansong: shortly after its success, Falconer retired. He died at his home, 28 Keppel Street, Russell Square, London, on 29 September 1879, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9109


Falconer, Forbes (1805-1853), orientalist, was born at Aberdeen on 10 September 1805, the second and only surviving son of Gilbert Falconer, schoolmaster of Braeside, Fife, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Donald. He was educated at Aberdeen grammar school and at Marischal College, where he obtained prizes in classical studies. His first publications, which appeared anonymously in local journals, were also classical, consisting of metrical translations from the Greek anthology. He began his oriental studies before the age of twenty, by attending the Hebrew classes of Professor Bentley in Aberdeen, and by private study of Arabic and Persian. He then went to Paris where for five years he attended the courses of De Sacy, De Chezy, and, for Hindustani, of Garcin de Tassy. 
After short visits to several German universities, Falconer returned to Britain and settled in London as a teacher of oriental languages. For a short time he was professor of oriental languages in University College, London. He was perhaps best known for his works on Sa'di's 'Bustan', from which he published in 1839 a volume of selections, very neatly lithographed from his own transcript. He also published a translation of part of the same poem, as well as selections from several of the Sufi poets including a poem of Hafiz, signed F. F., and a critical study of the 'Sindibad Namah' in the 'Asiatic Journal'. Falconer also edited Persian texts of Jami for the Society for the Publication of Oriental Texts. The critical ability demonstrated in these texts is attested by Francis Johnson in the preface to his edition of Richardson's 'Persian Dictionary'. 
Falconer was a member of the Asiatic societies of London and Paris, and an honorary member of the American Oriental Society. He died of bronchitis on 7 November 1853 at 6 Edwardes Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 9110


Falconer, Hugh (1808-1865), palaeontologist and naturalist, was born at Forres, Moray, on 29 February 1808, one of five sons and two daughters of David Falconer and his wife, Isabel Mcrae. He was educated at the local grammar school and the University of Aberdeen, where he obtained his MA degree. He later attended Edinburgh University, learning botany from Professor Robert Graham and geology from Professor Robert Jameson, and obtained his MD degree there in 1829, his thesis being entitled 'De chorea'. He went to London soon after and there met Nathaniel Wallich and worked with him on his Indian herbarium specimens. He also worked with William Lonsdale, curator at the Geological Society of London museum and worked at the Geological Society on the Ava (Burma) collection of fossil mammals made by John Crawfurd from the banks of the Irrawaddi. Both these activities were important in directing his later career. 
Falconer went to India as surgeon with the East India Company, Bengal establishment, arriving at Calcutta in September 1830, and obtained a position in the museum of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. There he saw fossil material from the Ava collection in the museum of the Asiatic Society of Bengal and this topic was one of his first publications (1831 in 'Gleanings in Science', 3). In the course of duties he met J. Forbes Royal of the Saharanpur/Serempore Botanic Gardens and was made his deputy, and in 1832, superintendent of the gardens. His resourcefulness there in making a mercury barometer for measuring altitude from materials obtainable locally was recorded by a contemporary writer. There too, in 1832, he was shown animal fossils from the Sewalik hills in the Himalayan foothills by P. T. Cautley, which they identified as fossil mammals of Tertiary age. Over the next twenty years and more Cautley and Falconer, with few resources, investigated the Sewalik hills fossil fauna with great skill and vigour. They later discovered and investigated further Tertiary fossiliferous material deposits at the Kalomal Pass. Yet more fossil bones of this formation were found by Lieutenant William Erskine Baker and Lieutenant Henry Durand during work at Markunda, west of Jumma, which came into Falconer's possession. 
Falconer demonstrated considerable stratigraphic ability in deducing that the Sewalik fossil material was not of New Red Sandstone age (Triassic) as was supposed, but late Tertiary (it is now known to be predominantly Plio-Pleistocene) and that the deposit was of a similar sedimentary facies to the molasse of Switzerland. The mammalian fauna consisted of mastodons, elephants, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, pig, and giraffe. They also found one of the first fossil monkey skulls, a fact noted by Charles Darwin during his earliest evolutionary musings. There were fossil fishes, and among the reptilian remains of crocodiles and tortoises was a giant tortoise which caught the public imagination. Falconer's work was detailed and he is known to have captured living animals to compare their anatomy with his fossil material. In recognition of their work on vertebrate palaeontology Falconer and Cautley jointly received the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society of London in 1837. 
Falconer was sent to the north-west of India in 1837 and made initial investigations of the natural history and geology of the Salt range (in present-day Pakistan), Kashmir, and south-eastern Afghanistan. Here his health began to suffer and he returned to England in 1842 bringing with him 5 tons of fossil bones in their rock matrix. He remained in England until 1846 or 1847. In London he worked on the Indian fossils at the British Museum and also worked at the museum of the East India Company in Leadenhall Street. During this home leave work was begun on the illustrations (lithographs) for what was to become Falconer's best-known publication, his uncompleted 'Fauna antiqua Sivalensis' (1846-9). Such of the letterpress and plate description as were ever published appeared in 1868 under Sir Roderick Murchison's editorship. Falconer was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1845. In India in the same year he was appointed professor of botany at Calcutta medical college and superintendent of the Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta (1848) as successor to Wallich. It was from here that Falconer undertook botanical work associated with the introduction of tea and 'Cinchona' species, which produce quinine, into cultivation in India. He selected and arranged the Bengal exhibits for the Great Exhibition of 1851. After this he undertook the task of preparing a catalogue of the fossils in the museum of the Asiatic Society of Bengal which appeared in 1859. This was a formidable task, as few records had been kept before his time. In India he continued his palaeontological work in the Sewalik hills as best he could with the resources at his disposal. However, his health was impaired and he returned to London for good in 1855, visiting Palestine, Syria, and the Crimea (during the siege of Sevastopol) on the way. In Europe a second phase of his career began: he worked on many aspects of vertebrate palaeontology and especially Pleistocene cave fossil faunas -- elephants and mastodons being a particular interest. He developed a reputation for thorough work and became an active member of the scientific community in London. In a memoir in 1857 he concluded that there had been three species of Pleistocene fossil elephant in southern Britain, disagreeing with Richard Owen in the process, who had considered there to have been only one. He also examined flint artefacts from the Somme valley of northern France in 1858 and the fossil fauna of caves in the Gower peninsula. Falconer in 1858 excavated chipped flints in Brixham cave, and was foremost in arguing that these were tools and therefore proof of mankind's antiquity (then disputed). His discoveries were exploited by Charles Lyell in his 'Geological Evidence of the Antiquity of Man' (1863) which led to acrimonious exchanges. At this time Falconer was also one of the committee who commented on the future housing of the botanical collections in the British Museum following the death of the botanist Robert Brown. 
For health reasons Falconer spent the winters of 1858-61 in the western Mediterranean, and investigated cave faunas in Malta, Sicily, and Gibraltar. His botanical and palaeobotanical interests continued: in 1860-62 he was able to conclude that the Bovey Tracy (Devon) lignite was of Miocene age and corresponded with the better-known German deposits of the same age. In the early 1860s he visited major British, French, German, and Italian museums and examined their fossil collections. At the time of his death he was vice-president of the Royal Society and foreign secretary of the Geological Society of London. He died at his home, 21 Park Crescent, Marylebone, London, on 31 January 1865 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 4 February. 
Regrettably Falconer's large and important Sewalik hills fossil fauna collection was never fully published, partly because of his ill health in later years and partly because some of his lithographic drawings made for the project had been removed from the stones between 1845 and 1855 while he was in India. The failure to complete this work was one of the tragedies of nineteenth-century Anglo-Indian science and Falconer cannot be held entirely responsible. In 1863 Falconer published on an American fossil elephant 'Elephas columbi' and it is known that he disagreed with Sir Richard Owen on some aspects of the Pleistocene fossil elephant taxonomy from the Gulf of Mexico and felt that Owen had ignored his prior name in favour of his own name, 'Elephas texianus' (Murchison, 'Palaeontological Memoir', 215-16); the belief persists that Owen, the Natural History Museum's first director, may have suppressed the publication of some of this work until after Falconer's death. Certainly it fell to Murchison in 1867-8 to publish much of what survived of Falconer's palaeontological notes and material as 'Palaeontological Memoirs and Notes of the Late Hugh Falconer'. 
Falconer's botanical collecting was also considerable. His plant material consisted of eighty cases of dried plants and these were passed initially to the museum of the East India Company, London, and after the company's suppression (1858) to the herbarium of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. His botanical notes and coloured drawings were also passed to Kew at this time. He was commemorated in the now obsolete plant genus 'Falconeria' J. D. Hooker (Scrophulariaceae), and in 'Rhododendron falconeri' (Ericaceae). The Falconer Museum in Forres, Moray, commemorates Hugh and his brother Alexander Falconer (1797-1856). 


@@@@@


doc= 9111


Falconer, John (d. 1560), botanist, was the first English person known to possess a herbarium. His antecedents are unknown: a suggestion (Garrett, 152) that he came from Rutland lacks confirmation. Falconer was tutor in William Lucy's household at Charlecote, Warwickshire, until 1545, when his friend John Foxe succeeded him there. He was at Ferrara, and a fellow student of William Turner at Bologna at some time between 1540 and 1547. Back in England, he was ordained deacon (1550) but fled to Strasbourg in 1554; by the autumn of 1556 he had moved to Frankfurt am Main, with property valued at 500 florins. 
Herbaria had appeared, as valuable complements to accurate botanical drawings, at least by 1551, when Luca Ghini of Bologna possessed one. 'Amatus Lusitanus' (Joao Rodrigues de Castelo Branco), who had received specimens -- including 'Symphyto petraeo', common comfrey -- from Falconer, referred to the latter's collection of dried plants using 'codici cuidam consitas ac agglutinatas' ('special sheets sewn and glued'; 337): 'maister Falkonners boke' contained an Italian specimen of sea trefoil (sea milkwort) (Turner, 'Seconde Parte', fol. 11'v'). Falconer had discovered rose parsley (pasqueflower, recorded by 1551) and his collection included 'Faba aegypta' (a 'Vicia narbonensis'), 'Elaphobosco' (both 1554), and a species of 'Stachys' (woundwort; 1562). 
Seemingly, Falconer never married, and his will, made on 16 April 1558, mentions no relatives. He left to John Hales 'my Avicenna with the index' (presumably an edition of 'The Canon of Medicine', and Palamedes's 'Index'); to 'Mr Railton', 'Imagines quadrupedum et avium' (perhaps Conrad Gesner's two books of 'Icones'); and to 'Mr Dr Turner, my herball [i.e. herbarium]'. Following some small bequests, including one of 40 shillings to John Foxe in Basel, the residue of his goods, 'here on this side the seas and in England' was left to his executrix, Elizabeth Lucy. If she died before he had 'finished this my journey', her brother Thomas was to officiate instead. Falconer was then in Frankfurt, with John Hales and Gregory Railton, staying in Thomas Watts's house. 
John Falconer, 'phisicyon' (presumed, perhaps, from his knowledge of simples), was buried in St Stephen's Church, Coleman Street, London, on 11 May 1560; on 22 May, John Jewel wrote to P. M. Vermigli, saying 'Our friend Falconer is dead' ('Zurich Letters' 1.79). Probate was granted to Elizabeth Lucy on 24 May 1560. Falconer's colleagues testified to his learning, and the 'Falconera' Salisb. (perhaps 'Albuca' in the Hyacinthaceae) was apparently named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9112


Falconer, John (1577-1656), Jesuit, was the second son of Henry Falconer (died 1579) and his wife, Martha Pike (died 'c'.1579/80), and was born at Litton, Dorset, on 25 March 1577. His father was the second son of an 'ancient and rich family' (Kenny, 70), his mother a wealthy widow from a respectable Cheshire family. Both parents died while Falconer was an infant. He and his four sisters were raised by their uncle John Brook and a cousin Edward Peto. At the age of eleven Falconer was sent to the grammar school of Sherborne, Dorset, for five years. He spent a year in service to his elder brother in Wiltshire before going up to Oxford in February 1595. He studied for nearly a year at St Mary Hall, and another year at Gloucester Hall, 'but visiting his tutor only once a month and avoiding all private and public disputations thus becoming less rather than more learned' (Kenny, 70). He then 'wasted' about two years with his brother in Wiltshire before joining the earl of Essex's expedition against Spain and 'returned to London without booty (thank God)' (Kenny, 70). As a result of the expedition he decided to repent and reform his life. Influenced by Catholics in Henry, Lord Windsor's household, where he served for nearly two and a half years, he converted to Catholicism in 1598. Selling his inheritance to his brother, Falconer left England and was admitted into the English College, Rome, on 27 May 1600 under the assumed name of Dingley. Ordained priest on 20 December 1603, he entered the Society of Jesus in Rome on 18 November 1604. On 28 May 1607 he was sent from Rome to Flanders to prepare to cross into England. Arrested in England some time in 1617 or 1618 he was among the Jesuits banished in 1618. For a year he served as assistant to the master of novices at the English Jesuit noviciate in Liege. Professed of the four vows at Arras on 21 July 1619 he returned to England about 1620. Between 1621 and 1624 he ministered to Catholics in the London area. In 1624 he was transferred to the residence of St Mary, a Jesuit district that comprised Northamptonshire and Oxfordshire. Between 1631 and 1648 he served as confessor, admonitor, and spiritual prefect at English Jesuit houses in Ghent, Liege, and Watten. 
Foley assigned Falconer a spirited role in the defence of Wardour Castle against the forces of Sir Edward Hungerford in May 1643 (Foley, 3.525-32). However, according to Jesuit catalogues Falconer was in Ghent at that time. Thus it is more likely that the Falconer involved in the defence was his nephew, a secular priest with the same name. 
Falconer's first publication, 'A Briefe Refutation of Iohn Traskes Iudaical and Novel Fancyes' (1618), castigated John Traske's insistence that certain Jewish traditions and customs must be practised in Christianity. His 'Fasciculus myrrhae' (1633) and 'The Mirrour of Created Perfection' (1632) treated two favourite Jesuit themes, the Eucharist and the mother of God. 'The Life of S. Catherine' (1634) and his translation of 'The Admirable Life of Saint Wenefride' (1635) by Robert, prior of Shrewsbury, were traditional lives of the saints. The latter was probably written for the use of Catholic pilgrims to the shrine of St Winifred at Holywell, still popular despite the Reformation. In 1648 Falconer returned to London and moved to the residence of St Mary in 1651. There he died on 7 July 1656. 


@@@@@


doc= 9113


Falconer, Randle Wilbraham (1816-1881), physician, the fourth son of the classical scholar the Revd Thomas Falconer MD (1771-1839) and his wife, Frances, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Raitt, was for many years one of the leading physicians of Bath. His grandfather William Falconer MD (1744-1824) and his father had also practised there, the latter offering medical assistance to the poor while acting as a clergyman. Randle Wilbraham Falconer began to study medicine at Edinburgh University in 1835, and graduated MD in 1839. Initially he settled at Tenby in Wales, and in 1842 married Maria, daughter of John Wood of Carmarthenshire. She died in 1847, and the same year he moved to Bath, where he lived and practised until his death. In 1850 he married Sophia Harriet Frances, the younger daughter of Major-General Howard-Vyse, formerly MP for Beverley and Honiton. 
In addition to his Edinburgh doctorate, Falconer became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1866, and held the honorary title of doctor from the Queen's University, Ireland, and that of fellow from the King and Queen's College, Dublin. He was also a fellow of the Medico-Chirurgical Society of London and president of the Bath and Bristol section of the British Medical Association in 1864-5. He was physician to the Institute for Idiot Children, Bath, and physician to the Bath General or Mineral Water Hospital between 1856 and 1881. He investigated the curative virtues of the spa, and produced several works on this subject. In 'The Baths and Mineral Waters of Bath', which was first published in 1857 and which reached a fifth edition in 1871, he argued that although drinking from the springs could have unpleasant side effects, they could 'accelerate the pulse, increase temperature of the body, and excite the secretions' -- frequently more rapidly and permanently 'than might at first be anticipated' (R. W. Falconer, 'Baths and Mineral Waters of Bath', 1857, 39). His study of patients with rheumatism, sciatica, gouts, and related conditions, which appeared in 1861, was praised by 'The Athenaeum' for being 'free from the pretensions and quackery that too often disgrace the literature of mineral waters'. 
Falconer had a wide range of interests, and was fond of archaeology and botany. Much esteemed by his fellow citizens, he was also elected mayor of Bath on two occasions, served as a respected magistrate, and supported a number of civic initiatives including the successful Bath city lectures; other schemes, for a public abattoir and a public library, were less successful. After his death at his home, 22 Bennett Street, Bath, on 6 May 1881, he was celebrated by the local historian Jerom Murch as a man who, having made the world a better place, would not be quickly forgotten in Bath. Falconer was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 9114


Falconer, Thomas (1736/7-1792), classical scholar, was the son of William Falconer, recorder of Chester, and Elizabeth, daughter of Randle Wilbraham de Townsend. He matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 12 March 1754, aged seventeen, but left without taking a degree. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 20 June 1760. Being prevented by chronic ill health from practising at the bar, he led a studious life at Chester. 
His main interest was in classical antiquities but he was also a patron of literature. Anna Seward called him the Maecenas of Chester. In 1771 Foote Gower addressed a letter to him, which was published as 'A Sketch of the Materials for a New History of Cheshire'. John Reinhold Forster dedicated to him his translation of Baron Riedesel's 'Travels through Sicily, and that Part of Italy Formerly called Magna Graecia' (1773). 
A paper Falconer read to the Society of Antiquaries in 1791, on the accuracy of Pliny's description of the temple of Diana at Ephesus, was published in 'Archaeologia', 11. His other published works were 'Devotions for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by a Layman' (1786; 2nd edn 1798); 'Chronological Tables, Beginning with the Reign of Solomon and Ending with the Death of Alexander the Great' (1796); and an 'Ode to Sleep', the publication date of which is uncertain. He also left material for an edition of Strabo which formed the basis for the work brought out in 1807 by his nephew, the Revd Thomas Falconer. From the evidence of his will, Falconer does not seem to have married; he died on 4 September 1792 and was buried in St Michael's Church, Chester. There is an inscribed monument to his memory in St John's Church, Chester. 


@@@@@


doc= 9115


Falconer, Thomas (1771-1839), classical scholar, was born on 24 December 1771 in Duke Street, Bath, the son of William Falconer, MD, FRS, of Bath, and Henrietta, daughter of Thomas Edmunds of Worsborough Hall, Yorkshire. He was educated at the cathedral school in Chester, Bath grammar school, Manchester grammar school, the King's School in Chester, and Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He was a precocious boy, and some of his verses were published in 'Prolusiones poeticae' (1788). He was elected a scholar of Corpus in 1788, and graduated BA in 1791 and MA in 1795. He was elected a fellow in November 1794, vacating his fellowship after his marriage on 7 December 1797 to Frances, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Raitt, with whom he had six sons and five daughters. After taking holy orders he spent some time in Edinburgh studying medicine. He took the degrees of MB and MD in Oxford in 1822, but never practised medicine, nor did he ever do any ordinary clerical duty apart from a short curacy in Bath. His lack of preferment may have been caused by his liking for controversy: he quarrelled with the bishop of Salisbury and turned down at least one living. 
Falconer's love of argument and wide but disorganized intellectual interests are evident from his works. Many of his published sermons, including the eight Oxford Bampton lectures entitled 'Certain Principles in Evanson's 'Dissonance of the Four Generally Received Evangelists' etc.' (1811), deal critically with the views of others, although his time in Edinburgh made him sympathetic to the ideas of nonconformists. 
Falconer's classical work lay chiefly in the field of ancient geography. In 1797 he published 'The Voyage of Hanno, Translated and Accompanied with the Greek Text and Dissertations', and he left a manuscript translation of Strabo which was later completed by his son William Falconer. With his father he also wrote a 'Discourse on the Measure of the Olympic Stadium' (1805) which was appended to his father's translation of Arrian's 'Periplus'. 
Although Falconer was not a particularly distinguished scholar, he was unlucky that his edition of Strabo became notorious through a review by Payne Knight in the 'Edinburgh Review' of July 1809 which formed a famous attack on Oxford and its scholarship. Falconer's elegantly produced two-volume folio edition was published by the Oxford University Press in 1807. It was based on material left by his uncle Thomas Falconer (1738-1792). The first two books had been seen through the press by Dr Parsons, master of Balliol College, and five more had been edited by the Revd Henry Halliwell of Brasenose College, Oxford. The edition was described by Knight as a 'ponderous monument of operose ignorance and vain expense'. His criticisms of Falconer and Oxford learning were answered by a series of lengthy 'Replies' by Edward Copleston (later provost of Oriel) which form an important -- if at times complacent -- apologia for Oxford education. Copleston's vigorous defence produced a personal letter of thanks from the chancellor and the conferring on him of the degree of DD by diploma. 
Falconer's edition hardly deserves the vehemence of Payne Knight's attack. Although the text is reprinted from Almeloveen's edition (itself a reprint of Casaubon's), Falconer senior had assembled a wide and valuable array of variant readings which proved very helpful to later editors. His manuscript (preserved in the Bodleian Library) contains collations made by several European scholars of manuscripts of Strabo from foreign libraries, including Paris, Florence, Madrid, and Moscow. 
Falconer died at his home in The Circus, Bath, on 19 February 1839. Thomas Falconer (1805-1882), the county court judge, and Randle Wilbraham Falconer (1816-1881), the physician, were his sons, and John Arthur Roebuck, the radical politician, was his son-in-law. 


@@@@@


doc= 9116


Falconer, Thomas (1805-1882), judge, was born on 25 June 1805, the second son of the Revd Thomas Falconer, MD, (1771-1839), of Bath, and his wife, Frances, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Raitt of the 2nd regiment; he was a great-grandson of William Falconer, recorder of Chester. He was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn on 13 November 1823 and was called to the bar on 8 February 1830. Falconer practised as an equity draftsman and conveyancer, and from 1837 to 1840 held the post of revising barrister for the boroughs of Finsbury, Tower Hamlets, and Marylebone. In the 1830s he was an active committee member of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, playing an important part in choosing manuscripts for publication by the society. Falconer also acted as nominal editor of the 'London Review' after its foundation in 1834 by a group of philosophic radicals (including his sister's husband, J. A. Roebuck) who were dissatisfied with the 'Westminster Review'. In practice, however, he was only the sub-editor. He resigned his post in 1837, as a result of disagreements with the true editor, John Stuart Mill, who was often exasperated by what he saw as Falconer's inefficiency. Falconer also contributed a tract on 'Orange Societies' (1835) to Roebuck's 'Pamphlets for the People', and wrote an account, published by the English Presbyterian Association in 1834, of the history and legal position of English Presbyterians. 
Falconer was a laborious worker, a staunch Liberal, a committed law reformer, and an energetic opponent of abuses. He was highly critical of the policies pursued in Lower Canada regarding political prisoners detained in the aftermath of the rebellion of the 'patriotes' in 1837. He subsequently spent more than two years in travelling through North America, returning to England in December 1842. His interest in Canada continued: in 1850 he was appointed by the earl of Elgin, governor-in-chief of British North America, and his council to act as arbitrator on behalf of that province for the purpose of determining the boundaries between Canada and New Brunswick. 
On 29 July 1851 he was nominated colonial secretary of Western Australia, but after resigning his appointment he was appointed on 22 December 1851 by the lord chancellor, Lord Truro, to be the judge of the county courts of Glamorgan and Brecknockshire, and of the district of Rhayader. Falconer was an energetic county court judge, who worked tirelessly in this position, travelling twenty-two days and covering 400 miles on circuit every month. Through his dedication, he managed almost to extinguish the civil business of the assizes in Glamorgan. He was also a staunch defender of the county court system against those who doubted its efficiency. 
After sitting on the bench for thirty years he retired in December 1881. He died at 18 Royal Crescent, Bath, on 28 August 1882, in the seventy-eighth year of his age. He appears never to have married. He was a member of several learned societies, and was a traveller of much experience. He was an occasional contributor to the 'Westminster Review' and the 'Colonial Magazine', and was the author of several books and a very large number of pamphlets. 


@@@@@


doc= 9117


Falconer, William (bap. 1732, d. 1770), poet and lexicographer, was baptized in Edinburgh on 11 February 1732, which was possibly also the day of his birth. He was one of three children of William Falconer, wig maker, and Agnes Shand of the Nether Bow, Edinburgh. Nothing is known of Falconer's childhood except that he had some rudimentary schooling under one Webster before he went to sea as an apprentice, probably in the coal trade from Northumberland to London, about which he makes knowledgeable references in his poetry. 
Evidence for Falconer's seafaring life is to be adduced from his long poem 'The Shipwreck', which he claims to be autobiographical. If so, by 1749 he had completed his apprenticeship and had joined a British merchant ship in the Levant trade at Alexandria as second mate. The ship, homeward bound via Venice, was driven off course by a furious gale and was wrecked at Sunium in Greece. Falconer was one of three survivors. In 1751 he was in Edinburgh for his first publication, an ode on the death of Frederick, prince of Wales. His life for the next decade is obscure. He was almost certainly at sea in merchant ships, and there is evidence from 'The Shipwreck' that he also served in the Royal Navy and may have been in Hawke's fleet at Quiberon Bay (November 1759). A surviving logbook records that in 1760 he was serving as mate on the 'Vestal' frigate in the north Atlantic trade. 
Falconer's serious literary career began in May 1762, when he was in London for the publication of 'The Shipwreck: a Poem, in Three Cantos, by a Sailor'. The poem was favourably reviewed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' on 1 June, and the reviewer's hope that the poem would achieve for its author 'preferment in the service' was fulfilled on Falconer's appointment as midshipman on the 'Royal George' on 10 June, though with peace approaching the ship was laid up and the crew paid off in December. 
Nothing is known of the following year until Falconer's appointment as purser of the 'Glory', laid up in Chatham Dockyard in Kent. Falconer perhaps gained this post on the recommendation of Edward, duke of York, who had shown the poet some patronage. This began a period of appointments as purser of laid-up vessels ('Medway', 1767; 'Swiftsure', 1767; 'Cumberland', 1768); these positions can be regarded as sinecures since Falconer was able to employ deputies for his peacetime purser's duties, leaving time for literary pursuits. Clarke records that the captain's cabin on the 'Glory' was 'fitted up with a stove, and with every addition of comfort... in order that Falconer might thus be enabled to enjoy his favourite propensity' (Clarke, xxxv). 
The first fruit of this change from seafaring was the publication in 1764 of a second edition, extended and much revised, of 'The Shipwreck'. That spring Falconer married Jane (1734/5-1796), daughter of William Hicks, surgeon of Sheerness Dockyard. He began to engage in literary and intellectual friendships, for example with Thomas, brother of Jonas Hanway, and with John Murray, whose invitation to enter into his new publishing venture in 1768 Falconer declined. Friendship with George Lewis Scott led to the suggestion in 1764-5 that Falconer compile a nautical dictionary, an undertaking that had its origins in the copious notes of technical explanation he had attached to 'The Shipwreck'. Proposals were published in 1767, and 'The Universal Dictionary of the Marine' was published in March 1769, by which time Falconer and his wife were living in Somerset House, London. 
Falconer's reputation rests on these two major works: the 'Dictionary of the Marine' and 'The Shipwreck'. The former is a work of extraordinary care and scientific thoroughness, and it became the standard nautical dictionary until the end of sail. The popularity of 'The Shipwreck' derives from its unique character as a technically detailed seafaring verse narrative, full of pathos and sublimity, from the pen of a professional sailor. Of the three versions, the first is the most accessible to a modern reader, unembellished by the extensive refinements added later to suit contemporary taste. It was highly praised by later writers, including Byron and Coleridge, and its popularity continued into the mid-nineteenth century. J. S. Clarke's 1804 edition, followed by all subsequent editors, is textually very faulty. Falconer's other poems -- short lyrics, a political squib on Pitt, odes, and descriptive pieces -- are unremarkable. 
In the summer of 1769 Falconer agreed to sail with the East India Company commissioners who were appointed for the restoration of order in India, probably with the promise of a secretaryship on arrival. The frigate 'Aurora' sailed on 30 September; contrary to most accounts Falconer was a passenger, not the purser. After his departure a third and again much revised edition of 'The Shipwreck' was published in November. The 'Aurora' arrived at Cape Town on 6 December 1769, sailing on 22 December. She was reported in Madagascar in April 1770. Nothing was heard of her again, despite searches by the 'Morse' Indiaman in 1771. Falconer can be presumed to have died in 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 9118


Falconer, William (1744-1824), physician, was born in Chester on 23 February 1744, the younger of two surviving sons of William Falconer of the Inner Temple, recorder of Chester, and his wife and second cousin, Elizabeth, daughter of Randle Wilbraham of Townsend near Nantwich, Cheshire. After graduating MD from Edinburgh in 1766 he attended the lectures of Gaubius and Albinus at Leiden and gained a second MD on 22 May 1767. He had become an extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 12 March 1767 and in the same year was appointed physician to the Chester Infirmary. Falconer established a good practice in the town. In January 1770, however, at the suggestion of the Quaker physician John Fothergill, he moved to Bath where he lived briefly in Duke Street and then at 29 The Circus. On 18 March 1773 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and on 12 May 1784 he was appointed physician of the Bath General Hospital, a post which he retained until 10 February 1819. Falconer married Henrietta (1739-1803), daughter of Thomas Edmunds of Worsbrough Hall in Yorkshire. Their only child, Thomas Falconer (1771-1839), took holy orders and gained the degrees of MB and MD; Thomas's fifth son, Randle Wilbraham Falconer (1816-1881), followed in his grandfather's footsteps by becoming a physician to the general hospital. 
Though greatly esteemed, William Falconer was not a popular man. As the nineteenth-century commentator, R. E. M. Peach, observed: 'He was too proud and too independent to stoop to the arts of his profession... [and] had a peculiar 'brusqueness' of manner, which has been sometimes referred to as the 'Falconer' 'temper'' (Peach, 101). Despite this abrasive personality Falconer ran a successful spa practice, counting among his patients the duke of Portland, Lord Chancellor Thurlowe, William Pitt, and Horatio Nelson. A cultivated man, Falconer engaged in the activities of the Bath and West of England Society and the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. He was also a prolific writer who published over forty books as well as numerous papers. These works ranged over topics in the classics, theology, and natural history, but medicine featured most prominently, including studies of plague, influenza, and fever, the antiseptic qualities of fixed air or carbon dioxide, and the implications of climate, diet, and lifestyle for health. 'A Dissertation on the Influence of the Passions upon Disorders of the Body' (1788) won the Fothergill gold medal of the Medical Society of London in 1796. However, William Falconer was most famous for his research into the Bath waters and their impact on chronic conditions, notably rheumatism, gout, and ischias, or the hip case. The Medical Society of London awarded its silver medal to him for an essay on this last subject in 1805. 
In investigating the efficacy of the spa, William Falconer made an important contribution to later Georgian medical quantification, which contests the view that clinical statistics only emerged at the Paris hospitals after the French Revolution. Building on the mortality and morbidity ratios which James Jurin had constructed to evaluate smallpox inoculation, Falconer was an 'arithmetic observationist clinician' who recognized that numerical analysis had to accompany simple counting if patient records were to yield their full potential (Trohler, 62-4). His training at the progressive Edinburgh medical school under William Cullen primed him for this role and brought him into contact with a group of students -- including Thomas Percival and John Haygarth -- who were to become pioneers of a social medicine which used statistical comparisons to tackle problems of urban public health. Like Falconer, Haygarth joined the staff of the Chester Infirmary in the late 1760s, and his subsequent control of its fever wards received widespread acclaim. Falconer, however, applied his Edinburgh education to the evaluation of balneology after his transfer to Bath in 1770. 
Falconer was the latest in a line of medical practitioners to subject the springs to scientific enquiry. Election to the Bath Hospital, while not inducing regular attendance at its weekly management committee, did enable him to follow the example of predecessors like William Oliver and Rice Charleton, and use the patient records for research purposes. This was the source for his most sophisticated project, 'An Account of the Use, Application and Success of the Bath Waters in Rheumatic Cases' (1795). More than 400 patients with rheumatism, admitted to the hospital between 1785 and 1793, were divided into five categories according to their state of health when discharged. One-third were described as 'cured', almost four out of ten as 'much better', and 15 per cent as 'better'. Therefore, Falconer concluded that the spa was beneficial. Furthermore, by adjusting for the sex ratio, and projecting a success rate for men from the rate achieved by women, he was able to suggest that male patients responded more effectively to treatment. 
The roots of Falconer's statistical methodologies in Edinburgh medicine linked him to the religious and political radicalism which informed this intellectual culture. Though pious and an 'earnest reformer', however, he was neither a dissenter nor a committed whig, believing that the party 'cared less for reform than they did for office' (Peach, 102). Support for Edmund Burke's early reaction against the French Revolution encouraged him to respond with what Burke himself praised as a 'temperate, judicious, and reasonable paper' (Peach, 102). Moreover, Falconer joined with his conservative medical colleagues in 1792 to resist a campaign to relocate the general hospital which was articulated through the new language of social medicine. 
Falconer died at his house in The Circus on 31 August 1824. He was buried at Weston, outside Bath. A contemporary chronicler compared 'his general manner, and sententious, pithy observations... to the style and address of Dr Samuel Johnson. Science and learning... [were] indebted to his pen' (Mainwaring, 260). 


@@@@@


doc= 9119


Falconer, William (1801-1885), classical scholar, was born on 27 December 1801 at Corston, Somerset, the eldest son of the Revd Thomas Falconer MD (1771-1839) and Frances, only child of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Raitt. He was a member of a remarkable family. His paternal grandfather (1744-1824), also named William, was a physician and a writer of some twenty-five miscellaneous tracts. William the younger had two brothers, Thomas Falconer (1805-1882), jurist and writer largely on legal matters, and Randle Wilbraham Falconer (1816-1881), physician and writer on medical matters. William Falconer matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 10 December 1819, took a first in mathematics and a third in classics, graduated BA in 1823 and proceeded MA in 1827. On 30 June 1827 he was elected a Petrean fellow of Exeter College where he examined in mathematics in 1832-3 and from 1836 to 1838. In 1839 he opened the Petrean scholarship to natives of Cheshire and on 26 January the same year he was given the rectory of Bushey, Hertfordshire. On 8 August 1839 he married Isabella Jane, daughter of J. Robinson, and widow of W. S. Douglas; she died at St Alessi, near Pistoia, on 7 February 1869. 
William's father edited the text of Strabo's 'Geography' in 1807, using materials left by his uncle Thomas Falconer (1738-1792). He also left a manuscript translation of that work. Hans Claude Hamilton of the Public Record Office, antiquary and classical scholar, was appointed to translate Strabo for the 'Bohn Classical Library'. It took him three years to finish the first six books, and Falconer, as son of the Oxford editor of Strabo, known to have had a translation of the 'Geography' intended for publication, was asked to complete the translation of the remaining eleven books. The 'Notice' prefatory to the first volume of the 'Bohn' edition states that the text used for the translation was that of the edition by the German scholar Gustav Cramer. There is no mention of the two Thomas Falconers. The 'Bohn' translation did not attract much attention, the reviewer of the first volume for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' displaying his knowledge of the descent of the text of Strabo, but expressing no opinion of the translation ('GM', 2nd ser., 43, 1855, 55-6). William Falconer died at Bushey, Hertfordshire, on 9 February 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 9120


Falconet, Pierre-Etienne (1741-1791), portrait painter, was born in Paris on 8 October 1741, the son of Etienne-Maurice Falconet (1716-1791), sculptor to Catherine II of Russia. He probably underwent some training in the French Academy of Art, but his father, who was on personal terms with Sir Joshua Reynolds, sent his son to London about 1765 to work under that painter's direction. In 1766 he obtained a premium of 20 guineas for a painting in chiaroscuro, and another of 26 guineas, in 1768, for a historical composition. He was a member of the Incorporated Society of Artists, and contributed forty pictures to their exhibitions from 1767 to 1773. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1771 and in 1772 sold a portrait of his wife to Horace Walpole (exh. Society of Artists, 1772; sold Strawberry Hill sale, 1842, day 22, lot 46). He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 14 February 1769 and exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1773. 
Falconet is best known for a set of portraits of eminent artists (1768-9). Drawn in profile in blacklead, with a slight tint of colour on the cheeks, they comprise portraits of Sir William Chambers, Francis Cotes, Joshua Kirby, Francis Hayman, Jeremiah Meyer, Ozias Humphry, George Stubbs, Benjamin West, James Paine, the architect, W. W. Ryland, Paul Sandby, and Sir Joshua Reynolds (the likeness is attested by Northcote) among others. Those of Sandby and Chambers are in the British Museum, as are engraved versions by D. P. Pariset and B. Reading. Other portraits by Falconet engraved by Pariset include Horace Walpole; the Revd James Granger (frontispiece to his 'Biographical History of England', 1769-74); and the 'Earl of Marchmont' (Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh). Others were engraved in mezzotint by Valentine Green, some by J. Hibbert, J. Watson, John Dixon, Gabriel Smith, and J. F. Bause. There is a small engraving, from a design by Falconet, representing the interior of his father's studio. His engraved illustrations to his father's article on sculpture in Diderot's 'Encyclopedie' are noted to have been one of his achievements. He also engraved some designs of F. Boucher and decorated a Chinese temple for Lady de Grey at Wrest, Bedfordshire. 
In 1773 Falconet travelled to St Petersburg to join his father. He married on 30 January 1777 Marie Anne Collot (1748-1821), his father's assistant, and herself a talented sculptor. Returning to Paris in 1778, he died there on 25 June 1791, having possibly separated from his wife. His daughter, Madame Jankowitz, bequeathed a collection of his works and some plaster busts by his wife, including one of Falconet himself, to the Musee de Nancy. Three of his autograph drawings are in the British Museum. 


