@@@@@


doc= 9221


Fawcett, John (1740-1817), Particular Baptist minister and theological writer, was born on 6 January 1740 at Lidget Green, near Bradford, the son of Stephen Fawcett ('c'.1702- 'c'.1751), who died of a fever in his fiftieth year, leaving a widow and a numerous family. Fawcett's 'pious mother' ('Account', 8) encouraged him to attend Bradford parish church, where the lecturer was the headmaster of the grammar school, the Revd Butler, who instructed him in the classics. He also received help in his Latin studies from David Pratt, a Bradford Presbyterian minister. While serving his apprenticeship, he heard Whitefield preach in Bradford, considering him 'for natural, unaffected eloquence... superior to any person he ever heard' (ibid., 15). He subsequently associated with Methodists and Independents in Bradford before joining the Particular Baptists in 1758. In 1758 he married Susannah Skirrow (1735-1810), the eldest daughter of John Skirrow of Bingley, and at the age of twenty 'was diligently practising compositions in prose and verse' (Turner, 65). Considering his secular occupations injurious to his health he entered on the work of a Baptist minister, and was settled at Wainsgate in 1764, and afterwards at Hebden Bridge, both in the parish of Halifax. 
Fawcett, who was a gifted scholar, a devoted pastor, and an inspired preacher and hymn writer, declined an invitation to move to London in 1772, preferring to continue his ministry at Wainsgate, which he described as 'a dry and barren place' (Watson and Trickett, 272). His remuneration at Wainsgate never exceeded $25 per annum. He opened a day school, founded a circulating library, and encouraged and trained many young men for the Baptist ministry, moving from his farmhouse near Wainsgate to Brearley Hall at Luddenden Foot in 1776 in order to develop this work. 
Fawcett preached about 200 sermons each year, and such was his reputation as a preacher that a gallery had to be erected at Wainsgate to accommodate the large congregations, many of whom travelled long distances to hear him. In 1777 he established a second place of worship in the Calder valley at Hebden Bridge, where he continued his ministry for a further forty years. From time to time he published books on practical religion, which were well received, as well as a collection of hymns. The largest of his literary undertakings, and that by which he was best known, was a 'Devotional Commentary on the Holy Scriptures'. This was finished in 1811 and was published in two large volumes, priced 5 guineas. Following its publication, he was awarded the degrees of MA in 1793 and DD in 1811 from an American college. His object was to bring out clearly and powerfully from every chapter of scripture such views as were best adapted to promote a devotional spirit, and each part of his exposition was followed by a paragraph of 'aspirations', intended to guide the feelings of readers. Fawcett, whose health had been declining in his later years, died from rheumatic fever on 25 July 1817 in his seventy-seventh year, at Ewood Hall, Midgley. He was buried at Wainsgate Particular Baptist Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 9222


Fawcett, John (1769-1837), actor and playwright, born in London on 29 August 1769, was the son of an actor, also 
After the death of the comedian Mills in 1788, Fawcett married Mrs Mills, formerly a Miss More, an indifferent actress, who, under the name of Mrs Mills, had played Imogen at Drury Lane in 1783. Fawcett, who had risen in Yorkshire to the pinnacle of reputation, received an offer for himself and his wife from Thomas Harris of Covent Garden, who had just lost John Edwin. Thus, Fawcett's first performance in London was at Covent Garden, where he appeared on 21 September 1791, playing Caleb in 'He would be a Soldier'. Ruttekin in 'Robin Hood', Jerry Sneak in Samuel Foote's 'The Mayor of Garratt', and other characters followed. In July 1794, as Young Pranks in John O'Keeffe's 'The London Hermit', he made his first appearance at the Haymarket, where he also played with success Edwin's great part of Lingo. He then renewed his engagement at Covent Garden. In conjunction with Joseph George Holman, Alexander Pope, and Charles Incledon, he gave at the Freemasons' Hall on the Wednesdays and Fridays of Lent 1795 an entertainment of reading and music. In March 1796, in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', he played, for Pope's benefit, Falstaff, in which he was held to eclipse all his contemporaries except George Frederick Cooke. Fawcett's wife died in August 1797, leaving a daughter. Between 1797 and 1802 Fawcett played at Covent Garden during the regular season, and for the summer months was at the Haymarket, of which house George Colman, in 1799, appointed him stage-manager. About this period Colman, with Fawcett in mind, began to write the pieces in which the actor's reputation was firmly established. The first of these was 'The Heir-at-Law' (Haymarket, July 1797), in which, as Dr Pangloss, Fawcett carried away the town. Thereafter came 'The Poor Gentleman' (Covent Garden, February 1801), in which he was Ollapod; 'John Bull' (Covent Garden, March 1803), in which he played the part of Job Thornberry; and 'Who Wants a Guinea?' (Covent Garden, April 1805), in which he was Solomon Gundy. He was also, at the Haymarket (July 1798), the original Caleb Quotem in 'Throw Physic to the Dogs', a character he repeated in September 1800, when Colman introduced it in 'The Review, or, The Wags of Windsor'. In 1800 Fawcett took part with John Johnstone, Holman, Pope, Incledon, Joseph Munden, Thomas Knight, and H. E. Johnston in publishing a statement of the differences subsisting between the proprietors and performers of the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden. The case was referred to the lord chamberlain, who decided against the actors. 
About this period, Fawcett became interested in pantomime and wrote 'Obi, or, Three-Fingered Jack', which was performed with great success at the Haymarket in July 1800, with Kemble as Obi and Emery Quashee; 'Perouse, or, The Desolate Island' was derived from Kotzebue's play and performed at Covent Garden in February 1801. 'The Brazen Mask, or, Alberto and Rosalie' was written with Charles Dibdin and performed at Covent Garden in 1802; it was followed by 'The Fairies' Revels, or, Love in the Island', acted by children at the Haymarket in the same year, and 'The Enchanted Island', a ballet based on 'The Tempest', at the Haymarket in June 1804. 'The Secret Mine', written in conjunction with Thomas Dibdin, was a spectacular melodrama performed at Covent Garden in April 1812. 
Fawcett left the Haymarket in 1802, only to reappear there from 1806 to 1808, when he left it finally. On 3 Cctober 1806 he married his second wife, Anne Gaudry, an actress who, after her marriage, retired from the stage and became a wardrobe-keeper at Covent Garden. With her he had two sons, one of whom became a clergyman, and a daughter. Fawcett's connection with Covent Garden lasted from his first appearance in 1791 to his retirement from the stage in 1830. Among his later creations, the part of Rolamo in Howard Payne's 'Clari, the Maid of Milan' (May 1823) is noteworthy as revealing a serious aspect of his talents. He was also the original Bartholo to the Figaro of John Liston in Henry Bishop's version of 'The Barber of Seville' (October 1818). In September 1829 Fawcett was superseded in the management of Covent Garden. Greatly chagrined he announced his intention of quitting the stage. A benefit was arranged for the actor, and on 30 May 1830, as Captain Copp, his original character, in Howard Payne's 'Charles II', he took, after speaking an address, his farewell of the public of the theatre in which he had been a main prop for thirty-nine years. With a salary of $100 a year allowed him as treasurer and trustee of the Covent Garden Theatrical Fund he retired to a cottage at Botley, near Southampton. He was mainly instrumental there in bringing about the erection of a church in his immediate neighbourhood, of which he was churchwarden. He died of an inflammation caused by a hurt to his foot in walking on 12 March 1837, and was the first person to be buried in the church. Generally speaking, Fawcett was greatly respected. Leigh Hunt believed that no other actor could 'procure so much applause for characters and speeches intrinsically wretched', and Fawcett's Lord Ogleby, his Sir Peter Teazle, and his Touchstone ensured for him lasting fame even after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 9223


Fawcett, John (1824/5-1857), organist, the second son of John Fawcett (1789-1867), was born possibly in Bolton. He studied music under his father, was organist of St John's Church, Farnworth, Lancashire, from 1835 until 1842, and afterwards organist (until his death) of Bolton parish church, a post which had previously been held by his elder brother, Thomas, and which was taken by a sister for a year when Fawcett visited London. There he entered the Royal Academy of Music, in December 1845, studied under Sterndale Bennett, and became organist at Earl Howe's Curzon Street Church. On his return to Bolton, Fawcett resumed his duties as organist and teacher, and, in 1849, became honorary conductor of the Bolton Harmonic Society. He obtained the degree of BMus from Magdalen College, Oxford, in November 1852. His exercise, a sacred cantata, 'Supplication and Thanksgiving', was performed at the music school in Oxford, with Fawcett himself conducting, and was published by subscription in 1856. This well-written cantata is the most important of Fawcett's compositions but he also published a few songs and piano pieces. He died on 1 July 1857 at the Ducie Arms, Great Ducie Street, Cheetham, Lancashire. 


@@@@@


doc= 9224


Fawcett, John (1789-1867), composer and choirmaster, was born in the village of Wennington in Lancashire on 8 December 1789. He followed his father's trade of shoemaking until 1825, but also pursued a keen interest in music. He was self-taught, and began his studies by copying out, and even writing from memory, the scores and parts of the hymn tunes practised in the village choir. At the age of twelve he joined a singing class and learned the Lancashire sol-fa system of singing. He also joined the militia band, in which he played the clarinet, and of which he became bandmaster at seventeen. In this role he composed marches and quicksteps, but the bent of his mind led him to the writing of hymn tunes, and soon his services as a choirmaster were eagerly sought, and Fawcett was employed in this capacity successively at the St George's, the Wesleyan, and the Independent chapels at Kendal, and the Holland Wesleyan Sunday school at Farnworth, Lancashire, between 1817 and 1825. In 1825 he moved to Bolton as the choirmaster of the Bridge Street Wesleyan and the Mawdesley Street Congregational chapels there and, relinquishing at last the business of bootmaking, he devoted himself exclusively to the teaching and composition of music. He taught the piano, organ, harmonium, flute, violin, cello, double bass, singing, and composition, besides establishing musical meetings at his own house, organizing concerts of local talent, and occasionally assisting, in conjunction with London and Lancashire professionals, at small festivals in the neighbourhood. He upheld the Lancashire system of notation with some obstinacy, a quality further illustrated in the close of his interesting address, 'Choirs and choir music', prefixed to the 'Voice of Devotion' (1862), a collection of 400 popular and original hymn tunes selected and revised by Fawcett. 
Fawcett himself composed over 2000 psalm and hymn tunes, most of which were published in collections. Three sets of psalm and hymn tunes were published by him under the titles of 'The Harp of Zion', 'The Cherub Lute', and 'Miriam's Timbrel' (1862). In Lancashire these were popular. In 1840 he collaborated with Joseph Hart in the compilation of an anthology, 'Melodia divina'. Fawcett died at his home in Haworth Street, Bolton, on 26 October 1867, leaving three sons and seven daughters, his wife having predeceased him. He was buried in Bolton cemetery five days later. Two of his sons, Thomas and John Fawcett (1824/5-1857), also became musicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 9225


Fawcett, Joseph (c.1758-1804), Presbyterian minister and poet, attended the Revd Mr French's school at Ware, Hertfordshire, and in 1774 entered the Daventry Theological Academy along with his schoolmaster's son, Barron French, whose sister he afterwards married. Most of his theological training was received from Thomas Robins, who succeeded Caleb Ashworth as manager of the academy in 1775. He trained himself to preach by declaiming to the thorn bushes on Burrow Hill, near Daventry. In 1780 Fawcett became morning preacher at Marsh Street Presbyterian Chapel, Walthamstow, on the resignation of Hugh Farmer, where he soon developed both his preaching abilities and unitarian opinions. The expression of the latter led to a split in the congregation in 1786, and he resigned the following year. 
On 23 September 1782, at Ware, Fawcett married Charlotte French (died 1824), daughter of his former schoolmaster, and in 1785 he revived the Sunday evening lecture at the Old Jewry meeting-house in London. It was here that Fawcett became one of the most popular and fashionable dissenting preachers of his day, who 'so much distinguished himself by his eloquence' ('The Times'). He is said to have attracted 'the largest and most genteel London audience that ever assembled in a dissenting place of worship' ('Monthly Repository', 1817, 90). Dissenters and churchmen of all shades of opinion, together with fashionable actors like Sarah Siddons and the Kembles, were among his admirers. Wordsworth liked his sermons but saw him as unstable, later modelling the Solitary in his poem 'The Excursion' on Fawcett. 
Fawcett gave up his lectureship in 1795 and took a lease on a farm called Edge Grove, near Aldenham, Hertfordshire, to devote himself to farming and poetry. He was disturbed by the war with France and published several anti-war poems (1795-1801), as well as his sermons in two editions. Radicals admired his poems; Joseph Priestley saw his long poem 'The Art of War' 'as discovering a most exuberant imagination... some parts are very affecting' ('Theological and Miscellaneous Works', 1/2.323). 
Fawcett clearly had a talent for friendship and conversation, exercising a significant influence on both William Godwin and William Hazlitt. Godwin first met Fawcett during his first pastorate at Ware in 1778-9, and they remained lifelong friends. Fawcett was the first of the 'four principal instructors' to whom Godwin felt 'his mind indebted for improvement' (Marshall, 47). Hazlitt in later life concluded 'With him I passed some of the pleasantest days of my life. The conversation... of taste and philosophy gave me a delight such as I can never feel again... he was the person of the most refined and least contracted taste I ever knew' ('Complete Works', 8.224). Fawcett died at Edge Grove on 24 January 1804 and was buried in Aldenham churchyard on 29 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 9226


Fawcett, Joshua (1809-1864), Church of England clergyman, was born at Bradford, Yorkshire, on 9 May 1809, the second son of Richard Fawcett, worsted manufacturer. He was educated at a grammar school at Clapham, Surrey, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1829 and MA in 1836. He was ordained in 1830, and after serving curacies at Pannall, near Harrogate, and at Everton, near Liverpool, he was presented in February 1833 by his brother-in-law, Henry Heap, vicar of Bradford, to the perpetual curacy of Holy Trinity, Wibsey, Low Moor. In the following year he married Sarah Elizabeth, third daughter of the Revd Lamplugh Hird, prebendary of York. 
Fawcett was a painstaking clergyman, an enthusiastic and uncompromising advocate of total abstinence, and a popular lecturer. During his incumbency he built a new church and parsonage, the former of which was opened in 1837. As the population of Low Moor and its immediate neighbourhood multiplied, five additional churches were erected. In 1860 he became honorary canon of Ripon, Yorkshire, and chaplain to the bishop. He published 'A Harmony of the Gospels' (1836), a collection entitled 'Pastoral Addresses' (1855), and ''The flood came and took them all away', a sermon on the Holmfirth flood... to which is added a detailed account of the awful disaster at Holmfirth' (1852). His other literary activities included historical and architectural works on Yorkshire churches, notably St Peter's, Bradford (1845), and St Thomas a Beckett, Heptonstall (1849), and the editorship of the 'Village Churchman', afterwards the 'Churchman's Magazine' (8 vols., 1838-45). Fawcett died suddenly on 21 December 1864 while walking on Low Moor and was buried on 28 December in Holy Trinity churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 9227


Fawcett, Sir William (1727-1804), army officer and author, was born into an old gentry family on 30 April 1727 at Shibden Hall, Halifax, Yorkshire, the son of William Faucitt (1706-1729?) of Bull Close, Halifax, and his wife, Martha (1704-1789), the daughter of James Lister of Shibden Hall. His father died when Fawcett was an infant, and the boy's education was superintended by his clergyman uncle, the Revd John Lister (1703-1759), at the free school at Bury, Lancashire. In his youth he became fluent in German and French. He may have taken part as a volunteer with Oglethorpe's Yorkshiremen in the suppression of the Jacobite rising of 1745. With the recommendation of his neighbours Lord Rockingham and Edward Lascelles (later earl of Harewood), he joined the army as a volunteer in the Low Countries, where on 11 October 1748 he was commissioned to a death vacancy as ensign in the 33rd foot. The post-war reductions, coming immediately afterwards, put him on half pay; he was commissioned ensign once again on 19 June 1749, in the 38th foot; but marriage intervened, and he exchanged onto half pay two months later. It was on 26 January 1751 that he began his uninterrupted career, exchanging to become an ensign in the 3rd foot guards, with which regiment he was to remain for nearly twenty-eight years. 
Early in August 1749 Fawcett married Susanna (1729-1783), the daughter of John Brooke of Hampstead, who brought him $80 per annum, the interest on what Fawcett described as 'her Fortune which amounts to $2,000, payable at her age of 21' (Central Library, Halifax, SH:7/FAW). They had eight children between 1750 and 1761, three of whom -- William, ('b'. 1750); Walker Dawson, ('b'. 1754); and Oswald, ('b'. 1761) -- were commissioned in the army; William and Walker Dawson reached general rank. 
Fawcett's devotion to his profession and to the good of the service, which was to continue throughout his life, was apparent from 1754, when he published his first work, a translation of the current 'Regulations for the Prussian Infantry'. This was followed in 1757 by the first English translation of 'Reveries, or, Memoirs upon the Art of War', by Maurice, comte de Saxe. On 14 May 1757 Fawcett purchased a lieutenancy in the 3rd guards (with rank in the army as captain, in the double-rank system prevailing in the guards); and from 1 December 1757 until 21 August 1765 he served in addition as that corps' adjutant, again indicative of application to duty. In 1759 he prepared an updated revision (the '8th edition') of General Humphrey Bland's 'Treatise of Military Discipline', and the same year published another translation, 'Regulations for the Prussian Cavalry'. These were all works highly regarded in professional circles, and all were later reprinted. 
Fawcett went to the war in Germany in 1758 with the first British contingent, as aide-de-camp to the respected General Granville Elliot, and after Elliot died in 1759 was aide-de-camp to the marquess of Granby, who commanded all the British troops in Ferdinand of Brunswick's army from August 1759. Fawcett was sufficiently regarded by Granby as to be sent home with the news of the 31 July 1760 victory of Warburg, 'giving the whole account in German' to the king ('GM', 1st ser., 74, 1804, 385), for which he was rewarded with a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy dated 25 November 1760; he then returned to Germany, and served there for the remainder of the war as the field army's deputy adjutant-general and Granby's military secretary. 
During his friend Granby's 'de facto' command of the army, from 1766, Fawcett was made deputy adjutant-general, and on 24 February 1767 he purchased the 3rd guards' captain-lieutenancy, succeeding on 3 July 1767 to the captaincy of his own company. In 1770 he obtained the sinecure lieutenant-governorship of Pendennis Castle, and on 25 May 1772 he was made brevet colonel. Fawcett travelled frequently, during his career, to observe the training and drill of the armies of Europe, and was several times in attendance at the Prussian army's annual manoeuvres. In 1775 he was sent to Hanover to arrange for electoral troops to reinforce the Gibraltar and Minorca garrisons; in 1775-6 he negotiated the subsidy treaties and engaged Hesse-Cassel, Hesse-Hanau, and Brunswick auxiliaries to prosecute the war in America; and during the years following he made frequent trips to Germany to inspect and muster replacements, for which services he was rewarded with the sinecure governorship of Gravesend and Tilbury Fort. Fawcett's son William, of the 3rd guards, was to act as aide-de-camp to the Hessian contingent commanders in America, Heister and Knyphausen. Fawcett was promoted major-general on 29 August 1777, and was given the colonelcy of the 15th foot on 12 November 1778. 
In 1781, already one of the most knowledgeable and professional soldiers and tacticians of the age, Fawcett was appointed adjutant-general on the British establishment, and, on being promoted lieutenant-general on 20 November 1782, entered upon the most important phase of his career. During the 1780s and 1790s he frequently encouraged studious officers, even sending out several times, as adjutant-general, army-wide circulars successfully soliciting subscriptions to new professional publications. He was responsible for stabilizing in 1786-7 the army's badly disrupted (by the late war) system of training and drill, then, during the years 1788-92 and beyond, acted as one of the principal figures (in conjunction with the duke of York, generals David Dundas, Sir William Pitt, and the earl of Pembroke, Major Le Marchant, and several other leading officers) in the preparation, testing, and issue of the regulations laid down for the heavy infantry. He achieved the same for the cavalry during 1787 and between 1794 and 1796. His last translation, of Francis de Rottenburg's German drillbook, as 'Regulations for the Exercise of Riflemen and Light Infantry', was issued in 1798 as the official drill for the new light infantry. All of these regulations were outstanding works and were crucial in preparing the army for the great struggle against revolutionary and Napoleonic France. Fawcett was at the same time one of the senior officers instrumental in the planning that led to the founding of the Royal Military College, at High Wycombe and then at Marlow. 
Fawcett's wife, Susanna, died at Eversley, Hampshire, on 7 April 1783, and the same year he married Charlotte Lucy (1751-1805), the widow of the chancellor of Lincoln, Dr George Stinton, and the daughter of Mr Noble of Louth, Lincolnshire. There were no children from this marriage. Fawcett was made a knight of the Bath in 1786; was appointed colonel of the 3rd dragoon guards on 22 August 1792; and was promoted full general on 14 May 1796. That same year he became governor of Chelsea Hospital. He retired in 1799 as a result of his age and failing eyesight, but was sworn a member of the privy council on 23 January. When he died, of old age, at his house in Great George Street, Westminster, on 22 March 1804, his funeral cortege included, among others, the prince of Wales and the royal dukes of Clarence, Kent, York, and Cambridge, together with 'a great number of General officers'; eight generals acted as his pallbearers ('GM', 1st ser., 74, 1804, 385). He was buried on 31 March in the chapel of Chelsea Hospital, where a monument was erected to him by his widow; she was buried beside him in 1805. The historian R. Glover justly called him 'a grand old soldier' (Glover, 43). 


@@@@@


doc= 9228


Fawkener, Sir Everard (1694-1758), merchant and diplomatist, was born on 23 February 1694 in the City of London and baptized on the same day at St Michael Bassishaw. The Fawkener family were long-established country gentry, with a seat at Uppingham Manor, Rutland. They had been engaged in trade, especially in the Levant, since the seventeenth century, and Everard's father, William (1642-1716), who became one of the leading members of the Levant Company, was a prosperous merchant. He married Mary (died 1700), the daughter of Ralphe Boxe, a citizen and druggist, in 1681; Everard was the eighth of their ten children. After an early classical education (Voltaire refers to his love of Horace, Virgil, and ancient Greek coins in a letter to Francois Augustin Paradis de Moncrif in February 1743; ('Complete Works', 92.336-7)), probably from private tutors, Fawkener entered the family business. In 1716 he was sent out to Aleppo, where he remained until 1725. This period coincided with the rise in importance of the firm Snelling and Fawkeners, who were the leading Levant traders by the 1730s, and it is likely that Fawkener would have become a man of wealth from his years in Aleppo. He met Voltaire in Paris in 1725, possibly on his return journey; it marked the beginnings of an enduringly memorable friendship. The following year he offered hospitality to the French writer when the latter found himself in England, alone, impoverished, and distressed. Fawkener had purchased or leased a country house at Wandsworth, then a village outside London, and this became Voltaire's home for large parts of his stay (1726-8). 
Thereafter Fawkener remained a merchant until 1735, when he was made ambassador to the Sublime Porte in Constantinople. For Voltaire, this elevation of a merchant to a senior diplomatic post convincingly demonstrated that England was the home of freedom -- unlike France, where such social mobility was unthinkable. As he put it to Fawkener in a letter dated 22 February 1736: 'Certainly England is the only country where commerce and virtue are to be rewarded with such an honour' ('Complete Works', 87.363). However, Voltaire apparently did not grasp the exceptionality of such an appointment, the reasons for which are still not entirely clear. Norma Perry succinctly sums up various grounds of eligibility: 'he was in fact only forty-one years old in 1735, he was a gentleman, he was wealthy, he moved in the best circles, he was well-acquainted with the east, he was a member of the powerful Levant company, he was knowledgeable, he was esteemed and liked. (Perry, 'Sir Everard Fawkener', 44)' Perry adds elsewhere one further consideration: he was ambitious (ibid., 45-6). In order to make his standing commensurate with his new situation, Fawkener was created knight bachelor on 3 October 1735. His term of office as ambassador lasted until November 1742, when he was granted permission to return home for a brief leave to attend to family business. But in the event he did not go back to Turkey. His stay had been largely unmemorable, but it appears that he fulfilled his duties with total assiduity and competence. 
In March 1745 Fawkener was appointed secretary to the duke of Cumberland, a post he held for the rest of his days, and shortly afterwards joint paymaster-general. The duke commanded all British land forces and as such was soon engaged in the Flanders campaign against the French in the War of the Austrian Succession (resulting in the French victory at Fontenoy) and the following year in Scotland opposing the Young Pretender, Bonnie Prince Charlie, which led to the decisive Hanoverian victory at Culloden in April 1746. Throughout these activities Fawkener was 'in constant attendance upon the Duke' (Perry, 'Sir Everard Fawkener', 95). But he did not relish his duties in Scotland: 'It is not pleasant campaigning here, but our Master and the service reconcile us to it' (ibid., 100). In July he left the highlands behind and was presumably home in London for the victory celebrations in the autumn -- which included a performance of Handel's 'Judas Maccabaeus', composed in Cumberland's honour. There remained the trial of Lord Lovat for treason in supporting the Jacobite cause (he was hanged in April 1747), at which Fawkener reported on his interrogations of the rebel. His unpalatable (and seemingly unsuccessful) task had been to elicit evidence that might damn Lovat's accomplices. Cumberland's employ must often have meant moral compromise. Further disappointment ensued. Fawkener had been named envoy to Frederick of Prussia at Potsdam; but, for whatever reason, the nomination was rescinded. A letter to Voltaire, dated 13 August 1751, suggests that Fawkener blamed himself for failing to prosecute his own interests sufficiently ('Complete Works', 96.259-60). Though he claims he 'was pleas'd not a little' at being passed over, it sounds like sour grapes. 
Fawkener remained a bachelor until he was fifty-two years of age, when, on 19 February 1747, he married Harriot (1725-1777), the daughter of Lieutenant-General Charles Churchill and his junior by thirty years; the couple had two sons and a daughter. His later years were generally something of an anticlimax. Fawkener's health was failing and his finances were falling into confusion (probably through extravagant living). When he died in Bath on 16 November 1758, he was both insolvent and intestate. He was buried three days later in Bath Abbey, where there is a memorial tablet to him. 
It is the association with Voltaire that has given Fawkener a special significance among his peers. The only Englishman with whom the French 'philosophe' ever developed close ties of affection, he was to the end for Voltaire a symbol of all that he thought best about England: his honourable mercantile background, the useful cosmopolitan life he had led as both trader and diplomatist abroad, his apparent lack of snobbery about aristocratic privilege. More than twenty letters written by Voltaire to Fawkener between 1735 and 1753 survive. It was to Fawkener, 'marchand anglais', that Voltaire dedicated his tragedy 'Zaire' in 1733. This was a highly unorthodox action in the eyes of conventional Frenchmen, and was felt to be beneath the dignity of tragedy (a parody of 'Zaire', d'Allainville's 'Temple du gout', took its revenge by portraying a certain 'Kafener' as a clownish merchant, slovenly dressed and smoking a pipe). For Voltaire the dedication bespoke his admiration at a 'profession which establishes the greatness of the State'; and he composed a second such epistle in 1736, when he enjoyed dedicating it to 'le chevalier Falkener, ambassadeur d'Angleterre a la Porte Ottomane'. Voltaire's last contact with the Fawkener family occurred just four years before his death, when Sir Everard's sons visited him at Ferney in 1774. He had them sit at table on either side of him, crying out: 'que je me trouve heureux de me voir place entre deux Fawkeners!' ('what joy to find myself seated between two Fawkeners!'; 'Complete Works', 87.485). Fawkener endured in Voltaire's mind as a living ideal of what English civilization had achieved. 


@@@@@


doc= 9229


Fawkes, Francis (bap. 1720, d. 1777), poet and translator, was the son of Jeremiah Fawkes, rector of Warmsworth, Doncaster. He was baptized there on 4 April 1720, and educated at Bury Free School. He was admitted as a sizar at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1738, being soon afterwards awarded an exhibition there; in 1742 he was made a scholar, and graduated BA; he took his MA in 1745. Fawkes took holy orders, and obtained a curacy at Bramham in Yorkshire, where he acted as chaplain to two local landowners, Mr Fox and Mr Lane. The charms of Mr Lane's house at Bramham were celebrated in Fawkes's first poetic publication (1745). Fawkes later moved to a curacy at Croydon. His poetic efforts may have attracted the notice of Archbishop Thomas Herring, either in Yorkshire (where Herring as archbishop of York had vigorously supported the government) or in the south (after Herring was translated to Canterbury); Fawkes wrote an ode on Herring's recovery from sickness in 1754. On 24 July 1755 at St Peter's, Leeds, he married Ann ('bap'. 1719), daughter of Salisbury Purrier. In the same year Herring rewarded him with the vicarage of Orpington, Kent: but his patron's death cut short further preferment from this modest beginning, and it was not until 1774 that Fawkes managed to obtain the adjacent rectory of Hayes by the favour of his own rector, the Revd Charles Plumptree. He became chaplain to the princess dowager of Wales. Overall, Fawkes's clerical career was undistinguished; in an age that tolerated much laxity in its parsons, he seems to have pursued enjoyment to the detriment of ambition. It is in some ways a fitting career for so effortless a classicist: Epicurus, with his injunction to live in happy obscurity, would not have disapproved. 
Fawkes used the pseudonym Eugenio when translating Edmond Halley's interesting Latin prefatory poem to Newton's 'Principia'. Latin poetry on scientific subjects was still taken seriously; it has been suggested that Halley's work veered dangerously close to the atheistic principles of Lucretius, but many more orthodox contemporaries of Fawkes, such as Isaac Hawkins Browne, also indulged in the didactic genre. Fawkes dedicated to his Yorkshire friend William Dixon his interesting modernization of Gawin Douglas's 'Description of the May' (1752), a reflection of the eighteenth-century desire to see medieval poetry in a more comprehensible, less off-puttingly archaic form. Douglas is picturesque, elegant, and esteemed, 'which is all the apology I shall make for having given it an English dress'. He prints the old Scots and his version on facing pages, encouraging close comparisons. So, on Chanticleer's two wives: '
For cocks, that couple with their nearest kin, 

Hold bygamy a pardonable sin 

' while Douglas has: 'As bird al tyme that hantis bygamy' (the glossary states: ''hant', to frequent, use'). Fawkes's version seems to nod elegantly at the opening of Dryden's 'Absalom and Achitophel'. 
Fawkes's anonymous translation of Anacreon, 'by a Gentleman of Cambridge' (1760), declares, with modesty typical of an eighteenth-century versifier, that some of the poems had been 'translated several years ago at College for the Author's amusement... [since] no one of this nation had hitherto furnished him [Anacreon] with a graceful Habit. Mr John Addison's translation, excepting a few odes, is harsh and crude, and far from being well done. (Fawkes, 'Works of Anacreon')' He is here ignoring or dismissing the huge interest in 'Anacreontea' among seventeenth-century poets (Abraham Cowley most notably, but also Thomas Stanley, Robert Herrick, John Oldham, and Lord Rochester). John Addison's 'Works of Anacreon and Sappho' (1735) would have been recently published when Fawkes, as an undergraduate, was allegedly improving on it. Fawkes admits he may be rash in taking on Sappho as well. Comparing his Sappho with John Addison's, there is no very clear improvement, but perhaps a veiling of passion; thus Addison has: '
yet I 

Alone, deserted, pining lie! 

' alongside Fawkes: 'And yet, alas! I lie alone' (Poole and Maule, 104-5). It is debatable whether Fawkes's slight understatement is an advantage. Fawkes offers some footnotes, showing awareness of modern critics; on Sappho's second ode he cites Joseph Addison's 'The Spectator' (no. 229) and Mme Dacier, but appears not to notice Catullus 51, the most famous of imitations (Fawkes, 'Works of Anacreon', 185). He translates Anacreon's fourth ode effectively: '
Our Frame no symmetry retains; 

Nought but a little dust remains, 

' and makes an apt comparison with Horace's 'pulvis et umbra sumus' ('we are dust and a shade'; 'Odes', iv.7.16). Such a comparison, however, would occur to most moderately well-read eighteenth-century gentlemen. 
Fawkes's 1761 poetic collection includes a number of interesting translations from modern Latin authors, emphasizing the importance of this literary genre in the eighteenth century, especially among university poets, and its close connection with poetry in the vernacular. He translated Cambridge tripos verses by Christopher Smart, and by 'my worthy friend and former tutor, the Rev. Richard Oakley' (Fawkes, 'Original Poems', 174). He also chose to translate a Latin poem by the Italian Renaissance writer Hieronymus Amaltheus, and several humorous Latin pieces by Vincent Bourne, one of the period's most successful writers of light verse; one of these -- 'Doron Adoron' [a gift but no gift], 'Thank you for nothing' (ibid., 132) -- reveals a timeless secret of the innkeeper's art, the provision of thirst-inducing salty snacks. Some of Fawkes's light verse achieved success; his song 'The Brown Jug' became remarkably popular. Fawkes engaged in some literary hack work, as well as lending his name to notes in 'The Complete Family Bible' (1761). He collaborated with William Woty on 'The Poetical Calendar' (12 vols., 1763), and 'The Poetical Magazine, or, The Muses' Monthly Companion' (1764). The 'Muses' stayed together for a mere six issues. Fawkes turned to the popular genre of the modern eclogue, a fitting combination of classical and polite learning, and wrote on partridge shooting. No doubt he also consumed the fruits of his literary labours. 
In his lifetime, Fawkes's reputation as a translator was high. He enjoyed the friendship and occasional collaboration of other literary figures, including Samuel Johnson and John Jortin, who both shared his affection for ancient and modern Latin. Though later critics have paid less attention, his works were reprinted in the nineteenth century, and five extracts from his translations of Greek poets were selected in 1995 for 'The Oxford Book of Classical Verse' (ed. Poole and Maule), where they stand up well in some impressive company. 
Towards the end of his life Fawkes was working on a translation of the Hellenistic epic poet Apollonius of Rhodes, but his 'dilatoriness and love of ease' prevented its appearance before his death. Fawkes died on 26 August 1777; his library was sold in the following year. His widow had been left with little else; her need for the subscription income encouraged the completion and prompt publication of his unfinished Apollonius in 1780. His 'coadjutor and editor', Mr Meen of Emmanuel, praised Fawkes's earlier work: his Anacreon and Theocritus are 'acknowledged to have considerable merit' (Fawkes and Meen, xv), and to the end of his life he could handle the heroic couplet with impressive facility. 


@@@@@


doc= 9230


Fawkes, Guy (bap. 1570, d. 1606), conspirator, only son and second child of Edward Fawkes (died 1579) of York and his wife, Edith Jackson, was born in the Stonegate district of York and baptized at the church of St Michael-le-Belfrey on 16 April 1570. Edward Fawkes was proctor, later advocate in the consistory court of York, possibly registrar of the exchequer court like his father, and, so far as can now be discerned, a staunch protestant. Guy's paternal grandparents were William Fawkes (died 1558x63) and Ellen Haryngton (died 1575), daughter of a prominent York merchant. Edward Fawkes died in January 1579, and was buried in York Minster. By February 1582 his widow had married Denis Bainbridge of Scotton, in the West Riding, and it is supposed that young Guy Fawkes became a Roman Catholic as a result of his connection with this strongly recusant family. He was educated at St Peter's School, in York. 
Guy Fawkes was by profession a soldier. In 1592 he sold the small estate in Clifton which he had inherited from his father and went to fight for the armies of Catholic Spain in the Low Countries; he was, by all accounts, conscientious and brave. He behaved gallantly at the siege of Calais in 1596 but had risen no higher than the rank of ensign by 1602. In 1599 he is described as being 'in great want'. During the early 1600s Fawkes travelled to Spain on perhaps two separate occasions, in 1603 seeking support from a reluctant Spanish court for another military venture in aid of English Catholics. According to a description from the pen of a Jesuit priest and former schoolfellow, Oswald Tesimond, Fawkes was something of a paragon: devout, patient, 'pleasant of approach and cheerful of manner, opposed to quarrels and strife... loyal to his friends', but at the same time 'a man highly skilled in matters of war' (Edwards, 68-9). In his character sketches of the Gunpowder Plot conspirators Tesimond is generous with praise and sparing in his censure, but it was just this mix of sound faith, technical expertise, and moral integrity which encouraged the original plotters to seek Fawkes's support in the spring of 1604. 
Knowledge of the conspiracy in its early days is heavily dependent on the confessions of two surviving ringleaders, Fawkes himself and the still more important Thomas Winter. Winter's confession, probably written for publication, certainly in his own hand, is one of the most remarkable accounts of intended treason in the pages of English history, and while not altogether free from obfuscation, it is substantially true. By comparison, Guy Fawkes's confessions show that, while he was privy to most secrets, he knew less than Winter. Winter, indeed, recruited Fawkes, albeit at the initial recommendation of the conspiracy's mastermind, Robert Catesby. The two men had much in common, both having travelled to Spain on similar missions within the previous two years. They met at Ostend early in 1604, during Winter's latest attempt to establish whether practical support from Spain might still be expected after the Stuart succession. Hugh Owen, the intelligencer on England at the court in Brussels, and Sir William Stanley both spoke highly of Fawkes, considering him entirely trustworthy, so the matter was pursued. In further conversation at Dunkirk, Winter told Fawkes that he and some friends were upon a resolution to 'doe some whatt in Ingland if the pece with Spaine healped us nott' (Salisbury-Cecil MS 113/54). After crossing the English Channel together, they called on Catesby at his London lodging late in April 1604. 
Winter's conclusion that Spain was manifestly unwilling to support the intransigent English Catholics seems to have persuaded Catesby that there was now only one way forward. Dreams that a Spanish army might invade England, overturn the heretic regime, and restore Catholicism along with a Catholic monarch were now effectively shattered. Catesby and his friends realized that they would now have to act on their own. So far Catesby had disclosed his plan to destroy parliament with gunpowder to no one apart from Winter and John Wright, but when another friend, the earl of Northumberland's cousin and estate officer, Thomas Percy, visited him in May fulminating against the inactivity of right-thinking Catholics, Catesby took the opportunity to take both Fawkes and Percy into his confidence, making sure that both had first taken an oath of secrecy. The scheme seems to have been well received. On 24 May 1604 Percy, trading on the personal goodwill of Dudley Carleton and John Hippesley, fellow officers in Northumberland's household, leased a small house adjacent to the Lords' chamber from one Henry Ferrers of Baddesley Clinton, who in turn rented the property from John Whynniard, keeper of the Old Palace of Westminster. 
The initial idea was that the plotters should drive a mine from the cellars of this dwelling straight under the Palace of Westminster, through the foundations of parliament house. Fawkes, 'becaus his face was the most unknowen', adopted the name John Johnson and took charge of the building, pretending to be Percy's servant (Salisbury-Cecil MS 113/54). Catesby's house in Lambeth -- the old Vauxhall manor house on the south bank of the Thames -- offered a convenient store for gunpowder and mining paraphernalia; it was a comparatively straightforward task to ferry these over to Westminster at dead of night. A sixth man, Robert Keyes, was brought into the conspiracy in order to look after the Lambeth end of the operation. When they heard that a severe outbreak of plague in the city had prompted a further prorogation of parliament, until February 1605, the plotters dispersed into the countryside, gathering once again in London at the start of the Michaelmas law term. 
For a time their schemes were frustrated: Scottish commissioners negotiating the proposed union between England and Scotland took over Percy's conveniently located lodgings for their deliberations. Just before Christmas, however, the conspirators began to dig their mine. By Christmas eve they had tunnelled up to the wall of parliament, but then news came through of yet another prorogation and work was suspended until early February. At this point they rowed all the gunpowder over from Lambeth and concealed it in Percy's house. Here was a decision born of pragmatism: as Winter explained, 'wee were willing to have all our dainger in one place' (Salisbury-Cecil MS 113/54). Another fortnight passed in laborious efforts to hack their way through solid foundations. Alarmed by the slow progress, the plotters secured the services of three new recruits, Christopher Wright (John's brother), Robert Winter (Thomas's brother), and John Grant. 
Now, however, fortune smiled. As they were tunnelling they heard a rushing sound over their heads. Fearing discovery they sent Fawkes -- the unknown face -- out to reconnoitre, but he came back with encouraging news that the tenant of a ground-floor vault below the Lords' chamber, a coal merchant appropriately named Ellen Bright, was vacating her premises. Percy at once set about securing the lease from Whynniard and the conspirators gratefully abandoned their mine, planning instead to stack up their powder in the vault. All of a sudden there was nothing to do but wait, and plan for success. Hours spent in the mine had allowed the plotters many opportunities to work out how best to capitalize on their deadly strike, but it is fair to say that their strategy was never really thought through. They hoped to kidnap the next heir and worked on the assumption, by no means a secure one, that Prince Henry would be blown up with his father. Percy, who thanks to Northumberland's patronage was a gentleman pensioner (one of the king's personal bodyguard), undertook to abduct James's second son, Prince Charles, the duke of York, hastening him away from court in the general confusion under colour of conducting the boy to a place of safety. However, Percy's colleagues appear to have doubted the feasibility of this scheme -- London was enemy territory, far from their Catholic refuges in the midlands. They pinned their hopes on securing the young Princess Elizabeth, then residing with John, Lord Harington, at Combe, 4 miles from Coventry. The means to this end would be an armed force of mounted Catholic gentry, and Catesby invited friendly midland squires to gather -- ostensibly to hunt -- near his home at Ashby St Ledgers on 5 November. 
A young girl, though, could not rule alone; she would stand in need of champions, or, indeed, a protector, a man of birth and political stature. Minor gentlemen could not fill such a role, but if the plotters themselves were unable to take on the task, who could? Here is entered a dark country. The same question was asked over and again by the Jacobean government in the months following the discovery of the plot, but never received a satisfactory answer. Indeed, if the surviving conspirators are to be believed, the matter was glossed over with extraordinary insouciance. All that Fawkes and Winter would say later was that a decision had been deferred until after the blast, when it might be clear which noblemen were still available. In principle, they had agreed to preserve as many peers 'as were Catholick or so disposed' (Salisbury-Cecil MS 113/54). More than once Catesby assured new recruits who scrupled at the possible deaths of patrons and friends that favoured noblemen would be dissuaded by 'tricks' from attending the opening of parliament. However, it is doubtful if he meant to honour such pledges. Robert Keyes recalled one occasion on which the mask slipped. Speaking contemptuously of the English nobility, Catesby 'made accompt of them as of atheists, fools and cowards'. Rather than risk failure he was fully prepared to see each and every man among them blown to perdition (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/126). 
Summer was spent far from London, in the countryside or, in Fawkes's case, overseas. He was in Flanders from Easter to August 1605, keeping his head down. But the time was not all wasted. While in Brussels he acquainted Hugh Owen with the plotters' design, in order that Owen might speak for them in the courts of continental Europe after the fact. At home, meanwhile, Catesby took stock of an increasingly pressing problem. He had borne the financial burden alone for upwards of one year and was unable to do so much longer. With the agreement of his colleagues, Catesby now widened the circle of conspirators in an attempt to bring in wealthy supporters -- men who might foot the bill for the projected rebellion in the midlands. Late in the summer he confided his secret to Ambrose Rookwood, Sir Everard Digby, and, fatally, Francis Tresham, having sworn all three to secrecy. 
None took the news particularly well, although Digby and Rookwood were soon persuaded that cruel necessity must have its way. Tresham, while apparently honouring his vow of silence, was clearly much perturbed, promising Catesby large sums of money if he would only call a halt to so perilous an enterprise. Catesby dissembled, but had no intention of backing down. Fawkes and Winter brought fresh gunpowder into the vault, fearing with good reason that the existing stock might have become damp. On 3 October parliament was once again prorogued, this time for a month. The new date for the state opening was set at 5 November. Winter, attending the ceremony in Lord Monteagle's entourage, must have taken comfort in the presence of Salisbury and other leading members of the council. 
At the end of October the principal plotters began to converge on London. About the 26th Catesby and Fawkes returned to White Webbs in Enfield Chase, home of the Catholic Anne Vaux. There they had news from Winter that Prince Henry would not be accompanying his father to parliament on 5 November. Catesby at once resolved to attempt the capture of the heir apparent, but once again there does not seem to have been anything in the way of precise planning. On the night of Sunday 27 October Winter learned from someone in the peer's household that Monteagle had received a general warning against attending the opening of parliament, and had immediately taken the message to court. Winter panicked. He went to White Webbs, trying to persuade Catesby that the game was up, but Catesby showed a steady nerve. He would, he declared, 'see further as yett', sending Fawkes out on reconnaissance (Salisbury-Cecil MS 113/54). No one ever questioned Fawkes's courage: he duly put his head in the noose, checking the cellar and reporting that nothing had been disturbed. 
On Friday 1 November Winter and Catesby met an agitated Tresham at Barnet. They accused him of betrayal; he denied it, redoubling his efforts at dissuasion. Winter was by now inclined to discretion himself, but Catesby remained determined to give the plot every opportunity for success. The final chance to abandon the enterprise passed on the evening of 3 November, at a meeting between Winter, Catesby, and Thomas Percy, recently arrived from the north. It was Percy who said what Catesby clearly wanted to hear, that they should see the business to its conclusion. He went to Syon House to dine with Northumberland on 4 November -- a point that would tell heavily against the earl thereafter -- and returned to his colleagues declaring that all seemed well (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/126). So Fawkes took up his station in the vault, with a slow match, and a watch, sent to him by Percy via Robert Keyes 'becaus he should knowe howe the time went away' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/100). 
Meanwhile the privy council was treading carefully, anxious not to alarm any conspirators into premature flight, but still half believing that the curiously worded 'Monteagle letter' signified little. On the afternoon of 4 November the earl of Suffolk -- who in his capacity as lord chamberlain had responsibility for ensuring that arrangements for the new session were in hand -- made a tour of inspection, accompanied among others by Monteagle. They looked over the Lords' chamber, and then descended into the ground-floor cellars which ran the length of the building. Inevitably, they noticed the unusually large pile of firewood covering the gunpowder, and asked Fawkes, in his guise as John Johnson, whose fuel this was. Hindsight later prompted Suffolk to record that the servant was 'a very tall and desperate fellow', but to all outward appearances the party was satisfied when Fawkes told them the wood belonged to his master Thomas Percy (Oldys, 3.256). Returning to court, however, Monteagle expressed surprise that Percy, an old acquaintance, rented property in Westminster. He also mentioned that Percy was a Catholic. 
That sufficed to stir King James's latent fears, and he ordered a further search of the vaults which, still with an eye to avoiding undue alarm, was to be carried out under the pretence of looking for some 'stuff' and hangings that had strayed from the wardrobe stores (Oldys, 3.257). The task fell to a Westminster magistrate and gentleman of the privy chamber, Sir Thomas Knyvett, keeper of the Palace of Westminster. In contemporary accounts of the subsequent search chronology varies slightly, but no more than one might expect given the scope for rumour and embellishment in so thrilling a tale (Gardiner, 114-37). About midnight Knyvett led his party into the cellar. They met Fawkes, fully clothed and in his boots, emerging from the room. Thinking him oddly dressed for so late an hour Knyvett had the suspect arrested, while his men hauled away the faggots and brushwood, uncovering thirty-six barrels -- nearly a ton -- of gunpowder. 
There followed Fawkes's finest hour. Examiners wrote grudgingly of his fortitude, his 'roman' resolution (Oldys, 3.258). Confronted with a barrage of questions he refused to implicate his colleagues, apart from Percy, whose crimes were manifest. Fawkes admitted having recently travelled to Flanders, but when pressed for a reason mocked his examiners, declaring that he had set out 'to see the countrey and to passe away the time' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/6). When he did speak plainly, it was to express his dislike of Scots, evident in his communications to the Spanish crown in 1603. According to tradition Fawkes wasted no time in telling the horrified king that he would have blown both James and his fellow countrymen at the court back to their northern mountains. Otherwise, he remained silent, muttering defiantly: 'you would have me discover my frendes' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/16A). Not until 7 November would he admit to his real name, and he did this only when the shaken interrogators, at last getting round to examining the contents of his pockets, found a letter addressed to a Mr Fawkes. 
It soon became clear that these heroics were in vain. The midland rising headed by the principal conspirators rapidly fizzled out in mass desertion and a brief skirmish at Holbeach House in Staffordshire, where Catesby, Percy, and the brothers Wright all perished. Winter was among those taken prisoner. News of this denouement filtered through to London on the 9th. On the one hand this made Fawkes's testimony still more important, since he was one of the two surviving members from the conspiracy's inner ring, but on the other all conceivable danger was now past, and the authorities held the precious prize of Thomas Winter. The privy council now relaxed a little and were prepared to wait, looking on Fawkes's testimony given on 7, 8, and 9 November as a provisional summary of the treason (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/49 and 54). It seems almost certain that torture of some kind had been employed in those critical days when king and council faced revolt in the shires. James had authorized its use, recommending that the 'gentler tortures' be tried first, progressing to something more savage should the prisoner prove reticent. Once the menace of a midland insurrection had passed, such extremities were set aside: Fawkes alone suffered in this way. 
The surviving principal conspirators languished in the Tower until January 1606. Then the assembly of a parliament eager to see the plotters receive their just deserts, and only too ready to pick up an infelicitous suggestion by the king in his November prorogation speech that the prisoners should be tried in parliament, spurred the council into action. On 27 January eight gunpowder plotters stood trial in Westminster Hall on charges of high treason. All but Sir Everard Digby pleaded not guilty, refuting certain points within the indictment while -- inevitably -- admitting to the whole. The trial lasted a day and commanded high prices as a public spectacle, one MP complaining that while he had paid 10's'. for standing room, others had been let into the same enclosure for much smaller sums ('Parliamentary Diary of Robert Bowyer', ed. D. H. Willson, 1931, 10). Both king and queen are supposed to have attended in private (John Hawarde, 'Les reportes del cases in camera stellata', 1894, 257). The attorney-general, Sir Edward Coke, launched into the prisoners in his usual bombastic style and the earl of Northampton delivered an immensely tedious speech defending the king from charges made by Digby that James had gone back on promises of toleration for English Catholics. The outcome of the trial was never in doubt, and verdicts of guilty were duly returned. Four of the condemned men were executed on 30 January in St Paul's Churchyard. The following day Thomas Winter, Ambrose Rookwood, Robert Keyes, and, finally, Fawkes suffered the same fate in the Old Palace Yard, Westminster; his body was quartered, in fulfilment of his sentence. 
On 5 November 1605 the inhabitants of London were encouraged to light bonfires in celebration of the king's apparently providential deliverance, always provided that 'this testemonye of joy be carefull done without any danger or disorder'. The citizens were happy to oblige, John Chamberlain marvelling at the 'great ringing and as great store of bonfires as ever I thincke was seene' (CLRO, journal of common council, 27, fol. 4; 'The Letters of John Chamberlain', ed. N. F. McClure, 2 vols., 1939, 1.213). Bonfires and the anniversary of the Gunpowder Plot have gone hand in hand ever since, a curious circumstance given that by any objective assessment the plot was just another in a line of failed conspiracies against the state. Right at the start it was the lingering uncertainties, the unresolved loose ends, and the king's own perception of God's divine hand which nourished collective memory. James saw great significance in the fact that he had been delivered from both Gowrie conspiracy and Gunpowder Plot on a Tuesday the 5th. Parliament passed an act for an annual public thanksgiving, gunpowder sermons were preached at court throughout his reign, and although the wording changed over time, prayers of thanksgiving for deliverance from the plot remained in the calendar of the established church until 1859. 
Over a much longer timescale, numerous circumstances have conspired to preserve commemoration in some form or other of events on 5 November 1605. Among these the most important have been repeated attempts either by the state or by some particular group within the country to focus the minds of Englishmen on a particularly horrific manifestation of Catholic perfidy. Gunpowder Plot commemoration was appropriated by the puritans in the 1630s and 1640s as they countered the creeping popery perceived in Charles I's court. Fireworks are observed from at least the 1650s, and the burning of effigies became fairly common after the much publicized torching of the 'whore of Babylon' -- adorned with symbols of papal office -- by London apprentices in 1673, following the conversion to Catholicism of the heir presumptive, James, duke of York. The Popish Plot frenzy and the exclusion struggles generated a fresh intensity in 5 November celebrations. James II's government failed in its attempt to ban fires and fireworks, and the fact that William of Orange landed at Torbay on 5 November 1688 once again magnified the date in the minds of many protestant Englishmen. From that day to this, as the old rhyme observes, gunpowder treason has 'never been forgot'. The fifth of November persisted as a day on which rowdy youths took the opportunity for challenging local authorities up and down the land: at that level there was little perception of the original conspiracy, just as today the historical facts are, for many, submerged beneath spectacle and consumerism. Commemoration was given yet another lease of life in the 1850s by the antagonisms generated by Catholic emancipation, and the re-establishment of a Catholic religious hierarchy in England. 
In 1790 'The Times' recorded boys begging in the street 'to burn Guy Faux'. By Victoria's reign, Fawkes -- the cloaked figure in the cellar -- was burnt in effigy almost everywhere, rather than the pope or the devil, and he has, in an increasingly secular and religiously tolerant age, held his place of dishonour atop the bonfires ever since, joined occasionally by the transient demon-figures of state politics or the popular press: suffragettes, the Kaiser, and Margaret Thatcher among them. Through the twentieth century celebrations have become more orderly, more tame. Even back-garden firework displays, widespread as late as the 1970s, have been frustrated by safety considerations, and the pull of large, organized shows. Those few surviving examples of vehement anti-Catholic ritual on bonfire night -- at Lewes in Sussex, for example -- are noteworthy in their rarity. Gunpowder Plot day has become Guy Fawkes' night, bonfire night, or firework night, but the durability of this particular manifestation of Englishness -- its ability to reinvent a reason for continuing -- remains remarkable. 
Perhaps this is only right. Though a failure, the plot came very close to success. Theories, as old as the treason itself, that the government either knew of the conspiracy from an early stage, or that it actually manipulated the conspirators through one or more 'agents provocateurs', draw unwarranted conclusions from the surviving evidence, fail to advance any credible motive for such chicanery, and were, indeed, effectively demolished long ago by S. R. Gardiner (in 'What Gunpowder Plot Was', 1897; see Nicholls, 213-20). The magnitude of Fawkes's intended treason should never be underestimated. Ordnance records state that the 18 hundredweight of powder transferred from the cellar to the Tower of London was 'decaied', but modern calculations suggest that, decayed or not, few if any in the Lords that afternoon would have survived a combination of devastating explosion and the noxious fumes thrown out by the combustion of seventeenth-century gunpowder. Guy Fawkes, the experienced soldier, knew this only too well. 


@@@@@


doc= 9231


Fawkes, Walter Ramsden Hawkesworth (1769-1825), politician and art collector, was born Walter Ramsden Hawkesworth at Hawkesworth Hall, near Guiseley, Yorkshire, on 2 March 1769, the eldest son of Walter Ramsden Beaumont Hawkesworth (1746-1792) and his wife, Amelia Farrer. His father assumed the additional surname Fawkes when he inherited Farnley Hall near Otley, with 15,000 acres, in 1786, and the son in turn inherited in 1792, also assuming the surname Fawkes. In addition to the Farnley estates he kept a London house in Grosvenor Place. 
Fawkes attended Westminster School (1781-6) and Trinity College, Cambridge (1786), but did not graduate. At Westminster he had been a schoolfriend of Francis Burdett, later the radical reformer, an influence that had lifelong effect. He put himself forward as an independent MP for Yorkshire against the tory Henry Lascelles in 1796, but withdrew because his fortune was no match for Lascelles's. He also stood in 1802, and, having joined the whigs, once again in 1806 when he was successful as an anti-slavery candidate, sharing a platform with William Wilberforce. The election campaign cost Fawkes dear, and he did not stand again. 
Outside parliament Fawkes spoke eloquently as an advocate for reform. He was the first chairman of the Hampden Club (1812), and in 1812 addressed the tenth anniversary meeting of Burdett's election to parliament. He spoke in Yorkshire against income tax (1816) and the Peterloo massacre (1819), and promoted a petition for reform which attracted 17,000 signatures in Yorkshire in 1823, the year he was high sheriff of the county. Fawkes was a trenchant political writer, publishing his 'Chronology of the History of Modern Europe' in 1810 and 'The Englishman's Manual, or, A Dialogue between a Tory and a Reformer' in 1817. 
One of Fawkes's closest friends was the painter J. M. W. Turner, whom he first met in the late 1790s. Turner's many regular visits to Farnley began about 1808, but by that time Fawkes had already become an extensive collector of Turner's work. The friendship between politician and painter flourished on a basis of mutual generosity, trust, and common pursuits, such as an interest in reforming politics and a fascination with the pattern of the landscape. 
On 28 August 1794 Fawkes married Maria Grimston (1774/5-1813); they had four sons and seven daughters. He brought modern techniques to the management of his estates, promoting active co-operation between landowners and tenants. The series of gouaches which Turner made around Farnley depicts shooting parties, expeditions, and scenes of domestic calm (priv. coll.; National Galleries of Scotland, Edinburgh; Rhode Island Museum of Art, Providence, Rhode Island; studies in the Tate collection). With his friends and family Fawkes assembled the Farnley 'Ornithological collection' -- five volumes of plumage specimens and watercolour studies of birds, some by Turner (priv. coll.; Leeds Art Gallery; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; Tate collection). Fawkes's passion for natural history took further practical form in his introducing zebra, wild hogs, and deer onto the estates, and culminated in his writing a four-volume 'Synopsis of Natural History' (1823). 
In 1816 Fawkes married Maria Sophia Vernon, formerly Mrs Pierce Butler (1786-1847). During the early 1820s, as his fortune ebbed away through political, publishing, and collecting expenses and his expansive style of living, he slipped towards, but narrowly avoided, bankruptcy. His friendship with Turner, however, deepened in these years: Turner lent him money, and for his part Fawkes opened his large Turner collection at his London house to an eager public in spring 1819. In the exhibition catalogue, Fawkes summed up his feelings for Turner, writing of the 'delight I have experienced, during the greater part of my life, from the exercise of your talent and the pleasure of your society' (W. R. H. Fawkes, 'Introduction', 'A Collection of Water Colour Drawings in the Possession of W. F.' 1819). Fawkes died at his London home in Baker Street, Portman Square, on 24 October 1825, and was buried on 8 November at All Saints, Otley, where there is a memorial. The bulk of his papers was destroyed by his heirs. 
The reformer Francis Place called Fawkes 'a man of weight and character' (BL, Add. MS 27850, fol. 255), and the painter Thomas Uwins saw him as 'a man of good sense, with a long purse and a noble soul' (S. Uwins, 'Memoir of Thomas Uwins', 1858, 2.225-6). 


@@@@@


doc= 9232


Fawkner, John Pascoe (1792-1869), pioneer in Australia, born on 20 October 1792 in London, probably near Cripplegate, was the son of John Fawkner ('b'. 1770), a metal refiner, and Hannah Pascoe ('b'. 1774), whose maiden name her son added to his own after her death in 1825. In 1801 his father was sentenced to transportation for receiving stolen goods worth $455, and with his wife, son, and daughter sailed on 24 April 1803 for the new convict settlement at Port Phillip. From there on 26 January 1804 the convicts were taken to Sullivan's Cove (Hobart), Van Diemen's Land, where the Fawkner family ultimately became successful farmers. In 1809 Hannah received a legacy which enabled the family to expand their farming and open a shop, while young John tried his hand as a sawmiller, builder, and baker. In 1814 he helped some convicts to escape, and for this he was said to have been sentenced to 500 lashes and three years' government labour. It seems he was not flogged but was sent to Newcastle, New South Wales, where he was employed in timber-cutting and lime-burning. He returned to Hobart in 1817, resumed his former bakery business, cultivated a 93-acre farm, supplied firewood and sawn timber, and sold (unlicensed) liquor. By the end of 1818 he had made $1000 and had begun to live with his future wife, Eliza Cobb (1800/01-1879), a newly arrived convict, transported for stealing a child. After further trouble with the law, the couple, who married on 5 December 1822 but never had children, moved in 1819 to Launceston, where Fawkner started another bakery and was active as a bookseller, lawyer, timber merchant, and farmer. In 1824 he opened -- without a licence for two years -- his large Cornwall Hotel, built for $2500. He sold his bakery and timber business, made some good purchases of land near the town, and became a very successful bush lawyer in the lower courts. On 8 February 1829 he started the 'Launceston Advertiser', which he edited for two years and owned for three, but, having in September lost the licence of his flourishing hotel, he returned to farming, with a nursery which soon became famous for the quality and variety of its produce. The following year he recovered his hotel licence, opened a library and newsroom, became an auctioneer, and began a coach service to Longford, 15 miles to the south; rumours of his having tried to 'rescue' more prisoners in 1829 prevented his obtaining the mail contracts that he sought, but he seems then to have been earning a net income of about $900 a year. 
By 1834 Fawkner had become intrigued by reports of the southern coast of mainland Australia and determined to make an attempt to settle there. He bought a ship, the 50 ton 'Enterprize', to cross the strait, but existing contracts delayed its delivery until after John Batman had visited Port Phillip. 
When the 'Enterprize' was finally ready, Fawkner, held back by his creditors, could not sail with her, but he financed the expedition which, under the command of John Lancey, was the first to settle on the site of the future city of Melbourne, landing on 30 August 1835 with horses, ploughs, plants, seeds, building materials, and provisions. Fawkner arrived at Melbourne on 17 October, moved into his house -- the first to be built there -- on 7 November, tended his farm, and opened a store and a hotel. In June 1837 he bought his first lots of city land, and on 1 January 1838 he started the 'Melbourne Advertiser', the first nine issues being in manuscript, but, unlicensed, it had to cease publication in March. Next year, having obtained type and licence, on 16 February he began the 'Port Phillip Patriot', which he owned for nearly seven years. By then he had built a larger hotel, which in June he leased for five years to the newly established Melbourne Club, and had bought 569 acres of suburban land for subdivision and 709 acres at nearby Pascoe Vale. Here he planned a village settlement and lived for fifteen years after 1840. He was then said to be worth $20,000. 
In 1841 Fawkner was elected to the market commission and the following year to the freshly constituted town council. He was a radical, but was regarded as honest and independent, though constantly involved in controversy and litigation. Legal expenses and the economic depression brought insolvency in March 1845, but in 1846 he sold his newspaper and paid his debts. He continued his farming, held a 12,800 acre pastoral run near Macedon for seven years, recommenced his business as a commission agent, and bought another 5000 acres of land, mostly near Melbourne, for $6000. In the public sphere, he passionately supported the agitations against convict transportation and Superintendent La Trobe, as well as the continuing campaign for separation from New South Wales. 
When this was achieved in 1851, Fawkner was elected a member of the new legislative council; he was re-elected to the reconstituted council in 1856, and remained a very active member until his death. He was a lifelong critic of squatters, Chinese and Americans, state aid to religion, papists, and La Trobe, and a supporter of yeomen farmers, a free press, law reform, married women, and national (non-sectarian) schools. In rejecting close participation in the policy of any administration he remained an independent critic of an increasingly conservative stamp, and in 1856-7 opposed manhood suffrage, the ballot, payment of members, and the opening of hotels on Sundays; in 1865 he supported the legislative council in its dispute with the radical MacCulloch government. Sickness prevented him writing his projected history of the colony, of which he always insisted (quite unjustifiably) that he was the founder; however, despite his increasing asthma and gradually failing health, his stocky figure, only 5 feet 2 inches in height, in its smoking cap and long cloak, was a familiar one in the council until very shortly before his death, on 4 September 1869, at his home at 226 Smith Street, Collingwood, where he had moved in 1856. Dogmatic, abusive, and litigious, he was shrewd and generous, with a radical's desire to develop a colony where a poor man might flourish. He was buried in Melbourne general cemetery amid general signs of respect for him as an indefatigable pioneer, his public funeral on 8 September being said to have been attended by 50,000 people. 


@@@@@


doc= 9233


Fazakerley, Nicholas (bap. 1682, d. 1767), lawyer and politician, was baptized on 26 February 1682 at Broughton, near Preston, Lancashire, the eldest son of William Fazakerley, a gentleman, of Kirkby, Lancashire. He matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 12 March 1702 but went down on 12 January 1703 without taking a degree. He was admitted to Middle Temple on 13 May 1700 and called to the bar on 23 May 1707. He was admitted to Inner Temple in 1716 and on 22 November 1734 to Lincoln's Inn where he was elected bencher on 25 June 1736. He became master of the walks in 1741, keeper of the black book (the records of the inn) in 1742, dean of the chapel in 1744, treasurer in 1747, and in 1748 master of the library. From 1738 to 1757 he held the office of counsel to the University of Cambridge. He practised from chambers in Hare Court, Temple, until November 1734, when he moved to 11 New Square, Lincoln's Inn. Fazakerley was returned unopposed as member of parliament for Preston on 24 January 1732, and held that seat until his death. His only preferment came in August 1742, when he was appointed recorder of Preston. On 10 October 1723 he married Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Lutwyche, member of parliament for, successively, Appleby, Callington, and Amersham. They had a son, who died on 30 June 1737 ('GM'), and a daughter, Elizabeth, who on 23 December 1744 married Granville Leveson-Gower, Viscount Trentham. 
Fazakerley first came to public notice when he appeared with Thomas Bootle in 1731 as counsel for the defence in the trial of Richard Francklin, a Fleet Street printer and publisher of 'The Craftsman', for publishing an anti-government letter said to have been written by Lord Bolingbroke. Fazakerley and Bootle in their conduct of that case 'started every objection and laboured every point as if the fate of the empire were at stake' (Campbell). 
Horace Walpole's description of Fazakerley as 'a tiresome Jacobite lawyer' is undiscriminating, for his political principles, while those of a tory, are not easy to classify. His subscribing $200 towards raising the Lancashire militia during the Jacobite rising of 1745 seems inconsistent with support for the Jacobite cause (Thomas Starkie to Lord Derby, 21 Oct 1745, MSS DDK/1741, Lancs. RO). An inveterate Jacobite might have been expected to do nothing, and it is unsurprising that he took no part in the negotiations between the Jacobite leaders and the French government from 1740 to 1745. Furthermore, after the failure of the attempted French invasion at the beginning of 1744 he introduced into parliament a bill making treasonable any correspondence with the sons or descendants of the pretender. When the bill was returned from the Lords to the Commons Fazakerley, in the course of the debate, 'denounced as one of the most pernicious and unconstitutional provisions ever devised' a government amendment, introduced in the upper house, to extend 'the attainder and corruption of blood, to the children of those who should be convicted under the act' (Coxe). 
Fazakerley's role 'vis-a-vis' the bill against treasonable correspondence suggests that his political principles were rooted in opposing the administration, and he voted against the government in every recorded division during the reign of George II. Of importance in this respect was his signing the circular letter of 20 December 1743 appealing to opposition members to be present to vote against the Hanoverian troops when parliament reassembled after Christmas (BL, Add. MS 29597, fol. 29). Some further insight into Fazakerley's politics may be provided by his supporting, together with other prominent tories, the programme for reform of Frederick, prince of Wales, which was published on 4 June 1747. Included in the programme were measures for the 'Abolition of party distinctions, [the taking] away of any Proscriptions of any Set of men who were friends of the Constitution... [the raising] and establish[ing] of a militia throughout the country [and an] Enquiry into abuses of offices' (BL, Add. MS 35870, fols. 129-30). Fazakerley's support for the prince of Wales's programme places him among those tories who after 1747 began to identify with the heir apparent rather than with the pretender. 
Fazakerley's opposition to the administration's bills often sprang from his belief that they were inimical to the health of the constitution. This was his theme when taking a leading part in the debate on the 'Regency Bill' in May 1751. That bill was introduced after the death of Frederick, prince of Wales, in March 1751, and was intended to cover the contingency of his son's succeeding before he had attained his majority. Fazakerley argued that rule by a regency council would lead to faction but that there should be a council for the regent, Augusta, princess of Wales, to consult with and to advise her when she desired it. During the course of 1753 he spoke against both Lord Hardwicke's marriage bill and that for the naturalization of the Jews. Fazakerley died at his house in Grosvenor Street, Westminster, in February 1767. 


@@@@@


doc= 9234


Fead, George (1728/9-1815), army officer, was probably a member of the Feads of Nithsdale, Dumfriesshire, several of whom settled in London as merchants. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, as a cadet on 1 September 1756 and became a lieutenant-fireworker in the Royal Artillery on 8 June 1757. In that capacity he was sent to America and saw action at the siege of Louisburg, Cape Breton, in 1758. He was then taken prisoner in Newfoundland, was exchanged, and returned to England. He returned to America and continued to rise through the ranks from second lieutenant on 21 March 1760 to lieutenant on 25 May 1764. After serving for six or seven years in America he returned home. 
Fead was promoted captain-lieutenant on 1 January 1771. On 3 February 1772 he married Elizabeth Kirkpatrick in Dumfriesshire and from 1774 to 1781 served at Minorca, where he was promoted to captain on 7 July 1779. During the siege of Minorca he commanded the artillery defending Fort St Philip and lost the sight of an eye. He was a witness at the court martial of Lieutenant-General James Murray, the garrison commander. He became brevet major on 19 March 1783 and in 1790 he went again to Newfoundland, staying for nearly two years. On 16 November 1792 he became regimental major, and on 5 December 1793 lieutenant-colonel. In 1793-4 he served under Prince Frederick, duke of York, in Flanders. In 1799 he went to Jamaica in command of the Royal Artillery, being made lieutenant-general on 25 July 1810, and afterwards lieutenant-governor of Port Royal. 
Fead died at his home on Woolwich Common on 20 November 1815 aged eighty-six, and in the fifty-eighth year of his military service, thirty of these being abroad. He had nine sons, at least three of whom predeceased him on active duty in the armed forces. In his will he referred to his wife, five sons and a married daughter, money in the funds, and some land in West Florida. 


@@@@@


doc= 9235


Feake, Christopher (1611/12-1682/3), Fifth Monarchist leader, was the eldest of five children of Edward Feake, gentleman, of Godstone, Surrey, and his wife, Anne Shaw. His birthplace is uncertain, although a Christopher Feake was baptized on 31 May 1612 at St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, in London. He entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1628, aged sixteen, graduated BA in 1632, and proceeded MA in 1635. By 1637 he had married Jane Man, daughter of John Man of Paul's Wharf, London, a union which by 1653 had produced eight children. 
Feake's clerical career began uneventfully as vicar of Elsham, Lincolnshire, about 1637. In January 1646 he obtained the sequestered vicarage of All Saints, Hertford, where his leanings to unorthodoxy soon became apparent. He dispensed with psalm-singing and the Lord's prayer, and preached against monarchy and aristocracy, asserting that there was in them 'an enmity against Christ' which he intended to destroy (Capp, 52). In 1647, upon the sequestration of the incumbent, William Jenkyn, Feake became vicar of Christ Church, Newgate, and shortly thereafter lecturer at both St Anne Blackfriars and All Hallows-the-Great, livings which by 1654 he had forfeited on account of being 'obnoxious to the government' (Wilson, 331). It was from these pulpits that his descent into notoriety may be said to have commenced in earnest. 
Early in the 1650s Feake's oratorical skills and use of the pulpit to incite as well as to instruct were recognized as useful tools in attempts to destabilize the government. In 1650 he preached before the lord mayor of London in support of the fifth monarchy prophesied by Daniel, and in 1652, on the recommendation of Major-General Harrison, before the House of Commons. By the end of 1651 Feake, now an Independent, was one of a group in London beginning to organize the Fifth Monarchists, a movement which felt itself called to establish the latter-day fifth kingdom of Daniel's prophetic visions, using force if necessary. Feake's own interest in the prophecies of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation' is said to have been provoked by the anti-prayer-book riots in Edinburgh in 1637. Feake soon became one of the movement's recognized leaders and one of the most hostile and outspoken critics of Cromwell and his government, which he had with some reservation initially supported. In December 1653 he openly denounced the protector as 'the man of sin' and the 'dissembleingst perjured villaine in the world' (Thurloe, 1.621, 641). It was language that even the usually tolerant Cromwell found unacceptable, and Feake, together with Vavasour Powell, who had also preached in Fifth Monarchist vein at the same meeting, was arrested and imprisoned, though released shortly afterwards. 
In January 1654 Feake was arrested again and imprisoned in Windsor Castle, now with John Simpson, another Fifth Monarchist, for 'the preservation of the peace of this nation' ('CSP dom.', '1653-4', 371). Feake, however, continued to lead the Fifth Monarchy movement from prison, notably through his pen, and his congregation in Warwick Lane and Swan Alley quickly published fourteen letters he had sent them urging the faithful, among other things, to be ready to raise an army 'for the King of saints' (Capp, 102). In 1654 Feake also published two of his most influential works, 'The New Non-Conformist' and 'The Oppressed Close Prisoner', the latter title derived from an order of the council of state that Feake and Simpson were to be kept 'close prisoners' (that is, without visitors and forbidden to speak publicly) ('CSP dom.', '1654', 189). In 'The Oppressed Close Prisoner' Feake had reluctantly conceded that Cromwell was the 'de facto' but not the 'de jure' ruler, an admission that was insufficient to obtain his release. His radical bent appeared again during his imprisonment at Windsor in his preaching from his cell window until he could scarcely speak for hoarseness, and teaching his young son to sing 'the Protector is a fool' (Capp, 108). In September 1655 Feake was removed to the Isle of Wight, where he remained in prison first with Harrison and later with Sir Henry Vane (the younger), until his release from Carisbrooke Castle on 31 December 1656. 
Upon regaining his freedom Feake returned without permission to London, where he resumed his public opposition to Cromwell. In a meeting at All Hallows in January 1657 he denounced the government as being 'as Babylonish as ever', and disparaged what he considered the apostasy of many of the saints, declaring that he was 'for rending and dividing yet more' (Thurloe, 5.756, 758). After a sermon lasting three hours Feake was publicly opposed by Simpson, whose views were now less radical, and by the Baptists Henry Jessey and William Kiffin for this renewed attack on the government, which they considered immoderate and unnecessarily inflammatory. Feake and other more thoroughgoing Fifth Monarchists were generally more mutually supportive, his name appearing frequently during the 1650s under prefaces and introductions to radical works by Mary Cary (1651), John Tillinghast (1656), and John Canne (1657). He was not, however, among the militant group from Thomas Venner's congregation which by early 1657 was planning an uprising, although in February and April he condemned the arrest of its leaders and was briefly imprisoned in the Tower. 
In June 1659, under the restored Rump, the fortunes of the Fifth Monarchists appeared to revive. Feake and Sir Henry Vane were thought by some, including John Ireton, the lord mayor of London, and Richard Baxter, to be the movement's leaders, although the designation of Vane was probably mistaken. But elation soon turned to disillusion. By the time the Rump was dismissed for the second time in October the Fifth Monarchists were fragmented beyond recovery, and the days of Feake's influence in London were in effect over. The publication of his 'A Beam of Light' in 1659 was largely an account of what had been, although the remaining 'children of light' were exhorted 'to be in readiness at an hour's warning' to promote the cause of King Jesus and his still-awaited kingdom (p. 59). Following the Restoration Feake, with others, attempted to keep the Fifth Monarchy cause alive, albeit with a less militant agenda. In 1661, as one of the movement's more able spokesmen, he travelled the country seeking to consolidate the flagging cause, occasionally showing up in London, but as in 1657, eschewing involvement with Venner's second uprising in the capital of that year, an event that helped ensure that by the mid- to late 1660s the Fifth Monarchy movement was already largely a spent force. In 1663 he was arrested in Dorking, Surrey, and taken back to London for questioning, but was released on a good-behaviour bond. He is recorded as a teacher at Dorking in 1662, and again in 1669 as preacher to a congregation of about 100 Independents, and was licensed as an Independent in 1672. He last appears as a preacher in a cellar on London Bridge in 1682. 
Carlyle described him as 'loud-tongued, loud-minded Mr. Feak of Anabaptist-Leveller persuasion' (Carlyle, 320). That he was vocal and inflammatory there can be no doubt, but there is little evidence that he was either a Baptist or a Leveller. Capp plausibly suggests that Feake saw himself principally as a preacher of biblical truth, regardless of the consequences, compelled to enter the political arena by his obligations to the word of God. It is worth recalling that in the heat and turmoil of the 1650s Feake declared 'Tyranny itself is not so ugly a monster by many degrees... as is anarchy' (Feake, 'Oppressed Close Prisoner', 11). While attacking monarchy, government, taxation, and the legal system, and denying the validity of the national church and its clergy, he was not sufficiently opposed to the present order to decline sending a son to Oxford. 
The date of Feake's death is unknown. His will has not survived, but in 1683 property he owned in Surrey passed to his son Samuel after disagreement with another son, John. Feake was survived by his wife, Jane, who by her will proved in 1693 left what possessions she had to her married daughter Mary Pigeon and an apparently small amount of money for the education of a grandson, Christopher. 


@@@@@


doc= 9236


Ferchar (d. c.651), a son of Connad Cerr. The evidence, however, is ambiguous. In the lists Ferchar stands before Domnall Brecc. And the only mention of Ferchar in the annals is a notice of his death, peculiar to the annals of Ulster, in 693. The year is improbably late, though not quite impossible; it has been conjectured that the entry belonged to a group of badly misdated entries (including one of the death of Domnall Brecc), and that Ferchar really died 'c'.651. 
If the Latin lists are right in making Connad Cerr a son of Conal, and if Conal was the Conall Comgall's son who reigned from 'c'.558 to 574, then Ferchar was, as far as can be ascertained, the last member of the house of Comgall to be a king of Dal Riata. After him the kingship seems to have been divided again, this time between 


@@@@@


doc= 9237


Ferchar Fota (d. 697), immediately before that of Eochaid, son of Domangart. The annals twice mention Ferchar Fota (his epithet means 'the Tall'): in 678 when he lost many of the tribe of Lorne in a battle against Britons, and in 697 when he died. Sons and grandsons of his became overkings of the Dal Riata, but the annal evidence affords no room for Ferchar himself as overking. It can only be guessed that he exercised kingship somewhere outside his own kingdom of Lorne, the northernmost of the kingdoms of the Dal Riata. Genealogists derived its kings from a brother of Fergus, son of Erc, two centuries earlier. 
Domnall Dond's successor was a younger cousin, 


@@@@@


doc= 9238


Fearn, John (1768-1837), philosopher, was born of Scottish descent and of parents not only of excellent virtues, but descended 'sufficiently well'. He was a 'self-taught metaphysician', a fact that was to count against him in his later philosophical conflicts. In early life Fearn spent two years as a midshipman on HMS 'Royal George' until the conclusion of the American War of Independence in 1783, and voyaged in the Pacific, where he saw the 'savage life', a field in which he believed a philosopher could gain some very valuable instruction. He also claimed to have discovered some small islands. During this period he held a number of posts in 'interior regions' and led a comparatively idle life, with hunting as his main occupation. His only companion was a copy of John Locke's 'Essay on Human Understanding', from which he claimed his natural inclination for reflection was strengthened, although he was to deny being either a disciple or a follower of Locke. 
Fearn married his first wife, Aeueasiua (died 1807?), daughter of Colonel Mackay of Brighouse, in Edinburgh on 31 May 1806. The couple had one daughter, Aeueasiua Mackay Fearn, baptized on 22 October 1807. Fearn's second marriage, on 20 October 1808 to Harriet, daughter of Philip William Thomas, a Quaker stockbroker of Highbury Grove, soon collapsed and the couple separated, as Harriet's affections were engaged elsewhere; she later gave birth to an illegitimate daughter, whom Fearn refused to acknowledge as his child. The family feud that followed led to a campaign of vilification against the philosopher, which included 'street-blackguardism' by his father-in-law. While these events were regarded by Fearn as a 'striking example of the structure of mind' ('will', TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1887, fols. 275-279'v'), they were not accepted in a wholly philosophical light and may well have been the cause of Fearn's frequent and prolonged bouts of ill health and somewhat irascible temper. 
Having relinquished the improvement of his fortune, and being sufficiently wealthy to devote himself to philosophical disputes, Fearn found himself opposed to many elements of the Scottish school and to materialism in particular, which he claimed inevitably led to atheistic beliefs, but he was no transcendentalist and stated that his writings were based upon induction as a labourer in the science of pneumatology. In his religion he was conventional and saw visible proof of God's existence in the world, although in his will he claimed, as a good philosopher, to have tested the precepts of the 'Divine mission and mediation of Christ Jesus' sufficiently to sustain a belief in the afterlife, in which he hoped to have some small office. 
Fearn was the author of some twelve books, of which the most notable were 'First Lines of the Human Mind' (1820), 'Anti-Tooke, or, An analysis of the principles and structure of language exemplified in the English tongue' (2 vols., 1827), and 'A Rationale of the Laws of Cerebral Vision' (1830). He regarded himself, and was regarded, as something of an outsider in the philosophical world. He believed that his ideas were undervalued mainly owing to his lack of an academic background and that his country had been to him an 'unfeeling stepmother'. He held to the view that a natural maturity of understanding was best obtained before the mind had been tampered with by schemes of philosophy, whether ancient or modern. Emphasizing the value to the philosopher of the solitary life, he refused to submit to the 'bonds' of patronage, although he was encouraged in his speculations by Dr Samuel Parr. Fearn discussed most of the important questions of metaphysics, to no great end, either in his own apprehension or in any philosophical recognition by his contemporaries. In later life rejection by the philosophical and scientific community led him to rail against the prevailing 'philosophical despotism' of the age. 
Believing that the philosopher wielding the 'weapon of truth... will give him[self] dignity' (Barker, 1.630), Fearn came into conflict with a number of contemporaries in print, most notably Dugald Stewart on vision, Sir David Brewster on optics, Horne Tooke on matters of linguistics, and Lady Mary Shepherd on perception. While Fearn gradually revised his views throughout his life he believed the fields of philosophy, theology, and linguistics were connected and that the second was only possible on the basis of the first, while the third was to be used to bring attention to the problem of the external world in the first two. Influenced by English empiricism, and particularly Locke, in addition to the Scottish philosophy he so much decried, Fearn critically examined the views of Berkeley, Hume, Thomas Reid, and Dugald Stewart. Proudly belonging to no 'philosophical sect', he claimed his speculations were 'the result of the most solitary, considered and uncommunicated course of thinking, that was ever followed' ('An Appeal to Philosophers by Name on the Demonstration of Vision in the Brain and Against the Attack by Sir David Brewster on the Rationale of Cerebral Vision', 1837). All of Fearn's work dealt in some way with the problem of perception which was based upon his laws of vision. The latter led him into a conflict of priority with the Scottish philosopher Dugald Stewart when Fearn claimed that Stewart had held different principles of vision until he had read Fearn's 'Essay on Consciousness' (1812), an unsolicited copy of which he had sent to Stewart. Some years later Stewart had apparently changed his mind on the matter and began to maintain the principles of Fearn, but he refused to acknowledge Fearn's priority. Fearn attempted to solicit the support of Dr Samuel Parr and Charles Babbage (J. Fearn to Charles Babbage, 6 Oct 1832, BL, Add. MS 37187, fol. 161) in this matter and while some commentators did concede originality to Fearn, it was denied by others. The consequences of his failed marriage, as well as his lack of recognition by his peers, cast a blight on Fearn's later life. He died on 3 December 1837 of a 'decay of nature' at his home, 32 Sloane Street, Chelsea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 9239


Fearne, Charles (1742x9-1794), lawyer, was born in London, the eldest child of Charles Fearne (died 1768), deputy secretary of the Admiralty and judge-advocate of the fleet, who presided at the trial of Admiral John Byng from December 1756 to January 1757. He was educated initially by his father, and then at Westminster School. When he left Westminster, his father persuaded him to enter the Inner Temple, although he was not sure that he wanted to practise law. His father died in 1768, leaving a small inheritance to be divided equally between his two sons and daughter. Fearne refused to take his share on the grounds that he had already received a few hundred pounds to start him in his profession and that he had received a superior education to that of his brother. 
Fearne had a remarkably inventive mind, which prevented him from devoting himself single-mindedly to law. Charles Butler described him as 'a general scholar... profoundly versed in maths, chemistry and mechanics. He had obtained a patent for dyeing scarlet and had solicited one for a preparation of porcelain' (Butler, 'Preface'). To finance a project to produce morocco leather, he sold some of his library; but the venture proved too expensive and had to be abandoned. Butler relates that a friend who mentioned to: 'an eminent gunsmith a project of a musket of greater power and much less size than that in ordinary use, the gunsmith pointed out to him its defects and observed that a 'Mr. Fearne, an obscure law man in Breame's-buildings, Chancery Lane, had invented a musket, which, although defective, was much nearer to the attainment of the object'. (Butler, 'Reminiscences', 1.118)' Fearne was also a classical scholar. 'He composed a treatise in the Greek language on the 'Greek Accents', and another on the 'Retreat of the Ten Thousand'' (ibid.). 
When Fearne 'resolved to dedicate himself to the study of law, he burned his profane library and wept over its flames' (Butler, 'Reminiscences', 1.126-7); works which he most regretted included the comedies of Aristophanes. His first legal publication was a 'Historical and Legigraphical Chart of Landed Property in England' (1769). He soon acquired a considerable chamber practice, and his 'Essay on the Learning of Contingent Remainders and Executory Devises', published in 1772, ensured his place among the leading property lawyers and remains the classical text on this arcane subject. Fearne's text is both logical and comprehensive for he had assimilated the old common-law learning which he revered. Nowhere is this more evident than in his defence of the rule in 'Shelley's case' (1579), which stated that if land was devised to John 'for life with remainder to his heirs', these words should be construed to grant John a fee simple, the largest estate known to English law, which enabled him to alienate the land, thereby defeating the expectation of his heirs. The lord chief justice, William Murray, Lord Mansfield, a most distinguished commercial lawyer, disliked the rule. In 'Perrin v. Blake' (1770) he held that the rule was not a rule of law but of construction, and it should not be followed if it was necessary to give effect to the settlor's intention that John should only enjoy a life estate. Although his decision was reversed by the court of exchequer chamber (1772), the controversy over whether Mansfield's view should prevail continued. Mansfield's 'heresy' may well have led Fearne to write the 'Essay', in which he vigorously defended the 'old learning' in 'Shelley'. The 'Essay' satirized Mansfield's judicial style, depicting his ruling that precedents were to be discarded as out of keeping with the superior talents of the times. He also asserted that Mansfield, when solicitor-general, had given an opinion in 1747 in which he concluded that John took a fee simple estate. Mansfield's denial that he had ever given such an opinion led to Fearne's indignant 'Letter' to him, in which Fearne set out the case on which Mansfield's opinion was based. The rule in 'Shelley' survived until the 'Law of Property Act' (1925) effectively abolished it. 
The 'Essay' sealed Fearne's professional reputation. It went through ten editions to 1844, and received an American edition in 1819. He was said to have been 'more consulted than any man of his time' (1 Cl. & Finn. 399). But other interests continued to distract him. To pursue them, he bought a cottage in Hampstead where he enjoyed doing mechanical and philosophical experiments. He remained out of London for longer and longer periods, often taking family and friends on sailing or fishing expeditions, leaving directions with his clerk 'not to know where his master was -- how he was -- or when he would be in town' (Cunningham). Inevitably his clients dropped away. He had made a large income, but he had lived so extravagantly that he had to accept his friends' financial assistance. To restore his fortunes, he returned to practice. But both financial adversity and the loss of his independence crushed his mind and body. Fearne retired, and died either in the neighbourhood of Croydon, Surrey, on 21 January 1794, 'at the premature age of forty-five' (ibid.), or at Chelmsford, Essex, on 25 February 1794, 'in the 52d year of his age' ('GM', 182), after a lingering illness. He was survived by his wife, about whom little is known; in 1797 'The Posthumous Works of Charles Fearne' were published for her benefit, edited by Thomas Mitchell Shadwell, a former ward of Fearne. The twelve-page list of subscribers was headed by Lord Chief Justice Kenyon and Sir Richard Pepper Arden, master of the rolls, an indication of the respect Fearne commanded. 


@@@@@


doc= 9240


Feary, John (d. 1788), landscape painter, of whose parentage nothing is known, in 1766 obtained a premium for artists under the age of twenty-one from the Society of Arts for a drawing from the duke of Richmond's gallery; in 1776 he was awarded a silver palette for a landscape. Said to have been a pupil of Richard Wilson, Feary entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1769 where the sculptor Joseph Nollekens observed him at one of Sir Joshua Reynolds's lectures assembled with 'all the other deformed students in the Academy' (Smith, 1.361). Feary first exhibited at the Free Society of Artists in 1770, sending 'A View from Maise [Maze] Hill in Greenwich Park', and 'A View of a Storm Breaking from the Surrey Side of Westminster Bridge'; in 1771 he sent to the same exhibition 'A View Taken from Highgate Hill'. From 1772 to 1788 he was a frequent exhibitor at the Royal Academy, firstly from Dean's Yard, Westminster, and then between 1776 and 1782 from Bridge Road on the Surrey side of Westminster Bridge. In 1779 he showed 'View of One Tree Hill, Greenwich' (Center for British Art, Yale, New Haven, Connecticut), which Waterhouse observes demonstrates some similarities to the early work of Francis Wheatley. He painted very neatly finished views of the parks and mansions of the nobility and gentry and in 1784 made a tour of Derbyshire; some of his landscapes were engraved. In 1788 he exhibited 'A View of Castle Hill, Devonshire' at the Royal Academy, but died that same year. His drawings were sold by Greenwood in April 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 9241


Featherston, Isaac Earl (1813-1876), politician in New Zealand, the fourth son of Thomas Featherston, a wealthy retail grocer of Newcastle upon Tyne, and his wife, Jane Earl, was born at Newcastle on 21 March 1813. He was educated at a private school in Tamworth and at Edinburgh University, from which he graduated MD in 1836. He then travelled for some years to improve his health (he suffered from consumption). On 10 December 1839 he married Bethia Campbell Scott (died 1864); they had four sons and eight daughters. 
With the intention of emigrating, Featherston took a position as surgeon-superintendent on board a New Zealand Company ship which left England in December 1840; he settled at Wellington, where he began to practise medicine. He soon became conspicuous by advocating the cause of the settlers who had purchased land under the New Zealand Company, and in 1852, when their claims were admitted, his services were recognized by the presentation of an address and a piece of plate. He also played a leading role in the Wellington Constitutional Association, which pressed for self-government for the settlers, and he supported the 'New Zealand Constitution Act', which was passed by the imperial parliament in 1852. He welcomed the considerable powers which the act conferred on the superintendents of the new provinces. In 1853 Featherston was elected superintendent of the province of Wellington, a post he retained by constant re-election until his appointment as agent-general in 1871. Under the new act he was also elected to the general assembly as a representative, at first for Wanganui and then, from 1855, for the city of Wellington. In the general assembly he became known as one of the most determined supporters of 'provincialism'. After failing to form a government in 1856, he concentrated on a career in politics at the provincial level, and he held office in the general government only twice -- for a month in 1861 and as minister without portfolio from 1869 to 1871. 
Featherston was a strong critic of the Stafford government's policies regarding the acquisition of land from the Maori that led to war in 1861 over the Waitara dispute. He was worried about the unsettling effects of these policies on race relations generally, and especially in Wellington province. He also feared the increased power of the general government resulting from the war policy, and he became renowned for the skill of his diplomacy in keeping the peace. On the renewal of the war in 1863 he used his influence to persuade the Maori of the province of Wellington not to join the 'rebels'. In 1865 he accompanied General Chute in his Taranaki campaign and led a contingent of Maori 'loyalists' in several engagements, for which he was awarded the New Zealand cross for bravery. 
Featherston assisted in establishing and developing the lines of steam communication between Australia and New Zealand. In 1869 he was sent as representative of the colony to Australia to urge the necessity of retaining troops in New Zealand, and the following year he went as one of two special commissioners to England for the same purpose. In 1871 he was appointed New Zealand's first agent-general; much of his work in this post involved the recruitment of migrants under Julius Vogel's immigration programme. He held the office until his death, at Brighton, Sussex, on 19 June 1876. 
Featherston was a formidable politician who fought determinedly and skilfully for what he believed in. He was on the losing side in the struggle to retain the provincial system, and his principal achievement was the promotion of settlement in the southern half of the North Island. 


@@@@@


doc= 9242


Featley, Daniel (1582-1645), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born on 5 March 1582 in Charlton-on-Otmoor, Oxfordshire, the second of the five children of John Fairclough and his wife, Marian Thrift. On 27 June 1590 he was admitted as a chorister of Magdalen College, Oxford, where his father was a college servant. At the age of twelve 'he gained no small credit and applause by the Latine and Greek verses which he frequently, wittily and elegantly composed' (Featley, 8). He was admitted scholar of Corpus Christi College, to which his father had also moved, on 13 December 1594, graduated BA on 13 February 1601, and was appointed a probationer fellow of the college on 20 September 1602. Some of his early writings survive in manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MSS Rawlinson C.753 and D.47), including notes 'ex Whitakeri responsione ad decem rationes Edm. Campioni' written in 1601, lists of books read in 1604 and 1605, and a sermon preached at the funeral of John Rainolds in 1607. His first published work, commissioned by Thomas Morton, was an abridgement of Laurence Humphrey's life of Bishop John Jewel, published in the 1609 edition of Jewel's 'Works'. 
In 1610 Featley was recommended by the vice-chancellor, John King, to the English ambassador to Paris, Sir Thomas Edmondes, who appointed him as his household chaplain. He spent the next three years in Paris, where he built up a formidable reputation as a protestant controversialist: his friend William Leo (also known as Loe) wrote that the Jesuits in Paris 'contemned him for that he was of so low a stature, yet admired him for his ready answers, and acute distinctions' (Leo, 23) and Featley himself claimed that Cardinal Perron had attempted 'to inveagle him to Popery, by promise of far greater preferments than ever he could expect in England' (D. Featley, 'Sacra nemesis, the Levites Scourge', 1644, 66). The sermons that he preached in Edmondes's house were later published in his 'Clavis mystica' (1636). They include a stinging attack on another English minister, Benjamin Carier, for his 'Laodicean temper in religion'; a marginal note records that Carier had 'preached a scandalous Sermon in Paris at Luxenburg house, and not long after reconciled himself to the Romish Church' ('Clavis mystica', 3x6'r'). Featley also took part in several disputations, including one on 4 September 1612 with Richard Smith, later bishop of Chalcedon, on the subject of transubstantiation, later published in 'The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome' (1630), and another with Christopher Bagshaw on the same subject, attended by Lord Clifford, Sir Edward Somerset, and 'divers other persons of great quality both English and French', and later published in 'Transubstantiation Exploded' (1638). According to Leo, Featley was still remembered twenty-five years later by some of his opponents 'with reverentiall respect for his accute and ready Disputation' (Leo, 23). 
In July 1613 Featley visited Oxford to take the degree of BD. He had intended to return to Paris, but decided to remain in England in order to take up the living of North-hill, Cornwall, which had been offered to him by one of his former pupils, Ezekiel Arscot. The benefice was worth $150 per annum, and Featley later claimed to have accepted it merely to 'relieve my private wants'. He soon came to regret his decision, writing to George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, that 'I cannot but lay blame on my sudden resolution to accept this benefice rather than to returne unto France according to your Grace's better advise', and to Robert Abbot, bishop of Salisbury, that he hoped it would 'please God to remove me out of this barren and thirsty soyle and settle me near the wellsprings of knowledge, that I may quench my thirst of controversy-learning' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D.47, fol. 41). In 1614, when Richard Mocket, chaplain to Archbishop Abbot, was promoted to the wardenship of All Souls College, Oxford, Featley made a bid to succeed him, declaring that he was well qualified for the post of archiepiscopal chaplain, both 'in regard of my experience beyond the sea and particular correspondencies with the greatest clerks in those parts' and 'my long travaile in the controversies of religion, wherewith we are little troubled at Northill' (ibid., fol. 50). In 1617 Abbot appointed him as one of his household chaplains, and on 6 February 1619 he was presented to the rectory of All Saints, Lambeth, immediately adjacent to the archbishop's residence at Lambeth Palace. 
As Abbot's chaplain, one of Featley's principal duties was to license books for the press, and from 1617 to 1625 he was one of the most active of the ecclesiastical licensers. He interpreted his role in broad terms, and seems to have acted not merely as a censor but also as a literary agent and adviser to inexperienced authors, one of whom, Simon Birkbeck, acknowledged his help in the preface to 'The Protestants Evidence' (1634): 'hee (I thanke him) was readie to resolve me when I was in doubt, and to direct mee, (yea and correct mee also) when I was at default'. Featley was sympathetic to puritan authors, and succeeded in getting a number of puritan works into print with only minimal corrections. In one case, William Hart's 'The Three Conformities' (1620), a translation of a work by Francis de Croy, it is possible to reconstruct Featley's alterations by comparing the printed version with a pre-publication manuscript (Beinecke Library, Yale, Osborn MS b. 280); this shows that Featley cut one entire chapter on 'Archbishoprickes, Bishoprickes and other Popish dignities' but made only minor changes to other passages which were implicitly critical of the ceremonies of the Church of England. In the wake of the Synod of Dort (1618) he also helped to arbitrate and moderate a number of theological disputes between puritan ministers, supplying conciliatory prefaces to several works including William Chibald's 'The Trial of Faith' (1623) and Ezekiel Culverwell's 'Treatise of Faith' (2nd edn, 1623). 
Featley continued to take an active part in anti-Catholic controversy, and participated in several more disputations, including one with George Musket on 21 April 1621 and another with a Dr Eglestone on 18 April 1623, both printed in 'An Appendix to the Fishers Net' (1624). In June 1623 he joined forces with Francis White in a debate with the Jesuit priests John Percy (alias Fisher) and John Sweet, held at Sir Humphrey Lynde's house in London and attended by a large audience including the earls of Lincoln and Warwick, Sir Henry Hastings, and Featley's fellow-chaplain Thomas Goad. The question at issue was 'whether the Protestant Church was in all ages visible, and especially in the ages going before Luther; and whether the names of such visible Protestants in all ages can be shewed and prooved out of good Authors' ('Romish Fisher', C3'v', p. 14). The debate seems to have been a somewhat chaotic affair: at one stage the Catholics in the audience started chanting 'Names, names, names', to which Featley retorted: 'What? Will nothing content you but a Buttery-booke?' The sensitive political negotiations over the Spanish match caused the debate to be halted prematurely, and both sides subsequently claimed victory: Featley published his account of it in 'The Fisher Catched in his Owne Net' (1623) and 'The Romish Fisher Caught and Held in his Owne Net' (1624). The latter pamphlet was licensed for publication by Featley himself, but William Bedell reported to Samuel Ward on 1 June 1624 that it was 'not yet permitted to be sold' because Richard Neile, bishop of Durham, had taken personal offence at a passage in which the premature ending of the debate was blamed on 'some, that tooke on them the office of the Divell who is the accuser of the bretheren' (Shuckburgh, 262). 
Featley was strongly opposed to the Arminian school of theology, which he regarded as dangerously close to semi-Pelagianism and Roman Catholicism. He may have been the 'Oxford man, chaplein to the Archbishop' mentioned by Joseph Mede in a letter of 25 April 1623, who preached a visitation sermon 'wondrous plainly and vehemently against the fearfull or flattering silence of our Clergie', warning that 'the hope of a crosier staffe or a Cardinalls hatt would make many a Scholler in England beat his braine to reconcile the Church of Rome and England' (BL, Harley MS 389, fol. 318). He was particularly scandalized by Richard Mountague's assertion that the Church of Rome could be considered a true church of Christ, and wrote a short treatise in reply, 'Certain doubts of S.B. resolved by Dr Daniel Featley, against popery, asserting the protestant church to be the onely Catholick and true church', though this did not appear in print until 1660. He also published several pamphlets in response to Mountague's 'Appello Caesarem' (1625), including 'Parallelismus nov-antiqui erroris pelagiarminiani' (1626), 'Pelagius redivivus' (1626), and 'A Second Parallel, together with a Writ of Error Sued Against the Appealer' (1626); he later claimed that by writing 'Pelagius redivivus' he had 'dashed all hopes of his preferment at court'. Mountague for his part was bitterly hostile to Featley ('that urchin') and resentful of his control over the licensing process, complaining to his friend John Cosin that Featley 'told me once, if I did not correct my booke voluntarily, I should be forced' ('Correspondence of John Cosin', 1.50). In another of his letters to Cosin he referred to 'that hobby-horse Featly', who 'will, as he hath formerly done, crouch and fawne, and wind himself out. It were not amisse he were smoked' (ibid., 1.100). 
In 1625 Featley got into trouble over the licensing of two books by puritan authors, William Crompton's 'Saint Austins Summes' (1625) and Edward Elton's 'Gods Holy Mind' (1625). Elton's book was called in, and 900 copies of it were burned at Paul's Cross on 13 February 1625. Mountague wrote to Cosin expressing amazement that Featley should ever have granted the book a licence: 'were not the Dr's braynes made of the papp of an apple that would allow such stuff to the presse? It is well the books made a fire, though not all, I doubt. But they are not burned that made the books' ('Correspondence of John Cosin', 1.61). Featley was summoned before King James and officially reprimanded: according to his subsequent account of the meeting in 'Cygnea cantio' (1629), the king 'seemed to be very much displeased that any should be permitted to print books in the Church of England, who were not conformable to the discipline of the Church of England' ('Cygnea cantio', B3'r'). Featley's defence was that he had only licensed the first few pages of Elton's book, and then 'made a stop' when he learned that the author had died, 'yet the booke tooke the libertie to flie out of the Presse without licence'; while he had deleted three entire sections of Crompton's book 'because they crossed the doctrine and discipline established in this Kingdome, and savoured of that humour which never yet bred good blood in the Church' (ibid., D3'v'), though, with hindsight, he admitted that he might have been better advised to have rejected the book completely. Some copies of 'Cygnea cantio' contain a note by the printer, Robert Milbourne, accusing Cosin of having engineered the suppression of Elton's book; and the whole episode seems to have been an attempt by the Arminian faction to embarrass Featley and Abbot. 
At Charles I's first parliament in 1625, Featley was elected a member of convocation, and became the leader of a group of forty-five clergy who agreed among themselves 'to oppose everything that did but savour or scent never so little of Pelagianism or Semi-Pelagianism'. In August of that year, there was an outbreak of plague in London, and convocation was transferred to Oxford; but Featley then fell ill and was suspected of having contracted plague, though in truth 'his distemper was but a Cold'. As William Leo, another member of convocation, later recalled: 'we were constrained to get him an horse, and two poore men travelled with him, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side did support and stay him up all the way, he travelling on foot pace, and so brought him home to Lambeth.' On his arrival at Lambeth Abbot refused to admit him, and Featley returned to his own house in Kennington 'in much anguish and grief'. After his recovery, 'he removed his Books and other goods from Lambeth Palace to his own house, and so deserted the service of his Lord' (Featley, H8'r', p. 19). The most plausible interpretation of this rather mysterious episode is that Featley's licensing of Elton's book had made him a liability to Abbot, who therefore seized the opportunity to dismiss him. Perhaps in compensation, however, on 29 November 1626 Abbot presented him to the rectory of All Hallows, Bread Street, London, which he afterwards exchanged for the rectory of Acton, Middlesex, while remaining in possession of his living at Lambeth. 
In 1624 Featley had married one of his parishioners, Joyce Halloway (died 1637), though he concealed the marriage while he was a member of Abbot's household. She was the daughter of William Kerwyn, citizen and mason of London, and widow successively of two London merchants, Richard Thompson and Isaac Halloway, and was described by Featley's biographer as 'an ancient grave Gentlewoman' (Featley, H6'r', p. 15), considerably his senior. She lived in 'a handsom house of her own in Kennington in Lambeth parish', which she settled on her husband for life, as there was no parsonage house attached to the benefice. According to Thomas Gataker, who preached at her funeral in 1637, she was a pious and charitable woman, who 'read the whole 'New Testament' twelve times over; and that, not slightly and superficially, but so as to observe somewhat that might be usefull unto her, either out of or upon every Chapter she read'. She had 'pretie skill in matter of Physick and Chirurgie' (Gataker), and acted as physician and apothecary to her poorer neighbours; according to John Featley, she was also 'a great Florist' who 'nourished a Garden which administered a sweet and delicate delight' (ibid.). She left the sum of $340 to charitable uses, and 'a faire Communion Cup' to the parish of Lambeth, 'to be raysed from the sale of some of her principall Jewels' (Gataker). Her house in Kennington was later the subject of protracted litigation, in which Joyce's nephew Andrew Kerwin sought to recover the copyhold from Featley (Parl. Arch., main papers, 10 Dec 1640 and 30 June 1641). 
During the plague epidemic of 1625-6 Featley wrote 'Ancilla pietatis, or, The Handmaid to Private Devotion' (1626), his most popular and least controversial work. As John Featley recalled, 'he was so sensible of the general calamity, that he laid by his Polemick Divinity, and wholly devoted himself to the study and practice of Piety and Charity' (Featley, H8'r', p. 19). 'Ancilla pietatis' was a collection of prayers for private use, written in the conviction that the sincere Christian ought to be 'more devout in private than in publike'. Featley believed that while public prayer was 'more solemne', private prayer 'ought to be more frequent [...]. Publike makes more noise, but private (for the most part) hath a deeper channell' ('Ancilla pietatis', B3'v'). The book became one of the religious bestsellers of its day, reaching an eighth edition by 1656. It was translated into French and Dutch, and did more than any other work to give Featley an international reputation: in his 'Sacra nemesis' (1644) he printed a letter from his Dutch translator, Wolfgang Meyer, declaring that his countrymen overseas 'confess they are much indebted to me for translating the works of Perkins, Willet, Downham, Squire and other English writers, but far more for the translation of your Devotions' ('Sacra nemesis', M3'r', p. 85). The second, third, fourth and fifth editions were all augmented with additional material, including 'Directions for a private fast', 'A special confession to be used before the receiving of the sacrament', and 'A psalme of thanksgiving for women after their delivery'; many copies are also found bound with a short catechism entitled 'The Summe of Saving Knowledge' (1626). 
Featley kept up a steady stream of publications in the later 1620s and 1630s. In 'The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome' (1630) he printed a report of a disputation with a Jesuit priest, Thomas Everard, held in 1628 in the presence of an unnamed nobleman who had been 'seduced by deceitfull guides... out of the right way into the Arminian tract, and afterward into the high road of Popery lying not farre off' ('Grand Sacrilege', preface). He also supplied a commendatory preface to the 1631 edition of Clement Cotton's 'Christians Concordance', explaining how concordances could be used to compile 'sacred collations or divine notes' as well as to assist the memory. His most important publication was 'Clavis mystica' (1636), a collection of sermons 'opening divers difficult and mysterious texts of Holy Scripture'. With this work, Featley found himself on the receiving end of ecclesiastical censorship, as he recalled in his evidence at the trial of Archbishop William Laud in 1644. When 'Clavis mystica' was about to be published, Laud summoned him to Lambeth and enquired whether his sermons had been licensed, to which 'he answered, that they were licensed long since when himselfe had power to license books, and printed by vertue of that license'. Laud then ordered him to submit the sermons to his chaplain, William Bray, who 'gelt them exceedingly, and purged out all the smart and masculine passages against the Papists, Jesuits and Arminians', with the result that seventeen sheets had to be cancelled and reprinted (Prynne, 2L1'v'). Some uncensored copies of the book have survived, and can be recognized by the absence of an errata list on the final page of text. 
This 'contretemps' did not prevent Featley from being appointed a royal chaplain in the late 1630s; the lord chamberlain's accounts show that he preached twice before the king, on 29 March 1639 and 14 April 1641 (TNA: PRO, LC 5/134). About this time, according to his nephew, he was invited to become a professor of divinity at Leiden, but declined the offer, feeling himself 'unfit to alter his climate, by reason of age and other infirmities' (Featley, 15'v', p. 38). When the civil war broke out, he did not follow the king to Oxford, but remained in London, where his high reputation as a theologian led to his appointment as a member of the Westminster assembly. Most of the episcopalian divines elected to the assembly, including Henry Hammond, Richard Holdsworth, and Featley's old Oxford teacher John Prideaux, regarded it as illegitimate because it had not been summoned by royal authority; and Featley was the only leading episcopalian to take his seat there. On 10 September 1642 he was requested by the Commons to answer a Roman Catholic treatise entitled 'A Safeguard from Shipwracke to a Prudent Catholique', which sought to prove that it was lawful for a Catholic to attend protestant services, receive communion, and take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy. His reply was published as 'Virtumnus Romanus' (1642), and consisted of a reprint of his opponent's work 'to lay open to the view of the world the detestable and damnable doctrine of Romish Priests and Jesuits', with an introduction and marginal notes by Featley 'by way of Antidote against those places where the rankest poyson is couched' ('Virtumnus Romanus', preface). This work caused him some embarrassment at Laud's trial, where he was forced to admit that one passage had been censored for being 'somewhat sharpe against the Separatists' (Prynne, 343'r'). 
Despite his membership of the assembly Featley's religious views caused him to be regarded in many quarters as an enemy of the parliament. On 10 November 1642 a group of soldiers vandalized the church at Acton, breaking down the communion rails, pulling down the font, and smashing the windows; they also burnt down the tithe barn with its stock of corn, valued at $211. On 19 February 1643 five soldiers entered the church at Lambeth, where they 'prophaned the church by walking with their hatts on in time of prayer, and taking Tobacco at the communion table', and then demanded to see Featley, threatening to 'squeeze the Pope out of the Doctor's belly' (Featley, I1'r', p. 30). Featley had been warned of the danger and prudently kept out of the way, but one of his parishioners was killed on the spot and another mortally wounded in the ensuing fracas. Shortly before this incident a group of disgruntled parishioners had submitted a petition to the committee for plundered ministers, complaining that Featley had encouraged 'new ceremonies' in the church at Lambeth, such as bowing at the name of Jesus and standing up at the 'Gloria patri', 'which many of his Parish practise' ('Gentle Lash', B1'v', p. 1). In a counter-petition submitted to the House of Lords in February 1643, Featley claimed that the opposition to him stemmed from a small group of 'obstinate separatists' (Parl. Arch., main papers, 23 Feb 1643), many of whom had not attended church for the past nine months. He gave further details in his pamphlet 'The Gentle Lash' (1644), where he declared that his opponents were 'men of very meane ranke and quality' ('Gentle Lash', E1'r', p. 26), including a shipwright, a cobbler, and a waterman. 
On 16 March 1643 Featley appeared before the committee for plundered ministers to answer the charges against him. He admitted that the communion table in Lambeth church was railed and set against the east wall in the Laudian style, but declared that 'it standeth as it did when I came first to the parish... and is the fittest place for it to stand in, that the communicants may best both heare and see the Minister at the Communion', adding that when the parishioners had been asked whether the rails should be removed, 'they cryed all with one accord, it is no innovation, let it stand, let it stand'. He denied having said in a sermon 'that it was blasphemie and ignorance to speake against bowing at the Name of Jesus', but defended the gesture as a sign of 'inward humility' ('Gentle Lash'). These arguments did not satisfy the committee, which ordered Featley to be sequestered from the rectory of Lambeth; but when this order was referred to the Commons on 11 July 1643, it was put to the vote and defeated by sixty-nine votes to sixty. Laurence Whitacre, MP for Okehampton, noted in his diary that the order had been made 'for his Malignant preaching against the Parliament, and encouraging of those that were ill affected to it: but by reason of his good deserts to the Church heretofore, and because he was chosen one of the Synode, it would not passe' (BL, Add. MS 31116, fol. 62). 
By this time Featley was becoming increasingly outspoken in his support for episcopacy. In one of his final speeches before the Westminster assembly he declared that, having received episcopal ordination, he could not vote against episcopacy without breaking his oath of obedience, and could not accept the solemn league and covenant unless its condemnation of 'prelacy' was qualified in some way. With such views Featley's removal from his livings was only a matter of time and in September 1643 he fell victim to a classic 'sting' operation when one Armiger Wardner, a feltmaker in Southwark, offered to carry a letter from him to Archbishop James Ussher at Oxford, and then denounced him to the authorities as a royalist spy -- although, judging by the contents of the letter, Featley was less interested in passing politically sensitive information to the royalist forces at Oxford than in pressing his own claims to ecclesiastical preferment. (His subsequent attempts to exonerate himself from the charge of place-seeking were embarrassingly lame: 'Put case, he did so... Is it a great fault for a Servant to begge of his Master?' 'Gentle Lash', A3'r'). On 29 September the Commons expelled him from the assembly, voted him out of his livings, and ordered him to be imprisoned. Many observers felt he had been harshly treated, Richard Baxter commenting that 'whatever his Fact were, he was so Learned a Man, as was sufficient to dishonour those he suffered by' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.73). Featley himself attributed his expulsion from the assembly to the fact that he had opposed the covenant and 'sided with the Presbyterians against the Independents' in the debate on the creeds ('Sacra nemesis', 4). 
Featley was imprisoned in Lord Petre's house in Aldersgate Street, where he engaged in a final burst of literary activity. He published two self-justificatory memoirs, 'Sacra nemesis, the Levites Scourge' (1644) and 'The Gentle Lash, or, The Vindication of Dr Featley' (1644), in which he pleaded his credentials as a champion of 'the true reformed Religion': 'Did not he oppose Arminianisme when it was in its fullest Ruffe? And when the Crime was capitall to speake against it, were his lipps sealed?' ('Gentle Lash', A3'v'). 'The Gentle Lash' ends with a 'Manifesto and challenge' in which Featley offers to maintain, 'by disputation or writing', the following three points: that the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' 'need no alteration at all, but onely an Orthodox explication in some ambiguous phrases, and a vindication against false aspersions'; that episcopacy is 'a truly ancient and Apostolicall Institution'; and that the prayer book 'is the most compleat, perfect and exact Liturgie now extant in the Christian world' (ibid., E4'r', p. 31). He returned to his old anti-Catholic stamping-ground in 'Roma ruens, Romes Ruine' (1644), a polemical work on the visibility of the Catholic church, written in response to a challenge from an unnamed 'Romanist' whom Featley took to be 'some mendicant friar'. He also set out his reasons for opposing the solemn league and covenant in a letter to 'my Noble and much Honored Friend, E.G.', published long after his death as 'The League Illegal' (1660). 
Another of his prison writings was 'The Sea-Gull' (1644), published anonymously but attributed to Featley by his friend William Leo. This brief pamphlet concerned a painting seized from a ship 'neere Arundell Haven about Christmas last', which had been alleged by some parliamentarian writers to depict the king handing over the sceptre of his kingdom to the queen and the pope, but which, as Featley had no difficulty in demonstrating, was actually a representation of a story from the 'Golden Legend', painted in Antwerp for the church of St Anne in Seville. Featley's final work, and the most important of his prison writings, was 'The Dippers Dipt' (1645), based on notes taken in October 1642 at a disputation with the Baptist minister William Kiffin in Southwark, but greatly expanded to form a polemical history of the Anabaptist movement since the Reformation. Later editions of the work were enlarged with further material, including Featley's speeches before the Westminster assembly, and a striking frontispiece by William Marshall entitled 'The discription of the severall sorts of Anabaptists with their manner of rebaptizing': the central scene shows some naked 'Virgins of Sion' being baptized in a river, flanked by a series of roundels depicting various sects and heresies, including the 'Separatist', the 'Enthusiast', the 'Libertine', and the 'Adamite'. 'The Dippers Dipt' was by far the most successful of Featley's controversial writings, provoking a reply from the Baptist minister Henry Denne, 'Antichrist Unmasked' (1645), and reaching a sixth edition in 1651 and a seventh in 1660. 
In March 1645 Featley was permitted to move to Chelsea College for the sake of his health. According to Leo, who visited him there shortly before his death, he was suffering from 'the Dropsie, which was on the left side of his face, and was falne into his left legge', and spoke 'with great shortnesse of breath' (Leo, F1'r', p. 25). He died on 17 April, and was buried in Lambeth church on 21 April; his last words were 'The poor Church of God is torn in pieces'. A few days before his death, he drew up 'A modell of an intended will, to be confirmed and executed if ever peace returne upon Israell', dated 14 April 1645 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/193). Although he had earlier claimed to have had 'all his estate both personall and reall sequestred, his bookes (in which lay his chiefest treasure) taken from him, his familie turned out of house and home, his servants and friends examined upon oath, concerning any plate, money, rents or arrerages, bills or bonds belonging to him, and all that could be found seized upon ('Sacra nemesis', 90)' many of his possessions may have been concealed by friends, as his will required his overseer Mr John Halloway to enter into a $700 bond for the safe custody of his plate. To Gregory Braxton, 'for manie yeares my right eye and hand', he left $100, together with 'all the copies begun or finished against Poperie, Arminianisme or Anabaptisticall Heresies' and 'a booke which my Lord Craven put mee upon long agoe, perfect for the presse', requesting 'that in the printing thereof greate regard be had to the speedie dispersinge of the copies, for God is my Judge that my principall end and scope of writeing of them was the glorifieinge of God and the cleareinge of his most holy truth' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/193). 
Featley was the subject of two biographical accounts, the first by William Leo, minister of Wandsworth, Surrey, and the second by his nephew John Featley (1604/5-1667). Leo's account was published in 1645 together with his funeral sermon for Featley; he stated that he had known Featley for thirty-seven years, 'one and twenty of which time we lived loving friends and neighbours but three miles distant from one another' (Leo, F1'r', p. 25). John Featley's 'Succinct history of the life and death of the learned and famous divine, Daniel Featley' was annexed to 'Featlaei paligenesia, or, Doctor Daniel Featley Revived' (1660); it is considerably fuller than Leo's account, but inaccurate in some details. He described his uncle as 'affable and courteous to all, without the least commixture of that sullen morosity which some men mistake for gravity' (Featley, L3'r', p. 81), though he noted that Featley's zeal in controversy had often made his opponents 'unjustly suspect that he had been cholerick' (ibid.). The fact that Featley devoted so much of his energies to polemical and controversial divinity meant that his writings were quickly forgotten; and this, together with his failure to achieve any major ecclesiastical preferment, has served to obscure his real talents as a theologian. Among protestant divines in France and the Netherlands he was regarded as one of the leading defenders of the Reformed faith; Leo recalled visiting the University of Groningen and seeing Featley's name in a list of 'the most famous Schoole-men' of the Christian church. It was his misfortune that, having found himself out of favour in the 1630s because of his views on doctrine, Featley then found himself attacked in the 1640s because of his views on church discipline, and was thus denied the recognition his talents deserved. 


@@@@@


doc= 9243


Featley, John (1604/5-1667), Church of England clergyman, was born in Northamptonshire, the son of John Featley. He matriculated from All Souls College, Oxford, on 4 November 1620 at fifteen, and graduated BA on 25 February 1625. Shortly after his ordination Featley sailed, in 1626, for the island of St Christopher (now St Kitts), where he was 'the first preacher of the gospel'. His sponsor was Sir Thomas Warner, appointed governor of the island in 1629. On 6 September 1629, during a brief visit to England, Featley preached a sermon at St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, published as 'A sermon preached to the nobely deserving gentleman, Sir Thomas Warner, and the rest of his companie, bound to the West Indies' (1629). Back on St Kitts by 3 May 1630, he attended as one of its members a meeting of the governing committee of the island, at which evidence was heard concerning seditious remarks reported to have been uttered in this new and remote colonial outpost. It must have been about this time that he married Anna, niece of Pierce Powell, with whom, as he recalled in 1666, he lived about thirty-five years and travelled thousands of leagues. 
In 1635 Featley was in England again, acting as curate at Lambeth, Surrey, for his uncle Daniel Featley (1582-1645), a well-known critic of nonconformity. John's visitation sermon preached at St Saviour's, Southwark, published as 'Obedience and Submission' (1636), reveals him as a leading defender of the Laudian church. Featley was anxious that all should obey the king's government, including its ecclesiastical magistrates, whom 'he appoints for the sweet, harmonious government of the church, by religious and just discipline' (p. 7). Even the moderate puritans, who 'better relish our doctrine than our discipline [must]... stoope low enough to enter in at the gate' (p. 24), and the day had passed of 'the grave bearded brownists... the down-lookt separatists, [and] the disorderly anabaptists' (p. 10). Such views fitted well with the latest official thinking, and according to Featley's own account he was in 1639 made chaplain to Charles I 'at Huntly fields, during the first Scottish expedition' ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 226). 
In November 1642, while Featley was at Acton, Middlesex, acting as curate for the rector, his uncle Daniel, there arrived, fresh from the encounter at nearby Turnham Green, radical soldiers of the city militia determined to confront their chief tormentor. Having vented their wrath upon the inside of the church some set up in the parsonage, and others set off for Lambeth to look for Daniel. Shortly after this John Featley was invited to return to St Kitts, and on 24 June 1643, with wife, children, and servants, he set sail from Tilbury Hope, in a ship (appropriately enough) 'pestered with brownists, anabaptists and antinomians, etc' (Featley, 'Featlaei', 2.39-40). Featley himself had gloated at those who 'have quit our country for their Canaan... the fear of conformity hath made them to use the wings of their ships', bidding them good riddance and 'a prosperous gale to carry them to their port' (Featley, 'Obedience and Submission', 21-2). This proved ironic. About 1645 Featley returned briefly to England, but soon took ship again for the near continent. On one of these voyages: 'The boisterous and churlish swelling of a rough and troublesome Severn, full of unexpected turnings and windings, carrying us far to sea, was the cause of embalming two of my children in the salt ocean and was like to prove the ruin of four more of them, besides the beloved wife of my bosom. (Featley, 'Fountaine', preface *5)' By 1646, however, Featley was safe at 'my house in Flushing' in Zeeland, from where he signed the epistle of 'A Fountaine of Teares' to Elizabeth, wife of Gilbert Keate (probably the grocer and alderman, died 1659), a work which she had encouraged him to begin some five years earlier. 
Nothing is certainly known of Featley's activities during the period of the Commonwealth and protectorate, though he may have returned with his family to Acton. In 1660 his fortunes improved abruptly; that summer he was appointed the king's extraordinary chaplain, and on 7 June 1661 he was created DD at Oxford. About August 1660 he petitioned for a crown presentation to the rectory of Beckingham, Lincolnshire; it is not known whether this was granted but he appears in May 1661 as rector of Langar in that county. Featley also won institution to the valuable rectory of Edwinstowe, Nottinghamshire, on the presentation of the dean and chapter of Lincoln, soon after his appointment to offices in Lincoln Cathedral. On 24 September 1660 he was installed in person as its precentor, having repulsed a challenge from Hugh Barcroft. He also won possession of the annexed prebend of Kilsby, rendering nugatory the institution to it on 1 November 1660 of John Whiston. It also appears from his will that he won a long struggle over the prebend of Scamblesby, against a determined challenge from Timothy Welfitt. 
Despite these material comforts Featley found much to discontent him when he drew up his will on 1 May 1666. First he was plagued with 'the grinding pains of the stone'. Then there was his 'disobedient and rebellious daughter' Anna, who had left home and 'had been of great charge to me in maintaining her abroad'. Anna, it seems, had become involved with a 'baker of Acton' and his wife who had 'extorted from me, by cunning meanes, three score pounds by keeping her from me'. His eldest son, John, had 'married against my will' despite all his father's 'importunacies' (Lincs. Arch., D & C will, 11/144). But Featley was able to provide generously for John, and for the eleven other surviving children of his marriage to Anna. He died at Lincoln, and was buried in the chancel of Lincoln Cathedral on 3 March 1667. His wife survived him, but had been 'long sicke and weake' (will) when, on 20 October 1667, aged fifty-two, she made her will, proved on 3 December 1668. 


@@@@@


doc= 9244


Fechin moccu Chae (d. 665), whose feast day was 20 January. The genealogies contain rival claims associating him with the Gailenga (of Meath and northern Connacht) and the Fothairt (mainly of Leinster). The latter claim may be connected with his church of Lathrach Cain, probably one of the places named Laragh in Leinster. The first Irish life (the printed text, from a single fourteenth-century manuscript, is a combination of two earlier lives) associated him with the Luigne of Connacht and, in particular, with the church of Achonry and its patron saint, Nath I. Similarly, Fore itself is said to have been within the bounds of the Luigne of Meath. Just as Cianan of Duleek linked together the Ciannachta of Brega and of Glenn Geimin, so Fechin linked together the Luigne of Connacht and Meath. As befitted the saint of an important client kingdom, Fechin was shown as taking a firm line with over-kings, such as Diarmait mac Aeda Slane, king of Tara. The second Irish text shows rather more interest in Leinster and provides a story of a usual kind to justify the payment of rents of Fechin from Leinster. In the Latin and Irish lives his mother was called Lassair; according to the first Irish life, she was of the royal family of Munster. Fechin also founded a monastery on the island of Omey near Clifden in Connemara, confirming his Connacht connections, but Fore was his principal church and 'the place of his resurrection'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9245


Fechter, Charles Albert (1822-1879), actor and playwright, was born on 23 October 1822 in Hanway Yard, Oxford Street, London (though Vapereau, in his 'Dictionnaire des contemporains', claimed Belleville, Paris, was his birthplace), the twelfth in a family of thirteen children. Though the Fechters were French emigres, Jean Fechter, his father, was German-born, and his mother, whose maiden name was Regis, was variously described as being English or Italian by birth. Both parents were sculptors. In 1830 the family, with their two surviving children, returned to Paris, but the political turmoil, which left an enduring impression on Charles, forced them back to London. After a further six years there, during which poverty caused Jean Fechter to put his gifts as a sculptor to commercial use manufacturing bronzes and candelabras, they settled in Paris in 1836. Charles's education had not been neglected: he learned Greek and Latin at Templeton's College in London, and continued his studies for two years at Boulogne-sur-Seine. He had developed an interest in the theatre while attending performances by W. C. Macready, Charles Kean (whose natural acting he admired), and Maria Malibran, but it was to take several years for him to choose between the rival muses of the stage and the fine arts. 
Fechter made his first stage appearance in 1840, in 'Le mari de la veuve' by the elder Dumas at the Salle Moliere, Paris, a small theatre for amateurs, after which he attended -- briefly -- the Conservatoire, and toured -- disastrously -- Italy with an itinerant French troupe. He spent three years in evening study at the Academie des Beaux-Arts, and at the age of twenty-one received, on the same day, both news of the award of the first grand medal for his sculpture and the call to his debut at the Theatre Francais, where he had previously auditioned. Fechter and his father tossed a coin, the outcome of which was that Charles and the theatre won, but his acting career was always distinguished by the picturesque qualities derived from his talent and training in the fine arts. 
Unfortunately, Fechter's career was also characterized by another less admirable quality -- his ungovernable temper. Thus, although his debut in December 1844 (as Seide in Voltaire's 'Mahomet' and Valere in 'Tartuffe') at the Theatre Francais had gone well and led to supporting roles with Rachel, after eighteen months Fechter walked out in a glory of indignation. Estranged from the Theatre Francais, he took engagements in Berlin in 1846 and the following year at the Vaudeville Theatre in Paris and the St James's Theatre in London, where he enjoyed the patronage of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. On 29 November 1847 he married a Mlle Rolbert, a pensionnaire of the Comedie Francais, with whom he had a son, Paul, and a daughter, Marie, who became an opera singer. 
Over the next thirteen years Fechter pursued his career principally in Paris. His success as Armand Duval in 'La dame aux camelias' at the Vaudeville on 2 February 1852 established him as the first 'jeune premier' in France. During 1857-8 he was stage director at the Odeon, a post which he resigned in protest at the restrictions placed upon him by the government in the interest of the Theatre Francais. Encouraged by his experience as a member of French companies performing in England, he determined not only to perform there again, but to perform in English. 
Fechter applied himself to the task of perfecting the language, studying for sixteen to eighteen hours daily over a period of four months, before appearing at the Princess's Theatre under the management of Augustus Harris. For his debut on 2 October 1860 he chose Victor Hugo's 'Ruy Blas'. 'His accent and his gesticulations were entirely from France', 'The Times' reported, 'but his articulation is perfectly clear' (29 October). 'Don Cesar de Bazan' followed (11 February 1861), and then on 20 March Fechter set himself the challenge of one of the greatest and most demanding roles in the English theatrical repertory -- Hamlet. A pale Norseman with long flaxen hair, wearing a strange garb, Fechter, ignorant of rather than ignoring the accretion of tradition to which English actors deferred, gave a revolutionary and revelationary performance, devoid of declamation, but infused with passion. In his first encounter with the Ghost, instead of the points beloved of English actors, he conveyed an overwhelming sense of sorrow. The meditative element formed the core of Fechter's prince, so that in the great soliloquies 'the birth of his thoughts is more visible than the influence of his emotions' ('The Times', 22 March 1861). He was charmingly tender with Ophelia, courteous to the players, but in the closet scene he was almost brutal towards Gertrude. In going 'straight from the book to the boards' ('The Times'), Fechter had released Hamlet from the straitjacket of convention in which the character had been so long confined. Charles Dickens, who initiated his friendship with Fechter after seeing him as Hamlet, wrote: 'Perhaps no innovation in art was ever accepted with so much favour by so many intellectual persons pre-committed to, and preoccupied by another system, as Mr Fechter's 'Hamlet'' (Field, 182). In contrast, Fechter's Othello (23 October 1861) was a failure, prompting G. H. Lewes to write, 'His Hamlet was one of the very best, and his Othello one of the very worst I have ever seen' (Lewes, 117), though Fechter did redeem his reputation with Iago (3 March 1862). 
On 10 January 1863 Fechter opened in 'The Duke's Motto' (from 'Le bossu' of Paul Feval) at the Lyceum Theatre, of which he had become lessee. There, on 27 April 1865, he appeared as Belphegor in 'The Mountebank' with his son Paul, then aged seven. During his generally successful management of the Lyceum, which he concluded on 25 May 1867, he encountered the limits of English acceptance of an actor whom they regarded as French, when the prominent place which his friend J. C. M. Bellew had secured for him in the Shakespeare tercentenary celebrations at Stratford upon Avon occasioned such a storm of protest that he had to withdraw. 
Fechter appeared at the Adelphi Theatre as Obenreizer in 'No Thoroughfare' by Charles Dickens and Wilkie Collins on 26 December 1867; it was the first of 157 performances. The elaborate drama 'Monte Cristo' (17 October 1868) was markedly less successful, as was 'Black and White' by himself and Wilkie Collins (29 March 1869). Following twelve farewell performances at the Princess's from 29 November 1869, Fechter sailed for the United States, where, after brief London engagements in 1872, he settled permanently in 1873. By then, his imperious temper was aggravated by alcoholic indulgence, which destroyed the delicacy of physique which had been one of his greatest gifts as an actor. His last original role was Karl in 'Love's Penance', his own adaptation of 'Le medecin des enfants', at the Park Theatre, New York, on 15 April 1874. Thereafter he appeared occasionally in Boston and other towns until 1876, when, having broken his leg, he retired to his farm at Rockland Center, Bucks county, two hours by rail from Philadelphia. There he died from a disease of the stomach at 6 a.m. on 5 August 1879. On 8 August his remains were placed in a receiving vault at Mount Vernon cemetery, Philadelphia, whence they were removed the following June to a grave on which was placed a bust of the actor and the inscription 'Genius has taken its flight to God'. 
'In delineating the heroes of romantic drama Mr Fechter had indeed no rival' declared the obituary in 'The Era' (10 Aug 1879); but Fechter's posthumous reputation rests on his Hamlet, which was not only original in itself, but the cause of originality in other interpreters of the role. 


@@@@@


doc= 9246


Feckenham, John (c.1510-1584), abbot of Westminster, was the son of Humphrey Howman (died 1550) of Beanhall, Feckenham, Worcestershire, a tolerably prosperous husbandman, and his wife, Florence (died 1550); three other sons and three daughters of this marriage reached adulthood. When both parents died in 1550 their last months had been clouded by John's imprisonment and the seeming end to his clerical career. This had begun when at an early age he entered the Benedictine monastery of Evesham, taking his birthplace for his name in religion. 
Feckenham was sent to Oxford about 1527, and by 1532 had become a fellow of the Benedictine foundation of Gloucester College. It is likely that he was ordained priest, probably back at Worcester, in the Embertide of 1530. Feckenham was a particular friend of Robert Joseph, another monk of Evesham, who had returned from Oxford charged with humanist ideas and an enthusiasm for the art of correspondence. Not all Joseph's friends replied to his elegant letters; that Feckenham did so with a literary polish that matched Joseph's own was specially appreciated. This is early testimony to Feckenham's facility with language, a capacity that (though scarcely evident from his surviving writings) would bring him renown as a preacher and spiritual counsellor. Much, no doubt, depended on the delivery, and a personal charm, which warmed all but the grimmest of his contemporaries. 
Feckenham graduated BTh at Oxford on 11 June 1539. On 27 January 1540, on the surrender of Evesham Abbey, he received an annual pension of $10. The same day he was instituted to the vicarage of his native village, presented by lay nominees on behalf of Sheen Priory. Feckenham, however, remained at Oxford, where on 21 March he preached before the university. He became chaplain to Bishop Bell of Worcester, following whose resignation in 1543 he obtained a similar appointment to Bishop Bonner of London, a Worcestershire man. In this capacity he was dispensed on 4 April 1545 to hold an additional benefice, having already (17 March) been instituted to the rectory of Solihull, Warwickshire, at the presentation of Sir George Throckmorton of Coughton. Though seemingly resident on neither of his livings, he established in both places a fund for loans to the good poor; at Solihull the subscribers (1548) were his parents, local dignitaries, and former monks and servants of Evesham Abbey. 
Feckenham accepted the royal supremacy under Henry VIII, but opposed the abolition of sacramentals and the introduction of ideas from abroad; a sermon at Paul's Cross on 16 January 1547 articulating these opinions and, according to the anonymous informer, others 'even more odious' ('LP Henry VIII', 21/2, no. 710), marks his first appearance on the public stage. If any action was contemplated against him, it was probably overlooked when the king died a few days later. Serious trouble came in 1549; by 22 October Feckenham was imprisoned in the Tower. It has been generally said that this was because of his religious views; but his having been arrested in Oxfordshire by William, Lord Grey of Wilton (whose pacification of that county had left several priests hanging from their steeples), implies more direct involvement in the recent disorders. He remained a prisoner for the rest of Edward VI's reign, though on 1 November 1551 he was released to the custody of Sir Philip Hoby in order to take part in debates at the London houses of the earl of Bedford, who was lord privy seal, Secretary Cecil, and Sir John Cheke. More remarkably still, he was then taken to Worcestershire for further public disputations with Bishop Hooper. 
Feckenham was freed on the accession of Queen Mary, and became her chaplain and confessor. On 24 September 1553 he preached at Paul's Cross, and was to become a familiar occupant of this and other London pulpits. On 25 January 1554 Bonner collated him to the prebend of Kentish Town, with a canonry in St Paul's Cathedral. In February he was sent by the queen to speak with Lady Guildford Dudley (the former Jane Grey), who was about to be executed for her earlier treason. Feckenham is said to have been given a respectful hearing, but quite failed to deflect her from her protestant convictions. He attended her on the scaffold, the scene so astonishingly evoked by Delaroche (1834). Feckenham also interrogated Princess Elizabeth and urged the queen to preserve her from her cousin's fate. 
On 10 March 1554 Feckenham was elected dean of St Paul's, retaining his prebend. During April he attended the disputations with Thomas Cranmer, Hugh Latimer, and Nicholas Ridley at the university church in Oxford. On 20 June he was presented by the queen to a canonry in Canterbury Cathedral, but this does not appear to have taken effect. During this year he vacated his original parish livings, and on 26 June was instituted to the vicarage of Finchley, Middlesex; this he resigned by November, probably on institution to the rectory of Great Greenford, Middlesex, on 24 September. 
On 25 November Feckenham preached again at Paul's Cross. Machyn records his theme as Dives and Lazarus; what he actually said was that all property taken from the church during the reigns of Henry and Edward should be unconditionally returned. This was embarrassing to the government, in the process of delicate negotiation to achieve England's absolution from schism without such reparations. Feckenham was consequently summoned to appear before the privy council with his offending text on 29 November. There was some suspicion that he had been put up to this by Pole in order to express what the cardinal himself believed but could not publicly advocate. The considered view is that Feckenham acted on his own initiative; in any case the matter brought him no lasting disfavour. 
At some time in the next few months Feckenham was chosen, in a fashion unknown, to lead a group of former monks seeking to return to the religious life. In a carefully staged appearance at court in March 1555 Feckenham and fifteen others petitioned the queen, who tearfully committed the practicalities to Stephen Gardiner and other councillors. The technical problems in satisfying these revived vocations were considerable; it was not until 21 June that Paul IV's bull 'Praeclara charissimi' pronounced the old English monasteries canonically dead. Pole, whose particular scheme this was, in any case did not want merely to restore the old, but to introduce the reformed monasticism he had known in Italy. The abbey eventually established at Westminster would be a new creation, inspired by the Cassinese model. Meanwhile Feckenham continued to officiate as dean of St Paul's; on 17 June he preached at the requiem for King Philip's deranged grandmother Juana of Castile, competently handling the requirements of this uninspiring state occasion. 
During 1556 Feckenham was frequently employed to interrogate those arrested in connection with the Dudley conspiracy. In May he was awarded the degree of DTh (in effect 'honoris causa') by Oxford. In July he helped the government to its greatest propaganda success, the conversion of Sir John Cheke. By the time Feckenham spoke at the formal recantation on 4 October, the formalities for turning Westminster Abbey back into a Benedictine house were nearing completion. Feckenham necessarily resigned all his secular preferments at this point. The new abbey was endowed on 10 November. No formal record of the inauguration exists, but it would seem that Feckenham and about fifteen monks received their habits on 21 November, and that the abbot was blessed on 29 November when Bonner celebrated 'coram cardinale'. 
Feckenham's abbacy is poorly documented. From later testimony it appears that the regime was more collegiate than in the traditional monastic style. The extent to which this reflected Feckenham's own preferences is impossible to determine, but his own previous monastic experience had been much diluted by residence at Oxford. Certainly the complex financial system of the old monasteries was not revived, and the abbot ran the administration. There was never enough money, though Feckenham was able to spend something on repairs to his country house at Chiswick. At Westminster he recovered the former abbot's lodging (now the deanery), which had passed into lay occupancy in Edward's reign. Within the abbey church his chief contribution was the restoration of Edward the Confessor's shrine, completed in April 1557. The extant wooden superstructure of classical design was long supposed to date from this time, but possibly this was simply reassembled under Feckenham's direction. The saint's body was restored at the same time. 
Feckenham also prominently defended the rights of sanctuary at Westminster. This had not been legally affected by the restoration of the monastery, since its basis was now in a statute of 1540. But Feckenham made it an issue, parading the sanctuary men with his community, and claiming to have given new life to a humanitarian institution neglected in the days of schism. This was awkward for Mary's government, worried as ever by public order, and anxious that the queen's prestigious refoundation should not be associated in the public mind with a thieves' kitchen. Feckenham was repeatedly instructed to maintain tighter control. In the parliament of 1558 (where the abbot sat as a spiritual peer) the government proposed to legislate away much of the residual privilege of sanctuary. Feckenham was invited to state his case on 3 February, which he did by citing a grant of King Lucius and other dubious evidences. He returned on 12 February backed by counsel, when legal and political argument rather than antiquarian rhetoric persuaded the government to withdraw its proposals. 
Feckenham and his monks were still in occupation of the abbey when Elizabeth I was crowned there on 15 January 1559. The abbot's role in the ceremony was the more prominent because the actual coronation had to be performed by the bishop of Carlisle. At the start of the first Elizabethan parliament (January-May 1559) Feckenham was publicly rebuked by the queen when taper-bearing monks greeted her arrival for the opening session. In that parliament the abbot retained his seat in the Lords, where he spoke vehemently against the 'Uniformity Bill', though abstaining from the vote. The same parliament also enacted the dissolution of Mary's religious foundations, and so ended Feckenham's career. A story that he was offered the primacy has no contemporary foundation, though no doubt his conformity would have earned him a decent reward. There was a rumour that the monks would be tolerated if they accepted a protestant liturgy, but this can never have been a realistic proposition. Westminster Abbey fell for the second time with effect from midsummer 1559. Pending new arrangements there Feckenham was allowed to remain, and he co-operated amicably with the lay officials who wound up the affairs of the abbey. He was permitted to keep such liturgical effects as would be illegal under the restored protestant order. But because he refused the oath of uniformity, he forfeited the offer of a pension. 
On 20 May 1560, the eve of the erection of the second collegiate church of Westminster, Feckenham was sent to the Tower for his overt opposition to the settlement of 1559. Thereafter he was moved from place to place, not infrequently bringing harsher conditions upon himself by his conduct during periods of relaxed detention or complete freedom. His first release was to the custody of Dean Gabriel Goodman at Westminster. While there in April 1563 he gave a collection of copes and other vestments to the dean and chapter. Later that year he was transferred to the household of Bishop Horne of Winchester, who had recalled Feckenham's openness of mind from an earlier encounter, and had some hopes of securing a notable conversion. But Feckenham had already written a tract reaffirming his refusal to conform, and to this Horne published a reply in 1566 ('An Answeare... to... the Declaration of such Scruples'; STC 13818). On Feckenham's behalf Thomas Stapleton responded with his 'A Counterblast to M. Hornes Vayne Blaste Against M. Fekenham' (1567; STC 23231), itself answered by John Bridges in 1573 ('The Supremacie of Christian Princes'; STC 3737). Stapleton's work has been of incidental but more lasting usefulness in supplying some details of Feckenham's career. 
In 1565 Horne asked to be discharged of his responsibility for Feckenham, who was then returned to the Tower. While there in 1567 he gave further assistance to the dean and chapter of Westminster by supporting, with precedent from his own time, their claim against the College of Arms for funeral furnishings. In 1571 a further round of polemics was prompted by a sermon in the Tower on 15 January by John Gough, to which Feckenham composed a rebuttal. This is said to have been printed, but only the responses by Gough himself and Laurence Tomson (STC 12131, 24113) are known. Feckenham was subsequently transferred to the Marshalsea. From there, by the privy council's order of 17 July 1574, he was released on Archbishop Parker's security, and he lived for some time at liberty in Holborn. 
Parker's death in May 1575 terminated this parole, and on 18 July the master of the rolls (or in his absence the recorder of London) was instructed to take new bonds for his good behaviour. He was then allowed to go to Bath for the waters, returning to 'the place where he presently is' by Michaelmas ('APC', '1575-8', 8). A similar excursion was permitted in 1576. But in June 1577 he and other Catholic parolists were accused of having abused their freedom by receiving 'evill disposed' persons whom they yet further 'perverted in Religion' (ibid., 371). Feckenham was then sent to the custody of Bishop Cox of Ely. Cox immediately objected to Feckenham's attendance by a Catholic servant, but the council realistically thought this preferable to hazarding 'a sounde body' ('APC', '1577-8', 13). In October 1579 Cox complained that his prisoner had taken to 'open discomending' of the established religion; at this point the council agreed to the replacement of the Catholic servant, and Feckenham himself was put on hard rations ('APC', '1578-80', 291). In June 1580 Cox had evidently come to find Feckenham an intolerable burden, and asked Burghley to be relieved of his charge. Conceivably Feckenham's table talk had hardened into garrulity. Their association can never have been mutually agreeable, and may even have been embittered by memories of Westminster, where Cox also had once been master. 
By October 1580 Feckenham had been taken to Wisbech Castle, at the extremity of Cox's diocese, where other Catholic priests were imprisoned. While there he signed his agreement to vernacular liturgy and certain other practices of the reformed church, but resolutely refused to make the full recantation that was so often sought of him. He died at Wisbech, and was buried in the churchyard there on 16 October 1584. 
Although Feckenham disqualified himself from a pension when Westminster was dissolved, he retained throughout his remaining life a comfortable income, from which he helped two kinsmen with exhibitions at Cambridge, and provided charitable amenities at Holborn, Bath, and Wisbech. Apart from the surviving sermons and speeches, he wrote a medical treatise which circulated in manuscript and was still being copied as a practical guide in the later seventeenth century. In so far as Feckenham has a public image, it was fashioned by the painters of the British historical school of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, for whom the last days of Jane Grey as described by John Foxe provided a favourite theme. Thus James Northcote in 1792 portrays 'Abbot' Feckenham as a ferocious black-bearded inquisitor, gesturing vainly while Jane kneels in prayer. Frederick Yeames's image (1868) is no less menacing for its understatement; he sets the encounter not in a Gothic dungeon but in a spacious domestic interior, where Feckenham (white-haired, avuncular, dressed as a modern Roman priest) leans forward in patient exposition. Jane sits bolt upright, staring fixedly away from Feckenham and his outstretched hand; his immediate concern, apparently, is not for her neck but her knee. Contrary to these Feckenham was a stocky, red-faced man, who maintained his dignity while not disdaining simple social pleasures. As the last 'de facto' -- as opposed to titular -- abbot he has a prescriptive place in Catholic and especially Benedictine history; he belongs in equal measure to the old English monasticism of his first profession, and to resurgent tradition which reckons its descent from Marian Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 9247


Feild, Edward (1801-1876), bishop of Newfoundland, was born on 7 June 1801 in Worcester, the third son of James Feild, surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth. After attending school in Bewdley he went in 1814 to Rugby School, where he gained distinction in Latin composition. In 1819 he matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, and moved to Queen's College as an exhibitioner in 1820, graduating BA in 1823. In 1825 he became a Michel fellow at Queen's College and, under the influence of Dr Lloyd, the regius professor of divinity who also taught Pusey and Newman, sought ordination. He proceeded to an MA in 1826 and from 1827 combined teaching and acting as a public examiner with a curacy at Kidlington, Oxfordshire. 
As curate of Kidlington, Feild reformed the Sunday school and friendly society, began a system of allotments on church land, spoke out against machine breaking, and gave evidence to the royal commission on the poor law (reports commissioners, appendix B (i), 1834, 34.376e). He raised money to build a school with one of the first infant sections in England, and soon attracted visitors to study his educational methods and organization. 
In 1834 Feild became rector of English Bicknor, Gloucestershire, where his efforts so impressed the National Society that when it wished to ward off state inspection of its schools it proceeded to appoint him as its first inspector. His many published reports on the state of parochial education in the dioceses of Salisbury and Worcester (London, 1841) urged attention to the physical environment of schools, attacked the Madras system, and criticized mechanical learning by rote. These reports were widely discussed within the Church of England, and particularly impressed Bishop Blomfield. 
On the strength of his work at Kidlington, Blomfield approached Feild to become bishop of Newfoundland, a post which he accepted, being consecrated on 28 April 1844 at Lambeth. Feild served as bishop from his arrival in Newfoundland in 1844 until 1876, despite being considered for the see of Lincoln in 1851 and being offered the bishopric of Montreal in 1868. His approach to the new diocese was firmly high-church, his doctrine being based on the 'Book of Common Prayer' as interpreted in a Catholic light: an early sermon, for example, was entitled 'God Glorified in his Saints' (1846). He was unresponsive to public pressure from low-church protestants and warned the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG) that any of its missionaries who denied the doctrine of baptismal regeneration in Newfoundland would be promptly suspended. Contemporary evangelicals attacked him in 'The Record' (8 June 1854) as 'an ultra-Tractarian of the Exeter school' and Methodist ministers were upset by his denial of the validity of their holy orders, even though he was personally helpful to individual ministers who were short of money. He was thought by some to be 'wanting in Christian charity towards ministers of other denominations' (Senior, 281) for his uncompromising attitudes to church doctrine and discipline in a diocese which had, until his arrival, been dominated by low-church tendencies. 
Another cause of Feild's initial unpopularity in St John's was his approach to the thorny question of church finance. Feild's solution was to oblige the clergy, amid great opposition, not to rely on subsidies from the SPG but to collect money for their support directly from parishioners, a measure which left many clergyman in serious poverty. Hoping that 'two or three might be found who would be ready to endure hardness for these poor fisherman [of Newfoundland] and for Christ's sake' (Senior, 280) he called those willing 'to undertake a mission of peculiar difficulty or privation, with no prospect of worldly preferment or recompense' (USPG, C/Can/Nfl 7, Feild to Hawkins, 9 Oct 1845). Realizing that he had little hope of attracting many educated middle-class candidates, he set out to attract working-class hopefuls by providing, in his newly established Queen's College, St John's (1850), not only theological training but also a general education which might widen their opportunities. Throughout his diocese he built Gothic revival churches, the cathedral being copied from a design by Gilbert Scott; although the foundation-stone had been laid as early as 1843 it was Feild who raised the necessary $15,000, mainly from churches in England, to see the cathedral's opening in 1850. When finally complete, several years later, it was thought one of the finest in North America. 
Feild's diocese, including not only Newfoundland and the Labrador coast but also the Bermudas, covered a distance of about 1200 miles, and included territories with dramatically different needs and problems. He consequently travelled a great deal, often in a specially purchased church ship (since the diocese lacked roads). His missionary journeys are described in a journal which was later published in various volumes of the 'Church in the Colonies'. These, together with his numerous charges, several pamphlets and sermons, and many letters to the SPG and to his influential Tractarian friends in England, kept his activities in the public eye in England, and particularly in the mother church. He set up boys' and girls' schools and campaigned for thirty years for a distinctly Anglican rather than a loosely protestant state-subsidized system of schools. His success in 1875 was unique in the British colonies. Although he disapproved of clergymen taking an overt role in politics, in 1857 he defended the Newfoundland fisheries against French demands, and in 1861 his denunciation of the government contributed to its fall. In 1867 he began a thorough reorganization of the diocese, acquiring an assistant bishop, J. B. K. Kelly, and calling a general synod in 1871. On 30 April 1867 he married Sophia (died 1908), widow of the Revd J. G. Mountain and daughter of Robert Bevan, a banker from Suffolk. Tough, resolute, with clear deep-set blue eyes and fair hair, his uncompromising attitudes to Catholics, Methodists, evangelicals and all those who were not of his own denomination made him heartily disliked at first, but his strong sense of principle, absence of malice, and personal warmth gradually won the affection and respect of the whole Christian community. 
In Newfoundland, where sectarian feelings traditionally ran high and St John's was often compared with Belfast, the Tractarian bishop was an essential if unwitting element in the process which led to a relatively peaceful resolution of interdenominational conflicts. Through actions such as his refusal to support the Newfoundland branch of the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1846, Feild split the unity of protestants. In asserting a high-church form of religion which local Methodists disliked even more than Roman Catholicism, he made it impossible for protestant ascendancy to be maintained amid a population which was more or less equally split between Methodists, Roman Catholics, and Anglicans. Feild's dislike of doctrinal compromise meant that he secured an agreement to share all state patronage on a strictly denominational basis and it was this safeguarding of each denomination's separate schools and economic interests which successfully kept the peace for many years. As well as inadvertently finding a 'modus vivendi' for three mutually suspicious Christian denominations, Feild's insistence upon local autonomy in many financial matters helped to establish a secure basis for the diocese's future. His other important contribution was administrative: his reorganization of the diocese, increase in schools, churches, and the building of a cathedral and theological college meant that he left a more prosperous, efficient, and stable diocese than he had found thirty-two years before. 
Throughout his life Feild was very healthy, but in 1875 overwork and a winter severe even by Newfoundland standards contributed to serious illness and he went to Bermuda to recuperate. On 8 June 1876 he died at Bishop's Court, Hamilton, Bermuda, and was buried on 11 June in the local cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 9248


Field, John (1544/5?-1588), Church of England clergyman, was a Londoner of unknown parentage, supported at Oxford by the Clothworkers' Company. The details of his university career are hard to disentangle from those of contemporaries with the same names, but he was probably the John Field who proceeded BA in 1564 and MA in 1567. He was ordained by Bishop Grindal on 25 March 1566 at the uncanonical age of twenty-one, when he was described as a bachelor of arts of Christ Church. He could already rely on the patronage of Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick. On the day after his ordination, thirty-seven London ministers were suspended at Lambeth for their refusal to wear the prescribed vestments, the overture to the Elizabethan puritan movement, and Field was probably one of the 'godly young men' without livings who were not required to conform and who stepped into the pulpits vacated by the nonconformists. But they too were soon silenced and Field returned to Oxford and to Broadgates Hall. 
A letter written to the martyrologist John Foxe in January 1567 establishes that Field was serving his literary apprenticeship by researching materials for the second, 1570, edition of the 'Acts and Monuments', and that he was probably close to Foxe's friend and the proto-nonconformist Laurence Humphrey, president of Magdalen College. By the spring of 1568 he had returned to London, became one of a group of puritans who regularly preached in the near-separatist parish of Holy Trinity Minories (a peculiar parish in every sense), and was soon curate of the neighbouring parish of St Giles Cripplegate, where all his children were baptized. By 1570 he was married and in 1571 he moved into his own house in Grub Street, where he was Foxe's neighbour. Another near neighbour was the seriously rich haberdasher Nicholas Culverwell of St Martin Vintry who, with other Culverwells, seems to have acted as fund-raiser and banker to the emergent puritan cause, and as a sustainer of the wider Calvinist international. In 1569 Field witnessed Culverwell's will. Nicholas's brother Richard Culverwell carried on the good work, and Richard Bancroft would later note that the money collected by the puritans 'for their brethren that travel for them beyond the seas' was 'commonly delivered' to Field and Culverwell (Peel, 'Tracts', xxix). 
According to a hostile witness, a renegade who twenty years later gave evidence against his old associates in Star Chamber, it was about 1570 that Field began to be an organizer, together with a curate of All Hallows, Honey Lane, Thomas Wilcox, convening meetings of some of the younger London ministers which were in embryonic form the conferences, or classes, of Calvinist ecclesiology. In 1572 Field would endorse something called 'the order of Wandsworth', evidently a kind of experimental presbytery, leading to the mistake, repeated by one church historian after another, that he was minister of that place. (Bancroft did not know how they 'grew to be so farre gone at Wandesworth' (Bancroft, 'Daungerous Positions', 43) and nor do we.) In the same year Field and Wilcox, speaking for this new and militant tendency, published their 'Admonition to the Parliament', a brilliant piece of journalism which brought a novel intensity to the faltering campaign for further reformation which was making heavy weather in the House of Commons. 
The 'Admonition' was a declaration of ecclesiastical war, and it lifted out of academe and into a more public domain the radical presbyterianism which Thomas Cartwright had been teaching in Cambridge. Field claimed sole responsibility for the 'bitterness of the style' (Peel, 'Register', 1.89), and would later fall out with the milder Wilcox in an acrimonious correspondence which was one of Bancroft's more interesting discoveries. His bitterness, and perhaps the intransigently anti-episcopal position which it coated, were at least partly circumstantial, the result of being suspended from his preaching ministry and reduced to school teaching. In trying to engage the support for the burgeoning presbyterian movement of one of the older 'fathers' of the reformed cause, Anthony Gilby of Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Field wrote of 'the over-much tyranny of those that should be my encouragers' (CUL, MS Mm.1.43, p. 447). Field and Wilcox were imprisoned in Newgate, where their many visitors, not all sympathetic, seem to have engaged in debates about the direction which the cause should now take. When John Whitgift published his 'Answer' to the 'Admonition' and Cartwright his 'Reply', which began the 'Admonition controversy', it was clear that this would be no nine days' wonder. After the influence of powerful friends -- the earls of Leicester and Warwick -- secured his release, nothing is heard of Field for two years, and it is very possible that he himself became one of the brethren who travelled 'beyond the seas', perhaps joining Cartwright and other puritans in the Calvinist sanctuary of Heidelberg. By now Field knew the power of print, and it looks significant that in 1574 some major manifestos of English presbyterianism appeared from a Heidelberg press. 
Field is next heard of in London in 1577 and, with the advent of Archbishop Grindal, things had changed, a truce in what a contemporary called 'civil wars of the Church of God' (Peel, 'Register', 1.191). Although, according to Bishop Aylmer, he was teaching 'God knows what' in private houses (Strype, 36-7), Field was now devoting much of his energy to the common anti-Catholic cause, his vehicle prefaces to translations of French works of protestant apology addressed to the great protestant earls. It was one of these publications, dedicated to Leicester, which provoked Robert Persons's 'Brief Discourse why Catholics Refuse to Go to Church', to which Field responded in his 'Caveat for Parsons', again dedicated to Leicester. Field was working his way back to a kind of respectability. In 1579 Leicester secured him a preaching licence from Oxford University and in 1581 he became lecturer at St Mary Aldermary, where he was at liberty to preach until once more suspended in 1585. But he was still the same Field, and in 1581 he took Leicester to task for his patronage of stage plays, in the same year taking advantage of a fatal accident in the Paris Garden bearpit to castigate in print the new leisure industry and its profanation of the sabbath. 
When John Whitgift succeeded Grindal in 1583, civil war was resumed, and Field seems to have been glad, looking back on 'this unhappy time of looseness and liberty gaining upon me and choking those good things which I thank God I was wont to feel in greater measure' (Usher, 95-6). When Whitgift imposed subscription to his three articles as a new test of conformity, which some hundreds of ministers throughout the province initially refused, Field was active in pressing an intransigent line, condemning the 'Book of Common Prayer' in its entirety and denouncing the limited and qualified subscriptions for which most of the non-subscribers would eventually settle. He wrote that one might as well subscribe to Aesop's fables. The new crisis stimulated the establishment of classis-type conferences in the country, and especially in Essex and Northamptonshire, a development which had begun a little before the arrival of Whitgift. For example, the only fully recorded conference, meeting in and around Dedham, held its first meeting in October 1582. It was now that all those letters were written to Field from which Bancroft loved to quote: 'I hope all things were so proceeded in as your self would like of', this from Suffolk (Bancroft, 'Daungerous Positions', 44); 'we have taken order for our monthly assembly', this from Oxford (ibid., 76). Much of the business that was transacted in the conferences was local and circumstantial, but it included concerted petitioning whenever parliament met, and the formal discussion of drafts of a 'Book of Discipline', a constitution for a presbyterian Church of England. 
John Field had thus become the linchpin of a precociously organized presbyterian movement which threatened the Church of England with a revolution which would have deprived it of both bishops and prayer book. He had also made himself the clearing house for the amassing of what Foxe would have called 'monuments' of the puritan cause and its repression, matter for a new book of martyrs. Some of these materials were published overseas in 1593 as 'A Parte of a Register'. The remainder, the so-called 'Seconde parte of a register', is preserved in a collection of manuscripts in Dr Williams's Library. Throughout the 1580s the literary warfare between the presbyterian puritans and the bishops and other proponents of conformity intensified, and on the puritan side it was masterminded by Field with the assistance of the dedicated printer Robert Waldegrave. Field was becoming progressively more radical, and according to that same hostile witness was given to saying that since the cause could not be won 'by suit nor dispute', it was up to 'the multitude and people' to bring the discipline to pass (TNA: PRO, STAC 5/A49/34). It is perhaps significant that when Richard Culverwell made his will in 1584, he left Field $3 but failed to appoint him one of the trustees to disburse the princely sum of $350 he left to sustain the godly cause. In the autumn of 1588, in some desperation, Waldegrave (whose original press had been sawn in half) and the author or authors of the pamphlets published in the name of a certain Martin Marprelate resorted to a secret weapon, which has been compared to poison gas, particularly because it blew back into the faces of those using it. The outrageous and seditious Marprelate tracts drew freely on Field's register, and it was in the course of searching for Marprelate and his press that Field's correspondence, together with much else besides, was discovered, leading to an exemplary prosecution in Star Chamber of some of the leading presbyterians -- but not of Field, who had died in March 1588 at St Giles Cripplegate, before the final act of this tragedy. He was buried on 26 March at St Giles, and was survived by his wife, Joan. Two of his seven children rose to the top in professions which would have horrified their father. Theophilus Field (bap. 1575) was to be bishop of St David's, while Nathan Field, born not long before his father's death, was to become a notable dramatist, the apprentice of Ben Jonson who performed in Jonson's anti-puritan plays. 
John Field is somewhat inadequately defined as a puritan minister and preacher. Bancroft, who followed Field's trail with all the dedicated persistence with which Dostoyevsky's policeman pursued Raskolnikov, and who had possession of his books and papers, captures his true historical significance: 'This John 'Field'... whilest he lived was a great and a chiefe man amongst the brethren of 'London': and one to whome the managing of the discipline (for the outward practise of it) was especially (by the rest) committed. So as all their letters, that were directed from the brethren of other places to have this or that referred to the London assemblies were for the most part directed vnto him. (Bancroft, 'Survay', 369)' 



@@@@@


doc= 9249


Feilding, Basil, second earl of Denbigh (c.1608-1675), parliamentarian army officer and politician, was the son of William Feilding (c.1587-1643) of Newnham Paddox, Warwickshire, and his wife, Susan Villiers ('fl'. 1606-1651), whose brother George Villiers, the favourite of James I and Charles I, rose to be duke of Buckingham. The Feildings were a substantial east Warwickshire family, with lands in that county, Leicestershire, and Rutland worth around $2000 per annum in the 1630s. But it was through the Villiers connection that they made advantageous marriages and rose to prominence and lucrative court office in the 1620s. In December 1620 William Feilding was raised to the peerage as Baron Feilding of Newnham Paddox and Viscount Feilding. In 1622, when he was created earl of Denbigh, his daughter, Basil's sister, Mary, married James Hamilton (1606-1649), the heir to the marquess of Hamilton, the premier Scottish peer, who succeeded to the title three years later. Basil Feilding attended Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1621, and was travelling in France in 1624 when his chaplain John Reynolds reported that late dinners at the French court were affecting the young man's health, while his French was suffering from too much contact with visiting English nobles. He was briefly at the Inner Temple in 1628. 
The young Feilding's background in the 1620s was complex. Reynolds was a radical puritan and was summoned back from France in August 1624 to answer the privy council for publishing intemperate pamphlets urging a war with Spain. On the other hand his mother, who died a Catholic, was at this time a patron of prominent anti-puritans such as John Cosin and William Laud. Feilding, created a knight of the Bath in 1626, was apparently a favourite of his glamorous uncle who took him on the ill-fated Ile de Re expedition the following year and it was through Villiers's influence that Feilding was summoned to the House of Lords in his father's title of Lord Feilding in 1628. The death of Buckingham was a traumatic reverse; Feilding later wrote that he had been promised the posts of gentleman of the bedchamber and master of the robes but that on his uncle's death Charles I had instead told him 'to try his fortune in the warres of Holland' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 223). He did indeed serve with Lord Wimbledon in the Low Countries and travelled in Germany in the early 1630s. 
Feilding's marriage to Anne Weston (died 1635), daughter of the lord treasurer, Richard Weston, earl of Portland, before January 1633 attached him to the most influential man in the government after Buckingham's death. In the 1630s Feilding attempted to juggle paradoxical, even contradictory, patronage relationships and political stances. He seems to have shared his father-in-law's support for a Spanish alliance (or at least for a pacific policy), yet he depended for advancement also on the influence of his mother, who was first lady of the bedchamber and a close friend to Charles's French queen, Henrietta Maria. In March 1633 Feilding played a supporting role when these divisions led the earl of Holland, from the queen's faction, to challenge Portland's son Jerome Weston to a duel. Feilding as Weston's ally challenged George Goring, Holland's friend, but both duels were banned by direct order of the king. 
From 1634 Feilding served as ambassador-extraordinary to Venice, where he proved an ineffective diplomat but an enthusiastic collector of pictures for both the king and his brother-in-law Hamilton. After the deaths of both his wife and his father-in-law in March 1635, Feilding continued his broadly pro-Spanish stance, but was increasingly dependent on the backing of Hamilton and his mother to keep royal favour. His supporters had a difficult task, for Feilding was a prickly and maladroit diplomat, over-protective of his ambassadorial privileges, as when he sheltered a servant who had murdered a gondolier. In late 1637 the countess of Denbigh and Hamilton used all their influence to have Feilding, rather than the more prominent Viscount Conway, sent to offer condolences to Henrietta Maria's sister on the death of her husband, the duke of Savoy. He typically repaid all this effort with deeply embarrassing advice to the widowed duchess to remain neutral in the conflicts between France and Spain. This necessitated renewed strenuous efforts by his friends to prevent Feilding being recalled in disgrace. He returned to Venice under a cloud, his long-cherished hopes of replacing Viscount Scudamore in the rather more prestigious position as ambassador to France in ruins. 
Feilding returned from Italy in June 1639, and at some point over the next three years he abandoned the court which had made his family's fortune for a parliamentarian stance. As so often in Feilding's life, it is impossible to disentangle the mixture of self-interest and principle which prompted this. At the Restoration he himself claimed that lack of preferment had freed him from commitment to the king's cause. A successor at Venice was appointed early in 1642 and Feilding was appointed lord lieutenant for Denbighshire and Flintshire under parliament's militia ordinance in February 1642, a clear sign that he was regarded as an opponent of the court. Indeed in June 1642 he urged Hamilton to support parliament's nineteen propositions as a basis for settlement, and at Edgehill he fought as a cavalry officer in the earl of Essex's army while his father served as a volunteer in the king's guard. 
This breach in the Feilding family caused great anguish to his mother, who urged Basil to 'leave those that murthered your dear father' (Warks. CRO, CR2017/C1/24) after William Feilding had been killed in Prince Rupert's assault on Birmingham in April 1643. Two months later the new earl of Denbigh was nominated commander-in-chief of the associated counties of Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire in belated succession to the radical Lord Brooke. Denbigh's hesitation over taking the covenant and the doubts about his political loyalty raised by his royalist connections delayed his arrival in the midlands until the winter. There his attempts to raise men and money met immediate and fierce resistance. In Warwickshire he was identified with the more moderate and neutral gentry and his command was sabotaged by the militant county committee dominated by William Purefoy. In Staffordshire similarly he was at odds with the supporters of the determined commander Sir William Brereton, though he gained the adherence of local officers such as colonels Simon Rugely and Lewis Chadwick. Denbigh's attempts to aid beleaguered parliamentarians in Shropshire were long delayed and he had little military success. There were minor victories in Staffordshire and the slightly more significant capture of Oswestry and Cholmondeley House in the north-west of his command in June 1644. In mid-July 1644 Denbigh returned to London to try to increase his political authority, presenting a remonstrance against Purefoy and his other Warwickshire rivals to the Lords in August. These tangled disputes in Staffordshire and Warwickshire occupied both houses of parliament until early 1645. Despite clear local support, seen in the thousands of signatures on pro-Denbigh petitions from both Staffordshire and Warwickshire, Denbigh was never granted adequate powers and never returned to military command. Like other aristocratic commanders he lost office under the self-denying ordinance. 
In 1644 Denbigh was clearly an ally of moderate aristocratic parliamentarians like the earls of Essex and Manchester, and in the localities he was sympathetic to distressed royalists. In May 1646 Marchamont Nedham, in his royalist phase, petitioned Denbigh from the Fleet prison for help in presenting a petition to parliament. By this time, however, perhaps radicalized by the experience of war and royal intransigence, he was identified with the more zealous, Independent peers such as Lord Saye and Sele and the earl of Northumberland. Denbigh was active in national politics throughout the rest of the 1640s, serving as one of parliament's commissioners treating with the king at Uxbridge in January 1645. He was a consistent supporter of the army in its conflict with the presbyterian-dominated Commons in the spring of 1647, and fled to the army in late July after parliament had been coerced by London presbyterian agitation. Denbigh was one of eight peers who signed a declaration in support of the New Model Army on 4 August 1647 ('JHL', 9, 1646-7, 385). He headed the deputation that delivered the four bills to Charles at Carisbrooke, Isle of Wight, in December 1647. The parliamentarians came with no power to treat and Charles tried to give them a sealed answer. On Clarendon's account it was Denbigh, 'a person very ingrateful to the King', who forced the king to back down, telling him 'that though they had no authority to treat with him... yet they were not to be looked at as common messengers' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.278). 
In January 1648 Denbigh, like lords Wharton and Saye and Sele, supported the vote of no further addresses to the king. In summer 1648 he was mostly absent from a House of Lords dominated by peers who wished for a speedy peace with the king. His closest allies sided with the army in hostility to renewed peace moves and in their willingness to condemn the invasion of England by Denbigh's brother-in-law Hamilton as treason. Denbigh himself did not return to the Lords until after Hamilton was safely defeated and his attendance was patchy until after Pride's Purge. In November and December 1648 he was in contact with the exiled presbyterian-royalist minister Samuel Kem, but from 12 December 1648 until the last sitting of the Lords on 6 February 1649 Denbigh was ever-present as speaker. 
Publicly at least Denbigh headed the small caucus of pro-army peers who gave some legitimacy to the revolution. He was among four peers only who attended on 19 December 1648, doing little but 'telling of Tales by the Fire's side' ('Mercurius Pragmaticus'), and later visited General Fairfax to declare their good affections to the army. In a striking gesture of submission, according to the newsletter report, Denbigh gave Fairfax a hand up to his horse. Around this time Denbigh was central to a murky, last-minute, and unsuccessful mission to save Charles's life, offering him some reprieve if the king renounced his negative voice, and repudiated any attempts to raise forces in Ireland or on the continent. In 1660 he told Charles II he had had 4000 men ready to rescue the king but 'their zeale and duty' had been 'made fruitless for want of a commission' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 224), but there is, predictably, no corroborative evidence. 
Denbigh refused to act when nominated to the commission to try Charles I, but the nomination itself is testimony to how far this nephew of Buckingham had travelled. He sat in the Lords on 30 January 1649 and was part of a committee established on 1 February to consider the settlement of the government after the regicide. Despite the abolition of the House of Lords he sat on the first two councils of state of the Commonwealth and was an averagely conscientious attender. He was not re-elected in 1651, but there is no real evidence of disaffection from the republic or of 'rapprochement' with the royalists, though there was much wishful thinking on the part of royalist conspirators. He was present at Hamilton's execution in March 1649, breaking the news to his old friend that there would be no last-minute reprieve. He gave some protection to Hamilton's orphaned daughters in the 1650s, and aided his royalist cousin, the second duke of Buckingham -- 'the onlye branch which is left of my deare uncle' -- over the composition for his estates ('Fourth Report', HMC, 256). He did not forget his mother, by this time an open Catholic and in exile with the queen in France, seeking to preserve her estates in 1651: 'how, though absent, being a Lady and having had noe share at all in the late troubles she can fall under the notion of delinquency is beyond my reason to judge of' (TNA: PRO, SP 23/170/350, April 1651). And he did not forget his own interests, petitioning in September 1649 for the repayment of $10,000 debts incurred as ambassador to Venice. A committee headed by his one-time local rival William Purefoy suggested a grant of $9000 although the House of Commons authorized less than $2000. 
Locally Denbigh was named to the Warwickshire commission of the peace and other local commissions throughout the 1650s. He was 'custos rotulorum' and active also out of sessions. His social contacts in the 1650s were mostly with parliamentarians, including intriguing meetings with Wharton and Saye and Sele in early 1657, where they perhaps discussed the offer of the crown to Cromwell and their own possible admission to the new upper house. His other preoccupation was genealogy and, through the eminent midland antiquaries William Dugdale and Elias Ashmole, he was provided with a fantasy genealogy connecting his family to the Habsburgs, 'the Perhapsburgs' in the words of J. H. Round (Goodwin, 110). In 1659 he paid Dugdale $100 for a pedigree with 67 'double roundles and 49 coronetts' (Hamper, 105). 
There are hints of passionate male friendship in youthful letters between Feilding and Edward Hyde, but there is evidence of intense emotion also in the third at least of his four childless marriages. His first wife, Anne Weston, died soon after their arrival in Venice in March 1635. On 12 August 1639 he married Barbara Lambe, daughter of the ecclesiastical lawyer Sir John Lambe, after the failure of her courtship by Lord Wentworth with, it was reported, at least $50,000 portion. She died on 1 April 1641 and three months later, on 8 July, Feilding married Elizabeth Bourchier (1622-1670) daughter of Edward, fourth earl of Bath. There are many passionate letters from her to Denbigh during his absences on campaign in the 1640s; one was signed off with 'A hundred thousand thousand kisses' (Warks. CRO, CR2017, family letters vol. 1, 151). She died on 22 September 1670 and again Denbigh remarried quickly, his new wife being Dorothy Lane ('c'.1650-1709), a midland gentlewoman. 
At the Restoration Denbigh was among the ten peers present on 25 April 1660 at the first meeting of the House of Lords since February 1649, and was active in parliament as the Restoration approached. He made a sycophantic and self-regarding 'submission' to Charles II in 1660 when he petitioned for repayment of the debts he and his father had incurred in royal service. He argued that his dismissal from his posts had given him 'a latitude to act beyond his own thoughts and intentions which hath produced the effects of a generall and particular sadd repentance' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 223). He referred to his father's death in the king's cause and claimed he had been prevented by considerations of honour from defecting to the royalists in 1644. Denbigh also claimed he had opposed the self-denying ordinance and had made determined efforts to save the king in 1648-9. He claimed arrears of pension for eight-and-three-quarter years expiring on 30 January 1649 but did have the grace to suggest that the king should use some arrears to redeem 160 paintings left in pawn in Venice and keep them as a present. In conclusion he asked for 'a fair construction on intermediate accidents and revolutions of affairs' since the late 1630s (TNA: PRO, SP 29/28/89; TNA: PRO, SP 16/491/129). 
Such effrontery prompts a cynical judgement on Denbigh's shifts of allegiance from 1628 to 1660. He could be condemned as disloyal and self-serving. Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, who had been his very close friend, gave a damning indictment in his account of Denbigh at Uxbridge: 'The earl of Denbigh had much greater parts, and saw further before him into the desperate designs of that party that yet had the power... and detested those designs as much as any of them; yet the pride of his nature, not inferior to the proudest, and the conscience of his ingratitude to the King, in some respects superior to theirs who had been most obliged, kept him from being willing to quit their company.' He alleged Denbigh had 'concluded that if any conjuncture fell out in which by losing his life he might preserve the King, he would embrace the occasion; otherwise, he would shift the best he could for himself' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.496). 
Clarendon, however, was embittered by Denbigh's betrayal of friendship as well as by a political divide. While Denbigh consistently sought office and reward, there is also evidence of steady principle in his career. From 1642 until his death Denbigh exhibited support for staunch protestantism and -- while willing to serve all kinds of regimes -- a preference for monarchy limited by parliament, with the peerage taking a central role. His attitudes are revealed in his comments when refusing the first oath proposed for members of the council of state in 1649. He could not endorse the 'particulars that look backward' because they were contrary to his role in the Lords, 'then acknowledged a third estate of this kingdom'. None the less he was prepared to continue in the public service: 'He hath formerly had the honour to be employed by the late king to the state of Venice and to other princes and served in it faithfully. That he was since employed by both Houses in arms and was also faithful in that. That now there is no other power in England but that of the House of Commons in whom the liberty and freedom of the people is so involved as he is resolved to live and die with them. And doth acknowledge them the supreme power of the nation. (TNA: PRO, SP 25/62/2-3)' Feilding was a conscientious patron of godly ministers in Warwickshire, protecting two presbyterians ejected after 1660, and was close to the maverick presbyterian Samuel Kem in the 1640s and 1650s. A magnanimous gesture in August 1660 elicited striking praise from the zealous republican Edmund Ludlow as 'very much a gentleman in his spirit, and deportment, and a lover of his country' (E. Ludlow, 'A Voyce from the Watch Tower', ed. A. B. Worden, CS, 4th ser., 21, 1978, 170). As Hamilton's brother-in-law, Denbigh was invited to nominate a regicide to be excepted from pardon as satisfaction for Hamilton's execution, and nominated, deliberately it was believed, someone who was conveniently dead. 
Denbigh's career after 1660 is as difficult to interpret. He received a further title -- Baron St Liz -- in February 1665. He was commissioned captain of a troop of horse in 1667 and made renewed attempts in 1674 to obtain his pension arrears. None the less he remained associated with dissident peers such as Lord Wharton, opposing the repression of dissenters in the 1660s, and in 1673 he was apparently active in the opposition to royal policy following the secret treaty of Dover. Among his papers and heavily annotated by Denbigh is the 'Steps of descent whereby of late this Monarchy hath much declined and lessened itselfe', a short treatise apparently relating to discussions concerning the passing of the 'Test Act'. It condemned the favours shown to papists, the suspension of laws passed by parliament, and England's engaging in war 'for the grandeur of France'. It called for James, duke of York, whatever his private opinions, to declare in the Lords that he would publicly defend the established protestant religion. A scathing reference to 'that darling Act of theirs for Uniformity' suggests that Denbigh was no zealous Anglican but someone who did not believe that protection for dissenters should be achieved through favours to Catholics and royal interference with parliamentary legislation. In 1675 Denbigh supported the earl of Shaftesbury and Lord Wharton in their attacks on the earl of Danby's repressive Anglican regime, protesting especially against the bill against persons disaffected from the government. His attendance was patchy after mid-May 1675, perhaps because of fading health, and he died at Dunstable, Bedfordshire, on 28 November 1675, on his way from London to the midlands. He was buried at Monks Kirby, Warwickshire. He had left no will and the administration of his estates was granted to his nephew and heir, William, third earl of Denbigh. 
For forty years Basil Feilding had played a secondary but significant role in English politics, diplomacy, and government. He had been a court favourite, a failed diplomat, a mediocre general, an energetic servant of parliament's committees and the English republic, and finally, it seems, a country peer. He had displayed embarrassing but seemingly shameless self-interest, alongside examples of magnanimity and public service. He remains an enigma. 


@@@@@


doc= 9250


Feilding, Robert (1650/51-1712), rake and bigamist, was born at Solihull, Warwickshire, the son of George Feilding, landowner, a kinsman of the earl of Denbigh. Nothing is known about his mother. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1673, but upon inheriting $600 on the death of his father abandoned a legal career in favour of an extravagant lifestyle. He was a frequent visitor to the court of Charles II where he acquired the nickname Handsome, or Beau, Feilding on account of his exceptional good looks and lavish attire. Jonathan Swift in his fragment of autobiography says that Feilding married Mary, only daughter of Barnham Swift (known as Cavaliero), Viscount Carlingford (died 1635), who 'brought him a considerable Estate in Yorkshire, which he squandered away' (Swift, 187). Feilding afterwards married Margaret (died 1698), daughter of Ulick Burke, marquess of Clanricarde, previously the wife of Donough MacCarthy, second Viscount Muskerry, killed at sea in 1665, and Robert Danvers, third Viscount Purbeck, killed in a duel at Liege in 1684. 
During the reign of James II Feilding became a Catholic. It would appear that he served as a justice of the peace for Middlesex, and may have been one of the justices who desired that the king would dispense with taking the test in 1687. A loyal supporter of James II, who gave him a regiment, he followed the king to Ireland and served as MP for Gowran in the Irish parliament of 1689. He later joined the exiled king in Paris, from where he petitioned for his own pardon in January 1692. By 1696 Feilding had returned to England and was imprisoned for a time in Newgate as a Jacobite, eventually securing his pardon in June 1697. Feilding once again became renowned as a womanizer and notorious for his extravagant habits. He cut a conspicuous figure in London society by travelling in a black coach accompanied by footmen dressed in yellow coats with black feathers in their hats and black sashes. He maintained his opulent lifestyle by being kept as a 'stallion' by a series of wealthy mistresses and also through gambling. He engaged in many fraudulent practices, such as bribing jockeys at race meetings, which, when discovered, led to his being beaten by several noblemen. His ostentatious lifestyle led him to fight several duels. In 1696 a reward of $200 was offered for his arrest after he had wounded the MP and justice of the peace Sir Henry Colt. At the age of fifty Feilding was himself seriously injured after fighting with one Mr Fulwood, a barrister of Gray's Inn, at the theatre. He later made a habit of displaying his wound to ladies in order to win their 'love and pity', but, as Swift observes, they 'fell a laughing' instead (Swift, 86). 
Feilding's wife died on 14 August 1698 and in 1705 he once again turned to marriage as a means of restoring his dwindling fortune. During the summer of 1705 he assiduously courted the wealthy and newly widowed Barbara Palmer, duchess of Cleveland (1641-1709), a former mistress of Charles II. At the same time he had designs on a recently bereaved young widow named Anne Deleau, reported to have a fortune of $60,000 -- a fact which Feilding ascertained by scrutinizing her late husband's will. Feilding visited her house at Waddon, near Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on pretence of viewing the gardens and succeeded in obtaining a glimpse of the reclusive widow through a window. He sent her a number of love letters which were apparently destroyed by her servants, knowing Feilding's notorious character and suspecting his mercenary designs. At length Feilding sought the assistance of Charlotte Henrietta Villars, Mrs Deleau's hairdresser, promising her $500 for her help in winning over the widow. Knowing that Mrs Deleau was unlikely to consent to marrying Feilding, Villars disguised an acquaintance, a poor woman named Mary Wadsworth, as the widow and arranged a meeting with Feilding at his London lodgings. On their second visit on 9 November 1705 a Catholic priest was fetched, who married Feilding to Mary Wadsworth, believing her to be Anne Deleau. In the meantime Feilding continued his pursuit of the duchess of Cleveland, whom he married on 25 November 1705. 
In May 1706 Feilding discovered the cheat of his marriage to 'Mrs Deleau' when he visited the real widow's house at Waddon and demanded to see his wife. He beat Mary Wadsworth and threatened severe violence against Charlotte Villars if she should reveal this marriage. However, the two women conveyed their story to the duchess of Cleveland via her grandson, the duke of Grafton. By this time Feilding's relations with the duchess had begun to deteriorate. He beat her and locked her up when she refused to give him money, and during spring 1706 Feilding began a sexual relationship with her granddaughter, Charlotte Calvert, 'nee' Lee (1679-1721), wife of Benedict Leonard Calvert, fourth Lord Baltimore. Feilding is believed to have fathered the child born to Charlotte on 23 April 1707. The duchess began proceedings in the London consistory court to annul her marriage to Feilding on account of his prior marriage to Mary Wadsworth, obtaining sentence on 23 May 1707. On 4 December 1706 Feilding was found guilty of bigamy at the Old Bailey. He escaped the death penalty by pleading benefit of clergy and also evaded the lesser penalty of being burnt in the hand by producing a warrant from Queen Anne to suspend the execution of the sentence. After the trial Feilding's rakish lifestyle was satirized in a number of publications, most notably in the 'History of Orlando the Fair' printed in 'The Tatler' in August 1709. Feilding was ultimately reconciled with Mary Wadsworth, with whom he lived at Scotland Yard until his death from fever on 12 May 1712 aged sixty-one. He left her the bulk of his property, including estates at Lutterworth, Leicestershire, in his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 9251


Feilding, William, first earl of Denbigh (c.1587-1643), naval officer and courtier, was the eldest of the three sons of Basil Feilding ('c'.1567-1633) of Newnham Paddox in Warwickshire and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Walter Aston of Tixall in Staffordshire. His date of birth is uncertain, but he is likely to have been at least sixteen years old when he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, as a fellow commoner on 1 July 1603. In 1606 he married Susan Villiers (died 'c'.1655), daughter of Sir George Villiers ['see under 'Villiers, Sir Edward] of Brooksby in Leicestershire, a union which produced four sons and four daughters. Their eldest son, Basil Feilding, was born in 1608. A dowry of $2500 was paid to Feilding's father, a substantial but not inappropriate sum, as the Feildings were among Warwickshire's leading families. Feilding was knighted on 4 March 1607. 
Feilding was a man of modest abilities, and since he did not inherit his father's estates until 1633 he would probably not have achieved distinction had it not been for the meteoric rise to royal favour of his brother-in-law, George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham. On 30 December 1620 Feilding was ennobled as Viscount Feilding, and on 11 January 1622 he obtained the mastership of the great wardrobe, which was worth about $4000 per annum to its holder. Six months later he was appointed a gentleman of the bedchamber at Buckingham's behest, and on 14 September following he was created earl of Denbigh. His children also benefited from Buckingham's rise to power. In July 1619 Buckingham so arranged matters that Feilding's second son would inherit the Irish earldom of Desmond. Three years later, Buckingham had Feilding's eldest daughter, Mary, marry James, earl of Arran, the son and heir of the marquess of Hamilton. 
Denbigh travelled to Spain in 1623 after Prince Charles and Buckingham journeyed in secret to Madrid. On the outbreak of war with Spain in 1625 Buckingham, as lord high admiral, gave Denbigh nominal command of a royal warship in the fleet under Sir Edward Cecil, but denied him command of a squadron since it was the duke's intention that Denbigh should spend his time aboard ship fitting himself for future naval service. However, when the fleet sailed on 8 October Denbigh was unexpectedly promoted to rear-admiral, as the vessel commanded by Sir Francis Steward sprang a leak and returned to port. His responsibilities were further increased upon arrival off Cadiz later that month, as he briefly assumed command of the entire fleet after Cecil went ashore, accompanied by his vice-admiral, the earl of Essex. Denbigh attracted little or none of the blame for the failure of the Cadiz expedition, and in August 1626 he was appointed vice-admiral of a second fleet under Robert Bertie, Lord Willoughby. The ships put to sea in October but the expedition had to be abandoned almost immediately as the ill-prepared fleet encountered severe storms in the Bay of Biscay. On his return to court he learned that his son-in-law, James, marquess of Hamilton, had refused to consummate his marriage to Mary Feilding and had returned to Scotland; Denbigh set off after him, but he had returned to Whitehall by mid-December, from which time, until the spring of 1627, he regularly sat on the commission for examining the reasons behind the failure of Willoughby's expedition. 
Denbigh served as admiral of the 4th squadron in the disastrous Ile de Re expedition of 1627. On his return to England he was appointed to the permanent council of war (15 February 1628), but he took no part in its deliberations as he was placed in command of a fresh fleet which was ordered to relieve the Huguenots of La Rochelle. A severe shortage of mariners forced him to reduce the size of this fleet, which arrived off La Rochelle in early May. There he discovered that the harbour defences were so strong as to be impregnable, and he therefore returned to England having accomplished nothing, to the fury of Charles I. Denbigh subsequently helped to prepare a second expedition at Portsmouth, and would certainly have commanded one of the squadrons had the fleet's intended commander, Buckingham, not been murdered in August. In the event he declined to serve, possibly because the duke's replacement was Robert Bertie, now earl of Lindsey, with whom it was rumoured that Denbigh had quarrelled in 1626. 
In 1629 Denbigh's conduct as master of the great wardrobe was criticized by royal commissioners, who discovered that he had been underspending on his assignments, and converting the cash saved to his own use. He had done nothing improper, however, as he was entitled to do this by the terms of his appointment, and was not therefore required to repay the sum of $16,853 which he had kept for himself. New regulations laid down by the commissioners in April 1630 nevertheless forbade him from pocketing departmental savings in future, and to ensure that these were followed the clerk of the great wardrobe was appointed co-accountant with the master. Denbigh deeply resented this slight to his honour and in 1634 persuaded the commissioners to restore him to his previous position as sole accountant. 
During his time as a naval commander Denbigh may have been seduced by tales of the Orient recounted by some of the captains who served under him, such as John Weddell, whose normal employment was with the East India Company. In August 1630 Denbigh obtained royal permission to tour India and Persia, and was given letters of introduction. He left England in January 1631 aboard an East Indiaman and the following November landed at Swally, from where he made his way to the court of the Mughal emperor. In 1632 he travelled to Persia, returning to England in August 1633 laden with jewels. As the first English nobleman ever to tour the Orient, he was proud of his visit and subsequently had his portrait painted by Van Dyck, who depicted him in semi-Indian costume attended by an Indian boy against a tropical background. 
Early in 1635 it was rumoured that Denbigh would become ambassador to Constantinople, but his appointment was successfully opposed by the Levant Company, which noted his lack of mercantile experience. Despite his previous naval service, he seems never to have been offered a command in the ship-money fleets of 1635-40. In February 1639 he promised to join the army which was gathering at York to fight the Scots, but if he attended he was not granted a commission. On the outbreak of civil war he was again denied a command of his own, but served as a volunteer in the king's lifeguard of horse. He saw action at Edgehill, and on 3 April 1643, as a cavalryman in Prince Rupert's troop, helped storm Birmingham, where he received severe injuries to the head and body. Though these began to heal, they were reopened by a fall in his coach, and he died intestate at Cannock in Staffordshire five days later. He was apparently buried at Monk's Kirby, close to his seat at Newnham Paddox. Letters of administration were granted to a creditor on 8 June 1651. Denbigh's widow died at Cologne about 1655. 


@@@@@


doc= 9252


Feinaigle, Gregor von (1760-1819), mnemonist and educator, was born at Ueberlingen in Swabia, southern Germany, on 22 August 1760, the son of Maria Magdalena Feinoegl. His father's name is not known. He joined the Cistercian abbey of Salem and was professed in 1780 and ordained priest in 1785, but the monastery was dissolved following the Napoleonic wars. From 1803 to 1806 he and his brother Alois rented the monastery weaving mill. Meanwhile he began to lecture on mnemonics, and published a pamphlet about his system at Karlsruhe in 1804. At Paris in 1806 Count Metternich and his staff are said to have followed his course with enthusiasm. Despite Dieulafoy's mocking farce, 'Les filles de memoire, ou, Le mnemoniste' published in 1807, he continued to lecture in France until moving to England in 1811, where he spoke in London, Liverpool, Glasgow, and other cities. 
Feinaigle's mnemonic method, following Cicero, consisted of using mental images to simplify remembering sequences of facts. In particular, his technique involved placing what must be remembered in a pattern located on each wall of an imaginary room. Additionally Feinaigle taught short-cuts in mental arithmetic. Though unoriginal, his skill was to present traditional methods of artificial memory as a rational way to remember quantities of information. He developed an effective lecture performance. He Anglicized his surname, and adopted the aristocratic 'von'. An accomplished showman, by patronage and publicity he stimulated public interest to watch him teach orphans to memorize sequences of dates or poems, and to perform complex mental calculations. The audience would then be invited to sign up for a course of fifteen lectures. Though no charlatan, Feinaigle did cultivate an air of mystery concerning both his own origins as a monk and priest, and the sources of his arcane techniques. 
In London Feinaigle gave a demonstration at the Royal Institution on 22 June 1811, and in the same year a full course at the rival Surrey Institution. Notes on this course, taken by John Millard, were published as 'The New Art of Memory' under Feinaigle's name in 1812. Michael Faraday tried to adopt the system, but Lord Byron satirized Feinaigle in 'Don Juan' (can. 1, st. 11). Feinaigle's lectures at Liverpool in September 1811 attracted further attention. Samuel Butler wrote from Shrewsbury for information. Another recruit was Bede Brewer, president of the English Benedictine monks, who encouraged Ampleforth College to employ Feinaigle to teach his system. Apart from mnemonics, another key feature of his educational method was the holding of regular examinations open to the public. These were both a test of the boys' progress and an opportunity to promote the school. Brewer and Peter Augustine Baines, prefect at Ampleforth, encouraged the spread of Feinaigle's system elsewhere. 
Feinaigle left Ampleforth and moved to Dublin in 1813. Once again he advertised public demonstrations, then promoted a lecture course. He spoke at the Rotunda in January and at the Royal Dublin Society in February. He was an immediate success and was persuaded to set up a new school, on the same basis as that at Ampleforth, but protestant. Feinaigle himself invested $4800 to purchase Aldborough House, which he renamed The Luxembourg. The Feinaiglian Institution opened in September 1813 and was oversubscribed from the start. Soon more schools were opened on similar lines, characterized by regular examinations and the absence of corporal punishment. The Feinaiglian Institution published a series of half-yearly reports which charts their steady expansion. 
On 3 July 1816 Feinaigle married Martha Gregg, 'nee' Dames (1780-1874), a widow. A son by her first marriage (to Hugh Gregg) was the protestant controversialist Tresham Dames Gregg. Feinaigle had two sons, Charles Gregory ('b'. 1817), who died in Australia in 1880, and George Leopold, who was born in November 1819 but lived for only two months. Feinaigle himself died suddenly of an apoplectic seizure on 24 December 1819 in Ireland and was buried at St Thomas's Church (Church of Ireland) in Dublin on 27 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 9253


Felix (d. 647/8), bishop of the East Angles, was born in the Frankish kingdom of Burgundy. Like all that is known for certain about Felix, his origin is reported by Bede in his 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum' and Bede says that he was ordained in Burgundy. He may have been a member of one of the communities founded in Francia by the Irishman Columbanus, before, inspired by the missionizing ideal of such houses, he travelled to England, and sought out the archbishop of Canterbury, Honorius. In 630 or 631, the archbishop ordained Felix bishop of the East Angles and sent him to that kingdom to preach. His arrival seems to have coincided with the end of a period of disorder that had followed the killing by a pagan of King Earpwald, who had converted to Christianity. The advent to the kingship of Sigeberht, who had adopted Christianity while in exile in Francia, may have been decisive in bringing Felix to East Anglia. Felix was given a see at 'Dommoc', which is usually identified with Dunwich, now largely disappeared beneath the sea, but may equally have been Felixstowe, or somewhere else. Felix helped Sigeberht to establish a school 'where boys could be taught letters' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.18), providing the king with teachers. The notion that this was at Soham is late and unreliable. Sigeberht himself abdicated the kingship and entered a monastery, whence he was later dragged by the East Angles to lead them in battle against the pagan Mercian king, Penda, a battle in which he and his successor Ecgric were slain. Felix's death, seventeen years after he became bishop according to Bede, and therefore in 647 or 648, probably occurred in the reign of Ecgric's successor Anna. It is not known where he was buried, though his relics were later claimed by Ramsey Abbey. In addition to Felixstowe, Suffolk, he may also have given his name to Felixkirk, Yorkshire. Two pre-conquest calendars give his feast on 8 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 9254


Felix, John (fl. 1525-1535), Benedictine monk, was professed at Westminster Abbey during the year 1525-6 and said his first mass in 1528-9. He was still at Westminster at Michaelmas 1535, but is not recorded in the abbey community at the time of its dissolution. His name is attached to an account of Abbot John Estney (died 1498), preserved in BL, Cotton MS Claudius A.viii, fols. 70'v'-71, which concludes 'Oro orate pro me Johanne Felix huius sancti cenobii Westmonasterii monacho' ('I pray you, pray for me John Felix, monk of this holy monastery of Westminster'), and he has usually been regarded as its author. It occurs in the manuscript immediately after the lives of the Westminster abbots down to 1390 by Richard Sporley and John Flete, and has the appearance of an extract from a continuation of them, since it begins with a reference to the translation of Abbot Thomas Millyng in 1474, and is presented along lines apparently modelled on the later lives. Those are increasingly punctuated by verse epitaphs of the abbots, and the life of Estney not only narrates his achievements -- his paying off debts, the privileges he secured from Rome, his building works -- but also provides a resume of them in thirty lines of undistinguished Latin verse. Since it is hard to see why Felix should have composed the life of an abbot who died nearly thirty years before his own profession, it must be possible that he was not in fact its author, but was rather its transcriber, the copyist from an otherwise lost text by another monastic writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 9255


Umfreville, Charles (1687-1763), Roman Catholic priest, born in England, the son of Charles Umfreville, was of French descent; he used the alias of Fell in England. After studying philosophy and divinity at the 'communaute' of Monsieur Duvieux he was sent to St Gregory's seminary at Paris in 1707. Later in the year he went to Douai to learn English and to complete his course of scholastic theology, although his later opponents spoke of his poor English. In 1709 he returned to Paris, and in 1713 was ordained priest. He was created DD in 1716. Shortly afterwards he went on the English mission and resided principally in London, where he devoted his leisure time to the compilation of 'The lives of saints, collected from authentick records of church history, with a full account of the other festivals throughout the year, to which is prefixed a treatise on the moveable feasts and fasts of the church', published anonymously in four volumes in 1729. A second edition appeared in 1750. Robert Witham, the president of Douai, wrote observations on this work and denounced it at Rome, his principal complaint being that Umfreville had taken his 'Lives' chiefly from Bachlet, and had recorded few miracles. The publication of the 'Lives' involved Umfreville in such pecuniary difficulties that when he was required to give a statement of his accounts of the London clergy funds, for which he was a deputy during the period 1728-57, he was found to owe $1272. Of this sum he was unable to pay more than 10died in the pound in 1731. In the following year his irregular election as a member of the chapter gave rise to much contention, and to some publications. The case was decided against him on appeal. In 1755 he was named superior of St Gregory's, Paris, but declined the office on account of health and age. He died in Gray's Inn on 22 October 1763, and was buried five days later in St Pancras churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 9256


Fell, Henry (c.1630-1674x80), Quaker missionary, was from Lancashire but his parents are unknown; he had a brother, Thomas. His surname was common in Lancashire and it has not been possible to establish his kinship (if any) with Thomas Fell, judge, of Swarthmoor Hall near Ulverston, and his wife, the Quaker pioneer Margaret Fell, nee Askew. Nevertheless, he clearly did have strong social ties with them, and was apparently Thomas's clerk. He probably became a Quaker when George Fox visited the Swarthmoor area in 1652. In 1653 he wrote, but did not publish, 'The standard of the Lord lifted against the Beast... or, An answer to a booke entitled 'A Looking-Glasse for George Fox''. 
By March 1655, when he held a meeting at Gravesend, Kent, Fell was travelling in the ministry. On 20 August 1656 he sailed from Bristol to the West Indies, arriving on Barbados on 7 October. There he held many meetings and experienced some difficulties with the Ranter Joseph Salmon. In late July 1657 he left the island. When the ship was approaching England it was captured by the Spanish and Fell was taken prisoner to Spain. He succeeded in escaping and reached London on 29 October 1657. In September 1658 he returned to Barbados, and from there went to Surinam, where he performed some service among the settlers and Indians. Arrested by the authorities, he was shipped back to Barbados in May 1659. 
By October 1659 Fell was back in London. He was seriously ill-treated by some soldiers near Westminster Hall, and on 21 May 1660 he was imprisoned at Thetford and whipped as a vagrant a week later. The pass for conveying him back to Ulverston provides a brief description: 'a very suspitious Jesuited deluder & one who denyeth the Oath of Allegeance & Supremasy, a man of midle statur of some thirty yeares of age, with brown Curled haire' ('Short Journal', xxi). Fell was rearrested when he returned to the town and preached again. He was released on 1 August 1660 and spent the rest of the year ministering in London, Suffolk, Norfolk, and Essex. He was in London in early January 1661 when he was caught up as an innocent bystander in Thomas Venner's Fifth-Monarchist rising and beaten up by soldiers as he was making his way to a Quaker meeting (Fox says that he would have been killed if the duke of York had not intervened). Fell was one of the twelve signatories to the important 'Declaration... Against All Plotters and Fighters in the World', issued on 21 January 1661, by which the Quakers disavowed the use of violence to achieve their ends. 
In May 1661 Fell embarked with John Stubbs on a voyage to Egypt; their ultimate destinations were the country of the legendary Prester John (to whom before their departure they produced an address in Latin and English: 'For Presbyter John and all his subordinate kings and princes, from the people of God in England... called Quakers') and China. They set out on their journey with Richard Scosthrop and Daniel Baker. As no shipmaster would carry them, the Quakers got a warrant from the king, which the East India Company found means to avoid. They then went to the Netherlands and from there proceeded to Leghorn, and thence to Alexandria. The English consul banished them from the place as trouble-makers. 'The Quakers', he explained, 'did throw Pamphlets about the Streets in Hebrew, Arabick, and Latin, and if they had staid a little longer, it might have set them a burning' ('Journal of George Fox', 1.469). They were compelled to return to England, travelling from Leghorn to Heidelberg, where they met their fellow Quaker William Caton, with whom they visited the elector palatine, Charles Louis. 
Fell probably spent 1662-4 at Swarthmoor Hall as scribe for Fox's 'Short journal'. By 1665 he was back in Barbados, married and planning to leave for New York. He then had severe business problems, and was undergoing a period of spiritual crisis. His financial problems continued, and his last surviving letter, written from Barbados to Margaret Fell in March 1674, while it attested to his renewed faith also reported that his wife and child were planning to return to Bristol, but that he was a virtually a prisoner for his debts. He was dead by 1680, when his name appears on a list of deceased Friends. He died either in Barbados or North America. 


@@@@@


doc= 9257


Fell, John (1625-1686), bishop of Oxford, was born at Longworth, Berkshire, on 23 June 1625, the eldest son among at least eight children of Samuel Fell (bap. 1584, d. 1649), then rector of Longworth, and his wife, Margaret (died 1653), daughter of Thomas Wylde of the Commandery, Worcester, and niece of Sir Robert Berkley of Spechley. After education at Lord Williams's School, Thame, Oxfordshire, on 25 May 1637, aged only eleven, he became a student at Christ Church, Oxford; the college was to be the centre of his life. His father, by this time Lady Margaret professor of divinity in the university, was installed as dean of Christ Church on 28 June 1638. John graduated BA on 24 October 1640, the same day as his older contemporary Richard Allestree, one of his two closest lifelong friends; the other, John Dolben, was elected a student of the college that year. 
Following the outbreak of the civil war the king established his headquarters at Christ Church and his residence at the deanery lodgings. Most junior members of the college, including Fell, joined the royalist army, but unlike his two friends there is no evidence that he served outside Oxford. With Allestree he proceeded MA on 2 June 1643. Looking back on this period later, he recalled a distinguished gathering of talent, owing to the peculiar circumstances of war. 'Oxford was then the common refuge and shelter of such persecuted persons, so that it never was nor is like to become a more Learned University... nor did ever Letters and Arms so well consist together, it being an accomplisht Academy of Both' (J. Fell, 'The Life of... Dr Thomas Fuller', 1661, 22). One notable visitor in 1643 and 1644 was the church historian Thomas Fuller; often resident from the spring of 1645 was the controversialist Henry Hammond, preferred by the king to a canonry at Christ Church. 
Although the city fell to parliament in 1646, in the next year Fell and Allestree obtained episcopal ordination, perhaps at the hands of their own bishop, Robert Skinner. However, with the arrival in September 1647 of the parliamentary visitors to the university, first Samuel Fell (the current vice-chancellor) and then Hammond (now sub-dean) were imprisoned and deprived. On 12 April 1648 Margaret Fell and her younger children were forcibly removed from the deanery and retired to Samuel's rectory at Sunningwell, Berkshire. With Allestree and Dolben, John appeared before the visitors on 3 May but, having refused to submit to their authority, was expelled from his place at the college on 15 May. Fell's bitterness at these events was as sharp in 1684, when he recounted Allestree's life, as it was in 1661, when he recalled Hammond's. Perpetrators of 'the long-expected Ruine', the visitors arrived 'with hunters Stomacks, and design for to boot, for to seize first and then devour the prey, by a new method of Judicature being to kill and then take possession' (J. Fell, 'The Life of... Dr H. Hammond', 1661, 50). Those who would not 'comply with the lust of these Usurpers' were 'banisht from the University, and requir'd to depart the precincts thereof within three daies, upon pain of being taken for spies of war'. By this means 'the men of greatest hopes and merit in the University were spoil'd of all things' and were replaced by 'an illiterate rabble, swept up from the plough tail, from shops and grammar scholes, and the dregs of the neighbor University' (R. Allestree, 'Forty Sermons', 1684, sig. b). 
The memory of disaster and persecution which so coloured Fell's later writing and shaped his attitudes is somewhat undermined by his actual experiences over the next decade. In spite of official banishment, he seems to have spent most if not all that time in Oxford, where he lived within a stone's throw of Christ Church, kept contact with his circle of like-minded friends such as Hammond and Gilbert Sheldon, the ejected warden of All Souls, and ministered to a sizeable congregation according to the proscribed liturgy. In the early 1650s he was taking services in the rooms of a college contemporary, the physician Thomas Willis, with what can only have been the connivance of John Owen, his father's successor as dean and vice-chancellor. According to one participant, Leoline Jenkins, the future secretary of state, attendance approached 300, although space makes this implausible. When in 1657 Willis bought Beam Hall in nearby Merton Street, Fell and his 'underground' church moved in with him. On 17 April that year Willis married Fell's sister Mary, with Allestree and Dolben conducting the ceremony with prayer book rites. 
The 'Anglican' cell had a political dimension. While Dolben, who in that year married Sheldon's niece Catherine, settled in St Aldates, Oxford, and joined Fell's ministry, Allestree, a royalist agent, channelled funds and information to Charles's court in exile. There Sheldon's friend George Morley, another ejected canon of Christ Church, was the king's chaplain. Fell's church nurtured the clergymen who were by 1659 pencilled in to form the nucleus of a restored church hierarchy and who were poised to effect it by propaganda. One member, the recently ordained Robert South, who was significantly still a member of Christ Church, preached at the university church on 24 July, inveighing against the harmful effects of fanaticism on scholarship and religion. The same month Fell issued anonymously 'The Interest of England Stated'. All parties currently contending for power might seek to impose their will against the public interest, but none was likely to succeed fully. Even 'the Royalist pretension of having the K[ing] an absolute Conqueror' which might 'destroy the interest of all parties that have appeared against him or his Father... infringe the liberties of English Subjects in general', and set 'up the primitive Government of the Church, at least in its full height' would probably falter if imposed by violence in the face of 'so great a multitude of eager dissenters' (p. 5). Since none could win, the only 'Expedient' which would 'satisfy the reall Interest of every party' was to call back the king anyway. All other forms of government had failed; only monarchy could provide the legal framework necessary for settlement. The king in question, moreover, had not only hereditary right and an identity of interest with that of the nation, but was also peculiarly well qualified because of his experience abroad, his maturity, his marriageability, and his 'infinite sweetness of temper' (p. 9). Since the choice was 'Anarchy or his restitution', all parties actively desired the latter; an honest and loving king would, in the tradition of his grandfather, Henri IV of France, bring forgiveness and healing. 
In the run-up to the April 1660 election to the Convention Parliament, Fell and his congregation openly canvassed for the royalist interest, and he signed the 'declaration' of Oxfordshire notables issued on 28 April which called for the king's return but denied all intention of revenge. He was already a canon-designate in the new order projected at Christ Church under Morley's deanship, but in the interval before the arrival on 23 July of the royal commissioners to impose it Hammond died. It was for his prebend that Fell petitioned that month and to which he was presented by the king on 9 July. Dolben and Allestree became fellow canons on 27 July. It was a measure of the importance for the new regime of the Christ Church connection that these 'posts were among the very first dignitaries of the Church of England to be filled at the Restoration' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 822). In the subsequent distribution of rewards the Fell circle featured prominently. Fell was installed as a canon of Selsey in Chichester on 18 August (although he resigned it by 26 January 1662). He, Allestree, and Dolben were created doctors of divinity on 3 October. Four of Fell's brothers-in-law were also honoured that autumn: Willis became doctor of medicine and Sedleian professor of natural philosophy; Walter Jones, another Christ Church man and husband of Philippa, proceeded DD and gained prebends at Westminster and St Paul's; Thomas Washbourne, husband of Dorothy, proceeded DD and became prebendary of Gloucester; George Benson, husband of Katherine, became canon and archdeacon of Hereford. With Morley away in London and Allestree his official substitute, the 'valiant triumvirate' (ibid., 823) ruled Christ Church, reintroducing the prayer book and instituting monthly communion in the cathedral. By 30 November, when following Morley's promotion to the bishopric of Worcester Fell, at only thirty-five, was made dean, the whole panoply of cathedral music and ceremonial was returning. 
The following year Fell published an edition of Suetonius and two works offering a cavalier Anglican perspective on the civil wars and interregnum and his blueprint for ensuring they would never be repeated. 'The Life of the most Learned, Reverend and Pious Dr H. Hammond' (1661), revealed Hammond's heroic efforts to sustain prayer book episcopalianism through the dark and dangerous days of conflict and the rule of 'a bloody TYRANT' (p. 66). His virtues were almost inimitable, but Fell held up his example to shame the reader into charity, meekness, reasonableness, and loyalty, and to challenge him into regular pious observance. Motivation behind 'The Life of... Dr Thomas Fuller' (1661) was perhaps more complex. Nephew of John Davenant, Fuller shared the bishop's reservations about the Laudian innovations of the 1630s and his strong anti-Catholicism. In the 1640s he favoured 'the blessings of an accommodation' (p. 23) and defended tithes, infant baptism, and a learned ministry. In appropriating the 'godly life' of a divine who from another pen might have appeared as a moderate puritan, Fell secured for his own 'Anglican' faction the first protestant historian of British Christianity and of precedents for ecclesiastical reconstruction. Fuller 'ceased not to assert the purity of the Church of England' (p. 37) and 'was wont to call those controversies concerning Episcopacy, and the newly invented Arguments' against the church 'things of a daies life and no permanency; the Church being built upon a Rock' (pp. 86-7). 
At Christ Church the co-operation of Fell, Dolben (as sub-dean), and Allestree (as treasurer), commemorated in a triple portrait still hanging there, ensured its establishment as a nursery of Anglican loyalism. Fell's brother Robert and at least four of his nephews joined sons of the nobility and upper gentry. With the deliberate intention of grooming them for service in church, state, and locality, Fell built on the college tradition of admitting a disproportionate number of elite students. Although their graduation rate was comparatively low, he imposed high standards of discipline through close pastoral supervision and strict regulation of college ceremonies and servants, and expected diligent attendance at prayers. His care for the morals, spiritual development, health, and academic progress of 'our little men' (BL, Add. MS 29582, fol. 13) was noted by contemporaries and pervades his letters to the Southwells and Hattons, for example. Some former students, like John Luke who in 1664 remembered 'yor most happy government' (BL, Sloane MS 3509, fol. 66), expressed their gratitude; some, like Richard Newdigate, kept in correspondence years after leaving the college and continued to receive paternal advice. Some proteges, like South and William Jane, doctrinal Calvinists firmly attached to the liturgy of the Church of England, duly progressed to positions in the divinity faculty from which they disseminated the anti-Roman but scholarly Anglicanism of the next generation. 
Wealthy students and ex-students, fund-raising friends like John Evelyn, Fell's own businesslike management, and occasional eminent visitors (like the king in 1663 and 1665, the prince of Orange, and the marquess d'Olivola) enabled and encouraged building projects. Subscriptions paid for the completion of a range begun by Fell's father: the north side of Cardinal Wolsey's original quadrangle, and its subsequent embellishment with an Italian balustrade and a broad terrace round the sides. Following a destructive fire in 1669 new canons' lodgings and adjoining buildings were erected round the 'chaplains' quadrangle; 'Fell's buildings' survived to 1863. Further works culminated in Sir Christopher Wren's Gateway Tower, the western exit to St Aldates, completed in 1682. The bell Great Tom was recast in the following year and first rang from its new position on 29 May 1684, the anniversary of the Restoration. 
The ascendancy achieved in Restoration Oxford by Fell, Allestree (from 1663 regius professor of divinity), and Dolben (before ecclesiastical promotion removed him) was sealed in August 1666 when Fell became vice-chancellor of the university. He remained in office for three years. Although the appointment was ringingly endorsed by the chancellor, Archbishop Sheldon, and Bishop Morley's friend Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, others like John Aubrey and Anthony Wood considered the monopoly of power by Christ Church as rigid, unwelcome, and inappropriate. To Fell's existing ambition to rule the entire university was united the particular aim of those who had suffered during the interregnum 'to reduce the university to that manner and form, as to preaching, disputing, discipline, opinion &c as 'twas when Dr Laud was chancellor'. Twenty years on, however, 'a most strange liberty, loosness in manners and religion had taken place' and the aim seemed unattainable and 'ridiculous' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.196). Certainly Fell moved swiftly to reintroduce the policies of Archbishop William Laud's chancellorship. Within a few days he had issued as 'Cum de vestitu et habitu scholastico' regulations for academic dress and 'with characteristic efficiency' had done his best to ensure their enforceability by commanding Oxford tailors, under penalty of fine or withdrawal of custom, to cut their cloth according to his printed specifications. 'For Fell as for Laud', clothing appropriate to social rank and academic standing 'was the mark of belonging to a well-ordered and disciplined society' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 842). Another plank of Laudian order was put in place in December when Fell and Sheldon licensed the publication in Oxford of the late archbishop's collection of private prayers, 'A Summarie of Devotion' (1667). Meanwhile, on 25 January 1667, in contravention of the declarations of April 1660 and of the Convention Parliament, which eschewed or prohibited the cancellation of university enactments between 1648 and 1660, its ruling body, convocation, formally condemned all transactions during that period of 'usurpation' and 'pretended jurisdictions'. 
With puritanical zeal as marked as that of any of the parliamentary visitors he so deplored, Fell addressed all manifestations of disorder. From the Lenten disputations of 1667, 'coursing', during which exchanges between participants tended to degenerate into violence, was curbed. As Wood saw it, the rigour of debate was thereby significantly undermined, although he also depicted Fell as a conscientious supervisor of lectures and examinations. While a promoter of the traditional proctorial system and (sometimes contradictorily) of collegiate independence where it concerned Christ Church, Fell was not prone to over-delegate and he personally engaged in disciplinary procedures. As in regulating alehouses to decrease drunkenness, he struck at the root of the problem. 
Fell's reign was the more effective for congenial chancellors. With characteristic speed and calculation, following Clarendon's fall from political power and resignation on 7 December 1667, on 20 December Fell secured the election of Sheldon as his successor. While the archbishop's own political eclipse, his age, and other preoccupations led him to refuse the position, two years of unofficial partnership were productive. Concerned to keep space for religious worship separate from secular university ceremonial, hitherto held in the university church of St Mary's, Fell was in conception and execution the driving force behind Sheldon's promotion of a designated building next to the Bodleian Library. The Sheldonian Theatre, Wren's most impressive and ingenious creation in Oxford, with its allegorical ceiling by Robert Streater asserting the triumph of scholarship over disorder, was officially opened on 9 July 1669 as the university's 'great hall'. On 31 July Sheldon recommended to the university as a prospective chancellor James Butler, duke of Ormond. The duke's widely acknowledged integrity, exemplary personal life, proven loyalty to the crown, but aloofness from the more sordid aspects of Charles II's court ensured a fruitful working relationship with Fell and the university after his election on 4 August; its success was acknowledged a decade later when he confided his grandson Lord James Butler to Fell's care at Christ Church. 
As vice-chancellor Fell was especially well placed to advance what was to be his greatest and most lasting achievement, the realization of Laud's dream of a securely based and internationally renowned scholarly press. Since the Restoration he had been at the forefront of the university's battle with the London Stationers and the king's printers over the privilege of printing bibles and prayer books, and in 1667 he had established a type foundry in Oxford. In 1669 he persuaded Sheldon to take the critical step of permitting the Sheldonian to be used as a printing house; an imprint depicting the theatre was still employed when the press moved to purpose-built premises after Fell's death. In partnership with Leoline Jenkins, now principal of Jesus College, Thomas Yate, principal of Brasenose, and secretary of state Sir Joseph Williamson, Fell obtained a lease for the university press, running from Lady day 1672. By this time, with Sheldon's consent, the enterprise was already well under way, underwritten by about $400 from the consortium's own resources. Fell's programme of publication was over-ambitious given the finance available, and was dogged by marketing problems, but his achievement was none the less impressive. He primed the pump with his own edition of Clement (1669), works on philosophy (1671), and music (1672), and with a basic grammar (1673). His 'new year books', an annual challenge to Christ Church students to edit classical texts, produced, for example, translations of Theocritus (1676) and Epictetus (1680). He commissioned the distinguished orientalist Edward Pococke to write on the minor prophets, obtained the printing and publishing rights of the immensely popular 'The Whole Duty of Man', supervised the translation into Latin of Wood's history of the university and printed it at his own charge (although not to Wood's satisfaction), and through persistence secured the rights to print bibles. His correspondence, full of press business, testifies to the many collaborative projects he encouraged, from a Welsh prayer book and catechisms (with his nephew-in-law William Lloyd, bishop of St Asaph), to the Saxon chronicle (with William Nicholson). Landmark publications included Robert Morison's 'Plantae umbelliferae' (1672-99), Robert Plot's 'Natural History of Oxfordshire' (1677), and John Loggin's 'Oxonia illustrata' (1674). These were beautifully produced, and all benefited from Fell's importation, above all through his agent Thomas Marshall of Lincoln College (also an Anglo-Saxonist), of a high-quality range of roman, italic, and Greek types. Bequeathed to Oxford University Press, these still survive; although their use rapidly decreased in the later eighteenth century, they were revived in 1864 and employed in special publications in the twentieth century. 
Fell's publishing work and his scholarship underpinned his continuing influence in the university after the years of his vice-chancellorship. Although his concern for the position of the church led him to have reservations about the new science and objections to the Royal Society, he supported scientific study at Oxford. By 1677 he had encouraged Elias Ashmole to leave his manuscripts and curiosities to the university and he was involved in negotiations to add the Arundel marbles to the Ashmolean collection. 
Fell's ascendancy was gilded and extended when on 8 January 1676, through the influence of Sheldon, he was elected bishop of Oxford. Consecrated in London at the chapel of Winchester House in Chelsea on 6 February, he was uniquely permitted to hold the bishopric and the deanery 'in commendam'. The rationale was the poverty of the see, but Fell's dual role was one of several contradictions in the career of this meritocratic enemy of pluralism, simony, and nonconformity: the Restoration church was full of his friends, kin, and former students, he favoured Christ Church men, and he was personally a puritan. 
Fell's commitment to his episcopal role was unequivocal, however, and his tenure, relatively long for bishops of Oxford, was important for the church and university at a time of crisis. He repaired the palace at Cuddesdon, damaged during the civil war. His diligence is attested by his visitation articles of 1676, 1679, and 1682, and by his manuscript diocese book, containing a systematic review of the parishes within each deanery, their incumbents, and sometimes their patrons and the value of the living. His correspondence reveals his preoccupations. 'Pluralities' were 'mischief in the church' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 37, fol. 69), which 'if not stopt, will go far forward toward the ruining of the church' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 32, fol. 159). Should one Mr Elsing obtain the Berkshire living he desired, Fell requested Archbishop William Sancroft that Elsing might resign the existing living 'belonging to us' so that he would not 'neglect both' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 33, fol. 25). In 1670 Fell had revealed to Newdigate his opposition to lay purchase of former church lands and he was keen to gather patronage in clerical hands. 'In an age where nothing is so prostituted & marketable ware, as the presentation to livings, it is a worthy charity to rescue the advowsons from the possibility of simoniacal practice, and the patrons from the guilt of it' (Warks. CRO, CR136, B401). None the less, the stern pastor was agreeably surprised when lay patrons did consult him over presentations; he accepted the request of a 'destitute' minister for a second cure for 'meer pity' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 33, fol. 19); and he showed notable patience over the scandalous behaviour of the curate of Beckley. His major concern was with active and visible dissent, but he also questioned his clergy over their parishioners' negligent attendance at church and failure to receive communion. Dissenters and backsliders were not simply to be disciplined, but also to be persuaded into conformity by their ministers' godly lives and preaching. Writing to Sancroft in 1683 and 1684 Fell identified Abingdon, 'a town... of considerable wealth... and no less aversion to government' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 34, fol. 112) and 'the disaffected town of Coventrye' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 32, fol. 175), which was not in his diocese, as places in particular need of a properly maintained ministry. 
In Fell's last visitation in 1682 one commentator detected 'more than a note of disillusion' in his charge to his clergy (Clapinson, xxxiii). He had already registered his exasperation at their feeble responses to his exhortations. Diligence in offering daily prayer and office, frequent sacraments, and catechizing of youth was undermined by the people's unwillingness to attend. His efforts to encourage monthly communion and observation of the festivals of the church had found greater success among gentle and noble correspondents like the Newdigates and Hattons, whose household piety he commended. A consciousness of 'the vanity of temporal proceedings' (BL, Add. MS 29582, fol. 1) and 'the prodigality of the generality of men' (Warks. CRO, CR136, B410) led him to put more faith in private and individual morality than in public and corporate virtue. 
Having preached with success before the king at Christ Church in 1663, Fell had become a royal chaplain. His monarchism continued unabated, but his scorn for 'glittering titles and empty names' (Warks. CRO, CR136, B416) and the antipathy toward aristocratic life displayed in thanking God that 'my Lady Hatton knows how to spend hir time without a playhouse, or Hide park, or a circle of impertinent visits' (BL, Add. MS 29582, fol. 57) cannot have made him a comfortable preacher. His court sermon 'The Character of the Last Daies' (1675) had castigated the 'jolly men of dissolute ungodly life' (p. 23), the 'scoffers' who denied the second coming of Christ in judgement and 'the expectation of future retribution' (p. 1). There had always been 'debaucht and dissolute persons', but never until now had they mocked so openly, 'with assurance and impunity' and 'for that' been 'esteem'd Wits and Masters of Reason' (p. 16). 
Events in the last years of Fell's life severely threatened the world he had striven so hard to construct after the Restoration. The dissolution of the Cavalier Parliament disturbed him, and he worked hard to get reliable tories returned in the three general elections of 1679, 1680, and 1681, in particular the election of Jenkins for the university seat in 1680; in that year he was also at the centre of arrangements for housing parliament in Oxford. He was consistently active in the Lords, opposing the 'warm counsels' of 'unquiet and tumultuous men' who sought to exclude James, duke of York, from the succession (BL, Add. MS 29582, fols. 1, 3). On 15 November 1680 he was one of the Lords majority who rejected the Commons' 'Exclusion Bill'. 
In 'A Sermon Preached before the House of Peers' (1680), delivered on 22 December, Fell's text was 'Matthew' 12: 25: 'every kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation'. Rebellion was 'the sin of witchcraft': 'by enchantment' men 'disturbed their own and the public peace' and forfeited 'all the advantages they enjoy in a setled Government' (p. 3). The 'mad Divisions' (p. 5) of civil war must not be repeated. Popery was 'made of superstition and cruelty, hypocrisy and prophaness' but other sects were 'extremely bad' (p. 13). Comprehension and toleration would not work, a foreign alliance would only inflame the situation, and a standing army would not agree with the country's liberties. Threatened by papal tyranny, men should abandon faction and seek reconcilement. Fell's long immersion in patristic scholarship and in particular his work on a collaborative edition of the third-century Carthaginian Father Cyprian's 'De catholicae ecclesiae unitate' provided an example of the imperative of unity under a bishop in time of extreme danger. The preface to his English version, 'The Holy Martyr St Cyprian of the Unity of the Church' (1681) noted the parallel assault from the 'machinations of idolatrous Rome' and the efficacy of Cyprian's exhortation to unity and obedience in public worship. It ignored any inconsistency in applying this to a protestant church. 
Fell's stance must have seemed vindicated by the successful visit to Oxford of the duke of York and his protestant daughter Princess Anne in May 1683; like previous royal visitors they lodged at the deanery. In June, however, he was thoroughly unsettled by the discovery of the 'diabolical' and 'execrable' Rye House plot, and was amazed that men 'of birth and fortunes' like the duke of Monmouth and Lord Russell should be privy to it (BL, Add. MS 29582, fols. 19, 21). He was characteristically less surprised by the rebellion and subsequent fate of Algernon Sidney, who 'died with the same surliness wherewith he liv'd' (ibid., fol. 99). Personal grief intruded on 7 December, when Fell recorded the death of his sister Philippa Jones, who since her widowhood in 1672 had lived with him and 'freed me from all domestic cares' (ibid., fol. 97). 
In Oxford Fell continued to tread a fine line between vehement anti-whiggery and efforts for reconciliation. Having failed to persuade James Parkinson of Lincoln of the danger of his 'seditious principles' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 899), he approved his expulsion from the university in September 1683. John Locke, who owed to Fell his appointment as a Christ Church student, lasted longer under Fell's very nose, and was expelled only in November 1684, after he had fled abroad. In that year Fell oversaw the publication of 'The Works of the... Author of the Whole Duty of Man', and Allestree's 'Forty Sermons'. Prefacing the latter with a hagiographical life of his friend, who had died in 1681, Fell reiterated his message of moderation, loyalty, austerity, and duty; he suppressed the contentious facts of Allestree's Arminianism and his readiness to be selective in his dismissal of Catholic belief. 
In the face of the duke of Monmouth's rising in the summer of 1685, Fell took the lead in organizing an armed force from among the students to defend Oxford, making use of an old friend at court, the second earl of Clarendon, to obtain equipment. When Monmouth went to his death on 5 July having refused 'to repent of murder, rebellion, & adultery' (BL, Add MS 29582, fol. 223), Fell was profoundly shocked. But he was beset from the other side by manifestations of creeping Catholicism within the university which finally hit close to home. That summer Obadiah Walker, principal of University College and a protege of Fell's in Anglo-Saxon scholarship, published a life of Christ containing doctrine on Mary and on papal authority which his colleagues found unacceptable. Jane and Fell had attempted to remove the offending passages, but Walker defiantly printed the original text. On 1 October the vice-chancellor, reportedly 'govern'd by Dr Fell' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 919) prevented the sale of Walker's books and Fell deleted the clause in his will which had given Walker printing privileges in the university. 
By spring 1686 Fell was ailing. An 'inflammation' in his side, similar to one which had killed his father, would not heal, and his year's lodging with Willis had undermined his trust in physicians' diagnoses (BL, Add. MS 29582, fols. 329, 335, 358). Observers considered him worn out by his many exertions. He drew up a final copy of his will on 11 and 26 June, naming his nephews Thomas Willis and Henry Jones, and his old friend John Cross as his trustees and executors, to administer, among much else, the lease on the press. Beneficiaries included his brother William, members of Christ Church, poor Oxfordshire clergy, and the divinity school library. Jane received Allestree's papers while most of Fell's went to Jones. Fourteen women, among them the dowager countesses Lovelace and Dorchester, were given 'bibles', 'not knowing a better gift for a bishop to bestow nor more usefull for a Christian to receive' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/385, fol. 278'v'). Fell died at Christ Church on 10 July and was buried on 13 July in the aisle north of the choir in Christ Church Cathedral. 
'The great loss we are like to sustain from the death of so great & good a man' (Warks. CRO, CR136, B418) was keenly felt at Christ Church and other quarters in Oxford. Opinion elsewhere was divided and complex. He had many admirers and his career and correspondence reveals a large circle of friends. In contrast, John Aubrey mocked him as a 'ghostlike ghostly father' who 'wore a countenance so pompous in its sanctity', a 'dry bone... a stalking, consecrated engine of hypocrisy' (Spurr, 222). Wood experienced what he felt was his highhandedness, but he could also appreciate his diligence, skill in mentoring students, encouragement of learning and the press, and charity. Burnet's measured verdict was that he was a man of strict life and 'much devotion', a scholar and a good manager, 'in all respects a most exemplary man, a little too heated' in disputes with dissenters and in his zeal for reforming abuses, a rare and worthy, but to many unpalatable man (Burnet, 142-3). The rhyme, '
I do not love thee Dr Fell 

The reason why I cannot tell; 

But this I know and know full well, 

I do not love thee Dr Fell, 

' the result of a mischievous translation of a Martial epigram by a disciplined student, Thomas Brown, stuck in the popular memory longer than the preoccupations of the man to whom it refers. It seems to touch a truth about the energetic, determined, effective, partisan, and sometimes sanctimonious man who made a profound contribution to Restoration Anglicanism and who in many respects 'was' Restoration Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 9258


Fell, John (1735-1797), Independent minister and classical tutor, was born at Cockermouth, Cumberland, on 22 August 1735, the son of Daniel Fell, a clerk at the dissenting meeting-house and a schoolmaster. He was apprenticed to a tailor in Cockermouth and after completing his apprenticeship moved to London to continue in this trade. There he developed an ambition to become a dissenting minister and, with the financial support of friends and the King's Head Society, entered Mile End Academy in 1757. Here he received his ministerial training from John Conder, Thomas Gibbons, and John Walker. He proved to be an able, diligent, and well-motivated student and gained the respect of his tutors, especially Walker, the classical tutor, who gave up his time to help him in his studies. 
After leaving the academy in 1761, Fell was for a short time an assistant in a school at Norwich and tutor in a gentleman's family. In 1762 he accepted an invitation to minister to an Independent congregation at Beccles, Suffolk. Here he remained until 1770, but declined to accept pastoral responsibility for the congregation as 'they were not formed into a regular church' ('Biographical memoir', 1). In May 1770 he succeeded David Parry as minister at the Independent chapel in Thaxted, Essex, where he was ordained on 24 October. His ministry in Thaxted proved hugely successful. He became 'useful and beloved' and the 'object of universal respect even among Anglicans' (ibid., 3). As a preacher his manner was lively and energetic and though strictly orthodox he was no bigot. The most memorable of his published works, which did much to enhance his reputation as a biblical and classical scholar, date from his time at Thaxted. The first two of note were 'Essay on the Love of One's Country' (1772) and 'Genuine Protestantism, or, The Unalienable Rights of Conscience Defended' (1773). The extent of his classical learning was revealed in 'The Idolatry of Greece and Rome' (1785), which was a reply to Hugh Farmer's treatise on the worship of classical gods. Fell did not confine his literary works to religion and classical themes. He published essays on the penal laws (1774) and English grammar (1784), while his 'Remarks on Rowley's Poems' (1782) demonstrated a talent for literary criticism. 
On 1 October 1787 Fell succeeded Benjamin Davies as resident and classical tutor at Homerton Academy, London, but his period of office there was not enjoyable or successful. He found difficulty maintaining discipline among the students, whose respect and support he failed to gain. One of them, William Walford, accused him of 'a want of energy in stimulating his pupils to exertion' and described his methods of teaching Latin and Greek as 'very defective... and deficient' (Walford, 101-4). It would seem that Fell's quick temper and irritable manner led to frequent altercations with both the students and his fellow tutors. This, together with his republican sympathies, led the academy to insist on his resignation. Fell left Homerton Academy in January 1797. His defenders claimed that his treatment was unjust and 'unpardonably severe' (Hunter) and maintained that the spirit of insubordination and discontent had been rife in the academy for some time before his appointment. His friends rallied to his support. A London merchant procured a sufficient sum of money to provide him with an annuity of $100, while friends collected $200 for him as remuneration for a course of twelve lectures to be delivered on the evidences of Christianity. Fell preached four of these to crowded audiences in the Scots Church, London Wall, but deteriorating health, in part brought on by the depression he felt over his dismissal, prevented him from finishing the lecture course. This was eventually completed by Henry Hunter and the full set of twelve lectures was published in 1798. 
Fell never recovered from his illness. He died, unmarried, at Homerton on 6 September 1797 and was buried in Bunhill Fields on 15 September, when a funeral oration was delivered by the Revd Joseph Brooksbank. A funeral sermon by his close friend Henry Hunter was preached on 24 September at the Old Jewry. 


@@@@@


doc= 9259


Fell, Leonard (1624-1701), Quaker missionary and writer, was the son of Thomas Fell of Baycliff, near Ulverston in the Furness district of north Lancashire. He took service in the nearby godly household of Thomas Fell (1598-1658) and Margaret Fell (1614-1702) at Swarthmoor Hall, near Ulverston; despite their shared surname, he appears to have been at most their distant relation. There he was converted to Quakerism by George Fox on his evangelizing tour of north Lancashire in 1652. In the following year Fell married Agnes Chambers, who died in 1662; he subsequently married a woman whose first name was Mary and who died in 1708. In 1656 he contributed to the survey 'The Persecution of them People they Call Quakers, in Several Places in Lancashire'. He himself experienced sharp persecution in the 1650s and 1660s -- he was imprisoned in Lancashire in 1654-6, in Leicester in 1661, and in Lancashire again in 1666 and 1668. It was, then, from an unimpeachable position of a witness of suffering, that Fell could publish in 1670 'An Epistle for the Strengthening and Confirming of Friends in their most Holy Faith', a work which urged Friends, 'Look not at sufferings, but look to the Lord that is able to deliver' (Backhouse, Backhouse, and Mounsey, 139). He was gaoled for refusal of tithes in 1671 and in the same year suffered distraint of goods as punishment for preaching. 
Enumerated in 1676 (as 'husbandman', of Baycliff) among the evangelizing Quaker 'First Publishers of Truth', Fell travelled extensively on Quaker missions, often with Fox, with whom he was closely associated as a disciple. In 1677 he left Swarthmoor with Fox on an extensive preaching tour of the south of England, and he visited Scotland three times during the course of his career as a missionary, one of these expeditions taking place late in his life. Fell's regular travelling gave rise to a colourful anecdote involving him with a highwayman who stole his horse and money but who was charmed by his victim's protestation 'Though I would not give my life for my money or my horse, I would give it to save thy soul' into returning the property (Braithwaite, 370). 
A Foxian loyalist, Fell, in 1677, joined in a denunciation of the anti-leadership Wilkinson-Story separation within Quakerism. In 1684, at the height of the tory reaction, he was again gaoled, for absence from church, sharing his imprisonment in Lancaster with Margaret Fell. He was, however, evangelizing in Cornwall in 1686. On Fox's death in 1691 he paid his tribute to his mentor in 'My Testimony for my Dear, True, and Well Beloved Friend and Father in Christ, George Fox', and in 1693 in 'A Warning to England in General, and the Cities of London and Bristol in Particular' he made his own contribution to this Quaker genre of admonitory literature. A model Quaker peace lover and reconciler, 'dear, ancient Leonard Fell' (Braithwaite, 369) made friends of quarrelling Sedbergh Quakers in 1695. Fell was saintly as well as peaceable, but was also a practical man of affairs, a horse dealer involved in regular financial transactions with the Fell household at Swarthmoor, as well as taking part in a property undertaking with the Quaker merchant of Lancaster, William Stout. He died in Darlington in 1701, having been a Quaker minister for forty or fifty years, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 9260


Fell, Margaret (1614-1702), Quaker leader, was born at Marsh Grange, near Dalton in Furness, Lancashire, the eldest of two daughters of John Askew, landowner, of Marsh Grange. Her father was a man of 'considerable estate which had been in his name and family for several generations' (Ross, 5). Her mother may have been the Margaret Pyper who married John Askew in February 1613 in Dalton in Furness, Lancashire. Very little is known of Fell's ancestry, although she had a sister who married Matthew Richardson, a Dalton attorney. 
In 1632, at seventeen, Margaret married Thomas Fell (bap. 1599, d. 1658), judge and politician, of Swarthmoor Hall, Ulverston, Lancashire, then a barrister of Gray's Inn. The Fell family had achieved gentry status in Lancashire in the wake of the Henrician dissolution of the monasteries. Margaret and Thomas had nine children, of whom one son and seven daughters born between 1632 and 1653 survived to adulthood. Thomas Fell was an important figure in local society, serving as a justice of the peace, and was a parliamentary sequestrator in 1642. In 1646 he was returned to parliament in a recruiter election and served as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, and by 1651 he was an assize judge in north Wales and Cheshire. The Fells supported William Lampit, a former New Model Army preacher and independent minister at St Mary's, Ulverston, and also welcomed into their home itinerant preachers. In late June 1652, while Thomas Fell was away from home on legal business, a travelling minister, George Fox (1624-1691), came to Swarthmoor Hall and converted Margaret Fell, her daughters, and most of her household to Quakerism. Margaret later described her experience of listening to Fox criticize those who understood scripture only with their minds: 'this opened me so, that it cut me to the heart; and then I saw clearly that we were all wrong' (Mack, 145). Upon his return Judge Fell was troubled by his wife's sudden conversion to this new dissenting sect, but Margaret convinced her husband of her new-found faith and introduced Fox to him. After her conversion to Quakerism she ceased to attend St Mary's, Ulverston, although her husband continued to attend regularly without her, and never converted to the sect. However, his sympathy towards Quakers was important, especially given his judicial position, and he allowed the Friends to hold their meetings at Swarthmoor Hall free from persecution. 
At Swarthmoor Hall as early as 1653 Margaret Fell established the Kendal Fund to aid travelling Quaker missionaries and their families, particularly those in financial distress due to imprisonment. She appointed two agents to collect and disburse money to itinerant Quaker ministers. She wrote letters of encouragement to the ministers in the field as well as to Quakers in prison. In 1655 she was being addressed by fellow Quakers as 'a nursing mother thou art who feeds the hungry with good things, but the fat with Judgment, who kills and slays the living and raises the dead' (Mack, 40). From the mid-1650s, for a generation, the issue of persecution which inspired so many Quaker writings was a gnawing problem for the Quakers. Fell sent four letters between 1655 and 1657 to Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell. One of the two penned in 1656 reminded him of his promise of liberty of conscience, and warned of the consequences of his religious policy: 'thou art feasting and feeding with Riotous Persons, with Musick, and sporting with them; which Practices are abominable to God; as also thy upholding such an abominable Priesthood; who instead of allowing the Liberty of Conscience promised, do Persecute and Sue Men to Treble Damages for obeying Truth, and seize on their Goods, and Imprison their Persons. (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 132)' Thomas Fell's death in 1658 deprived the Quakers of a judicial protector. Margaret was left a widow, aged forty-four, with eight unmarried children. She later wrote of her husband that he had been 'a tender loving husband to me, and a tender father to his children', and had 'left a good and competent estate for them' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 32). Thomas Fell's will probably dealt only with unsettled property as his son and heir, George, was not mentioned. Margaret was specifically left Swarthmoor Hall and 50 adjacent acres (she had already inherited the Askew estate at Marsh Grange from her father), while she remained a widow. The remainder of her husband's real and personal estate was to be divided equally among his daughters. Thomas Fell's death allowed Margaret to become an authoritative, pro-active Quaker minister who wrote and travelled and who became a political spokeswoman of the movement. She emerged as in effect a co-leader of early Quakerism with George Fox. In the late 1650s the Quakers began to organize as a church. Under Fox's leadership mostly, but with the help of other early ministers, a multi-tiered organization of local, or 'particular', monthly and then quarterly regional Quaker meetings for worship and business evolved. Fell was actively involved in this organization, not least as a veritable postmistress as Swarthmoor developed into a clearing house for correspondence, particularly to and from itinerant preachers and the peripatetic Fox. 
Fell was also active in trying to influence political events in 1659, in July signing a petition from Quaker women against tithes and in October sending an epistle to the army council. She continued this activity following the Restoration. In May or June 1660 Fell left Swarthmoor for London to try to gain the release of George Fox, who had been imprisoned in Lancaster. She wrote several letters to Charles II reminding him of the promises he had made in the declaration of Breda to allow religious liberty to 'tender consciences'. Fell's most important statement addressed to Charles II, and delivered personally in London in June 1660, was a defence of the Quaker principle of peaceful living, and explained why Quakers opposed oath taking, hat honour, and payment of tithes: 'we who are the People of God called Quakers, who are hated and despised, and everywhere spoken against, as People not fit to live... we have been a Suffering People under every Power and Change... persecuted by them all'. She assured the king that: 'our Intentions and Endeavours are and shall be Good, True, Honest and Peaceable... we do Love own, Honour the King and these present Governors, so far as they do Rule for God and his Truth and do not impose anything upon People's Consciences... We are a People that follow after those things that make for Peace, Love and Unity... [we] do deny and bear our testimony against all Strife and wars... Our weapons are not carnal, but Spiritual. (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 138)' Thirteen early Quaker leaders signed Fell's declaration, including George Fox and Richard Hubberthorne. Fox and Hubberthorne issued a peace declaration of their own in January 1661, which was subsequently looked upon by Quakers as their official peace testimony, but which appeared seven months after Fell's declaration. Despite Fell's efforts to inform Charles II of the peaceable ideals of the movement, persecution of Quakers increased, with Friends being imprisoned for nonconformity and their refusal to take the oath of allegiance. Fell later recorded that during this period in London, 'I spake often with the king, and writ many Letters and Papers unto him and many books were given by our Friends to Parliament... and they were fully informed of our peaceable Principles and Practices' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 17). She also sent letters to other members of the royal family, such as the dukes of York and Gloucester and Queen Henrietta Maria, to plead for the release of Quakers from prison. Fell's gentry status gave her an entree to court. She admitted that she was of a 'great family' and therefore she was 'moved of the Lord to go to the King' (ibid., 16). As another early Quaker leader, Francis Howgill, wrote of Fell's time in London, her 'servise... hath been good, and that which could not have been performed by many' (ibid., 137). 
The Fifth Monarchy uprising of January 1661 caused continued hostility towards Quakers, and Margaret delayed her return from London to continue working for the release of Quakers from prison. The king promised Margaret that the imprisoned Quakers would be freed, but the political situation, combined with the entrenched Anglicanism of the privy council and parliament, made it impossible. All her visits to the king and her papers written advocating the release could do was raise awareness of the plight of Quakers. She returned from London in September 1662. 
From 1664 until 1689 conventicle or sectarian worship was illegal in England. Despite this the Quakers continued to meet for worship, sometimes publicly but usually in private homes, thus incurring sporadic and occasionally heavy persecution from local authorities. In winter 1663-4 both Fell and Fox were arrested by the local constables for holding Quaker meetings at Swarthmoor Hall. At the next assizes held at Lancaster in March 1664 both were tendered the oath of allegiance. Fell was found guilty of refusing the oath and of holding Quaker meetings in her home, and was imprisoned in Lancaster Castle. On 29 August Margaret appeared at the assizes, declaring 'I am clear and innocent of the wronging any man upon the Earth, as my little child that stands by me here' (Mack, 180), presumably a reference to her youngest daughter Rachel. Unimpressed, the judge handed down the sentence of 'praemunire' against her, a serious matter for property holders like Fell because it meant that the convicted person's estate was forfeit to the crown and the person could be imprisoned indefinitely. She later wrote that 'the Great God of Heaven and Earth supported my Spirit under the severe Sentence that I was not terrified' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 18). Fell's daughters continued to live at Swarthmoor during their mother's imprisonment, and George Fell took steps to keep the property within the family, and protect his interest in Swarthmoor Hall by petitioning for a grant of the forfeited estate, which was duly given him in January 1665. The Fell trial became a well-known example of a trial over the issue of refusing the oath of allegiance on the grounds that Quakers could not swear to the king of England, as their allegiance was to Christ alone. Fell's incarceration lasted from March 1664 until June 1668. 
During her imprisonment Fell wrote several tracts in defence of Quaker principles, among which was her most famous published piece, 'Women's Speaking Justified' (1666). She defended the right of women to be Quaker preachers, arguing that the Quaker ministry was a spiritual and 'called' ministry. Those persons, regardless of gender, who experienced the divine light or leading of the Holy Spirit were the true ministers of Christ. She noted some twenty-four female biblical figures to support her view that Quaker women who were in the power of the Spirit or inward spirit should preach, teach, and minister. Fell made the distinction that foolish, gossiping, carnal women were to be barred from speaking for they were not of the 'Seed of the Promise' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 19). In theory, at least, the seed democratized the Quaker fellowship, and smashed through the political, religious, social, and gender restraints placed upon women. The concept of female ministry stirred a major debate between Quakers and most protestants. Fell's defence of women preachers was important because it was one of the first, and written by a Quaker woman. As a fervent and assertive Quaker apologist, Fell was not reticent in participating in some of the doctrinal debates of her generation. Fell's works, such as 'A Call to the Universal Seed of God' (1664), and 'A Call to the Seed of Israel' (1668), touched on protestant arguments over subjects such as Christology, election, revelation, millenarianism, and the conversion of Jews. 
Fell's four-year incarceration gave her a special status among Quakers, left unaltered her will to resist persecution, and seemingly hardened her views on the clergy. Shortly after her release from Lancaster Castle in 1668 Fell wrote a tract against bishops, oath taking, ordained ministry, infant baptism, and the eucharist, addressed to the Anglican, Cambridge-educated priest Allen Smallwood of Greystoke, Cumberland. This document was her response to a sermon preached by Smallwood in 1668 in which he gave the Anglican casuistic view of the Matthean text, 'swear not all' ('Matthew' 5: 34). Smallwood argued that this text did not prohibit all swearing in all situations. Fell's emotional reply wasted no time with diplomacy. She stated her opinion of Smallwood, the Anglican clergy in general, and gave her interpretation on various aspects of Quaker doctrine and principle as they were developing in the 1660s. She called Smallwood a blind, ignorant priest, and she accused the clergy and bishops in general of being 'debauched smearmongerers', adding 'and what is your spiritual men and clergymen as thou calls them whether Bishops or whatsoever titles thou gives them, else what are they butt a heap of evill doers and workers off iniquity' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 20). Fell's unpublished manuscript provides a contemporary expression of the Anglican-Quaker antagonism of the period. She expressed only antipathy for Smallwood and his ilk who represented for her the ultimate in hypocrisy and dissimulation. 
Before George Fox travelled to Ireland in May 1669 he and Margaret had agreed to marry. In mid-October 1669 the couple duly informed the Bristol meeting of their intentions, first to the men's meeting and then to a joint meeting of men and women. They married on 27 October with Margaret's daughters and their husbands present. A notable absentee was Margaret's only son, George Fell, who disapproved of the match. Mother and son were estranged in part over her marriage and in part over the ownership of Swarthmoor until George's premature death a year later. Fox signed a contract waiving his rights to Margaret's property, and her daughters, who were to inherit Swarthmoor Hall should she remarry, agreed to allow her to live there. The marriage did not impede their personal ministries, for a few days after the wedding Fox continued on his missionary visits while Margaret returned to Swarthmoor. However, the marriage removed Margaret's formal right to reside at Swarthmoor and George Fell took legal steps to regain possession, offering his mother $200 per annum provided that she vacated possession. In April 1670 Margaret was imprisoned in Lancaster, possibly at the instigation of her son, and while incarcerated she was subject to a phantom pregnancy. Meanwhile George Fell died in October 1670. In April 1671 Margaret was pardoned and released and Swarthmoor was granted by the crown to Susannah and Rachel Fell. Legal proceedings continued for years as George Fell's widow, Hannah, took steps to protect her son's interest in Swarthmoor. After the death of George Fox and the majority of George Fell's son, Charles, a settlement was finally concluded in 1691 when Rachel Fell's husband, Daniel Abraham, bought out Charles Fell's share in the estate, as well as the shares of his sisters-in-law. 
Margaret was fundamental to the evolution of the Quaker women's meeting as it developed outside London. The revolutionary concept of Quaker women's separate meetings for business, according to standard Quaker literature, emerged from Fox's writings in the 1660s. He called for women as 'helpmeets' to men to meet separately and organize for the discharging of duties of charity, care for the elderly, and the instruction of the younger women. The earliest women's meetings occurred in London in the late 1650s. Fox spoke in favour of women's meetings in 1669, and in 1671 again exhorted Quaker women to organize separate business meetings in the format of the London women's meetings with their visitations of the sick, the poor, prisoners, widows, and orphans, along with moral oversight of women. These female duties, Fox wrote, could best be handled by the women and in turn strengthen group survival. Fox's 1671 epistle preceded a journey to America; Margaret accompanied the party which saw Fox off at Gravesend, and even went on with him to the Downs near Deal. Following his departure she immediately returned to Swarthmoor and set up the Swarthmoor women's monthly meeting (SWMM). The first meeting took place at her home on 25 October 1671, and the first order of business was taking a collection for the poor. Subsequently the existence and scope of women's meetings became controversial, especially over the issue of women's meetings overseeing Quaker marriage procedure. This was part of a larger controversy involving opposition to the Fox-Fell leadership, which erupted with the Wilkinson-Story schism in 1674. 
In the 1670s Margaret and the SWMM, with few precedents except the London meetings, hammered out a discipline for women to follow. The SWMM outlined in detail what it meant in daily life to 'walk as becomes Truth' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 143). Quaker discipline was of utmost importance to the Swarthmoor women. Margaret's daughters attended the SWMM when living at or visiting Swarthmoor and Sarah ['see below'] and Rachel acted as clerks of the meeting at various times between 1671 and 1702. The SWMM became a model for Quaker women and Margaret's leadership directed Quaker women away from individual reliance on inward spiritual authority, which was characteristic of the earliest phase of the Quaker movement, to a more group-orientated authority with a stress on a deaconess-style ministry and lives of discipline and charitable service. Margaret's role was of central importance in the organization and management of the SWMM and subsequently the larger regional Lancaster women's quarterly meeting over a period of thirty years. She called the first meeting at her home; her name appeared among the signatures of regular attendees at the end of the meeting's minutes; she on occasion acted as arbitrator for internal disputes; she was innovative in her ideas on women's proper role in the certification process of Quaker marriages; and she remained involved in all the activities of the SWMM over the remaining thirty years of her life. Her leadership in this area helped to bring about internal stability in the newly emerging Quaker church order and thus helped the Quaker movement to survive and grow through an era of sectarian persecutions when religious tolerance was little valued in the wider society. 
As mistress of Swarthmoor Hall Margaret continued to hold meetings at her home, for which she endured fines, or distraint of goods, as did her neighbours. Margaret kept a record over the years of the persecution of local Quakers at the hands of the local JPs and constables in the 1670s and 1680s. In June 1673 Margaret travelled to Bristol to meet George Fox on his return from America. Although Fox had endured several imprisonments during his roving ministry, one of the harshest incarcerations was in Worcester from December 1673 to February 1675, which threatened his life. Upon hearing of his serious illness Margaret travelled from Swarthmoor to Worcester in August 1674, and then went to London in October to try to secure his release. When Fox was freed in February 1675, she took him back to Swarthmoor to convalesce, his first return to Swarthmoor since his marriage. His stay of twenty-one months from June 1675 to March 1677 was his longest stay with his wife, after which he recommenced his travels. Although he returned again to recover his strength from September 1678 to March 1680, Fox chose to base his activities away from Swarthmoor. Margaret later wistfully recalled that 'although the Lord had provided a habitation for him, yet he was not willing to stay at it because it was so remote and far from London, where his service most lay'. She had continued to live at Swarthmoor Hall 'where God had placed and set me' for the ordering of farm and family. Thus on 'truth's account' they denied themselves 'that comfort which one might have had in being together, for the sake and service of the Lord and his truth' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 22). The marriage became a model of early Quaker ministry which sacrificed all in the name of 'Truth'. Margaret understood at the beginning that marriage to a wandering, charismatic, religious leader would not be conventional or easy and her late-in-life commentary indicated she had long ago accepted that reality, albeit after some initial qualms. 
From May to July 1681 Margaret was in London, a visit which coincided with her daughter Sarah's marriage to William Mead. In September 1683 she was arrested at Swarthmoor for holding a conventicle and imprisoned. This treatment prompted a further trip to London from November 1684 to March 1685 to lobby the crown against the persecution of Quakers. She duly had an interview with the new king, James II, who told her to return home. Margaret made what was to be her final visit to her husband in London between April and June 1690. In January 1691 she received word from William Penn of Fox's death. Her 'dear husband' was, she wrote, 'the instrument of the hand of the Lord in this present age' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 24). Margaret remained at Swarthmoor, apart from one trip to London in 1697. In June 1698 she wrote a letter to William III to commend him on his 'Gentle Government and Clemency, and Gracious Acts' (ibid., 23). One of her final epistles to Quakers, written in April 1700, criticized the emerging interest in Quaker conformity of dress. She called the grey costume that was becoming popular a 'silly poor gospel'. The new style of dress was setting Quakers apart from the world as God's special people, and it was not an indicator of their interior spiritual religion and purity. She cautioned, 'Let us beware of this, of separating or looking upon ourselves to be more holy, than in deed and truth we are' (Ross, 379-80). She died at Swarthmoor Hall on 23 April 1702 attended by her youngest daughter, Rachel, and was interred in the Quaker burial-ground at Swarthmoor. The Abrahams duly inherited Margaret's estate and the family lived at Swarthmoor until 1759. 
Margaret Fell's religion was the wellspring of her life, and it superseded all other values and relationships after her conversion to Quakerism in 1652. She promoted Fox's primary leadership in the early Quaker movement. Her personal drive, social position, connections, permanence of place, practical skills, wealth, personal appeal, and longevity contributed to a significant degree to Fox's 'primus inter pares' status in Quakerism. She made Swarthmoor Hall a Quaker centre early in the movement's history, and it became a repository of Quaker writings and correspondence, especially those of Fox. It is evident that her personal power was greater than traditional Quaker historiography has conceded and that she was, although less acclaimed, as significant a leader as Fox in the formative years of Quakerism. However, not all Quakers held her in high esteem. Some of the Quakers who fell foul of Margaret believed that she used her wealth and social position to dominate meetings. Thus the Quaker Thomas Rawlinson, a steward of the Fells' iron forge near Swarthmoor, thought she 'loves to be great in the earth and among friends... to sit as judges and to reign... even as a queen upon the people' (Kunze, 'Margaret Fell', 114). After her death Margaret's published and unpublished papers and epistles were published under the direction of her daughters and sons-in-law in 1712, as 'A brief collection of remarkable passages and occurrences relating to the birth, education, life, conversion, travels, services, and deep sufferings of that ancient, eminent, and faithful servant of the Lord, Margaret Fell, but by her second marriage M. Fox'. 


Sarah also acted as clerk to the Swarthmoor women's meeting and the Lancashire quarterly meeting, resigning both only when she went south upon her marriage. In June 1681 Sarah married the widowed William Mead (c.1627-1713), merchant, a wealthy London linen draper of Fenchurch Street, who shortly after his marriage purchased an estate at Gooses, near Barking in Essex. This was to provide a convenient resting place for Quakers visiting London, particularly George Fox and Susannah Fell, who spent long periods living with her sister, before and after her own marriage in 1691. Sarah had one son, Nathaniel, born in May 1684, who became a prominent barrister and serjeant-at-law, was MP for Aylesbury (1715-22), and was knighted in February 1715. Ensconced in Essex, Sarah took over as clerk of the Box meeting, remaining so until 1708. She survived her husband, who died on 3 April 1713. She made her will three days later and following her death on 9 June 1714 was buried with Mead in the Quaker burial-ground at Barking. According to the Dutch writer Gerard Croese, Sarah was 'so stupendously eloquent in discoursing and preaching and so effectual and fervent in her addresses and supplications to God, that she ravished all her beholders and hearers with admiration and wonder' (Ross, 313-14). 


@@@@@


doc= 9261


Fell, Samuel (bap. 1584, d. 1649), dean of Christ Church, Oxford, was baptized at St Clement Danes, London, on 3 May 1584, the son of Hugh Fell, citizen and barber-surgeon. Educated at Westminster School, he was elected a Westminster scholar of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1601, matriculating as a gentleman on 20 November of that year. He graduated BA on 27 June 1605 and proceeded MA on 30 May 1608. 
Fell rapidly became a competent man of business. He was commissioned to write personalized Latin letters to great men soliciting benefactions for rebuilding the university's schools from 1612, and was elected proctor for the year 1614 to 1615. He became a canon of St Paul's, London, on 29 January 1613, and in 1615 obtained the rectory of Chalgrove, Oxfordshire, which he ceded to Dean William Goodwin of Christ Church in 1617, receiving in its place that of Freshwater, Isle of Wight. Having had an advance presentation from the king to a canonry of Christ Church by 1610, he was installed on 11 May 1619, about which time he was appointed a chaplain-in-ordinary to James I. He advanced academically in tandem with his preferments, proceeding BD on 23 November 1615 and DD on 23 June 1619. In the following years he obtained two Berkshire rectories, Longworth in 1621 and Sunningwell in 1625. He continued as a royal chaplain under Charles I. 
Fell married in 1624 Margaret, daughter of Thomas Wyld, of the Commandery, Worcester. Several sons, including John Fell (1625-1686), later also dean of Christ Church and bishop of Oxford, and a number of daughters were born to the couple. Fell was elected Lady Margaret professor of divinity on 8 August 1626, in the vice-chancellorship of William Juxon with whom he had good relations. He procured letters patent on 5 July 1627 attaching to his chair a canonry of Worcester, where Juxon was now dean, and was installed at the next vacancy on 20 May 1629. In the same year royal letters to Bishop Thornborough recommended him to the vacant archdeaconry of Worcester, but the bishop installed his own son. In 1628 Fell purchased from Sir John Coke, secretary of state, whose many favours he later acknowledged, the estate of Hall Court, Herefordshire. Fell became master of St Oswald's Hospital, Worcester, in 1631. 
Negotiating biennial election according to statute, Fell continued for nearly twelve years as Lady Margaret professor. He contributed Latin poems to collective university and college volumes, mainly celebrating royal occasions, but otherwise published only a professorial address and a sermon, 'Primitiae, sive, Oratio habita Oxoniae in schola theologica nono Novembris, et concio latina ad baccalaureos die cinerum', in 1627. In the address he claimed the professor should fight the sworn enemies of the church, including the reigning Antichrist, the raging Jesuit and the plotting Pelagian. 
That Fell published no more suggests his theological position was out of favour, like that of the Calvinist regius professor, John Prideaux, with whom he avoided clashes. He certainly escaped association with those frequently attacked as Arminians in Oxford. Anthony Wood's assertion that he abandoned his early Calvinism and 'became, after great seekings and cringings a creature of Dr Laud archbishop of Canterbury' (Wood, 3.243) is inadequate. Fell wrote to Bishop Laud in 1628 deferentially and with gratitude for favours received, when investigating a suspect vestry in Abingdon, Berkshire, for the bishop, but there is no evidence that he substantially altered his theology to cultivate Laud. By 1637 Laud was negotiating Fell's resignation and replacement by the more congenial anti-Calvinist Thomas Lawrence, master of Balliol. Fell's appointment to the rectory of Stow on the Wold and the deanery of Lichfield in that year may have been part of a package. On 13 October Fell asked Sir John Coke to move Laud, through Lord Treasurer Juxon, to grant him the see of Rochester, but without success. His expectations probably moved him, alongside the reluctant Prideaux, to certify the orthodoxy of William Chillingworth's answer to Edward Knott, the Jesuit, on 14 October 1637. Fell drove a hard bargain, and rumour reached Thomas Crosfield that he wished to make over his professorship, with canonry attached, to his son-in-law, Washburne, and 'so make it a portion w[i]th his daughter' (Queen's College, MS 390, fol. 177'r'). He resigned on 10 March 1638, to be succeeded by Thomas Lawrence, and became dean of Christ Church on 28 June. 
In 1631 Laud, as chancellor, had reproved Fell, alongside Prideaux, for neglecting lectures. The new dean received several severe reprimands in 1639. As promoter of a new examination for the bachelor of arts degree Laud was incensed by Fell's re-examining of Christ Church men after the public exercise. He wrote again calling him 'a sudden, hasty, and weak man, and most unlike a man that understands government' ('Works', 5.224) for contempt of proctorial and vice-chancellorial jurisdiction in a disciplinary matter affecting a Christ Church man. Fell's 'desire of popularity and pleasing boyes' had already been noticed in 1634 by Christopher Potter, provost of Queen's College (Queen's College, MS 390, fol. 175'v'). Laud also censured Fell over defective cathedral services. 
Fell continued to develop administrative and building skills. Even before he became dean he had assisted his predecessor Dean Brian Duppa's improvements to Christ Church buildings; Christopher Potter had commended him in 1634 for his 'skill in contrivance of building. The Deane of Christ Ch[urch] knew not how to have proceeded but for him: he hath builded upon his own charges at his two parsonages, & at Worcester assisted the B[isho]p of Lond[on] th[a]t is. (Queen's College, MS 390, fol. 175'v')' As dean he commenced the north range of Tom quad and created the great fan-vaulted staircase. His business competence was recognized in April 1633 when he was first-named university delegate for the press, with a view to printing the Bodleian Library's Greek manuscripts. 
On the break between king and parliament Fell established himself as Oxford's leading royalist. He took the 1642 protestation only with reservations. His arrest was ordered by parliament in July 1642 and he absented himself from Oxford. Lord Saye and Sele railed against him during his occupation of Oxford in September. Fell returned with other royalists in December, surrendering his lodgings to the king during the war. The new chancellor, Hertford, nominated him vice-chancellor in 1645. Following Hertford's flight from Oxford in 1646 before another nomination he remained 'de facto' vice-chancellor until 1648. 
In this office Fell led resistance after the parliamentary victory. He worked with Gerard Langbaine, keeper of the archives, to protect printing privileges acquired through Laud -- an interest inherited by his son, John Fell -- and pressed for tenants to pay arrears in rents. Having refused to appear before the parliamentary visitors on 29 September 1647, Fell was taken into custody and called before the committee of parliament on 15 November. Returning to Oxford he ignored orders to quit his lodgings. Eventually soldiers under the newly imposed chancellor, Pembroke, removed Margaret Fell and her children on 12 April 1648. Fell retired to Sunningwell, where he was unmolested, although he had been sequestered from Longworth in 1647. He died at Sunningwell on 1 or 2 February 1649, reportedly of shock on hearing of the king's execution, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 9262


Fell, Thomas (bap. 1599, d. 1658), judge, was baptized in Ulverston, Lancashire, on 13 March 1599, the son of George Fell of Hawkeswell ('fl'. 1596-1614), a gentleman of an ancient Lancashire family. He entered Gray's Inn in 1623 and was called to the bar in 1631. In 1651 he was chosen a bencher of that society. By then he had established himself as a prominent lawyer and a leading judicial figure within the parliamentarian and republican establishments. 
Having served as a parliamentarian sequestrator in Lancashire during the civil war, Fell was recruited to one of the vacant Lancaster seats at Westminster in January 1646. A year later he was acting in conjunction with the leading parliamentarian counsel John Bradshaw in both the duchy court at Westminster and the vice-chancellor's court at Lancaster. In 1648 he became attorney-general in north Wales. Having withdrawn from the Commons at the purge in December 1648 he was nevertheless appointed on 20 July 1649 as deputy to the chief justice of Chester (where once he had served as counsel to the corporation), and his formal readmission to the House of Commons followed three days later. 
Bradshaw was appointed chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster on 28 July 1649, and Fell was made a serjeant-at-law in the duchy court within days. He was vice-chancellor of the duchy by 11 September. A little over four years later the chancellorship was put in commission and the palatinate seal was held exclusively by Fell for a few months from 28 February 1654 (the express wish of the lord protector himself), then from 9 June shared once more with Bradshaw. Although two years passed before Fell took up his duties in the duchy court at Westminster he was in harness from February 1656. Apparently it was generally Fell, with his assistants, Baron Parker and Sergeant Cooke, who presided over Lancaster affairs at his time, while Bradshaw withdrew entirely. Hence the claim made in the parish register at Ulverston that, at his burial there on 10 October 1658, Fell was 'Chancellor of the Dutchy & commissioner of the Seals of the County palatine of Lancr'. 
In 1632 Fell had married Margaret Askew (1614-1702) of nearby Marshgrange, who was descended from a Lincolnshire dynasty once prominent at the early Tudor court. Margaret Fell was an early convert to the doctrines of George Fox and asked her husband to arrange, if he could, the publication of some of her mentor's spiritual meditations in 1653, along with those of other early Quakers including James Nayler and Gervase Benson. Fell had certainly used his local judicial position to protect Fox from his persecutors in Lancashire. He even made available his home, Swarthmoor Hall, for the first Friends' meetings in that area. 
There were limits to Fell's tolerance of the kind of revolutionary anti-formalism which appears to have weakened somewhat any pretence at a conventional patriarchal order in his own household. In 1657 his wife had to advise Gerrard Roberts to make sure a certain book that she wished published should 'Com forth Speedely and Bee Sent Abrode, before my Husband Com up to London, lest hee have sight of it and prevent the Sarvice of it' (RS Friends, Lond., Spence MS 3, 49). Quaker correspondence of the time frequently refers to the judge's resistance to truth. There is no doubting his godly credentials, however. In 1646 he had been appointed leading layman in the ninth classis of the Lancashire presbytery. 
Fell died on 8 October 1658 leaving his widow, one son, and seven daughters, including the Quaker preacher, Isabel Yeamans; he was buried at Ulverston parish church two days later. His father being described posthumously at the Restoration as a 'grand malignant', Fell's son, George, had to sue for pardon ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 50). In his will, dated 23 September and proved on 4 December 1658, Fell endowed the grammar school at Ulverston towards the maintenance of a schoolmaster. His extensive patrimony became the object of an apparently acrimonious dispute between his widow, Margaret, and his heir, George Fell, George's wife, Hannah ('nee' Cooke), and their son, the judge's grandson, Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 9263


Fell, (Walter) William (1761/2-1848), writer, was probably born near Brampton, Cumberland. He was a schoolmaster successively at Manchester, Wilmslow, and Lancaster, and was also an industrious writer for the press. His published works included 'Hints on the Instruction of Youth', published anonymously in Manchester in 1798; 'Hints on the Causes of the High Prices of Provisions' (1800); and 'A System of Political Economy' (1808). He also produced 'A Sketch of the Principal Events in English History' in 1811; it ran into a second edition in 1813. 
After his retirement, Fell lived at Clifton, near Lowther, Westmorland. He died on 27 March 1848, aged eighty-six, at Shap, in the same county, leaving his property to the children of his elder brother, John Fell of Swindale Head, thereby disinheriting his only surviving son, Henry, who was at that time living in Denmark. 


@@@@@


doc= 9264


Fellowes, James (fl. 1735-1751), painter, is known only through a series of modest portraits of sitters from the north Wales and Cheshire areas. These are, principally, 'Arabelle Pennant' of Flintshire (Manchester City Galleries) and 'The Revd Richard Davies' of Llannerch Park (ex Christies, 2 November 1984), both of 1735; five portraits of members of the Griffith and Mostyn families (each 1736; Rhuallt, Flintshire, in 1957); 'Mrs Elizabeth Pennant' of Nantwich (1740; ex Christies, 1 July 1938); fifteen portraits -- one of 1738, another of 1746 -- of, or related to, the Puleston family of Emral, Flintshire (ex Christies, 18 December 1933); 'Roger Wilbraham' (died 1754) of Nantwich (1741; ex Christies, 11 April 1997); and 'Mrs Catherine Vaughan' (1751; Nannau, Denbighshire, in 1957). 
It has been assumed, possibly correctly, that he was also the James Fellowes who painted the earlier portraits of Humphrey Gower (1638-1711), master of St John's College, Cambridge (who was a nonjuring sympathizer), and Thomas Wilson (1663-1755), bishop of Sodor and Man, which were engraved, respectively, in 1719 and 1726; and an altarpiece, 'The Last Supper' (1713-14), painted for Richard Welton, the nonjuring rector of St Mary's, Whitechapel, London, showing White Kennet as Judas Iscariot; it was removed in 1714 and remains, in modified form, in St Albans Abbey (an engraving is with the Society of Antiquaries). 


@@@@@


doc= 9265


Fellowes, Sir James (c.1771-1857), physician, born in Edinburgh, was the third son of William Fellowes, physician-extraordinary to the prince regent, and brother of Rear-Admiral Sir Thomas Fellowes. He was educated at Rugby School, and matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1791. On obtaining a Tancred scholarship he migrated in 1794 to Gonville and Caius College, where he became a Perse fellow, and graduated MB in 1797 and MD in 1803. He attended the lectures of George Fordyce and Andrew Marshall in London, spent some time in Edinburgh, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1800. He was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1805. 
Fellowes served in the medical department of the army before taking his degree, being appointed surgeon's mate in June 1794. In October 1795 he was appointed physician to the forces, and proceeded to Santo Domingo with Admiral Christian's fleet. In 1804 he was sent to investigate and treat an outbreak of pestilential fever at Gibraltar. He returned to England in April 1806, and in 1809 was knighted by George III. Soon after he was appointed chief of the medical department of the army at Cadiz. 
In March 1813 Fellowes was appointed deputy inspector of hospitals, and a month later, inspector of hospitals. He retired on half pay in October 1814. In 1815 he published 'Reports of the pestilential disorder of Andalusia, which appeared at Cadiz in the years 1800, 1804, 1810, and 1813'; this contained accounts of the epidemics he had witnessed at first hand at Cadiz, Malaga, and Gibraltar. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1816. In the same year he married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Joseph James, of Adbury House, Hampshire. They had a son, Thomas Hounsom Butler ('b'. 1827). Elizabeth's younger sister married the geologist William Henry Fitton. 
Fellowes was appointed a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for the county of Hampshire by the duke of Wellington, and was literary executor of Mrs Piozzi, formerly Mrs Thrale, who in 1821 left him her manuscripts, and copies of her published writings with manuscript annotations. He died at Langstone Cottage, near Havant, Hampshire, the home of his son, on 30 December 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 9266


Fellowes, Robert (1770-1847), philanthropist, born on 15 May 1770 at Gay Bowers, Danbury, Essex, was the son of William Fellowes (1740-1778) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1772), the daughter of Samuel Harris of London, and the grandson of William Fellowes of Shottesham Hall, Norfolk. Educated for the church at St Mary Hall, Oxford (BA 1796, MA 1801), he took orders, but seems to have held no preferment. For more than six years (1804-11) he edited the 'Critical Review'. He was the intimate friend of Samuel Parr (1747-1825), who introduced him to Queen Caroline, whose cause he embraced. He is said to have written all her replies to the numerous addresses presented to her in 1820. 
At his death in 1824, Francis Maseres, cursitor-baron of the exchequer, left Fellowes nearly $200,000. Fellowes erected to the memory of Maseres a monument in Reigate churchyard, with a eulogistic inscription in Latin, and used his fortune with great generosity, both in helping private individuals and in forwarding benevolent schemes. In 1826 he gave benefactions to encourage the study of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University, and he was one of the promoters of the London University. Out of gratitude for the professional services of Dr John Elliotson, who held a chair of medicine in University College, he provided there two annual gold medals, the Fellowes medals, for proficiency in clinical medicine. Fellowes also interested himself in the opening of Regent's Park to the public, and in the emancipation of the Jews. In politics, he was an advanced liberal, although he opposed universal suffrage. In 1828 he purchased 'The Examiner', an important organ of intellectual radicalism, and made Albany Fonblanque editor. 
Fellowes published many religious and theological works of his own, including 'A Picture of Christian Philosophy' (1799) and 'Religion without Cant' (1801); in these volumes he always advocated practical philanthropy. Gradually he abandoned the distinctive tenets of the Anglican church, and in his most mature work, 'The Religion of the Universe' (1836), he advanced a deistic view of religion which stressed the value of scientific knowledge. He lectured at the opening of the chapel of Barber Beaumont's philosophical institution in 1841. 
Fellowes married twice. His first wife was Elizabeth Annabella, the daughter of Aeneas Mackenzie; his second wife was Sophia (died 11 April 1836), the daughter of John Parmenter, of Castle Hedingham, Essex. He died at his home in Dorset Square, London, on 6 February 1847, leaving two daughters and two sons, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 13 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 9267


Fellowes, Sir Thomas (1778-1853), naval officer, was born at Minorca, the youngest son of William Fellowes MD, of Bath, physician-extraordinary to the prince regent, and his wife, the eldest daughter of Peregrine Butler of Dungarvon, co. Waterford. Sir James Fellowes was his brother, and his eldest sister was principal herb woman at the coronation of George IV. Fellowes served some years on East India Company ships and entered the Royal Navy in 1797, as master's mate, on the 'Royal George', with Captain Domett and Admiral Lord Bridport. He was afterwards in the frigate 'Diana' with Captain Jonathan Faulknor, and then in the West Indies, serving in different ships until the peace. 
On the renewal of the war, Fellowes was sent out to the East Indies with Sir Edward Pellew, and in 1807 was promoted lieutenant. He was then for some time in the 'Northumberland', flagship of Sir Alexander Cochrane in the West Indies. In 1808-9 he commanded the brigs 'Swinger' and 'Unique', in both of which he did good service against privateers and batteries; on one occasion, on 21 May 1809, he landed with twenty-four men at Basseterre of Guadeloupe, and spiked the guns of a battery in the presence of a large force of regular troops. He was the only man of the party who escaped unhurt. The 'Unique' (14 guns) was afterwards expended as a fireship, and Fellowes's conduct was rewarded with a commission as commander on 16 September 1809. In August 1810 he was appointed to the command of the gunboats at Cadiz, which he held until the following June, though advanced to post rank in March. From February 1812 to November 1814 Fellowes commanded the 'Fawn' (20 guns) in the West Indies, with some success against privateers; his 'zealous and active exertions' (O'Byrne, 352) were formally acknowledged by the governor of Curacao and by the merchants, who presented him with a piece of plate. In June 1815 he was made a CB, and on 22 February 1822 he was created a knight of the Spanish order of King Charles III, in recognition of his services at Cadiz. 
Fellowes married on 9 November 1813 Katherine Mary (died October 1817), eldest daughter of Captain Sir William Abdy RN, bt: they had one son and two daughters. He married again on 24 August 1819; his second wife was Mary Anne Catharine, only child of Colonel Isaac Humphreys, Bengal artillery, military secretary to the Bengal government; they had children. 
In 1827 Fellowes commanded the 'Dartmouth' (42 guns) in the Mediterranean, and on 20 October was with the fleet at Navarino, where his action, in trying to remove a Turkish fireship, was the immediate cause of the battle. Fellowes, with the other captains, received the crosses of the Legion d'honneur, the second class of St Anne of Russia, and the Redeemer of Greece. On his return to England he was knighted, on 13 February 1828, and was presented with a sword by the lord high admiral. He was made DCL at Oxford on 23 June 1830. He continued in command of the 'Dartmouth' until 1830; in 1836 he commanded the 'Pembroke' (74 guns) on the Lisbon station; and in 1837 was moved into the 'Vanguard' (80 guns) in the Mediterranean, at that time considered the best ship in the service. From 1843 to 1846 he was superintendent of the hospital and victualling yard at Plymouth. After he was promoted rear-admiral on 26 July 1847, he resided mostly at Tamerton Foliot, near Plymouth. Fellowes, a tall, stout man, died at the vicarage, Great Bedwyn, Wiltshire, on 12 April 1853. His son by his second wife, Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Fellowes (1823-1886), died while commanding the channel squadron. 


@@@@@


doc= 9268


Fellows, Sir Charles (1799-1860), traveller and archaeologist, fifth son of John Fellows, a wealthy silk merchant and banker, was born at High Pavement, Nottingham, in August 1799. In early life he travelled through much of Britain, and in 1820 settled in London, where he became an active member of the British Association and other scientific and scholarly institutions. On 25 July 1827, with William Hawes, he made the thirteenth recorded ascent of Mont Blanc, taking a new and later much used route to the summit known as the Corridor. 
After the death of his mother in 1832 Fellows passed much of the next ten years in Italy, Greece, and the Levant. On 12 February 1838 he landed at Smyrna, in Turkey, whence his explorations in the interior of Asia Minor led him to districts unknown to Europeans, and he thus discovered the ruins of a number of cities which existed earlier than 300 BC. After entering Lycia he explored the River Xanthus from the mouth at Patara upwards. Nine miles from Patara he found the ruins of Xanthus, the ancient capital of Lycia. About 15 miles further up he came upon the ruins of Tlos, the remains of which, like those at Xanthus, date to the fifth century BC. After taking sketches of the most interesting objects and copying a number of inscriptions, he returned to England, where his 'Journal Written during an Excursion in Asia Minor' (1839) created such interest that Lord Palmerston, at the request of the trustees of the British Museum, applied to the sultan of Turkey for permission to bring away a number of the Lycian works of art. 
Late in 1839 Fellows again set out for Lycia, accompanied by George Scharf, who assisted him in sketching. (This expedition and others with Fellows proved formative for Scharf, who went on to become a noted connoisseur and ultimately director of the National Portrait Gallery.) Fellows discovered thirteen ancient cities, all containing works of art, produced a map of the area, and brought home much natural historical material, as well as coins, and transcriptions and impressions of Lycian letters. However, permission could not be obtained from the Porte for the removal of any monuments or sculptures. In 1841 his 'Account of Discoveries in Lycia' appeared. 
In October 1841, at the request of the British Museum, Fellows set out on his third expedition. He ran into difficulties, and had to go to Constantinople to apply for another firman (permit). The English government had provided insufficient funds, and Fellows himself advanced the money to enable the workmen to proceed. It was his energy and experience, as well as his money, which made the expedition a success. The party landed at the mouth of the Xanthus River on 26 December, and in June 1842 seventy-eight cases of architectural remains and beautiful sculptures were sent to Malta. 
In his fourth and most famous expedition in 1844 Fellows led a large party, consisting of 100 men from the Royal Navy, stonecutters from Malta, men from Rome for taking casts, carpenters, interpreters, and others; twenty-seven additional cases were forwarded to England, and their contents exhibited in the British Museum. The most noteworthy places illustrated by these relics are Xanthus, Pinara, Patara, Tlos, Myra, and Olympus. In 1844 Fellows presented to the museum his portfolios, accounts of his expeditions, and specimens of natural history illustrative of Lycia. 
To refute allegations which had appeared in the press Fellows in 1843 published 'The Xanthian Marbles: their Acquisition and Transmission to England'. On 7 May 1845 he was knighted 'as an acknowledgment of his services in the removal of the Xanthian antiquities to this country'. Fellows's Xanthian antiquities were displayed originally in one room at the British Museum; Fellows, familiar with modern German museum practice, tried to ensure that the pieces were displayed in a historically coherent way, not grouped to make them look superficially more pleasing. 
Fellows married, on 25 October 1845, Eliza, only daughter of Francis Hart of Nottingham; she died on 3 January 1847. On 22 June 1848 he married Harriet, widow of William Knight of Oaklands, Hertfordshire. In the late 1840s and 1850s he published accounts of his travels and discoveries, as well as descriptions of particular artefacts which he had collected. During the latter part of his life he lived at Cowes on the Isle of Wight, occupying his time with agricultural pursuits. Fellows died at his London home, 4 Montague Place, Russell Square, on 8 November 1860 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His second wife died on 19 March 1874. 
In the twentieth century Fellows has been unjustly and casually criticized as a plunderer who stripped ancient sites of their treasures. In fact he was a careful and systematic observer of the countries through which he travelled, of their geology, geography, and natural history, as well as their antiquities. It was never his intention to add to a private collection, but he rather spent considerable sums of his own money to ensure that antiquities were carefully removed and transported to a public collection in the British Museum. He worked hard to ensure the interest of the scholarly world in his discoveries, and was a generous patron of others, notably Scharf. He was unquestionably ahead of his time in museum practice, and was actuated in removing the monuments by a genuine desire for their conservation, albeit one tinged with satisfaction that the British Museum's collection was unrivalled in Europe in this sphere. 


@@@@@


doc= 9269


Felltham, Owen (1602?-1668), essayist and poet, was the son of Thomas Felltham (1569?-1632) of Mutford, Suffolk, and his wife, Mary (died 1629), daughter of John Ufflete of Somerleyton, Suffolk. Thomas, a well-to-do member of the gentry, bore arms (on a field sable, two bars ermine, in chief three leopards' faces or), which Felltham caused to be engraved, with the crescent cadency mark of a second son, on the title-pages of the second (1628) and subsequent editions of his major work, 'Resolves'. Felltham's elder brother Thomas became wealthy as a vintner in Norwich and was named executor and sole heir in his father's will (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/161/64); his younger brother Robert was for a time attorney of the court of chancery before settling in Sculthorpe, Norfolk. Felltham had three sisters: Mary, Frances, and Elizabeth (pedigrees, BL, Harleian MS 5861, fol. 76; MS 1169, fol. 81). Both brothers were still living when Felltham made his will in 1667 but no sisters are mentioned in that document (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/326, fols. 363'v'-364). 
Felltham was educated by a private tutor in the standard Latin authors, whom he later quoted liberally in his 'Resolves'. Although one of his poems was included in Abraham Wright's 'Parnassus Biceps' (1656), a collection of verse by Oxford and Cambridge alumni, no record exists of Felltham's having attended either university. By 1621 he was established as a merchant in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch, London. On 10 October of that year, at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, he married Mary Clopton of Kentwell Hall, Melford, Suffolk, and on 29 August 1622 their daughter Mary was baptized in St Dionis (Bergquist, 233-4). Apparently both Felltham's wife and his daughter predeceased him; there is no mention of either in his will. 
In 1623 the first edition of Felltham's 'Resolves: Divine, Morall, Politicall' (entered in the Stationers' register on 26 May) was published, without a date on the title-page, by the London bookseller Henry Seile. It consists of 100 brief moral musings, or essays, each concluding with a resolve designed to better the writer's future conduct. Although its engraved allegorical title-page is primarily devoted to Christian iconography it also includes a caduceus and a merchant ship, the latter no doubt alluding to Felltham's current profession (Bergquist, 234). The book is dedicated to Lady Dorothy Crane, daughter of Sir Henry Hobart, lord chief justice of the common pleas. It was no doubt during his years as a merchant that Felltham visited the Netherlands and wrote his largely satirical 'A brief character of the Low-Countries under the states. Being three weeks observation of the vices and vertues of the inhabitants', which was widely circulated in manuscript, translated into Dutch, and first printed in a pirated truncation in 1648 and issued in an authorized edition in 1652. 
During his years in London, Felltham met Sir Kenelm Digby, his wife, Venetia, Ben Jonson, and Jonson's young friend and protege Thomas Randolph, who wrote a poem in praise of Felltham and his 'Resolves'. By this time Felltham was also writing poetry, and over the next several years a number of his elegiac and commendatory verses appeared in print: a poem in praise of the translator Kingsmill Long in the first publication in English of Barclay's 'Argenis' (1625), an elegy on the death of Roland Cotton in 'Parentalia' (1635), a tribute to Robert Dover and his Cotswold games in 'Annalia Dubrensia' (1636), and elegiac tributes to Randolph in 'Poems with the Muses Looking-Glass' (1638) and to Jonson in 'Jonsonus virbius' (1638). In addition an early version of his poem on the nature of true happiness was prefaced to Edward Benlowes's 'Theophila' (1652); his witty answer to Ben Jonson's ode 'Come leave the loathed stage' was included in 'Parnassus Biceps' (1656); and his accomplished love lyric beginning 'When, dearest, I but think on thee' was mistakenly included in 'The Last Remains of Sir John Suckling' (1659). 
By 1625 Felltham had become acquainted with Barnabas O'Brien, a younger brother of the Irish fifth earl of Thomond; both men witnessed the will of O'Brien's mother-in-law on 13 August of that year. About 1628 O'Brien purchased the manor at Great Billing, Northamptonshire, and Felltham became steward of that estate, a position he held until his death. Until the 1640s O'Brien, who succeeded his brother as sixth earl of Thomond in 1639, was largely an absentee owner, dividing his time between Ireland and London, and Felltham probably lived most of his time at Great Billing, overseeing the estate and collecting rents. He was probably there in 1628 when Seile issued the much enlarged second edition of 'Resolves'; on the errata page the printer notes that 'The Authors absence ha's made faults multiply'. To the original 100 resolves, now designated 'The first century', this 1628 edition adds a 'Second Century' of lengthier, individually titled 'excogitations', or extended meditations, thereby quadrupling the size of the book. These new pieces are dedicated to Thomas, Lord Coventry, baron of Alesborough and lord keeper of the great seal, upon whose death in 1640 Felltham wrote a glowing elegiac tribute. For this second edition of 'Resolves' an entirely new allegorical title-page was executed. Tellingly it omits all references to commerce and instead proclaims Felltham's place among the gentry by including the family arms. This expanded edition of 'Resolves' must have been quite popular. Later in 1628 Seile issued a third, slightly revised edition of the book, with the order and designation of the centuries reversed, individual titles added to the original resolves of 1623, and a subject index appended to the whole. In this format and text 'Resolves' was republished four additional times before the interregnum (in 1632, 1634, 1636, and 1647). 
Throughout his adult life Felltham was an ardent adherent of the established church. In the 1628 excogitation 'On the choice of religion' he writes: 'Among all the Diversities in Religion, that the world holds, I thinke, it may stand with most safety, to take that, which makes most for Gods Glory, and Mans quiet. I confesse in all the Treatises of Religion, that I ever saw, I find none that I should so soone follow, as that of the Church of England. (O. Felltham, 'Resolves', 2nd edn, 1628, no. 16)' He rejects Roman Catholicism because it 'disdeifies' God (ibid.) and the separatist puritan because he 'would exclude order, that his braine might rule' (ibid., no. 5). In 1637 William Johnson, an Englishman at the Jesuit college in Cadiz, wrote to Felltham expressing admiration for some parts of 'Resolves' but deploring his attitude toward Roman Catholicism. Felltham's answer, many times longer than Johnson's letter, upholds the position of the Church of England, supporting his argument with an impressive number of citations from biblical and post-biblical authority, including Roman Catholic -- particularly Jesuit -- writers. This exchange was published in the eighth edition of 'Resolves' (1661). Felltham was stunned and angered by the events of the 1640s. When parliament implicitly abolished the celebration of Christmas by sitting on that day in 1643 he wrote an indignant poem, protesting against the outrage. Reacting to the execution of Archbishop Laud in 1645 he wrote an impassioned Latin epitaph which concludes with the statement that with Laud lie buried, for a season, the grandeur of the kingdom, the defence of the cavaliers, the freedom of the subjects, and the safety of Britain. 
Felltham's adherence to the Stuart monarchy was as strong as his devotion to the Church of England. Even more impassioned than his poem on the execution of Laud was his reaction to the execution of Charles I, delivered in an English elegy that, after thoroughly berating the actions of 'a perfidious Part of His prevalent Subjects', concludes 'Here Charles the First, and Christ the second lyes'. Because of his political and religious beliefs Felltham must have found his employment with the O'Briens congenial. Both Barnabas and his son Henry (who succeeded to the title on his father's death in 1657) were royalist and Anglican but it was probably the Countess Mary (1592-1675) for whom he felt the greatest affinity. While her husband and later her son accommodated themselves to parliament and then to Cromwell, no doubt to ensure the continued possession of their estates, the countess remained, like Felltham, a fervent royalist and Anglican in her personal convictions. After the O'Brien family set up residence at Great Billing in 1641 she and Felltham must have been in daily contact, and since throughout the 1640s and 1650s the church at Great Billing was in the hands of a fervent Presbyterian, she seems to have employed Felltham as a kind of lay chaplain. At some time after parliament banned the use of the 'Book of Common Prayer' in private households in 1645 Felltham prepared 'A form of prayer compos'd for the family of the Right Honourable the countess of Thomond'. In it he amends, augments, and domesticates the Anglican services of morning and evening prayer, simultaneously avoiding the letter of the law while providing the countess with essentially Anglican forms of worship. She allowed him to print this liturgy in a few presentation copies of the 1661 'Resolves', where he remarks in 'To the reader' that it 'was made use of, when the Liturgy of the Church, was, as the Church it self in the 'Revelation', forc'd to flie into the wilderness'. 'A form of prayer' and the prefatory reference to it were not included in copies of the book intended for public sale, and Felltham's liturgy was not published at large -- and then in a slightly emended form -- until the twelfth edition of 'Resolves' in 1709. 
In 1661 Felltham published the eighth edition of 'Resolves' in a handsome folio that was obviously intended to be a volume of record. It contains the 1628 century of resolves unchanged, a thorough revision and expansion of some of the 1623 resolves (along with wholly new pieces) that forms a new century of eighty-five essays, two discourses on biblical passages, and (in a few presentation copies) 'A form of prayer'. Appended to it is a separate section entitled 'Lusoria, or, Occasional Pieces', which collects his poems, 'A Brief Character of the Low-Countries', letters, and a Latin epitaph for himself. The book is dedicated to the dowager countess of Thomond, 'out of the sense of Duty', since most of its parts had been 'Composed under the Coverture of your Roof, and so born Subjects under your Dominion'. 
In his last years Felltham divided his time between the Thomond seat at Great Billing and the dowager countess's town house in the Strand. The Northamptonshire manor became a favourite of courtiers of Charles II, and on at least one occasion the duke of York (later James II) was entertained there. Joseph Williamson, successively Latin secretary and secretary of state in the 1660s, and Edmund King, personal physician to Charles II, were frequent guests. These two men witnessed Felltham's last will and testament, signed on 4 May 1667. The extent and nature of the bequests to family members and friends reveal that Felltham had become modestly wealthy in the service of the O'Briens. He instructs that where his body 'shall fall to Earth I am Content that in that parish there the Trunke be laid, the sooner after my decease the better in the Church or any where, where my executor pleases'. Although he asks to be buried 'with as litle Ceremony as decently may be', he also requests that an 'Annexed Inscription... be sett up in the wall neere the place where I shall be Interred' (will). Felltham died in London on 23 February 1668 at the house of the dowager countess and was buried the next day in St Martin-in-the-Fields. The annexed inscription is missing from both the holographic and the probate copies of his will, and any memorial tablet that may have been erected is now lost, but Felltham was probably referring to a copy of the Latin epitaph for himself that was published under the heading 'Quod in sepulchrum volui' as the last item in the 1661 edition of 'Resolves'. In it he recalls that in his lifetime he saw sin prosper while virtue presented its head to the axe, but he is able to rejoice that he also lived to see the injustice of man eventually reordered justly by God in the restoration of the monarchy. As is quite evident from his epitaph Felltham's life was profoundly influenced by the interconnected political and religious controversies of his day, as was most of what he wrote. 
In its 1661 form 'Resolves' was published a further four times after Felltham's death (in 1670, 1677, 1696, and 1709), and between 1800 and 1840 several abridgements and putatively complete editions appeared in both England and America. The only twentieth-century edition is that by Oliphant Smeaton (1904), allegedly based on the second edition (1628) but actually following the third (also 1628). 'A Brief Character of the Low-Countries' was published separately, in both English and Dutch, several times during the seventeenth century. In 1973 Ted-Larry Pebworth and Claude J. Summers published an annotated edition of 'The Poems of Owen Felltham', and in 1986 Pebworth published a critical edition of 'A form of prayer'. 
From Felltham's 'Resolves' emerges the portrait of a Christian stoic, but one who is not pietistic. As he states in the 1628 excogitation 'Of puritans' (no. 5), 'A bounded mirth, is a Pattent adding time and happinesse to the crazed life of Man'. Writing with a poet's prose and enlivening his own words with liberal quotations from classical and contemporaneous authorities Felltham documents his commitment to the search for the attributes that make up a good life in an 'Age of loosenesse' (dedication, 1623). Throughout he considers such perennial subjects as humility, friendship, good and bad ends, the nature of the Christian life, the vanity and shortness of human life, and the preparation for death. But he also comments upon such topical concerns as puritanism, the propriety of ceremonialism, and the fall and restoration of anointed kings. What he has to say is rarely original; rather it is a thoughtful and carefully crafted distillation of a conservative Englishman's view of life in the earlier seventeenth century. 'A Brief Character of the Low-Countries' focuses on baser stuff, but the same concept of what man can and should be underlies its light tone and often extravagant play with language. In it the Dutch are time and again criticized because they lack order, degree, and moderation in their private lives, their family relationships, their churches, and their state. Felltham's poems are of interest both for their often insightful comments on famous people and important events and for their lyricism. At his best he treats old themes with freshness and vitality. A professed amateur of letters, Felltham has no claim to status beyond that of minor poet, but such a ranking in a period as rich in poetry as his is not to be despised. 


@@@@@


doc= 9270


Felton, Henry (1679-1740), Church of England clergyman, was born on 3 February 1679 in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, the eldest son of John Felton and his wife, Mary. He attended Cheney's School in Buckinghamshire, Westminster School under Dr Richard Busby, and Charterhouse in London, before matriculating at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 31 March 1696. Felton graduated BA in 1699 and proceeded MA in 1702. He later received the BD (1709) and DD (1712) from Queen's College, Oxford. Felton was married about 1710, and he and his wife, Susanna, had four sons and two daughters. John ('b'. 1712) and his brother William ('b'. 1713) followed their father to St Edmund Hall. 
Felton was ordained deacon by William Lloyd, bishop of Worcester, on 6 December 1702, and ordained priest on 11 June 1704 by Henry Compton, bishop of London. He apparently preached before various congregations in London until his appointment in 1708 to serve the English church in Amsterdam. On his return to England in 1709 he became the domestic chaplain to the duke of Rutland; he went on to serve three successive dukes. Through the patronage of the duke of Rutland he was appointed to the rectory of Whitewell, Derbyshire, in 1711. The duke later presented Felton to the rectory of Barwick in Elmet, Yorkshire, a living he held from 1736 to 1740. In 1722 he was made principal of St Edmund Hall, Oxford; he served in that post for the rest of his life. In October 1739 Felton was struck by an illness that lingered on and caused him to suffer through a period of confinement; he recovered enough to deliver a final sermon at Barwick on Christmas day 1739, but soon afterwards fell ill again; he died on 1 March 1740 at Barwick, and was interred in the chancel of the church there. William Felton, in a biographical sketch of his father, records that as death approached he prepared himself for it and 'behaved, under his long and painful sickness with a resignation and piety becoming a Christian, and agreeable to his character as a minister of 'Jesus Christ'' (Felton, preface to 'Sermons on the Creation', vii). 
Felton's 'Dissertation on Reading the Classics, and Forming a Just Style', first published in 1709 (5th edn, 1753), served, according to Joseph Levine, as a 'plea for the traditional classical education, freed from some of its more pedantic characteristics' (Levine, 55). Written to instruct a young nobleman, John Roos, later the third duke of Rutland, in the affairs of society, the book showed that Felton valued the Latin writers above the Greek. Commenting on the proper method of studying the classics, modern English writers, grammar, history, and divinity, he sought to deflect criticism of the book's style by noting that he had not written this book for the 'grave and learned', but to instruct a 'young nobleman of sprightly parts, and a lively imagination' (Felton, 'Dissertation', ix-x). 
William Felton described his father's presence in the pulpit as 'grave and harmonious'. He also describes him as a 'zealous defender of the truth of Christianity and of its sound doctrines' (Felton, preface to 'Sermons on the Creation', xi-xii). He was a friend of the theologically orthodox whig clergyman Daniel Waterland, and was considered a whig of the school of Edmund Gibson, bishop of London. This theme is found expressed in his Lady Moyer lectures, preached at St Paul's in 1728-9, which were published under the title 'The Christian Faith Asserted Against Deists, Arians, and Socinians in Eight Sermons' (1732). William Felton published posthumously 'Sermons on the Creation, Fall, and Redemption of Man' (1748), which contained sermons composed by his father about 1730 and preached at Whitewell, and later preached in 1736 at Barwick. Felton had originally planned to ask Daniel Waterland to revise the sermons before they were published, but he died before this could happen. 
Besides defending the orthodoxy of the English church Felton defended the protestant settlement in the state. Some of his more politically orientated sermons condemned Francis Atterbury and offended the tories (Ward, 140). In a sermon commemorating the death of Charles I, and preached before the House of Commons on 30 January 1734, Felton contrasted two parties, the 'Puritan Gaulonites', who refused to give any honour to Charles, and the 'Tory Herodians', who gave too much honour to the late king. He placed Christ and himself between these two extremes. Though honouring the virtues in the king, he praises the 'Happy 'Constitution' in 'Church' and 'State', as it was wonderfully restored; and afterwards 'as wonderfully preserved', is 'now' in all human appearance most firmly settled and assured to us by the 'Protestant Succession'' (Felton, 'The Herodian and the Gaulonite', 28-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 9271


Felton, John (d. 1434), theologian and preacher, was born at an unidentified 'Feltun'. Nothing is known of his family. He was vicar of Melchbourne, Bedfordshire, and then, from 1397, of St Mary Magdalen, Oxford, where he remained until his death in 1434. In 1418 he was licensed to hear confessions in the archdeaconry of Oxford. It seems that he never took a degree. This last information comes from Thomas Gascoigne (died 1458), who recorded it in the margin of BL, Arundel MS 63, fol. 77'r'. The same note reveals that Felton was a splendid ('gloriosus') as well as a frequent and regular preacher, and that he worked a (posthumous) miracle in the time of William Rede, vicar of the same church from 1443 to 1469. 
Felton's sermon collection, consisting of fifty-eight 'sermones dominicales', survives in many copies; it may have owed its popularity to utility rather than to the author's repute. Completed in 1431, it belongs to the long-established genre of model sermons written for a double public: an initial one of clerical readers, and an ultimate one of listeners who would usually have been lay. The prologue follows a stereotyped pattern (humble author pressed to 'publish' for the sake of others, and so on), but the specific emphasis on the needs of students and young men may go a little beyond the topos. Probably he had Oxford students especially in mind. By Felton's day plenty of model sermon collections were available, but he may have felt that his task was to synthesize and perhaps update, in one volume, material from some of the best thirteenth-century handbooks of preaching material. 
Felton says he will frequently write the name of his source in the margin of his book, and in fact often does so. Scribes were clearly intended to include these indications. There is also evidence that he made a 'tabula', or index, for some treatises of Robert Grosseteste (died 1253), and an abbreviation of a fourteenth-century 'dictionarium theologicum'. Felton's reliance on earlier works does not mean that there is no aesthetic value in his preaching as transmitted. He was capable of creating a clear and elegant structure. Further study is likely to reveal that he made something original out of his materials. His 'oeuvre' is important for the history of religious mass communication and mentalities. The table that he appends to his sermon collection, especially the long entry listing the 'exempla' he has used, would help scholars to exploit the work as evidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 9272


Felton, John (d. 1570), Roman Catholic martyr, was, according to an account given in 1627 by his daughter, Frances Salisbury, related to the protestant Feltons of Norfolk but occupied the former Bermondsey Abbey, Surrey. Salisbury added that her mother was maid of honour to Mary I and formerly wife of her auditor, adding (rather implausibly) that she was also so favoured by Elizabeth that the queen, after executing her second husband, licensed her to keep a priest in her house. Perhaps Salisbury's mother was the Ellyn Goodwin married in St Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey, on 30 July 1557 to a John Felton, who had successive infant daughters baptized Frances there in 1560, 1564, and 1565. It seems that Felton was not then a recusant, but his son Thomas Felton (1566x8-1588), a Franciscan friar and, in his turn, a Roman Catholic martyr, was not baptized in the parish church. 
Felton's devotion to the papal primacy led him to publish in England (and so give it canonical effect) 'Regnans in excelsis', the bull of excommunication and deposition against Elizabeth issued by Pius V, by nailing a copy to the door of the bishop of London's palace by St Paul's Cathedral on 25 May 1570. Salisbury said that Felton went to Calais to collect the bull himself and affixed it with Lawrence Webb, who fled abroad and became professor of moral theology at Douai. However, contemporary sources, both government and Catholic, said that the bull came from a chaplain of Guerau de Spes, the Spanish ambassador, Pedro Berga, prebendary of Tarragona. A second version of the indictment named Felton's accomplice as 'Cornelius Irishman, clerk', probably an alias. The ubiquitous intriguer Roberto di Ridolfi seems to have been the ultimate importer of copies of the bull, including one which Felton gave to a member of Lincoln's Inn who was caught in the subsequent raids and forced to name him. 
Felton was arrested and did not attempt to deny his actions. He was imprisoned in Newgate and 'by writing, signed by his own hand', on 27 June he treasonably 'declared that the queen... ought not to be the queen of England' ('Fourth Report of the Deputy Keeper', 265). However, as he would not admit to 'speech with the Spanish ambassador' it had already been decided on 25 June that he should be racked at the Tower of London ('APC', '1558-70', 373); so after some delay Felton probably became 'the first of a long procession of Catholics tortured for reasons of state' (P. Williams, 'The Tudor Regime', 1979, 393), if without further result. 
On 28 July Felton was still at the Tower. He was arraigned at the Guildhall on 4 August, apparently brought from Newgate, not from the Tower as Salisbury believed. He was charged with asserting 'that the queen had never been true queen of England' (TNA: PRO, KB 8/41, m. 31), a position derived from the bull, although arguably based on heresy at accession rather than illegitimacy. Though apparently sentenced to Tyburn, on 8 August he was returned to St Paul's Churchyard to be executed at the scene of his crime. Assertions of proper repentance are outnumbered by statements, both protestant and Catholic, that he asked pardon of any whom he had injured but denied that the queen was one -- he had merely promulgated a proper papal statement. Repelling protestant clergymen he made an ostentatiously Catholic end even under the pressure of prompt cutting down and quartering: 'having his heart in his hand, he said once or twice, 'Jesus'' (Pollen, 'Acts', 211). 
Felton reduced the perquisites of the hangman Bull (in whose name protestants found a providential pun) by sending a diamond ring worth $400 to Elizabeth via Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex -- a later occupant of Bermondsey Abbey and perhaps even his immediate landlord. Salisbury claimed that $33,000 worth of plate and jewels was seized after Felton's death. This seems an incredible sum and may perhaps be business stock -- Sir William Cecil noted a John Felton in 1568 as selling $265 worth of ingots used for an alchemical fraud. Protestant balladeers inevitably took an unfavourable view of Felton's slightly obscure position: '
A roisting shifting prodigall so he his time did spend 

Which sought of ev'ry one to have that able was to lend... 

Ne landes he had ne hands did seek to get the bread he eat... 
(Knell, sigs. A3'v'-4'r')' Felton's widow was said to have brought her third husband, a recusant named John Strangman, 'ffyftye pound by the yere at London and aboute Brystow' ('Miscellanea XII', 42). She was still living in 1577. 
For Richard Bristow, Felton was preceded as martyr by the 1569 rebels (R. Bristow, 'A Briefe Treatise of Diverse Plaine and Sure Wayes', 1574, fol. 73'r'). Most martyrologists drew the line at them, but by 1741 even Felton was tacitly excluded by Richard Challoner. His case was still troublesome, however, 'the one case in the whole list where a Catholic... commits an arguably treasonable act' (P. Hughes, 'Rome and the Counter-Reformation in England', 1942, 251). Protestant propaganda always asserted that execution for treason, for Catholics, constituted martyrdom 'ipso facto'. 'Regnans in excelsis' unfortunately served to entangle the two. 


@@@@@


doc= 9273


Felton, John (d. 1628), assassin, was born, perhaps near Sudbury in Suffolk, the son of Thomas Felton (died 1611x14) and his wife, Eleanor (died in or after 1630), daughter of William Wright, one-time mayor of Durham. He was one of nine children in a family of precarious gentle status, a junior branch of the Feltons of Playford in Suffolk, distantly related to the earl of Arundel. His family circumstances were volatile. Thomas Felton had enjoyed a lucrative career as a pursuivant, hunting down recusants and systematizing procedures for sequestering their estates. In 1602, however, his notorious efforts came to a halt when he lost his post to Sir Henry Spiller. Despite energetic efforts to recover his position by tarring Spiller as soft on recusancy, by June 1611 Thomas Felton was imprisoned for debt in the Fleet, where he died, not long after, a ruined man. In recompense for his services, however, his widow managed to secure a $100 per annum pension from the crown. 
Nothing is known of John Felton until the mid-1620s, when he became a professional soldier. His career in arms proved frustrating. He sailed with the ill-fated 1625 expedition to Cadiz, and on his return spent part of 1626 in Ireland as a lieutenant in a company commanded by a Captain Lee. On Lee's death Felton tried and failed to take his place as captain. In May and June 1627 Felton was one of a number of officers who petitioned for a captain's post on the forthcoming expedition to relieve the Huguenots of La Rochelle. But despite his efforts, and help from Sir William Uvedale and Sir William Beecher, Felton failed to secure a post as either captain or lieutenant. In August, however, he was selected to travel with a second wave of troops. Holding the rank of lieutenant -- probably in Captain Williams's company under the regimental command of Sir James Ramsey -- Felton arrived on the Ile de Re, outside La Rochelle, late in September. Felton's experiences on the island were traumatic. In its final weeks the expedition was rapidly running out of supplies and ideas. At the end of October the English attempt to storm St Martin's citadel was easily repelled. Felton was undoubtedly present at the disastrous assault and witnessed at first hand the horrific slaughter of English troops during both the attack and the ignominious retreat that ensued. 
Felton left Re in late 1627 with a wounded hand and no promise of promotion, and made his way to London, where his mother, brother Edmond, and widowed sister Elizabeth were living. For about nine months Felton lodged in Fleet Lane in the house of Thomas Foot, a servant to the warder of the Fleet prison. Foot recalled Felton as a taciturn man, an impression seconded by another lodger who remembered him as 'melancholy... much given to reading of books, and of very few words' (SP 16/118/16). Felton's brother Edmond -- who saw little of him in London -- thought him in general of a 'melancholy disposition' (SP 16/114/31-I), but it seems clear that his combat experiences had darkened his mood. His sister recalled that, since his return from Re, Felton had been much troubled 'by dreams of fighting' (SP 16/118/54). Felton was also nursing a personal grievance against the duke of Buckingham, whom he blamed for withholding about $80 in back pay and for twice thwarting his promotion to captain. Felton engaged a scrivener, George Willoughby, to draw up a new series of petitions to various privy councillors pleading for his back pay and promotion, but his efforts failed. 
At the scrivener's shop, some time late in June 1628, Felton found Willoughby transcribing a copy of the remonstrance against Buckingham, drawn up earlier that month by the House of Commons. Eventually Felton prevailed upon Willoughby to lend him the document, which he read at The Windmill inn in Shoe Lane. The remonstrance had a profound effect on Felton, convincing him that his personal suffering at Buckingham's hands was part of a much larger story, that of the duke's wicked and treacherous rule over the whole nation. After several weeks brooding on the remonstrance, Felton decided to act. On Monday 18 August 1628 he resolved to kill the duke of Buckingham and 'make himself a martyr for his country' (SP 16/114/20-21). The following day Felton visited the lodgings of his mother and sister to say goodbye. He told his mother that his debts were mounting and that he was going to Portsmouth to ask the duke for his back pay. 
On the morning of Saturday 23 August the duke of Buckingham awoke to the good, though inaccurate, news that the French siege of La Rochelle had been lifted. After finishing his breakfast, the duke hurried through the parlour of his lodgings in The Greyhound inn on Portsmouth High Street, intending to take the joyful news to the king, who was staying nearby at Southwick. Amid a crowd of clients and military men, the duke was making his way to the door when he stopped to return the greetings of one of his colonels, Sir Thomas Fryer. Just behind Fryer, nestled in the jostling crowd, was John Felton. As Fryer made his bow to the duke, Felton reached over the colonel's lowered shoulder and plunged a cheap dagger into Buckingham's chest. Muttering an oath, the duke fell to the ground, dead. Chaos ensued, giving Felton a clear chance to escape, but instead he made his way to the inn's kitchen. Soon after, perhaps confused by the yells of 'A Frenchman!' which he mistook for his own name, Felton left the kitchen and, drawing his sword, announced to the frantic mob, 'I am the one' (SP 16/114/20-21). He was immediately seized. Stitched inside his hatband were two statements justifying his deed, insisting that, as a soldier and a gentleman, he had chosen to hazard his life for the honour of his God, king, and country. 
Felton was interrogated that afternoon in Portsmouth and later taken to the Tower of London. The authorities were convinced that the assassin had not acted alone, and on 26 August the king established a commission to discover by any means, including torture, the identity of Felton's accomplices. Felton himself consistently denied any conspiracy, and after three months of strenuously chasing false leads the authorities reluctantly agreed. On 27 November Felton was convicted in king's bench, after a trial in which Attorney-General Heath branded him a base, atheistical coward and a disgrace to the profession of arms. 
Two days later, on 29 November 1628, Felton was hanged at Tyburn. For some weeks, he had been visited by clerics deputed by the authorities to encourage a full and repentant confession. A printed account, seconded by a number of eyewitness reports, suggests that Felton made an edifying end on the scaffold, confessing his crime, acknowledging its wickedness, and praying for forgiveness. A newsletter writer reported that the earl of Arundel attended the execution with a winding sheet for his distant relative's corpse. The winding sheet, however, proved unnecessary. Felton's body was cut down and taken to Portsmouth where it was hung in chains to rot. 
Three months earlier, as he was being taken from Portsmouth to London, John Felton had passed through the town of Kingston, where an old woman had called out to him, 'God bless thee, little David!' (BL, Harley MS 390, fol. 437'r'). Felton had believed that in killing Buckingham he would become the martyr of his country. In the weeks following the assassination, as Felton sat in the Tower under threat of torture, his actions were celebrated across the land. Toasts were drunk in Dover alehouses and Oxford butteries. Copies of Felton's hatband statements were passed from hand to hand. Stories of his words and deeds were exchanged in the streets or scrawled into newsletters. Dozens of poems celebrated his actions, hailing the melancholy, frustrated lieutenant as a patriot hero, God's agent, England's deliverer, another Phineas, another Ehud. Where the duke was effeminate, cowardly, popish, and corrupt, Felton was manly, brave, protestant, and virtuous. One poet declaimed, '
Stout Macabee, thy most mighty arm, 

With zeal and justice arm'd, hath in truth won 

The prize of patriot to a British son. 
(Fairholt, 70)' Poets interpreted the torture inflicted on his body as a mark of his martyr's virtue. Versified accounts of his execution had him unrepentant to the end. And his shameful hanging in chains was refigured as a glorious burial under a heavenly tomb bejewelled with stars, removed from the worms and corruptions of an earthly grave. The vast gulf between the poets who lionized Felton and the authorities who punished him pointedly suggests the gravity of the political crisis of the later 1620s. And the popular celebration of Felton's deed undoubtedly inspired in Charles I a deeper distrust of his subjects, a distrust that pushed him along the road to personal rule. 


@@@@@


doc= 9274


Felton, Nicholas (1556-1626), bishop of Ely, was one of three sons of John Felton, merchant of Great Yarmouth (died 1602). Admitted to Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1577, he later moved to Pembroke College, where he became a fellow in 1583 and Greek lecturer in 1586. He proceeded BA in 1581, MA in 1584, BTh in 1591, and DTh in 1602. On 15 August 1589 he was ordained deacon and priest by Bishop John Howland of Peterborough, and preferments in London soon followed. He was collated to the rectory of St Antholin, Budge Row, by the dean and chapter of St Paul's on 18 April 1592, and later to that of St Mary-le-Bow by Archbishop John Whitgift on 17 January 1596; he retained both livings until his elevation to the episcopate in 1617. About 1591 Felton married Elizabeth, widow of Robert Norgate (died 1587), master of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and they had three sons, John ('b'. and died 1592), Nicholas, and Robert; the latter two followed him to Pembroke and eventually into the ministry. His wife was to predecease him by twenty years, being buried in St Antholin's on 9 January 1606. 
Though Felton published nothing in his lifetime, eight manuscript sermons of his survive, probably transcribed by Edmund Willis, a pioneer in shorthand who stated in 1618 that 'for the space of many yeeres' he had practised the technique by noting Felton's sermons (Willis, sig. A'r'). The sermons (Senate House Library, University of London, Carleton MS box 17/8) were preached at St Mary-le-Bow and St Antholin's between 1599 and 1606. They deal with uncontroversial Christian themes such as conscience, prayer, and charity, though at one point Felton urged his auditory 'with patience [to] enduer and suffer scandales in the Church and not make rents and divisions for them' (Felton, 'Certaine Sermons'), a light rebuke to puritans and separatists. There are also notes of a sermon Felton delivered in 1616 at the funeral of his fellow collegian and intimate friend Roger Fenton, rector of St Stephen Walbrook, in which he observed that Pembroke College had never produced 'a more learned [man] than this: except one', a compliment to the distinguished scholar Lancelot Andrewes (CUL, MS Dd.5.31, fol. 186'v'). 
Felton was probably chaplain to Elizabeth I from the 1590s, and retained his chaplaincy under James I, preaching at the Lenten court sermons between 1606 and 1608. In 1612 Bishop Andrewes, former master of Pembroke College and an ally, learned from Felton that the current master, Samuel Harsnett, was thinking of resigning in favour of Thomas Murriell, whom Andrewes regarded as unsuitable, and he wrote in support of Felton's candidacy, adding that 'his Majestie hath formerly ben pleased to signifie his good lyking of him and to wish him some preferment' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/70/15). In the event Harsnett did not resign until 1616, whereupon, backed by the king's recommendation, Felton was elected his successor on 5 July. He appointed the young and energetic Matthew Wren as his president, and a period of administrative reform began in the college. Meanwhile Felton continued to acquire further preferment: in 1616 Bishop John King of London collated him to a canonry in St Paul's, and Lord Knyvet of Escrick presented him to the living of Great Easton in Essex; he was also briefly vicar of Blagdon, Somerset, resigning the living in 1618. Finally, and probably with the backing of George Villiers, newly created earl of Buckingham, Felton won the see of Bristol, and was consecrated at Lambeth on 14 December 1617. Immediately he was in the hunt for a richer bishopric, being mentioned as a candidate for Lincoln and then Salisbury, but in the end succeeded Andrewes as bishop of Ely on 11 March 1619, having resigned as master of Pembroke on 9 February. 
There are few signs that Felton was an energetic diocesan: though the records are sparse for his brief time at Bristol, fuller sources at Ely indicate that Felton resided in London for most of each year, though he had no court duties to detain him there, and failed to attend any of his three diocesan visitations, though he did return to Ely during the summer months of most years. There he is known to have occasionally attended the county assizes and the sewers commission, necessary duties in view of his extensive temporal powers as bishop. In London Felton lived at Ely House, though he was temporarily obliged to give it up first for the Spanish ambassador and then for the duke of Richmond, a sign of his minor status at court. 
Felton's theology and churchmanship are hard to establish with any precision. He moved among a circle of evangelically minded bishops, such as Archbishop George Abbot of Canterbury and bishops John King of London and Arthur Lake of Bath and Wells, the latter a close friend whose last confession Felton heard in May 1626. His posthumous reputation was as a dedicated preacher and 'very hospitable to all, and charitable to the poor' (Fuller, sig. Sfff'v'). Among his chaplains was the future bishop Ralph Brownrig, but also, according to Anthony Wood, the puritan George Walker, and Felton was in addition an early patron of the future presbyterian Edmund Calamy. In 1624, moreover, Felton secured the vacant lectureship of Holy Trinity, Cambridge, for John Preston, the godly master of Emmanuel College, in the face of some opposition at court, though Felton proceeded cautiously, emphasized Preston's 'professions of all conformitie', and was encouraged by assurances from the secretary of state Sir Edward Conway that 'his Majestie wilbe farre from taking ill his admittance to that lecture but will approve it and take it well' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/70/58, 164/39). Felton died in London on 5 October 1626 and was buried the next day under the communion table in St Antholin's. Under his will he left bequests to his family, including his poor kindred at Yarmouth, and $5 each to twenty poor beneficed ministers in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 9275


Felton, Sir Thomas (d. 1381), soldier and administrator, was a younger son of Sir John Felton of Litcham, Norfolk, and his wife, Sibyl. His family may have originated in Northumberland, but had been settled in north-west Norfolk since the thirteenth century. Much of Felton's wealth and advancement were secured by lengthy service in south-west France during the 1360s and 1370s, but he retained close links by marriage and connection with men in the household of Edward, the Black Prince, who shared a common background on estates close to the royal lordship of Castle Rising. From his own marriage, before 1356, to Joan, daughter of Sir Richard Walkfare, and those of his daughters, Mary to the elderly Sir Edmund Hemgrave and Sibyl to a son of William, Lord Morley, he acquired additional lands in Ingoldisthorpe, Dersingham, and Great Ryburgh, Norfolk, in Fordham, Cambridgeshire, and in Aslackby, Lincolnshire. Through the patronage of the Black Prince he also received Kirton in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, Haverfordwest in south Wales, and in 1370 the justiciarship of Chester for life. In 1379 he succeeded to the estate of his elder brother, Sir Hamo Felton, who had been a Norfolk member of parliament. Yet the establishment of his own lineage eluded him; a son, Thomas, and his sons-in-law predeceased him, and his widowed daughters became nuns. The demise of his name was among those recorded in the lost east window of the Augustinian friary at Norwich erected by Sir Thomas Erpingham in 1419 to commemorate families in East Anglia that had died out in the male line. 
Felton's military and diplomatic career followed a similar curve. He was in the prince's service from at least 1353, by when he had been knighted, was with Audley and Chandos outside Lombez during the prince's first 'chevauchee' in 1355, and was a leading knight on the second, which culminated at the battle of Poitiers in 1356. On the army's return to England he was among those few who received annuities of 40 marks. At the creation of the principality of Aquitaine in 1363 he became a prominent member of the prince's administration, acting first as steward of the household, and then as seneschal of Aquitaine at $500 a year, a post which he held, virtually without interruption, until 1377. The Chandos herald calls him one of the prince's companions and closest councillors. In this role he advised on the military intervention in Spain in 1367, and on 3 April fought in the battle of Najera, his encouragement of the vanguard noted in the Chandos herald's poem. Froissart, however, places him differently, at the preliminary skirmish at Arinez during which the Northumberland knight, Sir William Felton, whom the chronicler calls his brother, was killed, and Sir Thomas himself captured, and notes his exchange some time after midsummer at Valladolid for Arnoud d'Audrehem, the marshal of France, who had himself been captured at Najera. If Felton had indeed been captured at Najera, he was certainly free by mid-July, when he was sent on a diplomatic mission to Pere III, king of Aragon. He was to go back to Aragon in 1371 and 1373, on each occasion in an attempt to negotiate an Anglo-Aragonese alliance against Castile. 
But it was after the collapse of the prince's lordship in Aquitaine in 1369, and his later return to England in 1371, that Felton achieved his widest authority, as effective head of the English administration, along with a reputation in English and Gascon chronicles, including the life of Bertrand du Guesclin. From about 1371 one of the select group of military bannerets which had included both Knolles and Calveley, Felton's military and administrative role in France was now confirmed. In 1373 he received envoys from Pope Gregory XI, having captured a number of the latter's kinsmen in the Perigord. The defence of Aquitaine was, however, conducted on a minimal budget, and, while Felton now acted in the prince's name to retain more widely among the military community than he had ever done in his own right, he was rarely able to command a force greater than 350 men. The crisis came in 1377. Felton sought to stiffen the wavering loyalties of Gascon lords by securing the trial and execution of Guillaume Sanche de Pommiers, who had been negotiating the delivery of Fronsac to Charles V; on 1 September, while attempting to relieve the siege of Bergerac, he was himself captured at Eymet and his ransom set at 30,000 livres. Although finance was partly arranged by Gaston de Foix (Phebus), count of Bearn, Felton was still owed money for his service in Gascony, and his wife was forced to enter a parliamentary petition for aid towards his release. He was initially granted money from the ransom of the count of St Pol, and in December 1380 received 20,000 livres tournois from that of Guillaume des Bordes, who had been captured in Cherbourg in 1379. 
Having returned to England late in 1380, like other former members of the Black Prince's court Felton looked set to enjoy both favour and prominence, and was immediately contracted to lead the large army that was to relieve Thomas, earl of Buckingham, in Brittany, while in January 1381 he was elected to the Order of the Garter. But the expedition never materialized and Felton died on 26 April, while preparations were still in progress. The management of his memory and the disposal of his estates was taken in hand by his widow, Joan, who established a chantry for four chaplains in the newly built chapel of St Anne at Walsingham in 1385, and provided endowments to support his two surviving daughters, Mary and Sibyl, as nuns at the Minories in Aldgate, London, and at Barking Abbey. Mary, already the survivor of marriage to an older man, was posted as an apostate and vagabond sister in 1385, but Sibyl rose to be abbess at Barking, and in 1397 established a second chantry at the shrine of St AEthelberga there, for the souls of her father and mother. 


@@@@@


doc= 9276


Felton, Thomas (1566x8-1588), Franciscan friar and martyr, was born at Bermondsey Abbey, Surrey, the only son of John Felton (d. 1570), Catholic martyr, of Bermondsey Abbey, and his wife, a maid of honour to Mary I. His father was one of the wealthiest gentlemen in Surrey. His uncle was Edmund Felton. John Felton was executed in 1570 for nailing the papal bull 'Regnans in excelsis' excommunicating Elizabeth I to the door of the bishop of London's palace. Thomas Felton had a sister. 
As a boy, Felton served as a page to the Catholic gentlewoman Lady Elizabeth Lovel. His family sent him to be educated at the English College at Douai, then in exile at Rheims, when he was still very young. He progressed quickly, however, and received his clerical tonsure from Cardinal Louis de Guise, archbishop of Rheims, in 1583. He entered the order of Minims at Rheims, but shortly afterwards returned to England, in order to dispose of some possessions before settling at the monastery, or perhaps because he had become ill in the austere living conditions. Having recuperated, he tried to return to the continent, but was arrested and imprisoned in the Poultry compter, where he remained for about two years. He was finally released through the influence of an aunt, Mary Blount. Felton tried again to travel to France or Italy soon afterwards but was again apprehended and placed in Bridewell prison. This time Lady Lovel, by then herself a prisoner for her recusancy, was able to have him freed, but he was arrested again almost immediately while making a final attempt to flee to the continent. He was returned to Bridewell, and severely tortured, but refused to recant or submit to the authority of the queen. 
At his trial at Newgate prison, Felton proclaimed that 'he had read divers chronicles, but never read that God ordained a woman should be supreme head of the Church' (Challoner, 140). He was found guilty and sentenced to death. He may have actually left his order by this time. On 28 August 1588 aged but twenty or twenty-one, he was hanged, drawn, and quartered near Brentford, Middlesex, alongside a priest named James Claxton or Clarkson. His family had secured the promise of a pardon for him, but it may have entailed compromising conditions, since Felton refused to accept it. He was perhaps inspired to persist in his beliefs by the example of his martyr father. His name appears on a 1588 official list of 'Persons to be executed' with the note 'cul. refuse pardon' ('guilty, refused pardon'; Pollen, 290). Felton's execution was part of the large-scale acceleration in the persecution of Catholics that immediately followed the defeat of the Spanish Armada, when the issue of recusants' conflict between religious and national loyalties became especially volatile. 


@@@@@


doc= 9277


Felton, Sir William, the younger (d. 1367), soldier and administrator, was the son of Sir William Felton of Northumberland, who died about 1358, and his first wife, Isabel. Sir William Felton the elder has often been confused with his son, who seems to have been born between 'c'.1315 and 1325. In the records of the Crecy campaign the father is said to have been with the king from the landing at La Hogue until the siege at Calais. He is described as 'Sir William Felton the elder', while 'Sir William Felton, chyvaler' is named as the last member (and therefore implicitly a junior figure) in the retinue of the bishop of Durham. It is reasonable to assume that it was Sir William Felton the elder who played a distinguished part in Edward III's Scottish wars, and that it was he who was at the battle of Halidon Hill in 1333, and commanded Bamburgh and Roxburgh castles from 1334 to 1340. He was sheriff of Northumberland and governor of Newcastle in 1342-3, and was summoned to parliament in the latter year. After this it is less clear which of the two Sir Williams is intended; it was probably the elder who fought at Tournai in 1339 and at Sluys in 1340, but in the Breton campaigns of 1343 it could have been either, since the younger man's military career must have begun about this time. After Sir William the younger's service at Crecy, he next appears in Brittany with Henry, duke of Lancaster, in 1355; he is unlikely to have fought at Poitiers, as some historians have assumed, as he does not appear in any of the records of that campaign, and he was probably still in Brittany. 
Felton may have been on the Rheims campaign of 1359. He was one of the commissioners appointed to supervise the transfer of territories under the provisions of the treaty of Bretigny, signed in May 1360. He was appointed seneschal of Poitou in February 1362, and later seneschal of Limousin as well, and was lieutenant to Sir John Chandos, the king's lieutenant-general in France. He now played a leading military role in the administration of Aquitaine by Edward, prince of Wales. He defeated a group of Bretons belonging to the Great Company in Limousin in Lent 1362, and was active in securing castles and attempting to suppress the English freebooters whom the truce had deprived of a livelihood. Following the truce of Landes d'Evran between John de Montfort, duke of Brittany, and Charles, duke of Blois, in July 1363, Felton was put in charge of Bertrand du Guesclin, who had been pledged as a hostage, but du Guesclin negotiated his release within a month. Felton challenged du Guesclin with breaking his word in a letter of 24 November 1363, a charge du Guesclin rejected on 9 December. On 29 February 1364 the 'parlement' of Paris, sitting as a court of honour, freed du Guesclin from the requirement to defend his actions. On the prince's expedition to Spain in 1366-7, he was in the vanguard under the duke of Lancaster. A day or two before the battle of Najera he and his kinsman Sir Thomas Felton were with a small body of men, probably a foraging party, about 2 or 3 miles from the main army. Enrique da Trastamara's brother, Don Tello, led a surprise attack on the English camp, which was driven off with some difficulty. Don Tello's force then attacked Felton's men, who made a stand on a small mound near the village of Arinez, about 3 miles from Vitoria; Felton had 200 men-at-arms and the same number of archers, but they were greatly outnumbered. Sir William Felton and many others were killed, and the remainder were taken prisoner. The exploit passed into local folklore, and in the eighteenth century the 'Englishmen's hill' was still a landmark. Du Guesclin's biographer makes du Guesclin the prime mover in the attack, which is his revenge for Felton's challenge to his honour; but the Spanish chronicler, Pedro Lopez de Ayala, was with Enrique da Trastamara's army, and his account is likely to be more accurate. 
Felton was married; Sir Thomas Gray's erroneous claim that he married Isabella, countess of Fife, probably derives from a writ of 1359, which gives his wife's name as Isabel; Isabella, countess of Fife, was married four times, but her first husband died 'c'.1360. William Felton's heir was Sir John Felton, who was of age at his father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 9278


Felton, William (1715-1769), composer, was born at Market Drayton, Shropshire, the son of George Felton, clerk in holy orders. He was educated at Manchester grammar school and St John's College, Cambridge (BA 1736; MA 1743). He was ordained at Hereford Cathedral on 11 August 1742 and admitted vicar-choral in 1743. He married, as her first husband, Anna, daughter of the Revd Egerton Leigh, and they had a daughter. Enjoying the patronage of Velters Cornewall MP, he became rector of Moccas in 1744. In 1749 he became rector of Norton Canon, in the gift of the dean and chapter of Hereford. 
In 1744 and 1745 Felton served as a steward at the choir festivals at Hereford and Gloucester respectively. A gifted keyboard player, he published sets of concertos for organ or harpsichord in 1744 (dedicated to Velters Cornewall) and 1747, and further sets in 1752, 1755, and 1760. George Frideric Handel subscribed to the first set, though he suggested that a clergyman would be better employed writing sermons than concertos. Charles Burney acknowledged how, in youth, he was inspired both by Felton's concertos and by his performance. An andante with variations from op. 1 no. 3, performed at a subscription concert in Manchester on 23 July 1744, became popular and, supposedly, was played when the Young Pretender, Charles Edward Stuart, fled from Manchester in 1745. 
In 1749 Felton revived the Musical Society in Hereford, which, founded in 1723, had ceased activity ten years later because of the decaying state of the college hall. Felton gave the society new life by establishing its meetings in 'Frank Woodward's Great Room'. Partly amateur, partly professional, the concerts were so successful that in 1750 the custos (senior vicar) and vicars approved fund-raising for the restoration of the college hall. Entirely rebuilt, it was ready in 1753 for the evening concerts of the triennial festival meeting. Custos Phelps and the vicars expressed their gratitude to Felton for the restoration of their hall, 'which has since afforded great accomodation to the College... and to the general community on numberless public and private occasions' (Hereford Cathedral Library, MS R. 12. XIV). On the death of Custos Phelps in 1754 Felton's expectation of election to the office was disappointed because, he contested, of irregularities in the conduct of the election. The subsequent dispute, 'Waring v. Felton', ended with Felton's withdrawal of his case. Out of favour, Felton was given a minor canonry in 1756. On the death of Custos Waring in the summer of 1769, 'the Vicars offered the first-fruits of their freedom to Mr. Felton' (ibid.), and he at last became custos. In the same year he was appointed chaplain to the widowed princess of Wales. In November he was nominated to the vacant benefice of Preston and Blakemere. He died at Hereford on 6 December 1769. He was buried in the lady chapel at Hereford; there is a large stone to his memory in the bishop's cloister with the inscription 'Vir animose justus et rerum musicarum peritissimus' ('A just and courageous man, supreme in the art of music'). 


@@@@@


doc= 9279


Fenn, Ellenor, Lady Fenn (1744-1813), educationist and children's author, was born in Westhorpe, Suffolk, on 12 March 1744, the third child of Sheppard Frere (1712-1780) of Thwaite, Suffolk, and his wife, Susanna (1709/10-1779), daughter of John Hatley of London. As a child she was 'of strong original understanding and great accomplishment' (Festing, 294). On 1 January 1766 she married the antiquary John Fenn (1739-1794) and settled at Hill House, East Dereham, Norfolk. They had no children but raised an orphaned heiress, Miss Andrews, and frequently looked after their nephews and nieces, particularly William Frere, who described 'looking up to my uncle and aunt as parents' (W. Frere, ix). 
Ellenor's interest in children's literature developed during the 1770s as she wrote, illustrated, and bound manuscript books for her nieces and nephews. She was influenced by Anna Letitia Barbauld's 'Lessons for Children' (1778) and contacted the London publisher John Marshall, who issued most of Ellenor's works from 1782 to 1812 either anonymously or under the pseudonyms Mrs Teachwell or Mrs Lovechild. Works by Solomon Lovechild and Timothy Teachwell are sometimes attributed to her, but these attributions are doubtful. As most of her books were undated and passed through several editions it is difficult to determine the order of publication. Early titles from 1782-3 provided instructions in manners: 'School Occurrences', 'Juvenile Correspondence', and 'School Dialogues for Boys'. Her most famous title, 'Cobwebs to Catch Flies' (1783-4), contained dialogues for teaching reading. A copy was received in the royal nursery, and it went through many editions in Britain and America until the 1870s. 
Ellenor was particularly interested in educating girls, and many titles were issued in the series 'Mrs Teachwell's Library for Young Ladies'. Her 'Female Guardian' (1784) contained moral anecdotes about pupils at a school for girls and included a critique of Horace Walpole's 'Castle of Otranto'. She published one book of fables (1783), with explanatory 'morals' as dialogues between mother and child, but usually disapproved of imaginative works, arguing 'there is no need for invention, the world is full of wonders' ('The Rational Dame', 1790?). Likewise her 'Fairy Spectator' has been described as a 'mean-spirited anti-fairy tale' (Jackson, 147) in which the heroine realizes that her beautiful dreams are illusory. 
Ellenor was not only concerned with writing for children but also with providing their mothers with the materials and the self-confidence to educate them. 'The Child's Grammar' (1799?) was 'designed to enable ladies who may not have attended to the subject themselves to instruct their children' (title-page). Her 'Rational Sports' (1783?) contained advice about how mothers 'may inform the minds of their little people' (title-page). She likewise compiled a number of games and other teaching aids, many of which have been lost. 'The Art of Teaching in Sport' (1785?) was designed to accompany 'a set of toys, for enabling ladies to instill the rudiments of spelling, reading, grammar, and arithmetic, under the idea of amusement' (title-page). 'The Mother's Grammar' (1798?) was accompanied by an elaborate 'Game of Grammar'. She also advertised a series of books, 'Schemes for teaching under the idea of amusement', including 'The Infant's Delight' to teach reading and 'The Figure Scheme, or, Figures Rendered Pleasant for Children'. She realized the importance of pictures as an aid to learning and published several volumes of woodcuts for children, and seems to have maintained a close practical contact with her publisher in the layout and production of her works, which contain large types with wide margins. She received no payment for her works, merely free copies to distribute to friends. 
Ellenor broke with Marshall in 1795 (possibly over his dealings with Hannah More's 'Cheap Repository' tracts). Her new titles were thereafter published in Norwich ('The Village Matron', 1795, and 'The Short History of Insects', 1796) or by Elizabeth Newbery and her successors in London ('The Infant's Friend', 1797, 'The Friend to Mothers', 1799, and 'Family Miscellany', 1805). Marshall continued to publish editions of her established works. 
John Fenn was knighted in 1787 and served as high sheriff of Norfolk in 1791-2. His death, on 14 February 1794, left Ellenor financially secure, enabling her to spend her remaining years carrying out good works in her locality. In 1785 she had been the prime mover in establishing a Sunday school, which by 1788 was teaching over 100 poor children; she was also among 'the most respectable Dereham ladies' who taught the girls (Boston and Puddy, 291). Later she introduced a needlework school and revived the trade of tow-spinning to give poor women an income. Borrow portrays her in old age as the 'Lady Bountiful' of Dereham, 'generous and kind, who loved to visit the sick, leaning on her gold-headed cane' (Borrow, 17). She died at Dereham on 1 November 1813, and was buried at Finningham church, Suffolk. 
Ellenor Fenn's works were popular and well reviewed in her day and regularly reprinted until the 1860s. However, her formulaic output, her disapproval of imaginative stories, her insistence on class distinctions, and her determination 'to correct some of the foibles incident to girls' (Mrs Teachwell, 'Female Guardian', title-page) have not endeared her to twentieth-century critics. Darton considered that she had 'something of the professional moralist or even hack in her' (Darton, 163). Muir includes her in 'a monstrous regiment' of women authors 'who had no preconceptions beyond turning out persuasive didacticisms of the sort that publishers could sell' (Muir, 84). Jackson refers to the 'oppressive discipline and intense moralizing' of her works (Jackson, 147). Yet she had humour and realized that the educational process must be enjoyable to both adult and child. Above all she had the gift of communicating with children at their own level. To that extent her chosen epithets of Lovechild and Teachwell were appropriate. Her will, proved on 29 December 1813, left the bulk of her substantial estate to her favourite nephew, William Frere, with smaller bequests to her remaining nephews, nieces, and godchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 9280


Fenn, Humphrey (1543/4-1634), Church of England clergyman, matriculated as a sizar from Queens' College, Cambridge, on 12 November 1568, and graduated BA in 1573. Nothing is known of his background, which was probably comparatively humble. Having moved to Peterhouse, he proceeded MA in 1576 and began his ministry in Northampton in the same year, immediately establishing a nonconformist reputation. He was imprisoned and, although the inhabitants petitioned the queen on his behalf attesting to the quality of his preaching, it seems that he did not return to the town on his release. 
On 21 February 1578 Fenn succeeded Anthony Fletcher as vicar of Holy Trinity, Coventry. By this time he was married, a daughter being baptized at Holy Trinity in July 1578; nothing certain is known of his wife. In Coventry he became associated with Thomas Cartwright (1535-1603) and the growing presbyterian movement. A classis was established in Warwickshire around 1583, headed by Cartwright and Fenn, both of whom enjoyed the patronage of the earl of Leicester. At the request of the London puritans he accompanied the earl to represent their grievances to the queen. When Whitgift's three articles were issued in 1583 he refused to subscribe and was suspended. An account of his examination from a manuscript of Roger Morrice ('c'.1628-1702) was included by Benjamin Brook in his 'Lives of the Puritans' (1831). Fenn was replaced in Coventry by a Welshman called Griffen, but was restored to his vicarage shortly after 14 July 1585 through the intercession of Leicester. In the same year he accompanied the earl to the Netherlands as a chaplain. 
In 1590 Fenn was again suspended, as a result of his active participation in the Warwickshire classis and his support for the puritan 'Book of Discipline', to which he, Cartwright, and ten other ministers in the county had subscribed in 1588. He was committed to the Fleet prison and, refusing to take the oath 'ex officio', was imprisoned for contempt and deprived of his living. His successor, Richard Eaton, was instituted on 12 January 1591. In May that year the attorney-general exhibited a bill against Cartwright, Fenn, and seven others in Star Chamber, and on 13 May they made their first appearance before the court. The defendants denied that in their 'associations' they exercised any jurisdiction or meddled with sedition -- a defence which Fenn steadfastly maintained. They were remanded without bail, although James VI of Scotland interceded (12 June) for their release. By December 1591 the case against them had reached stalemate and they petitioned for their release on bail. A further petition in April 1592 was successful. By the autumn Fenn had returned to Warwickshire and was petitioning to be allowed to preach. 
It is not certain that Fenn and his co-defendants were ever completely cleared of the charges against them and the extent to which he was subsequently able to resume his ministry is unclear. He was not restored to the vicarage of Holy Trinity, but Julines Herring (1582-1644) studied divinity with Fenn after leaving Cambridge and he appeared on one list of proposed representatives for the 1604 Hampton Court conference. The Humphrey Fenn appointed to the Sunday lectureship at St John the Baptist, Bablake, Coventry, on 24 April 1624 was his son, an Oxford MA born in 1582. In 1626 or soon after 'old Mr. Fenn' joined with the mayor and leading citizens in inviting Samuel Clarke (1599-1683), the martyrologist, to become a lecturer at Coventry ('Lives', 5-6). 
Fenn's will, written in 1631 when he was eighty-seven and had been a preacher for fifty-five years, was prefaced by a profession of his faith declaring that the Church of England maintained 'a shameful schism against all the reformed churches of the gospel' and endorsing a presbyterian system of governance for the church. He died in Coventry early in 1634 and was buried there on 8 February in Holy Trinity churchyard. A fortnight later Archbishop William Laud received from the bishop of Coventry and Lichfield a copy of the controversial preface, which also circulated in manuscript among the godly before its publication as 'The Last Will and Testament with the Profession of Faith of Humphrey Fenn' (1641). Fenn's wife apparently predeceased him; she may be the Anne Fenn buried at Holy Trinity on 27 January 1631. His probate inventory shows that he died a comparatively wealthy man. 


@@@@@


doc= 9281


Fenn, James (c.1540-1584), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born at Montacute, near Yeovil, Somerset, became a chorister of New College, Oxford, and was elected to a scholarship at Corpus Christi College (31 July 1554), and a fellowship on 26 November 1558. Fenn graduated BA on 22 November 1559, but was stripped of his academic standing for refusing to subscribe to the royal supremacy. Forced to leave Corpus Christi, he took up a teaching position at Gloucester Hall instead. When expelled from Oxford in November 1560 he acted as a private tutor in Somerset, where he also married and had two children, Francis and John. Following the death of his wife he became steward to Sir Nicholas Poyntz, a Catholic gentleman at whose suggestion he left the country to study for the priesthood. 
Fenn arrived at the English College, then at Rheims, on 5 June 1579, was priested at Chalons-sur-Marne (1 April 1580), and returned to England a month later (10 May). He was apprehended at Brympton, Somerset, so was presumably working from Poyntz's household. He was sent to Ilchester gaol and, although not yet known to be a priest, was loaded with irons. The council ordered him to be brought to London where, following an examination by Walsingham, he was committed to the Marshalsea by September 1581. Fenn continued his pastoral work in prison and seems to have had 'a particular charity for pirates, whom he visited as much as he could' (Challoner, 91). When one of his penitents became Catholic, Fenn was identified as a priest and was moved to close confinement in the Tower on 4 September 1584. He was indicted the following day and was accused of conspiring to assassinate the queen. Fenn was condemned to death and was executed by hanging, drawing, and quartering at Tyburn on 12 February 1584, together with four other priests. 'His quarters were disposed on four gates of the city, and his head upon London Bridge' (Challoner, 93). He was beatified in 1929 by Pope Pius XI. 
Fenn's two brothers were also priests, John Fenn and Robert Fenn BCL, who had to resign his fellowship of New College in 1562. Gibbons's 'Concertatio' commented that Robert Fenn 'ob Catholicae veritatis testimonium, exilium, carceres, vincula, et cruciatus immanes constantissime perpessus est' ('in testifying to the Catholic faith, he was subjected to exile and imprisonment and most frequently bound and tortured'; Gibbons, 410). 


@@@@@


doc= 9282


Fenn, John (1535-1615), Roman Catholic priest and translator, was born at Montacute in Somerset. He was brother to James Fenn and Robert Fenn, who both also became priests. After a time as a chorister at Wells Cathedral he was sent to Winchester College in 1547 and went on to become a fellow of New College, Oxford, in 1550, where he studied civil law. In the reign of Queen Mary he was appointed master of the grammar school at Bury St Edmunds where he established a great reputation for himself, but at the accession of Elizabeth he was ejected from the post for his religious beliefs. In 1562 he was also deprived of his New College fellowship for the same reasons and sought refuge in Flanders. He matriculated at the University of Louvain on 28 March 1564 and was still listed as a student there in 1570. He is listed as a priest by 1574. 
Fenn's deep knowledge of Latin resulted in a number of translations of contemporary works into English, beginning in 1568 with 'A Learned and Very Eloquent Treatie, Written in Latin', a translation of Bishop Osorius's treatise against Walter Haddon. In this and later translations of works on the rosary and the life of St Catherine of Siena he 'transforms his original into something which is purely English' (Southern, 122). Fenn also translated works of John Fisher into Latin and the catechism of the Council of Trent into English. Once a priest he became chaplain to Sir William Stanley's regiment, which was fighting for the Spanish in the Netherlands. In 1583 he co-edited, with the Jesuit John Gibbons, 'Concertatio ecclesiae catholicae in Anglia', an important book that stressed 'the use of torture and other forms of cruelty on the Catholic priests by the English authorities' (Milward, 68). This brought about an angry reaction from the English authorities and prompted Lord Burghley to publish an official reply. 
Fenn was recorded in 1601 as being resident as chaplain at the monastery of St Ursula, a house of canonesses at Louvain, but in 1609 he was appointed chaplain to the sisters of St Monica's, a newly founded house of English Augustinian canonesses in the same city. There he remained until his death. He was fully involved in the life of the monastery, and indeed lent it a large amount of money that it was unable to repay, but from which he released the canonesses. The sisters provided him with a room which he used to accommodate his large library. His time as chaplain also provided him with an opportunity to use his childhood musical gifts and he taught the sisters singing. He died on the feast of St John the Evangelist, his patron, 27 December 1615; 'having been a long time blind and decrepit, he lived a true sincere man one of the old stamp, and served God faithfully' (Hamilton, 1.39). He left the sisters all his possessions, including his library, and was buried in the cloister of the monastery. 


@@@@@


doc= 9283


Fenn, Sir John (1739-1794), antiquary, was born on 12 November 1739 in Norwich Cathedral close, the eldest son of John Fenn (1707-1741), a surgeon, and his wife, Mary ('b'. 1712), daughter of Jacob Emerson of Gressenhall. After his father's death, his mother moved to North Elmham in 1743, and to East Dereham in 1746. Fenn was educated at the grammar schools of Scarning and later Botesdale, where he was befriended by the elderly antiquary Thomas Martin of Palgrave. At seventeen he was admitted pensioner to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1761 and proceeded MA in 1764, when he was also elected to a fellowship. 
At university Fenn became friends with John Norris, son of the antiquary Anthony Norris, and with John Frere. In 1763 he began courting Ellenor Frere (1744-1813) ['see 'Fenn, Ellenor, Lady Fenn], John's sister and daughter of Sheppard Frere and Susanna Hatley; they married on 1 January 1766. She was subsequently the author of many children's books, writing under the pseudonyms of Mrs Teachwell and Mrs Lovechild. After their marriage the couple lived at Hill House, East Dereham. They had no children, but brought up an orphaned heiress, Miss Andrews, and later their nephew William Frere (1775-1836). Fenn led an active civic life, serving as commissioner of the land tax in 1765, deputy lieutenant in 1766, director of the local house of industry in 1775, and a magistrate from 1776. He was also a friend of the Greek translator Robert Potter, and compiled a manuscript history of Potter's school at Scarning. 
Between 1768 and 1775 Fenn and Antony Norris helped William Whittingham to publish the remaining parts of Charles Parkin's continuation of Francis Blomefield's 'History of Norfolk'. In 1769 he started corresponding with the antiquaries James Granger and Richard Gough, and in January 1771 was elected to the Society of Antiquaries, shortly before the death of Thomas Martin, his mentor. 
Martin had died insolvent, and in an attempt to prevent the piecemeal sale of his library Fenn assisted William Whittingham in listing and valuing the collection on behalf of the executors. He made an offer for the whole of $500, but was outbid by John Worth, a Diss apothecary, early in 1772. Thereafter he assisted Worth in cataloguing many of the manuscripts prior to their public sale in 1773 and 1774; in return he was given choice items and permitted to buy others privately. Likewise after Worth's death in December 1774 Fenn performed a similar task for his executors. During this period he acquired the Paston letters, which had been discovered by Francis Blomefield and were subsequently acquired by Martin. In 1784 Fenn wrote a biography of Martin (published in 1904), and published 'Three Chronological Tables, Exhibiting a State of the Society of Antiquaries of London'. He also contributed periodically to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
Between 1777 and 1782 Fenn unsuccessfully attempted to interest the Society of Antiquaries in publishing some of the historic letters in his possession. There was plenty of encouragement from individual members such as Gough, Horace Walpole, Edward King, and Sir John Cullum, and so he decided to publish the most interesting of the Paston letters himself, as a parallel text, giving a transcription and modern translation. The first two volumes of Fenn's 'Original Letters' appeared in January 1787, and were dedicated to the king. The work was a literary sensation, quickly selling out, and warranting a reprint, which included additional notes by George Steevens. The reception also encouraged the editor to prepare two further volumes. The originals of those already published were exhibited to the public at the Society of Antiquaries, and when George III expressed an interest in them in May 1787, Fenn bound and presented them to him. In return he received a knighthood. 
Fenn employed a young amanuensis, William Dalton, to help with the transcriptions for the remaining volumes. Thus the editor was able to publish a third and a fourth volume in May 1789, and had made substantial progress with a fifth. However, his progress was set back during 1792 and 1793 by his appointment as sheriff of Norfolk, an office he characteristically undertook with great zeal. The text of the last volume was complete and Fenn was working on an introduction and history of the Paston family when he suffered an apoplectic stroke. He died on 14 February 1794 at home at Hill House, and was buried in Finningham, Suffolk, where there is a mural monument. The manuscript remained with Lady Fenn until her death in November 1813, and passed to William Frere who published it in 1823. 
In 1865 doubts were cast on the authenticity of Fenn's edition of the Paston letters, in the 'Fortnightly Review', owing to the disappearance of the originals. The rediscovery of many of the letters gave rise to a detailed investigation by the Society of Antiquaries. Fenn was shown to have been a competent, rigorous, and accurate editor, although unsurprisingly he had misdated some of the letters. His transcriptions were used as the basis for James Gairdner's editions between 1872 and 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 9284


Fenn, Joseph Finch (1819-1884), Church of England clergyman, was born on 3 October 1819 at Travancore, India, son of the Revd Joseph Fenn, later minister of Blackheath Park Chapel, Kent. He was educated at Blackheath School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1838, where he graduated BA as eighteenth wrangler in 1842, MA in 1845, and BD in 1877. He was ordained a deacon in 1845, and priest in the following year. He held a fellowship of his college from 1844 until 1847, when he was presented to the college living of Stotfold, Bedfordshire. On 13 January 1848 he married Mary Jane (died 1870), eldest surviving daughter of Samuel Bignold, mayor of Norwich and MP for the city (1854-7). They had at least two sons. 
In 1860 Fenn was appointed by the trustees to the perpetual curacy of Christ Church, Cheltenham, on the resignation of Archibald Boyd. In 1877 he became chaplain to C. J. Ellicott, bishop of Gloucester and Bristol, and in 1879 an honorary canon of Gloucester; in 1880 he was elected one of the two proctors in convocation for the united diocese. 
Though a good scholar and of very extensive reading, Fenn published little, devoting himself to his parochial duties, including the careful preparation of his sermons. Some of these, forming a volume entitled 'Lenten Teachings, 1877-84', were published after his death. He kept clear of the controversies dividing the Church of England, but was active in charitable work in Cheltenham, and was the eloquent promoter of the free library system in the town. Latterly he became a strong supporter of total abstinence from alcoholic liquor. He was generally regarded as an evangelical, but was not a party man. He supported both the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and the Church Missionary Society, and had a leaning to the old high-church section of the established church. His Cheltenham parishioners persuaded him to decline an offer of the benefice of St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, in 1877. The church of St Stephen, Tivoli, in the district of Christ Church, was built mainly by his exertions to provide for an increasing population, and he made substantial contributions towards the undertaking. After the death of his first wife he married Mina Frederica. Fenn died at his home, Christchurch Lodge, Cheltenham, on 22 July 1884, and was buried in his family vault in the churchyard of Leckhampton, near Cheltenham. A large memorial brass was erected in Christ Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 9285


Fennell, James (1766-1816), actor, was born in London on 11 December 1766. His father, John Fennell, was in the treasury department of the navy pay office in London; his mother was a former Miss Brady. James went to school first at Bow under the Revd Dr French and then to Eton College. After a trip to France he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, matriculating in Michaelmas 1784. His life at the university was extravagant. Having abandoned the idea of taking orders he entered Lincoln's Inn in November 1786. In consequence of gambling debts he mortgaged to his father the money to which he was entitled, and, when no further allowance could be obtained, in June 1787 went to Edinburgh with a view to becoming a professional actor. John Jackson, the manager of the Theatre Royal, engaged him as an amateur. His first appearance, under the name of Cambray (from the resemblance of his own name to that of Fenelon, archbishop of Cambrai), was as Othello. He played six times in Edinburgh with some success, and accepted an engagement for the following season. After returning to London, he appeared at Covent Garden on 12 October 1787 as Othello, and acted in other plays. Thomas Harris, the manager, offered to engage him and pay his forfeit to Jackson, but he returned to Edinburgh in time for the season of 1788 and worked diligently and conscientiously. Among his friends in Edinburgh were Henry Mackenzie, the author of 'The Man of Feeling', and John Home the author of 'Douglas'. He lived for a while with James Bruce, an explorer of Africa, and claimed to have helped him to write his 'Travels'. He was to play Jaffier in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', the part of Pierre having been assigned to an actor named Woods. A proposal that the parts should be exchanged led to a riot in the theatre and a bitter controversy; Fennell offered at one point to reveal a 'scene of villainy'. Edinburgh lawyers took part against him, and addressed a letter to the manager (15 July 1788) signed by Henry Erskine (dean of faculty) and 182 advocates and writers. Fennell took legal action but ultimately agreed to a compromise, which involved payment to him of $500. He was also invited to play once more at the theatre, and appeared accordingly as Othello. 
Fennell gave one more performance in Edinburgh and then went to London, where he is said to have edited the 'Theatrical Guardian', of which six weekly numbers are believed to have appeared in London in March and April 1791. In August 1791 he played Othello at York under Tate Wilkinson. Soon afterwards, on his arrival in London, he was arrested for debt. He was still helped by his father, who with other members of his family had disowned him when he took to the stage. He then acted at Richmond, where he brought out his 'Linda and Clara, or, The British Officer', a comedy in three acts, subsequently enlarged to five, and published in 1791. While in London he pursued literary and scientific schemes. A trip to Paris in 1791 led to the publication of 'A Review of the Proceedings at Paris during the Last Summer' in 1792. On 10 May 1792 he married Miss H. B. Porter, the third daughter of Dr Porter. 
Soon afterwards (1793) Fennell accepted an offer from Thomas Wignell, the manager of the Philadelphia theatre, and started for America. In 1794 he was the idol of the literary youth of Philadelphia. Between 1797 and 1806 he acted at many theatres in New York, Boston, and elsewhere. He was popular and successful, and while his best role was thought to be Othello he played a wide range of tragic parts. He gave readings and recitations at the College Hall, Philadelphia, and for a time kept an academy at Charlestown, Massachusetts. In 1814 he established salt works near New London, Connecticut. He invested heavily and fell into debt, and was forced to resort to all sorts of work, including manual labour. He also tried to establish in Philadelphia a school similar to Eton or Westminster. He wrote some verse epistles, one of which was printed, and composed an 'Apology' for his life (1814). In a pitiable preface he speaks of poverty, and of his 'drooping family'. Fennell was a talented and remarkably handsome man, over 6 feet in height, with light complexion and hair, and light grey eyes. It was said that he never paid his bills in Paris or Philadelphia, that he lived by fraud, and passed his life between a palace and a prison. In 1815, at the Chesnut Street Theatre, Philadelphia, he was allowed to attempt Lear, but his memory was gone. He died on 13 June 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 9286


Fennell, John Greville (1807-1885), artist and writer on angling, was born at sea between Ireland and England. He began his artistic career by winning the silver medal offered by the duke of Sussex for a drawing of Hercules. He was a student at the school of engraving run by the Finden brothers, and met Hablot K. Browne (Phiz). As a young man Fennell found his humorous paintings sold well but later in life he was fonder of landscapes. In some of these, however, he was very careless, and his work was always uneven. He drew pictures of the tournament at Eglinton Castle for the 'Illustrated London News'. His interest in natural history displayed itself chiefly in observations on the habits of fish and waterside birds. These he carried on while angling, of which he was an excellent practitioner. He was especially fond of the Thames and his writings helped to popularize coarse fishing there. He was a member of the 'Field' staff from the start of that paper in 1853, and, as Greville F., wrote regularly on fishing subjects; he was also a frequent contributor, as Creel, to the 'Fishing Gazette' and other sporting papers on angling and outdoor pursuits. In 1870 he wrote 'The Book of the Roach', an exhaustive treatise on angling for that fish. He also wrote 'The Rail and the Rod', a guidebook to the angling resorts within 60 to 80 miles of London which could be reached by railway. 
Fennell was never so happy as when relating to a circle of friends reminiscences of Dickens, Thackeray, Douglas Jerrold, Mackay, and Harrison Ainsworth, with all of whom he had been on intimate terms. Indeed he wrote the angling portions of Dickens's 'Dictionary of the Thames'. He was a freemason. He lived long at Barnes, and late in life at Henley-on-Thames. Fennell died suddenly at his home, Jessamine Cottage, Church Street, Rotherfield Greys, near Henley, on 13 January 1885. He was buried in Trinity churchyard, Henley. His widow, Sarah Florence Savage Fennell, and their daughters survived him. His epitaph from 'Isaiah' was appropriate: 'The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9287


Fenner, Dudley (c.1558-1587), Church of England clergyman and Calvinist theologian, was a native of Kent, said by the puritan printer Robert Waldegrave to have been 'heir of great possessions' (Fenner, 'Certain Godly and Learned Treatises', Waldegrave's Epistle). He matriculated fellow-commoner of Peterhouse in 1575, but left Cambridge without taking a degree, in his own words, 'pluckte from the university as from the sweetest brestes of the nurse' ('DNB'), for reasons unknown but which may have had to do with the puritanism which soon manifested itself. No graduate, Fenner was the most learned of the 'godly ministers' of his generation, a protege of Thomas Cartwright whose posthumous reputation was boosted both by his premature death and by his avant-garde Ramism; for the profound impact of the logical and rhetorical method of Ramus 
(Pierre de la Rame; died 1572)
, which was advanced as a substitute for Aristotelianism, is evident in everything that he published. He is said to have preached in Cranbrook, Kent, in the mid-1570s, but there is no trace of his presence in that well-documented parish before 1583. The intervening years were spent in Antwerp, where Fenner shared a ministry to the Merchant Adventurers with first Walter Travers and then Cartwright. There is no evidence that he was episcopally ordained, and, like Travers, he may have received a form of presbyterian ordination. 
Cranbrook was a populous, industrial parish where the vicar, Richard Fletcher, found it convenient to placate a vociferous and powerful puritan element by employing a succession of radical curates: the preacher-printer John Strowd, Thomas Ely (or Hely), and, finally, Fenner. Strowd and his supporters had clashed violently with Fletcher and his son, the future Bishop Richard Fletcher of London. But when in 1584 a critic of the Kentish puritan ministers (probably Reginald Scot) accused Fenner of making 'broile and contention' in Cranbrook (Peel, 1.238-41), the charge was denied. The nature of the 'modus vivendi' with Fletcher was that Fenner had total charge of the Saturday lecture. Within months of his arrival on this scene, Archbishop Whitgift was pressing subscription to his three articles, and Fenner became (with Josias Nicholls of Eastwell) the ringleader of seventeen non-subscribing Kentish ministers in a series of encounters with the archdeacon, with Whitgift in person, and with the privy council. The ministers had a favourable hearing from the council, thanks perhaps to the absence of some of its more senior members and the undue influence of its clerk, Robert Beale, who was highly sympathetic to their cause, and Whitgift was asked that they be treated 'with moderation' and 'conscionable favour' (Fenner, 'A Defence of the Godlie Ministers', sigs. C2'v'-3). This was in contrast to their reception by the archbishop who, in the presence of many gentlemen, railed on the ministers as 'boyes, princockes, and will you teache all others?' (ibid., sig. G'v'). 'By my traweth, Mr Fenner, youe are as bad as the worst... Can you tell mee, I was a preacher before some of you weare borne' (Sheffield City Library, Wentworth Woodhouse MSS, tracts 32, no. 16). The ministers were suspended, and Fenner was one of a small minority of non-subscribers, nationally, whose suspension would never be lifted. Presently, he was the author of a formal petition to the lower house of convocation, ostensibly 'tending to reconciliation' ('A Parte of a Register', 323). This was taken to the upper house but not heard of again. 
At about this time, Fenner was singled out for a searching examination before Whitgift, conducted on the 'ex officio' oath, which, unlike some other puritans, he did not refuse. Many of the seventeen articles on which he was charged concerned his presbyterianism: that he should have taught that there ought to be no archbishops in the church; that the 'whole government' of the church consisted of pastors, doctors, elders, deacons, and widows; that 'the people' ought to choose their own ministers; that there should be an equality of ministers. But in the final and most interesting article, Fenner was charged with having baptized children with such unusual names as Joy Again, From Above, More Fruit, and Dust. In response, Fenner gave a detailed account of the circumstances in which some of these names had been used. More Fruit was the name he had chosen for his own daughter, 'that I mighte have her to carye a fruitfull remembrance of thestymacyon I made that after a deare sonne taken to the Lorde he gave me more fruicte by my wife which I scarsely looked for' (Northamptonshire Record Office, MS F. (M).P.62). More Fruit made her will on 8 April 1602 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/99, sig. 25), another daughter, Faint Not, on 16 February 1604 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/104, sig. 85). According to Fenner, the vicar, Richard Fletcher, raised no objection to these names, which may reveal more about the politics of Cranbrook than about Fletcher's views on the matter. More than once in his published writings Fenner defended this practice, which William Camden was to mention critically in his 'Remains Concerning Britain', and Ben Jonson to parody in his plays. It was the first duty of a father to present his child for baptism 'and there to give a name in the mother tongue which may have a godly signification for that work' (Fenner, 'Certain Godly and Learned Treatises', 49). A more common practice of the godly was to use such biblical names as Samuel, or Barnabas, or Timothy, which Fenner pointed out were meaningful in the original Hebrew or Greek, but not in English. Fenner's eclectic and even deviant practice seems to have been confined to the Kent and Sussex weald, and to Northamptonshire, where it may have been introduced by John Penry, another Peterhouse man. But whether he was its inventor is not certain. Thomas Ely, who preceded Fenner in the Cranbrook pulpit, moved on to Warbelton in Sussex, where about half the children born in the next few years received such names, many more than were so baptized in Cranbrook. 
A tradition that Fenner was imprisoned and eventually forced to subscribe runs counter to his own statement, dated 12 June 1585, that after his suspension he received no censure 'or other paine in that respect' (Peel, 1.296). It must have been soon after recording this formal 'testimony' that Fenner withdrew into voluntary exile in the Netherlands, becoming preacher to the English merchants at Middelburg. He could count on the protection of the earl of Leicester, who arrived in the Netherlands at the same time, and to whom he had dedicated in 1583 an anti-Catholic polemic, 'An Answere unto the Confutation of John Nichols his Recantation', which acknowledged 'many incoragements in those things which are good' (Fenner, 'An Answere', epistle). To the Merchant Adventurers he wrote of 'howe much I am bound unto your worshippes, who have not onely orderly called me to the woorke of the ministerie amongest you, but more liberallie entertayned mee... then any of the lights whiche have heretofore shined unto you' (Fenner, 'The Song of Songs', 1594, Epistle). That was in the preface to Fenner's metrical version of the 'Song of Songs', in which he states that it was the custom of the merchants 'ordinarilie, eare you depart from the table, both at noone and at night, [to] admonishe your selves by singing some spiritual songs' (ibid.), which were then expounded by the minister. 
In Middelburg, Fenner lived in close proximity to Richard Schilders, who at this time was beginning to take over from Robert Waldegrave as, so to say, printer-in-ordinary to the organized puritan movement, and Schilders was busy printing Fenner's own prolific output: 'The Artes of Logicke and Retorike' (five editions between 1584 and 1588), an exposition of the ten commandments, a catechism, a treatise on the sacraments, a little book on 'lawfull and unlawfull recreations' (the unlawful included mixed dancing, dicing, 'wanton pictures, vain gestures'; Fenner, 'A Short and Profitable Treatise', 1590), and a Parthian shot, detailing the bitter experiences of 1584: 'A Defence of the Godlie Ministers, Against the Slaunders of D. Bridges' (1586). Fenner's treatise on logic and rhetoric was a popularization of the system devised by Ramus, 'plainlie set foorth in the English tounge, easie to be learned and practised', together with godly 'examples': an order for the godly household, an interpretation of the Lord's prayer, an exegesis of the epistle to 'Philemon'. The argument was advanced on all occasions by means of binary opposites, the Ramist procedure: 'the prayer it selfe hath two partes' (Fenner, 'The resolution and interpretation of the Lordes prayer', 'The artes of Logicke and Retorike'); 'the entrance to this Epistle hath two partes' (Fenner, 'The epistle to Philemon', ibid.). Fenner's treatise was reprinted in the seventeenth century without the 'examples'. It was not difficult to be a Ramist when it came to expounding 'the whole doctrine of the sacramentes': 'The sacraments are two: Baptism, The Lords Supper'. 
Fenner's major literary achievement was a substantial work of Calvinist theology, 'Sacra theologia, sive, Veritas quae est secundum pietatem' (1585), more Ramism. All theology was divisible into two parts: 'de Deo', and 'de actionibus Dei'. Further editions were published at Geneva in 1586 and 1604, with a dedication to the earls of Warwick and Leicester. There is internal evidence that Thomas Cartwright exercised some oversight in this venture, and an epistle from Cartwright refers to the shared ministry in Antwerp. Another preface acknowledges the contribution of Josias Nicholls, the only other Kentish incumbent to baptize his own children with such names as Above-hope and Suretonhie. Manuscript copies exist of 'Sacra theologia' in English translation, but 'The Sacred Doctrine of Divinitie', printed by Schilders in 1599 and with a preface dated 1 January 1589 making reference to Fenner as having died three years earlier, was not by Fenner but was the work of Sir Henry Finch. Since Finch was Nicholls's parishioner at Eastwell, the relationship of these two works may deserve further investigation. Fenner's 'Sacra theologia' was a book which lasted. A copy of the 1585 edition in Peterborough Cathedral Library (deposited in the Cambridge University Library) was once the property of White Kennet, bishop of Peterborough from 1718 to 1728, while the Cambridge University Library copy of the 1586 edition belonged to John Hacket, post-Restoration bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. 
Fenner died in Middelburg in 1587. His widow, Joan, married the celebrated Cambridge Calvinist William Whitaker, and, after Whitaker's death, Josias Nicholls. In a posthumous edition of Fenner's works of practical divinity, published in Edinburgh in 1592, Robert Waldegrave, now king's printer in Scotland, wrote of 'one whome the Church of God in this age could have hardliest spared: he ended his testimonie in this life being under thirtie yeres of age' (Fenner, 'Certain Godly and Learned Treatises', Waldegrave's Epistle). The presbyterian and anti-prelatical polemics attributed to Fenner (including 'A Counter-Poyson, Modestlie Written for the Time') were reprinted in 1593 in 'A Parte of a Register'. 


@@@@@


doc= 9288


Fenner, Sir Edward (d. 1612), judge, the son of John Fenner of Crawley, and Elinor Goring, was descended from a well-established Sussex family. After a period at New Inn, he entered the Middle Temple in 1557 and was called to the bar. In 1576 he was made bencher of his inn. He was autumn reader in the same year and in 1577 he was created serjeant-at-law. Alongside his legal career he represented Lewes in the parliament of 1571, and as member for New Shoreham he played an active part in that of 1572. In 1590 he was made a judge of the court of king's bench, and played his part in several state trials, including those of the earl of Essex and the earl of Southampton. He is known to have married and had children. He was knighted in 1603. Age began to take its toll in the early years of the seventeenth century, and in 1608 he was pensioned off from his judicial office. He died on 23 January 1612 at Hayes, Middlesex, the place where he had made his home after moving from Sussex in the mid-1590s, and was buried the following day in the parish church. 
Fenner was a capable lawyer, though he was overshadowed by the forceful personalities of his judicial colleagues. He is principally remembered as the defendant in 'Lord Buckhurst's case' (1598), the first case in Sir Edward Coke's 'Reports', and as the object of Robert Cecil's barbed remark, 'Justice Fenner will never run mad with learning' ('CSP dom.', '1601-3', 285). Yet his reputation was defended by Coke himself; and the legal diarist John Manningham records some earthy 'bons mots' which point to a genuine quickness of wit. Unlike many of his contemporaries, he does not seem systematically to have reported cases, though a few notes attributed to him do survive in manuscript. 


@@@@@


doc= 9289


Fenner, George (c.1540-1618), merchant and privateer, is of unknown parentage. However, the name Fenner was common in west Sussex, and the family into which he was born has been described variously as a mercantile clan in Chichester itself, or as a minor but armigerous gentry family based at West Wittering. It is quite possible that the two were identical, because George Fenner clearly began his career as a trader, and the manor of Earnley was held by a man of that name from 1561 to 1564. There were four Fenners at sea as captains during Elizabeth's reign -- Edward, George, Thomas Fenner, and William -- and the 'Victoria county history' describes them as brothers. However, the evidence for this is insecure, and it seems more likely that they were cousins. 
Nothing is known of George Fenner's early life or education, but he was certainly literate, as became a man of his status, and several years of conventional schooling can be assumed. He first appears in public in 1566, when along with Edward he took three ships and a pinnace to the Guinea coast, and became embroiled in a sharp skirmish with several Portuguese men-of-war. By this time he was clearly a seafarer of some experience, but how he obtained that experience is not known. In October of the same year he was included along with John Hawkins in the ban against trafficking to the domains of the king of Spain, and bonds were taken of him for that reason. In 1570, describing himself as 'George Fenner of Chichester', he petitioned the council for redress against the Spaniards for ships allegedly seized by them in the Low Countries. Like many others, Fenner chose to regard this grievance as a licence to plunder on his own behalf. In 1572 he appears to have been attacking Spanish shipping in the Azores, but with what success is not clear. In July 1575 he again petitioned the council for redress, but it is not certain whether his petition referred to his original grievance, or to a new one. His reprisal targets seem to have been rather indiscriminate, because later in the same year he was in trouble for having brought two captured French ships into Portsmouth. Nine years later, in September 1584, he was complaining that the French had seized a ship of his at Le Havre, and an inquiry was set up at Chichester. The outcome is not known, but the circumstances suggest that Fenner continued to be an active trader and part-time pirate throughout these years. 
In the Armada campaign Fenner commanded the galleon 'Leicester' with credit but no particular distinction. However, he appears to have earned the good opinion of Lord Admiral Howard, with whom he served in 1591 and again in 1593. He also captained Howard's ship the 'Disdain' on a privateering venture in 1589, taking several prizes. In 1597 he accompanied the earl of Essex on the 'islands' voyage, and was later sent out in the 'Dreadnaught', which was a royal ship, against Spinola's galleys in the channel. His last recorded service was again with Howard, in July 1599. By that time he was becoming old, and may well have retired from the sea. Nothing is known of his domestic circumstances, but the fact that he was admitted as a brother (pensioner) of the newly founded Sutton's Hospital in the London Charterhouse in 1614 suggests that he may have had no immediate family. He died at the Charterhouse on 26 October 1618, and was buried in the chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 9290


Fenner, Thomas (d. in or after 1593?), sea captain, is of unknown parentage; his origins are difficult to determine because there were several Sussex men of that name at the time. He is usually described as coming from Chichester, of the same merchant family as George Fenner, and probably his cousin. However, the first time he appears in public, in connection with a trading voyage to Guinea in which he was a partner (1564), he describes himself as 'Thomas Fenner of Erneley in the County of Sussex, gent.'. A victualler of that name spent a week in the Fleet prison in 1580 for selling ordnance to the Spaniards, and the member returned to parliament for New Shoreham on 10 November 1584 was also called Thomas Fenner, but it is not likely that either of these was the same man as the sea captain. 
By the time that Fenner captained the 'Elizabeth Bonaventure' on Francis Drake's expedition to the West Indies in 1585, he was described as a 'veteran', but there are no clear records of how he acquired that experience. Perhaps he was just better than George at keeping out of trouble. He served with distinction on that voyage, and seems to have been a trusted friend of Drake. Two years later he captained the 'Dreadnaught' in the expedition against Cadiz, and was trusted to report directly to Sir Francis Walsingham, both before the fleet sailed and also after success had been achieved. Against the Armada he captained the 'Nonpareil' under Drake's command, and as vice-admiral reported regularly to Walsingham throughout the campaign. He was a member of Lord Howard's council of war, and took part in the attempt to intercept the enemy on the Spanish coast, which was frustrated by bad weather. He served with distinction, and according to one Spanish report was knighted as a reward, but this does not seem to have been the case. 
In 1589 Fenner again served under Drake in the Lisbon expedition, and on this occasion was designated to assume command of the fleet if Sir Francis became incapacitated. He played a leading and active part in the campaign, of which he left a record in letters to Lord Burghley, Walsingham, and Francis Bacon, but seems to have attracted none of the blame for its failure. He was, however, somewhat disillusioned with service to the crown, which he complained had left him $1800 out of pocket, and informed Walsingham that he intended to bestow the remainder of his fortune on a voyage to the Indies. Whether he did that is unclear. In 1591 he 'promoted' (or financially sponsored) three ships in partnership with one John Bird, and in 1593 appears to have been involved in the transportation of troops to Brittany. If this Captain Fenner (his usual designation) was the same man, then he disappears from the records after November 1593, and may have died at about that time. Nothing is known about his private life, but if he was the Captain Fenner of 1593, then he had married, because it was then explained that in his absence from his duties (unspecified) at Chatham, his son had performed them on his behalf. 


@@@@@


doc= 9291


Fenner, William (c.1600-c.1640), Church of England clergyman and writer on theology, matriculated from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1612, graduating BA in 1616 and proceeding MA in 1619. He is listed as a fellow of the college from 1618 until 9 July 1622, when he was incorporated a member of Oxford University. After being ordained he is believed to have been chaplain to the earl of Warwick. In 1625 he was named as vicar of Harston, Cambridge, and the same year he was made vicar of Sedgley, Staffordshire. Prior to his arrival the parish was allegedly 'a very heathenish place', but by Fenner's 'holy life and faithful preaching... many persons were turned to righteousness' (Brook, 451). He was, however, forced to leave by 1627. In that year he proceeded BD and travelled about for some months preaching in various places. In 1629 he was presented to the living at Rochford, Essex, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
While Fenner was most noted as a preacher and sought after as a casuist, after his death, which occurred about 1640 when he was about forty, he became known for his theological writings, many of which were published by Edmund Calamy, his successor at Rochford. Calamy wrote in his preface to Fenner's 'Souls Looking-Glasse' (1643) that while generally there were a great 'many good books written,... there wanteth one book to make us put those good books into practice... this book... may have this happie effect' (sig. A2). Fenner's numerous writings enjoyed popularity for some time and two separate collected editions of his works appeared within two decades of his death. In perhaps his most famous treatise, 'Christs Alarm to Drowsie Saints' (1650), Fenner uses 'Revelation' 3:1 as the basis for an extended discussion of the nature, purposes, and effectiveness of the ministry. His other posthumous publications demonstrate his concern for a variety of themes including the fundamentals of a godly life, issues of conscience, eschatology, obedience, repentance, and the nature of belief and emotions. 


@@@@@


doc= 9292


Fenning, Elizabeth (1793-1815), convicted attempted murderer, was born in Dominica in the West Indies on 10 June 1793. She was one of the ten children of William Fenning, infantry soldier from Suffolk, and his Irish wife. In 1796 the 15th foot, in which her father served, returned to Dublin; the Fennings moved to Red Lion Passage, London, where Fenning's brother was a potato merchant. Elizabeth, who was short but 'of the most perfect symmetry', was employed as a domestic servant from the age of fourteen, and in January 1815 entered the service of a tradesman, Orlibar Turner, of 68 Chancery Lane, London, as a cook. 
On 21 March 1815 Turner, his son Robert, and daughter-in-law Charlotte all became very sick after dinner, having eaten some yeast dumplings prepared by Fenning. Roger Gadsden, one of Turner's apprentices, had eaten a piece of dumpling after dinner, although he had been strongly advised by Fenning not to touch it. Fenning herself ate some of the dumpling, and became so ill that her mother was summoned to her side. It was discovered that arsenic had been mixed into the dumplings, and suspicion fell on Fenning who was arrested. Her trial was heard at the Old Bailey on 11 April 1815. The evidence produced against her was that she had asked leave to make the dumplings, that she was alone in the kitchen during the whole of their preparation, that she knew of and had access to arsenic kept in Turner's office, and that the basic ingredients were not contaminated. Fenning pleaded not guilty, claiming that Mrs Turner disliked her and pointing out that she too had been made ill by the dumpling. Five witnesses to her good character were produced, but the recorder summed up against her and the jury found her guilty of attempted murder. She was sentenced to death, on hearing which she fell into a fit and was removed unconscious from the dock. 
Popular opinion was largely in favour of Fenning's innocence, and strenuous efforts were made to procure a remission of her sentence. The day before the execution the case was reviewed by the Home Office, which concluded that the conviction was safe. Accordingly, on the following morning, 26 June 1815, Fenning was hanged, declaring on the scaffold, 'Before the just and almighty God, and by the faith of the holy sacrament I have taken, I am innocent of the offence with which I am charged'. Many were convinced of her innocence, and as many as 10,000 people took part in her funeral procession five days later at St George the Martyr, Bloomsbury; her coffin was carried by six girls dressed in white. 


@@@@@


doc= 9293


Fenton, Edward (d. 1603), soldier and sea captain, was the son of Henry Fenton of Stretton-le-Steeple, Nottinghamshire, and Cicely Beaumont of Coleorton, Leicestershire; the poet Sir Geoffrey Fenton was his brother. At an unknown date between 1578 and 1582 he married Thomasina, daughter of Benjamin Gonson, the former treasurer of the navy ['see under 'Gonson, William]; they had no children. In 1566 he served as a soldier with Sir Henry Sidney in Ireland during the suppression of Shane O'Neil's rebellion. Three years later Henry Bynneman published his 'Certaine Secrete Wonders of Nature', a translation of Pierre Boaisteau Launay's 'Histoires prodigieuses' (1567). This, and his earlier association with Sidney, brought Fenton to the attention of Sidney's brother-in-law Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick. At the end of 1574 Warwick became one of the leading promoters of Martin Frobisher's north-west passage project, and in 1577 it was probably his influence that secured Fenton's place in the second voyage to Baffin Island as captain of the bark 'Gabriel', with wages of $8 per month. On 12 August 1577, in his only reported action during the expedition, Fenton led his men in a mock skirmish against demonstrations by an Inuit party seeking to recover three of their abducted compatriots. 
In 1578 a much larger expedition to Baffin Island was organized to recover large quantities of supposedly gold bearing ore from sites on the northern shores of Frobisher Bay. Fenton was appointed lieutenant-general -- in effect, Frobisher's second in command -- and governor of a proposed colony of 100 men, intended to remain on Baffin Island during the winter of 1578-9. This would have been the first English settlement to be established outside Europe; however, the loss at sea of parts of a prefabricated blockhouse, and of provisions intended for the colonists, made its abandonment inevitable. On the outward passage, separated from the fleet during storms, Fenton's ship 'Judith' endured weeks of danger from icebergs and appalling weather but reached the appointed landfall some ten days before Frobisher. Somewhat jealous of Fenton's abilities, Frobisher subsequently challenged his authority over the common mariners, and seems to have encouraged their insubordination to him. On 24 August, as the expedition prepared to return to England, Fenton supervised the construction of 'Fenton's watch-tower', the first English stone-built structure on the North American continent: 'to prove what the vehemencie of winde and weather would do therwith this winter, to thende, that if the nexte yere habitacion shoulde be performed there, that then by this litle begynninge, a juste occasion and experiment should given how we shoulde deale in building greater howses. (Magd. Cam., Pepys Library, MS 2133, 55)' Three days later Fenton and Thomas Morris, master of the ship 'Frances of Foye', were the first Englishmen to observe Cyrus Field Bay, having walked across country from the northern shore of Frobisher Bay. 
Following the return of the expedition the enterprise collapsed in the face of burgeoning debts and the failure of assayers to find any precious metals within the New World ore. In the following year Fenton was employed in Ireland once more, as an aide to the English commander Sir William Pelham (a former Frobisher adventurer) during the pacification of the Fitzmaurice rebellion. Between 16 October 1579 and 28 September 1580 he wrote several letters directly to Francis Walsingham and, upon one occasion, to Lord Burghley, providing information upon the campaign. A letter of 10 June 1581 from Sir Henry Wallop to Walsingham reports the murder of one James Fenton, possibly a cousin, enticed into an ambush by Sir Owen O'Sullivan's wife. By that time it seems that Edward himself was in England once more, perhaps having returned when Pelham was superseded as English commander by Lord Grey, and was involved in a new oceanic project. The earl of Leicester, Francis Drake, and others formed a syndicate to take advantage of the queen's support for the Portuguese pretender, Dom Antonio. The fortifying of Terceira in the Azores was considered, as was a descent upon the Spanish main. Too provocative for Elizabeth and Lord Burghley, the project was abandoned in the autumn months. However, a less contentious scheme went forward, whereby an expedition would sail to the Far East to initiate English trade with states friendly to Portugal and resurrect Drake's Moluccas connections. Fenton had some responsibility for the preparations in 1581 (though Drake apparently did not want him to sail in the voyage), and assisted its appointed leader, Martin Frobisher, to equip and man the ships. 
From the start problems emerged between two principal factions. The Drake party, largely consisting of men who had sailed in the circumnavigation, anticipated a reprise of that voyage's depredations upon Spanish possessions. The merchants who invested were opposed to this. With Burghley's backing, they placed their own personnel in the ships and attempted to curb any unwelcome initiative on the part of the expedition's commander once at sea. Refusing to accept these intrusions, Frobisher stepped down on or before 27 February 1582, and Fenton was appointed in his place. His fleet consisted of the 'Galleon Leicester', commanded by Fenton himself, with his cousin by marriage, William Hawkins the younger, as lieutenant-general; the queen's ship 'Edward Bonaventure', commanded by Luke Warde; and two barks, the 'Francis' (John Drake) and the 'Elizabeth' (John Skevington). Inclement weather prevented the dispatch of the expedition in February 1582 as originally intended. The ships did not depart from Southampton until May, far too late to avoid contrary winds in the southern Atlantic. 
It was to be a disastrous voyage. As early as 31 October 1581, while Frobisher was still the appointed expedition leader, Fenton had written to him to complain of Hawkins's youthful indiscretions. From the beginning of the voyage this and other clashes resulted in greater shipboard discord than was usual even in that extremely factious age. 'Drake's men' urged war upon Iberian vessels, the merchants wanted only trade; Fenton, torn between the two, and with the authority of the broad seal of England behind him, gradually lost both judgement and self-control. By the time that the vessels reached the coast of Africa, he was exhibiting symptoms of paranoia, and announced an intention to seize and fortify St Helena, and to make himself 'king' there -- not a wholly ridiculous plan, given that he had a well-armed expedition and the island was uninhabited, but entirely against the letter and spirit of his orders. He also behaved with extreme arrogance in pacifying outbreaks of discord in the ships. However, some form of armed neutrality among the leading officers was reimposed, and the ships pressed on south-westwards, making the coast of Brazil in November, where the mariners were rested and the ships reprovisioned. At a fateful meeting of officers on 20 December the irreconcilable aims of the various parties could be ignored no longer. The Drake faction wished to pass through the Strait of Magellan, the merchants held out for the Cape of Good Hope (as their instructions stipulated). The following night the bark 'Francis' deserted. At St Vincent, a sea fight with Spanish ships broke any vestigial sense of purpose among the English fleet. Luke Warde's 'Edward' deserted after the battle; the 'Galleon Leicester' and 'Elizabeth' moved northwards to Spirito Santo, where, after briefly attempting to negotiate a trade treaty with the governor, the Englishmen precipitously departed, fearing Portuguese treachery. Following the collapse of a ludicrous, but mercifully brief, plan to pass on to Newfoundland, the two ships returned to England. They came to the Downs on 29 June 1583, by which time Fenton had placed William Hawkins in irons, following a fight between them in which knives had been drawn. 
Humiliated by the fiasco Fenton did not have employment again until 1588 when, with some distinction, he commanded the queen's ship 'Mary Rose' during the Armada campaign. In 1589 his brother-in-law Sir John Hawkins obtained for him the post of deputy treasurer of the navy, which he discharged without undue prominence. He appears to have lived at Deptford from that time onwards, and died there in 1603. He was buried at St Nicholas's Deptford. A memorial to Fenton in the church, erected by his nephew by marriage, the earl of Cork, is tactfully kind to his memory, praising his services in the north-west voyages and in 1588 without mentioning the debacle of 1582. 
Extant sources provide no positive opinions of Fenton. Henry Oughtred, Leicester's merchant-partner in the Moluccas project, wrote: 'his experience is verye small his mind hyghe... thrall to the collycke and stubborn' (Taylor, 27). Richard Madox, chaplain in the 'Galleon Leicester', called him 'colorik and bas' (Donno, 142), while George Barne, a leading Muscovy merchant who helped to organize the voyage, was reported to be similarly unimpressed: 'The master [Christopher Hall] towld me Alderman Barne thowght our generaul but a folish flattering fretting creeper and so I fear he wil prov' (ibid., 139). Only Luke Warde's account of the voyage of 1582, which Richard Hakluyt reproduced in the 1589 edition of 'Principall Navigations', is generally neutral regarding Fenton's performance and character, although even he was moved to refer to the ordeal as a 'troublesome voyage'. However, Michael Lok consistently portrayed Fenton as the injured party in his clashes with Frobisher, and it is clear that his weaknesses of temperament disguised genuine ability. He was undoubtedly cultured and observant, and his ships' logs and journals of 1578 and 1582 show him to have been a brave, active, and accomplished navigator. As second in command to Frobisher he exhibited considerable initiative, courage, and tact; perhaps it was only the corrupting weight of too much authority that was eventually to pervert these qualities. If so, he was by no means the only Elizabethan sea commander to be so stricken. 


@@@@@


doc= 9294


Fenton, Edward Dyne (d. 1880), army officer and author, entered the army as an ensign in the 53rd Shropshire regiment of foot in 1847, was promoted lieutenant in 1849, placed on half pay in 1857, obtained a captaincy in the 14th Buckinghamshire regiment of foot in 1858, and exchanged into the 86th Royal County Down regiment of foot in 1860, with which he spent some years at Gibraltar. He retired from the army about 1870, after which he lived mainly at Scarborough. He was a keen amateur photographer, and popular among his friends. He published: 'Sorties from Gib. in Quest of Sensation and Sentiment' (1872), a collection of entertaining narratives of brief tours in Spain; 'Military Men I have Met' (1872), humorous sketches, illustrated by Linley Sambourne, of types of military character; 'Eve's Daughters' (1873), a volume of sketches illustrating female character; and 'B.' (1874), a three-volume novel. Quite popular at the time, they are no longer read. 
Fenton died at his home, 2 Avenue Road, Scarborough, Yorkshire, on 29 July 1880. His son Denzil was the sole executor of his modest estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 9295


Fenton, Elijah (1683-1730), poet, son of John Fenton, attorney and coroner for the district, and Catherine Maere, was born at Shelton, near Newcastle under Lyme in Staffordshire, on 10 May 1683. His father died in 1694 and evidently left his family in excellent circumstances, for Fenton, the eleventh child of the marriage, entered Jesus College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 1 July 1700, after having attended grammar school at Newcastle under Lyme. He matriculated in 1701 and was awarded the degrees of BA in 1704-5 and MA twenty-one years later in 1726. 
Fenton had been intended for the church, but he refused to sign the oaths, probably for religious rather than political reasons. Instead he took employment as assistant to the nonjuror Ambrose Bonwicke the elder, a well-known schoolmaster, at Headley in Surrey. He was with Bonwicke in 1706 and 1707 and left some time before the autumn of 1708 to become headmaster of the grammar school at Sevenoaks, Kent, in 1708, remaining there until the end of the 1711 term. At about this time Bolingbroke suggested he leave Sevenoaks with the promise of better employment. This came to naught. From December 1711 until 1720 he was secretary to Charles Boyle, fourth earl of Orrery, whom he accompanied to Flanders in 1713. From 1714 to 1720 he was tutor to Lord Broghill, the earl's son. 
While it is probable that a manuscript poem, or a transcript of it, entitled 'Cleopatra', dated 1700 and signed Elijah Fenton, is indeed by him, Fenton's first publication was 'An Ode to the Sea, for the New Year', a slim volume of thirteen pages (1707), written in praise of Queen Anne and the duke of Marlborough. A more important and extensive publication appeared two years later. The 'Oxford and Cambridge Miscellany Poems' (1709), edited by Fenton, contained three signed poems by him, as well as a number of others of his, unsigned. The rest of the miscellany was made up of earlier poems by a number of writers, including, among others, John Milton, John Dryden, Thomas Otway, and Matthew Prior. One of Fenton's poems was a pastoral elegy, 'Florelio', a eulogy on the marquess of Blandford, a son of the duke of Marlborough, who died in 1703. Fenton's 'Poems on Several Occasions', dedicated to Charles Boyle, fourth earl of Orrery, was published in 1717, and shows the poet trying his hand at various genres, typical of so many other collections with the same title. In 1720-21 he helped Alexander Pope with his edition of Shakespeare, and with the notes on Pope's 'Iliad'. 
At the end of his tenure as tutor to Lord Broghill, Fenton was recommended by Pope to James Craggs the younger, a secretary of state, as one who could make up for any of Craggs's deficiencies in literature. When Craggs died on 16 February 1721, Fenton was again at a loose end. With the translation of the 'Iliad' behind him, Pope had turned his thoughts to the 'Odyssey', and enlisted the aid of Fenton and of William Broome. By February 1722 the translation was well under way, but fears that the public knowledge of the collaboration would harm sales of the translation resulted in the issue of proposals as late as 1725. Fenton translated books i, iv, xix, and xx, for which Pope paid him $200. He evidently did not want his share in the translation known; later critics of his part are agreed that his was the worst part of the translation. He had earlier translated the eleventh book of the 'Odyssey', 'In Milton's Style', although he did not claim that book as part of his share in the translation. During the period from 1721 to 1725 he was busy working on the tragedy 'Mariamne', and on an edition of Edmund Waller's works, started in 1724 and published in 1729. 

'Mariamne' was Fenton's most popular and profitable work. It was begun as closet drama, but, with the encouragement of his friend Thomas Southerne Fenton sought out Colley Cibber, manager of the Drury Lane Theatre, who rudely rejected it. It was, however, accepted at the Lincoln's Inn Theatre in 1723, the 'British Journal' of 3 March noting that there was present 'the greatest Audience ever known at either Theatre' on the occasion of the usual third-night benefit, 25 February 1723. The prologue, by 'A Friend', was by Broome. The play went through many performances and brought Fenton in excess of $1000. It was printed in 1723, with second and third editions in 1726 and 1729. In 1725 he revised the punctuation of several of Milton's works, including 'Paradise Lost', with a brief life of the poet, a work that went through a number of editions, the life being translated into French in 1729. He, with Broome, had projected the re-annotating of Dryden's translation of Virgil. Also projected were a translation of Oppian and a tragedy, 'Dion'. 
Partly through Pope's influence, Fenton had in January 1724 become tutor to the son of Lady Trumbull, and remained with the family until his death, brought on by gout, on 16 July 1730 at Easthampstead, Berkshire, where the Trumbulls usually spent the summer and where he was buried. Samuel Johnson praised Fenton as a versifier and poet; other critics were less kind. 


@@@@@


doc= 9296


Fenton, Sir Geoffrey (c.1539-1608), translator and administrator in Ireland, was one of seven children (six sons, one daughter) of Henry Fenton from Stretton-le-Steeple in Nottinghamshire and Cicely, daughter of John Beaumont of Coleorton, Leicestershire. Little is known of Fenton's early life, but, as he acknowledges in his first published work, he travelled extensively, possibly to Spain and Italy, and definitely to France. Two of his works ('Actes of Conference in Religion' and 'Monophylo') are dedicated to Lady Elizabeth Hoby, widow of Sir Thomas Hoby, the ambassador to France, which suggests that Fenton may have been part of Hoby's entourage in Paris in the 1560s before the latter's early death in 1566. 
Fenton had a productive career as a translator of French and Latin works. His first work, 'Certain Tragicall Discourses of Bandello' (1567), was a translation of the Italian novels of Matteo Bandello, from the French translations made by Francois Belleforest and Pierre Boaisteau. The work was dated 22 June 1567 from his chamber at Paris and dedicated to Lady Mary Sidney; her husband, Sir Henry, was then lord deputy of Ireland. Fenton, whose choice of translations and prefatory comments to them indicates a staunchly protestant faith, appears to have gravitated towards the protestant faction at court. The dedicatory epistle contains fulsome praise of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, its unofficial leader. There were also a number of commendatory verses, including one by George Turberville. 

'Certain Tragicall Discourses' is one of the first collections of Italian prose fiction in English, along with William Painter's 'Palace of Pleasure' (1566) and George Pettie's 'The Palace of Pleasure' (1576). Fenton suggests, in line with contemporary humanist and protestant wisdom, that the variety of tales should be read as moral exempla, some -- such as the story of Lucrece -- showing fine moral behaviour that should be imitated, others revealing the dire effects of immoral behaviour. When Roger Ascham made his famous attack on the malign influence of Italian romance in 'The Scholemaster' (1570), it is likely that he had Fenton's work in mind (although had he read the work carefully he might well have found it to be rather more orthodox than he assumed). 'Certain Tragicall Discourses' is clearly one of Fenton's most important works and its influence was recognized by Thomas Warton who referred to it as 'the most capital miscellany' of Italian novellas in English (Warton, 3.478). 
Fenton produced a number of translations in the next few years on political and religious subjects. 'An Epistle or Godlie Admonition, of a Learned Minister of the Gospel... to the Pastoures of the Flemish Church in Antwerp' (1569) was a translation of a work pleading for unity in the church and dated 10 December 1569. 'A Discourse of the Civile Warres and Late Troubles in Fraunce' appeared in 1570, dedicated to Sir Henry Sidney. In the prefatory epistle Fenton argued that it was vital for Englishmen to know about the horrors of the recent religious wars in France, and argued, as he had done with regard to prose fiction in his first work, that history taught a series of good and bad examples that should be imitated or avoided. The work was dated 24 May 1570, and gave Fenton's address as London. In 1571 he published a translation of a French religious treatise, 'Actes of Conference in Religion, Holden at Paris', dedicated to Lady Hoby, which sought to mediate between the extremes of Catholicism and protestant sectarianism, also written in London and dated 4 July 1571; a translation of a philosophical dialogue dealing with how to live a moral life, 'Monophylo', appeared in 1572, again dedicated to Lady Hoby, and dated 6 April 1572; 'A Forme of Christian Pollicie', another translation of a French work, appeared in 1574, dedicated to William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and dated 16 May 1574 from the author's chambers in Blackfriars; and in 1575 Fenton published 'Golden Epistles Contayning Varietie of Discourse both Morall, Philosophicall, and Divine', dedicated to Burghley's daughter, Lady Anne, countess of Oxford, also written at his chambers in Blackfriars and dated 4 February 1575. This last work, a selection of letters offering advice and consolation, was popular enough to be reprinted twice. 
In the next few years Fenton must have been at work on his most ambitious project, a translation of Francesco Guicciardini's 'Storia d'Italia' from the French version. This eventually appeared in 1579 entitled 'The Historie of Guicciardini'. It was dedicated to Elizabeth, perhaps indicating that Fenton was being rewarded by patrons for his work and was now moving in more exalted circles. The history narrated the conflicts between the various Italian city states and their allies between 1490 and 1534 and was a major work of European history. Fenton's translation had a significant influence on English historiography, especially the 'Tacitean' history produced in the late 1590s, which tried to provide a detached view of political offices and processes. As in his earlier work, Fenton suggested that Guicciardini's history was best read as a series of good and bad examples. It was reissued in 1599 and in 1618 after Fenton's death. Fenton's son-in-law, Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, regarded the 'Historie' as one of his most treasured possessions (Canny, 28). 
Fenton produced no more translations. In 1580 he went to live in Ireland, where his brother Edward Fenton (d. 1603) was serving as a captain under Sir William Pelham. Geoffrey may also have served under Pelham, because Pelham wrote to Sir Francis Walsingham on 16 February 1580 to recommend Fenton as a secretary to the new lord deputy, Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton, one of the earl of Leicester's clients. Fenton wrote to Burghley from Limerick on 22 July to say that he had been sworn in as secretary to Grey. Fenton would have served alongside Edmund Spenser, another secretary to Grey, who arrived with the lord deputy on 12 August. Spenser moved in the same protestant circles and they both married into the powerful and wealthy Boyle family in Munster. 
Fenton married Alice, daughter of Dr Robert Weston, formerly lord chancellor of Ireland, and widow of Dr Hugh Brady, bishop of Meath, in June 1585. They had one son, Sir William Fenton, and a daughter, Catherine, who married Richard Boyle, later first earl of Cork, on 25 July 1603, making Fenton the grandfather of Robert Boyle and the dramatist Lord Orrery. Fenton's advice on land grants and law helped Boyle to secure his position as the richest man in the British Isles. 
Fenton pursued an active career as a major civil servant in Ireland: his name appeared frequently in the state papers as a policy maker, adviser to the lord deputy, and channel of information and an informer to the queen. In this last role, unsurprisingly, he made a number of powerful enemies. Fenton delivered a message personally to Elizabeth in December 1580, which was probably the start of his close relationship with her. His official letters are notably eloquent and stylish. 
Fenton assumed the role of principal secretary of state in Ireland in the 1580s, serving under a number of lord deputies until his death. He was also MP for Carlow (1585-6). Fenton had a particularly unfortunate relationship with Sir John Perrot, lord deputy, 1584-8. Fenton was sent to London in June 1585 to get the queen's permission to divert funds from St Patrick's College, Dublin, to the newly established protestant university in the city, Trinity College. He returned to Ireland after a prolonged stay in March 1586, bringing a whole series of charges against Perrot. Perrot retaliated by publicly humiliating Fenton, having him arrested on a charge of debt (he owed Perrot $70), carried through the streets on a market day, and thrown into debtor's prison in January 1587. Fenton was eventually released on the orders of Elizabeth. From 1590 to 1591 Fenton was seconded to London to serve as a commissioner for the impeachment of Perrot. In 1589 he began a long-running feud with Sir Richard Bingham. Throughout Fenton's career complaints were made at the wealth he had amassed through his offices. 
Fenton was knighted in 1589 during the deputyship of Sir William FitzWilliam. In the 1590s he was one of the most prominent and influential policy makers in the administration, serving as a commissioner for Ulster and Connaught and acting as surveyor of the queen's possessions, as well as serving on the Irish privy council. He was generally in line with the hardliners who favoured stern military action to sort out any opposition to English rule or rebellion, but he often stressed also that Ireland could not be properly governed without the consent of the natives, and was especially keen to promote the spread of the protestant faith, principally through preaching. 
Early on in his career Fenton was an advocate of the Munster plantation, suggesting in 1583 that the English should occupy the rebels' land and the Irish be transported into the interior. He frequently complained that Ireland lacked the tools of judicial torture such as the rack and was quite prepared to use underhand methods to deal with troublesome Irish leaders. He advocated the assassination of various chieftains in the 1580s and 1590s, including Florence McCarthy Mor, leader of the McCarthy clan in Desmond (co. Kerry). When negotiations failed in 1597 and 1598 Fenton also suggested a similar end for Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, a plan which he frequently urged Robert Cecil to carry out in the late 1590s. He played a crucial role in the government campaign in the Nine Years' War, and the negotiations which brought it to an end. Elizabeth trusted Fenton to act as her official messenger and to convey letters to Tyrone. 
Fenton was in danger of losing his exalted position with the accession of James. He had frequently expressed hostile attitudes towards the Scots in official communications, and had opposed using them to colonize Ulster, as others advocated. He was suspicious of James and warned Cecil that the Scottish king was really in league with Tyrone and Spain and so was helping to undermine stability in Ireland. When James acceded to the English throne Fenton asked Cecil to help preserve his position, but also sounded out the opinions of other leading courtiers, a move which may have undermined his relationship with Cecil. Fenton was obliged to share the office of secretary with Sir Richard Coke, a relationship that undoubtedly caused considerable tension, but he was confirmed in his position for life in 1604. 
Fenton clashed with the new lord deputy, Sir Arthur Chichester, who held the post from 1605 to 1616, over the principles and progress of the Ulster plantation. Fenton argued that Chichester was excessively lenient in his actions and plans, mixing natives and colonists and granting too many pardons to rebels. Fenton's views seem to have held sway, and the plantation was established with a rigid separation of Scots and English settlers from Irish, Ulster being treated as a conquered country in need of control (although practice soon undermined theory). 
Fenton died in Dublin on 19 October 1608, and was buried in St Patrick's Cathedral in the same tomb as his father-in-law. 


@@@@@


doc= 9297


Fenton, Lavinia, duchess of Bolton (1710-1760), actress and singer, was born on 7 October 1710 and baptized at St Margaret Westminster on 22 October as Lavinia Besswick, daughter of Peter and Elizabeth. According to 'The Life of Lavinia Beswick, alias Fenton, alias Polly Peachum', a mixture of fact and fiction published after 'The Beggar's Opera' made her the toast of the town in 1728, she was the illegitimate daughter of one Beswick, a lieutenant in a man-of-war, who was recalled to his ship before she was born. We are told that when Beswick did not return Lavinia's mother married a Mr Fenton and opened a coffee house near Charing Cross. Lavinia, then aged seven or eight, 'being a Child of a vivacious lively Spirit, and a promising Beauty', was a favourite of the customers, and 'a Comedian belonging to the 'Old House' [Drury Lane Theatre], took great Delight in hearing her sing such little Catches as she had learnt from the humming Beaux... and taught her some Airs, which have since been to her Advantage. ('Life', 7)' She was sent to boarding-school for five years, after which her mother began scheming for a suitable protector for her, but the girl found her own first lover, a Portuguese nobleman. 
The 'Life' states that she first appeared on stage in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan' at the New Theatre in the Haymarket, later sharing a benefit there with Mr Gilbert, when she played Cherry in George Farquhar's 'The Stratagem'. She joined a twice-a-week summer company of young actors at Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was then engaged by the theatre manager John Rich for the winter season. The theatre advertisements bear this out, for 'a Gentlewoman who never appear'd on any Stage before' ('Daily Post', 24 Feb 1726) played the 'ingenue' role of Serina in 'The Orphan' at the New Theatre on 24 February 1726 and 'Miss Besswick' shared a benefit there with Gilbert on 12 April, when 'The Stratagem' was performed. During the summer season at Lincoln's Inn Fields Miss Fenton was advertised as Lucilla in William Davenant's 'The Man's the Master', 'being the first Time of her Appearance on this Stage' ('Daily Courant', 15 July 1726), and later played Lucia in Thomas Shadwell's 'Epsom Wells' and Ginnet in Davenant's 'The Wits'. With John Rich's patent company from autumn 1726 she took the role of Mrs Squeamish in William Wycherley's 'The Country Wife', made many appearances as a country lass in Lewis Theobald's pantomime 'The Rape of Proserpine' and, during the benefits in spring 1727, was Cherry in 'The Stratagem' and Lucy in Thomas Baker's 'Tunbridge Walks'. 
John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', with Lavinia Fenton as Polly Peachum, was first performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 29 January 1728. According to the actor James Quin its success was in doubt until the audience was won over by Polly's innocent looks in her pathetic air 'O ponder well'. On 20 March, after the thirty-sixth night, Gay wrote to Swift: 'There is a Mezzo-tinto Print publish'd to day of Polly, the Heroine of the Beggar's Opera, who was before unknown, & is now in so high vogue, that I am in doubt, whether her fame does not surpass that of the Opera itself. ('Letters of John Gay', 72-3)' Henry Carey agreed: '
The Sons of 'Bayes', in Lyric lays, 

Sound forth her Fame in Print O! 

And, as we pass, in Frame and Glass, 

We see her 'Mezzo-tint'-O! 
(Carey, 152)' Her 'life' was printed, her portrait appeared on screens and fans, a collection of theatrical anecdotes was dedicated to her, supposed letters to her were published, and the prima donnas of the Italian opera were said to be quite eclipsed. Not everything was adulatory. Verses in the 'Daily Journal' accused her of having a coarse voice and charmless face, and there was much salacious gossip. The poet Edward Young wrote to Thomas Tickell: 'Polly a Wench that acts in the Beggars Opera... 'tis said, has raised her Price from one Guinea to 100, tho she cannot be a greater whore than she was before' (Tickell, 144-5). But it was sweet, faithful Polly, dressed, as Charles Macklin remembered, with Quaker-like simplicity, who delighted the audiences. 

'The Beggar's Opera' was performed every night until 7 March, and then twice weekly between the actors' benefits, for which Lavinia Fenton learned several new roles, including Ophelia in 'Hamlet', Betty in Susanna Centlivre's 'A Bold Stroke for a Wife', and Marcella (with the mad song 'I burn') in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Don Quixote'. She appeared in Farquhar's 'Love and a Bottle' for the benefit of her Macheath, Thomas Walker, performed a skating dance with the dancer Nivelon, and sang a ballad by the bass singer Richard Leveridge. For her own benefit she acted Cherry in 'The Stratagem', but the takings were under $100. The 'Life' claimed that this was because her patrons were offended by pit and boxes being put together and that Rich allowed her 'The Beggar's Opera' as a replacement benefit. The sixty-first night of the opera, on 14 June, was advertised as the last that season, but an extra performance was added on 19 June, when 'to the great Surprize of the Audience, the Part of 'Polly Peachum' was performed by Miss WARREN, who was very much applauded; the first Performer being retired, as it is reported, from the Stage' ('Country Journal', 22 June 1728). Gay sent the news to Swift on 6 July: 'The D of Bolton I hear hath run away with Polly Peachum, having settled 400'l' a year upon her during pleasure, & upon disagreement 200'l' a year' ('Letters of John Gay', 76). 
It is Charles Powlett (or Paulet), third duke of Bolton (1685-1754), who gazes fixedly at Polly in the Hogarth painting of 'The Beggar's Opera' Newgate scene now in the Tate collection. According to Horace Walpole, the duke had been forced by his father to marry an heiress, but she was ugly ('a monster'; Walpole, 2.329), the marriage was probably never consummated, and the couple separated when his father died. Lavinia Fenton seems to have lived happily and discreetly with Bolton, and they had three sons, Charles, Percy, and Horatio Armand, who entered the church, the navy, and the army respectively. The duke was determined to regularize their union immediately his wife died, to the extent of arranging for a clergyman, Joseph Warton, to travel with him and his family on their continental tour in 1751. Warton returned to England before the expected news of the duchess's death arrived, and the marriage was performed on 20 October 1751 at Aix-en-Provence by the hastily summoned chaplain to the British embassy at Turin. Forty years later Warton was to write of Lavinia: 'She was very accomplished; was a most agreeable companion; had much wit, and strong good sense, and a just taste in polite literature. Her person was agreeable and well-made; though she could not be called a beauty. I have had the pleasure of being at table with her, when her conversation was much admired by the first characters of the age. ('Works of Alexander Pope', 9.100)' On Bolton's death in 1754 the title passed to his brother, since his sons were illegitimate, but he bequeathed all he owned to his 'dear and well beloved wife', making her the sole executrix. He died at Tunbridge Wells, and it was a surgeon from that town, George Kelley, whom the dowager duchess made her executor and residuary legatee. Horace Walpole saw her relationship with Kelley as evidence that she had 'after a life of merit relapsed into her Pollyhood' (Walpole, 21.365), but her will makes it clear that her sons were already provided for. She died at her home, Westcombe House, Greenwich, on 24 January 1760 and was buried at St Alfege's Church on 3 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 9298


Fenton, Richard (1747-1821), topographical writer and antiquary, the youngest child of Richard Fenton and his wife, Martha, was born at Rhoson, St David's, Pembrokeshire, and was baptized at St David's Cathedral on 20 February 1747, 'being then a month old'. He received his early education at the cathedral school and Haverfordwest grammar school, and apparently entered Magdalen College, Oxford, though there is no record of his matriculation. He did not take a degree but entered the civil service as an officer of the board of customs. Unwisely, he made use of his undoubted ability as a poet to satirize his superior officers and he resigned in 1774. He became a student of the Middle Temple on 24 August 1774 and was called to the bar in January 1783. 
In London Fenton enjoyed the life of a sociable, clubbable young gentleman and became friendly with a number of writers and painters, among them Oliver Goldsmith, David Garrick, Samuel Johnson, Sir Richard Colt Hoare, and Sir Joshua Reynolds (who is said to have painted miniatures of Fenton and his wife). He also became a member of Welsh literary and cultural societies, the Cymmrodorion (serving as treasurer for a time) and the Gwyneddigion. He was friendly with the Welsh scholar William Owen Pughe, whom he assisted in editing 'The Myvyrian Archaiology of Wales' (1801) and whose daughter Elen was to marry Fenton's son John in 1814. Fenton's 'Poems' (1773, and two volumes 1790) contain witty, Augustan occasional poems addressed to his friends and are a good indication of his life in London and in the country. He did not, however, lose any of his scholarly inclinations and, probably inspired by Colt Hoare, he began to contemplate the idea of researching and writing a history of Wales. 
Fenton was then practising as a barrister on the Welsh circuits and was also invited to prepare government reports on social and political conditions in Wales. His legal skills, fluency in French, Latin, and Greek, and an ability to read Welsh, together with his wide reading and extensive cultural background, were indispensable aids to his accumulation of knowledge of Welsh life, cultural history, and topography gained in the course of his tours and professional work. His first intention had been to prepare a new and extended edition of Thomas Pennant's 'Tours in Wales' (1778, 1781) but the proposed format of the book proved to be unacceptable and the plan was dropped. Aware of the growing interest in county histories in Wales and probably influenced by his friend Theophilus Jones, the historian of Brecknockshire, Fenton took up the idea of writing a history of Wales as a series of county histories and in 1788 he took a house in Machynlleth, Montgomeryshire, which he believed would be a more central location for his tours of the country. His increased affluence after the death of his father and following his marriage to Eloise (Eliza), daughter of Baron and Baroness Pillet de Moudon, about 1782, gave him the means to pursue his scholarly interests. He retired in 1792 to devote all his time to his antiquarian and historical work and to undertake, often with his friend Richard Colt Hoare, a series of tours, especially between 1804 and 1813, of Welsh counties (Caernarvonshire most thoroughly) and of Wiltshire and Somerset. His edition of George Owen's unpublished 'Description of Penbrokshire' (1602-3) from a manuscript in his possession -- Owen was his great-grandfather -- appeared in the 'Cambrian Register' (1795-6). 
In 1796, following the death of Samuel Fenton, his uncle and adoptive father, Fenton moved to Fishguard, Pembrokeshire, where he inherited his uncle's commercial and property interests. He built at considerable cost a new mansion, Plas Glynamel, and developed its gardens and woodlands. 'A Historical Tour through Pembrokeshire' appeared in 1811, the only county history which he succeeded in completing and publishing. His anonymously published 'Tour in Quest of Genealogy through Several Parts of Wales, Somersetshire and Wiltshire by a Barrister', a lightly written account of a tour undertaken with Colt Hoare, also appeared in 1811. In a different vein, his 'Memoirs of an Old Wig', a humorous self-deprecating satire of modish society, was published in 1815. 
Fenton died at Plas Glynamel in November 1821 and was buried in the same month at Manorowen church, near Fishguard. He was survived by his wife and three sons. A selection from his unpublished tour journals and notes was edited by John Fisher and published in 1917. A fellow of the London Society of Antiquaries, Fenton was an assiduous researcher and antiquary. He built up a large library of books, manuscripts (including the notes of other antiquaries, such as Edward Lhuyd, Thomas Pennant, and William Williams of Llandygai), and records, together with his own transcripts of materials and voluminous personal notes and literary translations. He corresponded with many of the leading Welsh scholars of the day, and toured Wales extensively to visit prehistoric sites, many of which he excavated, and other features in the landscape. His books and journals, more tour literature than history, are entertaining reading, being an attractive mixture of accurate reporting and recording interspersed with personal descriptions of scenery and accounts of oral history, local legends, and substantial alfresco meals. Though he was careful to record his discoveries, his enthusiastic excavating activities have been criticized and he has been described by one reviewer as 'an iconoclastic gourmet who went through the land breaking up barrows and cracking cromlechs' ('Archaeologia Cambrensis', 5th ser., 12, 1895, 159). 


@@@@@


doc= 9299


Fenton, Roger (1565-1616), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Lancashire; while there are no details of his immediate family, several later Fentons held degrees in theology and were curates of Lancaster church. He was admitted a sizar at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1585, graduated BA in 1589, became a fellow in 1590, and proceeded MA in 1592. Here he made lasting friendships with Lancelot Andrewes and Nicholas Felton. He preached informally at Gray's Inn from 1598, and dedicated to its readers his first published work, 'An Answere to W. Alablaster his Motives' (1599); the bench in turn paid the expenses for the BD he received in 1602, and formally admitted him on 9 March 1606 as preacher at the inn, a position he held until his death. From about 1600 he served as chaplain to Sir Thomas Egerton in Cheshire and London. On 18 August 1601 he was presented by the Grocers' Company to the rectory of St Stephen Walbrook (becoming a neighbour of Felton at St Antholin's), and on 29 September 1603 he was presented by the king to the rectory of nearby St Benet Sherehog. He resigned the latter on his appointment on 14 November 1606 to the vicarage of Chigwell, Essex. On 18 September 1609 he succeeded Andrewes in the prebend of St Pancras, St Paul's, which carried with it the rectory and advowson of Chigwell. 
Among Fenton's major published works were 'A Perfume Against the Noysome Pestilence' (1603), preached during a visitation of plague, and 'A Sermon of Simonie and Sacriledge' (1604), an examination of the practices of the early church, delivered at Paul's Cross and dedicated to Egerton. 'De disciplina ecclesiae primitivae' (Hunt. L., EL 1149), on the same theme, is among several major unpublished works by Fenton in Egerton's manuscript collection and dedicated to him; it is particularly significant as it has the author's Ramist subdivisions in the margins to instruct the reader in the new logic. 'A Treatise of Usurie' (1611) revealed Fenton's commitment to the abolition of usury. While holding that 'riches are sacraments of his favor' ('Diary of John Manningham', 89), he believed that collecting interest was against the law of God where it could be documented in the scriptures and in the writings of civilian lawyers. Robert Filmer, who gave a page-by-page critique of Fenton's work, argued in 'Quaestio quodlibetica' (1653) that usury was a moral question and not an article of faith, thus not sinful or unlawful. 
An active scholar, Fenton was appointed a translator for the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' published in 1611 -- a member of the Westminster group responsible for the translation of the epistles of St Paul and the canonical epistles from the Greek. As a theologian he placed primacy on the role of the Holy Ghost in Christianity, and in each person coming to an understanding of the Spirit's work through his own vernacular language. He believed that the true Christian must intensify the experiences of misery, search diligently to find specks of sin, and be very active in repentance. In 1613 Fenton proceeded DD. 'A Sermon Preached at the Anniversarie of the Companie of Grocers' (1615) and a collection under the title 'A Sermon Preached at St Mary Spittle' (1616), reveals that he preached on various notable city occasions, including funerals. 'A Treatise against the Necessary Dependence upon that One Head, and the Present Reconciliation to the Church of Rome' (1617), compiled by Emmanuel Utie and published after Fenton's death, comprises a number of Fenton's sermons before the king and at Paul's Cross. 
Fenton died on 16 January 1616 and was buried under the communion table at St Stephen Walbrook; his friend Felton preached the funeral sermon. His epitaph speaks of him as dying prematurely, and the parish erected a monument to mark the community's loss. The father of Thomas Fuller, the ecclesiastical historian, regarded Fenton as painful, pious, and learned. According to Utie he was admired as both preacher and writer, and noted for his 'naked innocencie without affection, and the naturall majestie of the style, like a Master Bee without a sting' (Utie, sig. A2). 


@@@@@


doc= 9300


Fenwick, Francis (1645-1694), Benedictine monk, was born in London of an ancient Northumberland family. He entered the English Benedictine priory of St Edmund, Paris, where he was professed on 1 November 1664, and graduated MA from the Sorbonne in 1670, presumably after ordination. He acted as secretary to the president general of the English Benedictines in 1675, and in 1677 became a doctor of theology of the Sorbonne, the same year as his election as a Benedictine master-general. During this period he seems to have acted as tutor to Robert Throckmorton. From 1685 he worked on the English mission in London and preached at the consecration of Bishop Bonaventure Giffard in the banqueting house at Whitehall in April 1688. He returned to Paris to become prior of St Edmund's (1689-93) where he tightened discipline and succeeded in stabilizing the monastery's financial position and ennobling its chapel with a fine organ. As prior he also welcomed the eldest son of the king of Tartary, introducing him, at the request of Dom Joseph Johnston, to Bossuet, who would act as his tutor. He resolutely maintained his Jacobitism in Paris, visiting St Germain and receiving James II in 1693 when the disguised king paid a visit to the monastery. He was opposed to the declaration of toleration for members of the Church of England which the earl of Melfort drew up for James, but continued to act in Paris as the channel of Melfort's correspondence with England, especially that directed to the Anglican Sir John Fenwick. At the general chapter of 1693 James II sought to have him remain in Paris as his chaplain 'because the king would find him most useful at this time' and was impressed by his preaching and 'his most sweet affable temper' (Weldon, 'Memorials', 4.84; 1.480). However, the chapter, although initially favourable, eventually appointed him, with the queen's support, as superior for life of the English Benedictine college of St Gregory (or Cajetan College) in Trastevere, Rome, allowing him its revenues for life provided he repaid its debts. In Rome he championed the cause of the English Benedictines against the claims of the vicars apostolic, and acted as the Jacobite agent to the papal court. He died unexpectedly on 30 October 1694 and was buried the following month in the English College, Rome, where his epitaph survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 9301


Fenwick, George (c.1603-1657), colonist in America, army officer, and politician, was the son of George Fenwick of Brinkburn, Northumberland, a country squire, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of John Forster of Newham. He matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1619, was called to the bar at Gray's Inn, London, on 21 November 1631, and was admitted ancient on 24 May 1650. He married, at some time between 1634 and 1639, Alice (died 1645/1648), daughter of Sir Edward Apsley of Thakenham, Sussex, and widow of Sir John Boteler of Teston, Kent (died 1634). 
Fenwick was a proprietor of land in southern New England acquired through the 1632 patent of Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick. In 1636 he arrived in New England as the vanguard of an expected wave of puritan grandees preparing to settle along the Connecticut River. This grand migration never fully materialized and Fenwick's initial stay was short. Nevertheless, he helped establish a defensive fort called Saybrook, in honour of Lord Saye and Sele and Lord Brook, two patent holders, at the mouth of the Connecticut River before departing for England that same year. He returned with his wife and household to establish a plantation at Saybrook in 1639. There he served as agent for the patentees and 'de facto' governor until 1644. 
Although he did not accept their invitation in 1639 to become a freeman and magistrate, Fenwick worked co-operatively with the leaders of neighbouring Connecticut colony. On 29 July 1641 he joined with agents of Connecticut and New Haven to acquire the earl of Stirling's land claims to Long Island. In 1643 Connecticut paid $40 for repairs to the Saybrook Fort, which protected both the Saybrook plantation and Connecticut's upriver towns. That same year Fenwick served as a commissioner from Connecticut for the United Colonies of New England, an intra-colonial defensive alliance. He was reappointed commissioner in 1644 and 1645, and named a magistrate of Connecticut colony in 1644 and 1645 and 'in absentia' in 1647 and 1648. 
On 5 December 1644 Fenwick, as agent for the Warwick patentees, sold the Saybrook Fort and lands along the Connecticut River to Connecticut colony for $1800, of which Fenwick received $1600 through levies on goods passing the mouth of the Connecticut River. Fenwick had also promised to convey to Connecticut lands mentioned in the Warwick patent between the Connecticut River and Narragansett Bay, if it came into his power to do so. His inability to make good on the transfer of these patent lands, which may have been due to the questionable validity of the Warwick patent itself, led in later years to numerous disputes. In 1657 Connecticut refused to give Fenwick's heirs possession of his estate until they paid $500 for non-fulfilment of the agreement. 
Fenwick returned to England in 1645. His wife, Alice, who died at Saybrook shortly afterwards, following the birth of their second child, Dorothy, was interred within the fort. In England Fenwick served under Warwick as a member of the parliamentary commission for the English plantations in America. On 20 October 1645 he was elected to the Long Parliament as a member for Morpeth. During the second civil war he commanded a regiment of northern militia, took part in the defeat of Sir Richard Tempest, relieved Holy Island and recaptured Fenham Castle. On the surrender of Berwick he became governor of that place, apparently as deputy for Sir Arthur Haslerig, with whom he served on the commission for plantations, and whose eldest daughter, Catherine (1635-1670), became Fenwick's second wife. Fenwick was appointed one of the commissioners for the trial of the king, but did not act. In 1650 he took part in Cromwell's invasion of Scotland, was made governor of Leith and Edinburgh Castle in December 1650, and took Hume Castle in February 1651. He was also one of the eight commissioners appointed for the government of Scotland in December 1651. In the two parliaments of 1654 and 1656 he represented Berwick, and was one of the members excluded from the second of those parliaments. According to his monument in the parish church of Berwick, Fenwick died on 15 March 1657, and this is confirmed by the fact that a new writ for Berwick was moved on 26 March 1657. In some accounts Fenwick is confused with Lieutenant-Colonel Roger Fenwick, who was killed in the battle of Dunkirk on 4 June 1658. 


@@@@@


doc= 9302


Fenwick, Sir John, first baronet (1579-c.1658), politician and landowner, was the son of Sir William Fenwick ('c'.1550-1613) of Wallington, Northumberland, and his wife, Grace, daughter of Sir John Forster of Edderstone. His parents married in 1579, and he is recorded as thirty-five in his father's inquisition post mortem in 1614. The Fenwicks were a powerful county family. From his father John inherited Fenwick, East Matfen, Wallington, Camboe, Walker, Eshington, Gunnerton, Ryal, Sweethope, Harewood, and several other rents and smaller properties. John's maternal grandfather had already settled on him in April 1602 the manor of Hexham, along with extensive further properties and incomes. In 1618 he purchased Rothley from William, Lord Eure, for $1000 and in 1632 the regality of Hexham. Together these properties gave him significant interests in coal- and lead-mining. He was noted for the horses he bred -- 'the best horses ever was in England for coursing', according to his nephew -- and suffered huge losses during the civil war from the requisitions of the Scottish army for cavalry mounts (Underdown, 50). As lieutenant of Tynemouth Castle he was granted 100 marks a year out of the rents of the ninth earl of Northumberland, when the disgraced earl was restored as governor, and he was allowed to remain in post after Northumberland was released from the Tower in 1621. 
Fenwick married three times. In 1602 he wedded Catherine, daughter of Sir Ralph Slingsby of Scriven, a client of the Percys. Their only son, John, was killed fighting for his king at Marston Moor. The couple also had two daughters, Catherine and Elizabeth. About 1620 he married Grace Loraine, with whom he had a daughter, Grace, and two sons, the future Sir William Fenwick (died 1676), father of Sir John Fenwick, the Jacobite conspirator executed in 1697, and Allan (died 1673). His third wife, about whom very little is known, was the daughter of a Mr Bone. 
Fenwick purchased a baronetcy in 1628, and served as a knight of the shire for Northumberland in every parliamentary session from 1624 until the civil war; only in the Long Parliament did he initially represent another seat, Cockermouth (probably through Percy influence) between February 1641 and January 1642, before choosing to sit again for Northumberland when a seat was vacated there. As deputy lieutenant in the county he was active in mustering forces against the Scots, and he remained loyal to the crown through most of the first civil war; these royalist sympathies being manifest, he was excluded from the Commons on 22 January 1644. In December that year Fenwick was captured by parliamentarian forces while riding towards Banbury and, deciding that co-operation was the safest course, he subsequently accepted the new regime, being appointed high sheriff of Northumberland and being readmitted to the House of Commons on 26 June 1646. He was also named a member of a commission for the conservation of peace between England and Scotland, appointed in the same year. Thereafter, with advancing years and with the English revolution taking ever more extreme forms, he kept a lower profile and abstained from attending the house after Pride's Purge. He died about 1658. 


@@@@@


doc= 9303


Caldwell, John (1628-1679), Jesuit, was born in co. Durham of protestant parents who disowned him when, on his arriving at mature age, he embraced the Roman Catholic faith. He studied humanities at the English College at St Omer from 1654 to 1656 and entered the Society of Jesus at Watten on 28 September 1656. He studied philosophy and theology at the Jesuit college at Liege from 1657 to 1664. Having completed his studies he was ordained priest in 1664 and was procurator or agent at the English College, St Omer, from 1665 to 1672. He returned to Watten in 1672, was made a professed father in 1673 and was sent to England in the same year. He used the alias John Fenwick. He lived in London at the College of St Ignatius (1674-9) and also acted as procurator of St Omer's College. In the fourth year of his ministerial labours he was summoned, on the information of Titus Oates, to appear before the privy council, and was committed to Newgate. After suffering a long and painful confinement he was tried for high treason with Father Ireland, but as the evidence was insufficient, he was remanded back to prison. He was arraigned a second time at the Old Bailey on 13 June 1679, together with four other Jesuit fathers. Oates and Dugdale were witnesses against them, and in accordance with the direction of Chief Justice Scroggs the jury found the prisoners guilty. They suffered death at Tyburn on 20 June 1679. Caldwell's remains were buried in the churchyard of St Giles-in-the-Fields. An account of 'The tryals and condemnation... for high treason, in conspiring the death of the king, the subversion of the government and protestant religion' of the five Jesuits was published in 1679 and an account of their final protestations and devotions was published as 'A Remonstrance of Piety and Innocence' in 1683. Caldwell was beatified by Pope Pius XI on 15 December 1929 with other victims of the Popish Plot. 


@@@@@


doc= 9304


Fenwick, Sir John, third baronet (c.1644-1697), army officer and Jacobite conspirator, was born at Wallington, Northumberland, the only son (with two sisters) of Sir William Fenwick, second baronet ('c'.1617-1676), of Wallington, Northumberland, and his first wife, Jane (died 'c'.1665), daughter of Henry Stapilton of Wighill, Yorkshire. His grandfather was the parliamentarian MP Sir John Fenwick (1579-c.1658), and his father was a moderate parliamentarian MP as well. 
Fenwick was a delicate child, whose mother's excessive devotion caused his father's lifelong hatred. On 14 July 1663, aged about nineteen, he married at St James's Clerkenwell Lady Mary [
Fenwick began an army career. He was a captain in a short-lived regiment in 1667, obtained a cornetcy in the queen's Life Guards in 1672, and was gradually promoted to lieutenant-colonel by 1681, while serving in higher temporary ranks elsewhere. He combined his military career with a reputation for dissipation. In February 1671 he fought a duel with John Churchill, later first duke of Marlborough, after a quarrel at a masquerade, and was one of a party of drunken courtiers, headed by two dukes, who murdered a beadle outside a brothel. This behaviour was perhaps appropriate to a gentleman of Charles II's privy chamber, an appointment Fenwick received in 1671 and retained until Charles's death. One particularly ill-informed lampoon claimed that Charles had knighted Fenwick after seducing Lady Mary, but Fenwick was never knighted. His letters written from prison in 1696 show their underlying devotion. However, he retained the manners of a Restoration courtier, and in 1686 was still trailing ludicrously after the reigning court beauty. Fenwick was a good horse-breeder, but the legend which makes him a major introducer of foreign stocks at Charles's behest confuses him with his grandfather and namesake, Charles I's master of the stud. 
Fenwick saw service abroad when from 1672 to 1674 he was a captain in the Royal English infantry regiment serving with the French army against the Dutch and empire, campaigning under Turenne. After England left the Third Anglo-Dutch War, he went in 1675 to the Netherlands, having been strongly recommended by James, duke of York, to William of Orange, and was made colonel on 3 September NS of an under-strength English regiment in the Anglo-Dutch brigade. Fenwick attempted in vain to recruit for it in England over the winter, as he had been unable to match the better terms offered by French recruiters, and early in 1676 he suggested to William that he might raise the English regiments' pay. The wanton insult with which William replied, determining their future relations, is recorded in several versions: Lady Mary's is: ''I make their pay better,[?] I would not, Sir, go to that door to oblige an Englishman'... 'Then, Sir, I am sorry I am in your service'... 'You may quit it when you please...'' ('Life of Fenwick', BL, Add. MS 47608, fol. 168). Fenwick determined to campaign that summer for his own reputation, further alienating William. He served with distinction, but was abruptly called home by his father's death, about June 1676. 
Fenwick found that Sir William had burdened the estate with $4000 debt and $1900 annuities. He was driven to sell his lead mines for absurdly low prices to the younger William Blackett (1657-1705), who made his fortune by them. 
Fenwick was returned in his father's place for Northumberland on 15 March 1677, probably without a contest. On 19 February 1678 he was made colonel of a new infantry regiment, which he raised among his northern gentry neighbours; it served in Flanders, but was disbanded in March 1679. In the exclusion crisis Fenwick was a tory, but represented the views of the Northumberland gentry, including their suspicion of papists, rather than those of the court. In 1679 he not only refused to support for the other county seat a servant of James's suspected of popery, but contributed $1000 for his successful rival's campaign. He was re-elected for the three Exclusion Parliaments, and was a JP and deputy lieutenant in Northumberland. The continuing factional dispute set him against the lord lieutenant, Henry Cavendish, second duke of Newcastle; but he was made governor of Holy Island on 1 May 1681, and was re-elected to the Commons in 1685 amid local rejoicing. During the rising of Archibald Campbell, ninth earl of Argyll, in Scotland following the accession of James II and VII he left parliament and went north as a brigadier-general to command the regular and local militia forces against a possible extension of Argyll's campaign to the borders. The claim that he carried up Monmouth's attainder from the Commons to the Lords was invented to justify his own attainder. 
Fenwick, while maintaining his independent line in the county during James II's Catholicizing campaign, was probably more compliant before James himself. He became colonel of a regiment of horse (the later 3rd dragoon guards) on 6 November 1687, and was recommended as court candidate for Northumberland in 1688. During the campaign against William, Fenwick, promoted major-general on 6 November 1688, led westwards a force intended to protect Bristol, but in the panic over officers' defections he was recalled. In early December he commanded 5000 men around Windsor, but was beset by desertions among his men and plots to seize him among his officers. After James's first flight, he refused to head the provisional government's military force. He escorted James back from Faversham with his life guards. As the king prepared to flee again, he surrendered to him his commissions, prompting at some point William's sneer that he would not make him a corporal though James had made him a brigadier. Parting from him at Rochester, James urged him to seek re-election and support his rights. However, Fenwick's solvency collapsed once he lost government office. He had to sell Wallington to Blackett for $4000 and a $2000 annuity for his and Lady Mary's lives. As he was still pursued by his and Sir William's creditors -- Slingsby Bethel the republican was the most troublesome -- little was available for him. 
In March 1689 Fenwick and other former courtiers of James II were fomenting disturbances in the Borders near Carlisle to assist the invasion of Scotland which, James had written, he would shortly be mounting from Ireland. When this did not take place, and government troops appeared, they surrendered or drifted away. Fenwick was arrested in the north in April and committed to the Tower on 13 May. He was bailed in October and discharged on 28 November. He apparently never strayed far from London again. Meanwhile, Lady Mary had begun involving herself in every Jacobite intrigue from encouraging weavers' riots to exhorting the French to invade. The turncoat songwriter Thomas D'Urfey caricatured her as 'Lady Addleplot' in the 1691 play 'Love for Money'. The two other main former soldier-courtiers prominent in Jacobite conspiracy, Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe and Edward Sackville, also had active wives. 
Fenwick was intended for military command in any Jacobite rising to be held in 1689-90. His own former court position enabled Williamite military officers to approach him with protestations of continuing secret loyalty, real or feigned; he was not good at discriminating. During the 1690 invasion crisis, he was again temporarily sent to the Tower. 
After James returned from Ireland to St Germain, he appointed a 'select Number' -- this was apparently the group's actual title ('JHC', 11.577; BL, Add. MS 47608, fol. 120) -- of six Jacobites to manage his affairs and send him information of political events and secret military and naval intelligence, the most prominent of whom was probably the earl of Ailesbury. Fenwick was distinctly a second-rank figure in the 'select number', and his imprudent conduct sometimes justified this. In April and May 1691 Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe and he displayed overt and sometimes indecent rudeness to Queen Mary in St James's Park, openly mocking her when the French captured Mons almost under William's eyes, until they were forbidden access. William, indignant that anyone else should insult her, declared (as in several of his quarrels) that, were he a private man, he would challenge Fenwick; and remembered the incident vindictively. 
Fenwick and the 'select number' were expected to try to win back leading Williamites to assist in restoring James, but disagreements over methods and implications divided leading Jacobites into two factions. The 'compounders' believed that major concessions must be made in negotiations with politicians supporting William's government in order to restore James peacefully. Fenwick and most of the 'select number' became 'non-compounders', who thought that these concessions would place James and his supporters in their enemies' hands, and believed that only a large-scale French invasion could bring a successful restoration. Personal hostilities reinforced distrust: one important contact of the compounders was Marlborough, but Fenwick distrusted him and his main Jacobite go-between, Edward Sackville. As relations worsened, the conspirators 'had no Communication one with another: There was a Distinction made between Compounders and Non-compounders; and so we had no Conversation together' (Fenwick's second confession, 'JHC', 11.579). Most of Fenwick's information on compounding negotiations was secondhand, out of context, and sometimes inaccurate: this would make confirming it difficult when his life depended on this. 
If the non-compounders' strategy was to be plausible, the English Jacobites must rise to support the French invasion. At the most promising opportunity, the French invasion attempt from La Hogue in May 1692, the 'select number' failed to provide an urgently needed overall organizing authority in London. Quarrels between Fenwick and Sackville over which was the elder major-general with the right to command the force helped paralyse preparations. As the crisis approached Fenwick, Sackville, and Oglethorpe met; 'but all we considered of, was how to save ourselves from being taken up' (Fenwick's second confession, 'JHC', 11.579). When it came Fenwick, put in the proclamation of 9 May, just escaped arrest, losing his breeches, and hid successfully. 
The disaster at La Hogue threw the initiative to the compounders. In April 1693 Charles Middleton, second earl of Middleton, crossed over to become a Jacobite secretary of state, eclipsing his colleague, John Drummond, earl of Melfort. Middleton prepared to have James issue a declaration containing major concessions. Too late, the 'select number' secretly sent over Ailesbury with an offer from tory admirals to connive at an invasion. Once the declaration had been issued, the 'select number' were wrong-footed. They met at Fenwick's house to send out agents to stir up corn riots, following Lady Mary's example in exploiting social discontent, but without support from the Jacobite court their appeals for a further invasion attempt were fruitless. 
The death of Mary II in December 1694, leaving the unpopular William alone, revived the enthusiasm of the 'select number'. In April 1695 they sent over a carefully prepared scheme to finance the Jacobite cause by large-scale coining in France, in which several rich men were ready to invest $20,000. That month Fenwick found that Robert Charnock and other officers of Colonel John Parker's secret Jacobite regiment were planning William's assassination (under the euphemism kidnapping), misled into supposing that James would soon send a warrant for it. Fenwick declared his (justified) disbelief in this and violently opposed the scheme. However, one of his subsequent confessions, claiming that his arguments and trickery alone had prevented the attempt, was clearly exaggerated: Charnock would not have become so absorbed by Fenwick's conversation as to forget he had a regicide prepared. Fenwick and three others of the 'select number', the brewer Sir John Friend and several officers of Parker's, meeting twice in May 1695 (just after the Act of Grace pardoned most earlier Jacobite intrigue), sent Charnock to France with a memorial arguing that a French invasion 10,000 strong, launched that summer before William's return from the continent, would be sufficient to take advantage of English disillusion with William. Yet only Charnock's repeated emphasis that the mission would be futile without it drove them to add a promise that they would have 2000 Jacobite horse raised and ready to join the landing. Their immediate willingness to swell the number to 4000 or even 10,000, and their argument, when prosecuted, that such a small offer could not be made seriously, shows their unreliability. Fenwick added a request for a new commission as major-general. 
Charnock, returning, found the point he had insisted upon compromised. After Parker had fled to France, his officers had looked to Fenwick to command them in a sudden crisis. On 10 June 1695 Fenwick joined several of them in what was intended as a formal propaganda celebration in Drury Lane for the birthday of James Francis Edward, prince of Wales. It became a drunken riot in which they were routed by local butchers and arrested. Rather than preparing the promised help for the invasion, they were now awaiting fines or imprisonment. Fenwick was acquitted on proving, humiliatingly, that when the serious rioting began he was already too drunk to stand. 
Nevertheless, when James that winter did receive a small French force with which to launch an invasion, according to James Fitzjames, duke of Berwick, overall general of the intended English risings, Fenwick was to command the putative 2000 horse in London and the south-east, though Brigadier-General Sir George Barclay was sent over as his second in command. Fenwick complained that he and his 'select number' colleagues received no warning of the coming invasion. Barclay swiftly concluded that the London Jacobites were hopelessly unready to rise, and turned to plotting assassination. Since Fenwick had so opposed the previous spring's plot, Barclay avoided approaching him. The assassination plot was exposed on 23 February 1696, before the invasion was quite ready -- though, Ailesbury claimed, Fenwick had a brief outburst of wild optimism. Virtually all Jacobites had to go into hiding. 
George Porter, a leading assassin who turned king's evidence, had attended the meetings which sent Charnock to France; and he persuaded the actor Cardell Goodman, who had not been there at the crucial moments, to be the necessary second witness. This, by contemporary convention, would allow Fenwick to deny the mission in his last speech. Fenwick and his fellow of the 'select number' William Herbert, Viscount Montgomery, later second marquess of Powis, remained in hiding while their wives tried to bribe Porter to cross to France, but on 6 May he entrapped their agent. In mid-June Fenwick fled from London through Kent, hoping to escape to France. However, Charles Talbot, duke of Shrewsbury, secretary of state to William III, had him under observation, and, although a messenger's recognition at Canterbury caused him to swerve aside, he was captured on 12 June at New Romney, and a compromising note to Lady Mary was intercepted. On 19 June the lords justices sent him to the Tower. 
To escape trial and execution without infringing his honour, Fenwick applied to the lord steward, William Cavendish, first duke of Devonshire, offering, if he were pardoned and not made a witness, to confess some vital secrets to William alone -- something several respectable politicians had done. Devonshire wrote to William on 7 July. Shrewsbury later added that Sir John was 'generally reputed a fearful man', and might confess enough to save his life: 'if he were well managed he might... facilitate the business in the next session' ('Private and Original Correspondence of... Shrewsbury', 131-2) by exposing crypto-Jacobite opposition MPs. However, when Devonshire, under strict promises of confidentiality (afterwards ignored), interviewed him on William's orders on 11 August, his 'confession' dealt almost entirely with the dealings of the major 'compounding' politicians, Shrewsbury himself, Admiral Edward Russell, and Sidney, Lord Godolphin, all then in office, and Marlborough, with Middleton: their failure to keep their promises to James, he considered, justified this limited exposure. Devonshire, though he told Fenwick he believed William had heard most of this before, was shaken, and secretly sent William the confession. Fenwick soon added the tale of saving William from assassination in 1695. 
William probably believed most, but not all, of Fenwick's charges, but was angered that he had said so little on the non-compounders' intrigues. Fenwick was told that his paper was unsatisfactory and that his trial would proceed. He was arraigned on 17 September. Lady Mary, driven both by desire to save her husband and the hope of overthrowing the compounders, approached his fellow prisoner Ailesbury, urging him to confirm Fenwick's account. When Ailesbury refused, Lady Mary threatened that Fenwick would testify against Ailesbury in court to justify his truthfulness. Either then or after a similar later approach Ailesbury applied obliquely to the men Fenwick had attacked, and they promised that if Ailesbury remained silent they would protect him. Excusing himself that, if unsigned and unsworn, a paper could harm nobody, Fenwick on 23 September made a further confession of the doings of the 'select number'. The trial was again postponed. 
The delays, meanwhile, allowed wild speculation to spread publicly as to whom Fenwick had named. The eccentric whig Charles Mordaunt, earl of Monmouth (later third earl of Peterborough), at first feared that Fenwick had revealed his many Jacobite plots; on finding that he had not, he began demanding that Fenwick's allegations be investigated. Shrewsbury had originally lied unhesitatingly dismissing the paper. Early in October, however, a hunting accident triggered a serious illness which prevented him from returning to London. Hostile observers (including Fenwick) and false witnesses assumed that this was either a trick or psychosomatic guilt. Foreseeing such attacks, he tried to resign, which only confirmed his critics' suspicions. The government realized that Fenwick's papers must be brought into parliament and denounced, and made careful preparations. However, ministers failed to stop Jacobites hired by Ailesbury, Montgomery, and Lady Mary from carrying Goodman off to France about 1 November. They now lacked the second witness necessary for a trial. 
William reluctantly agreed to see Fenwick, just transferred to Newgate, before the cabinet on 2 November. It was probably not Goodman's escape that made Fenwick again refuse to speak, for he showed no confidence, but repeatedly begged to consult Devonshire. He declared that his knowledge was only for William's ear. 'You shall trust where I trust', he replied (cabinet minute, 2 Nov 1696, BL, Add. MS 72567). Fenwick would not either withdraw his accusations or further confess his own activities. As he refused to say anything more without further time to consider, William finally said: 'Be it so, I will neither hear you nor hear from you any more' ('Private and Original Correspondence of... Shrewsbury', 421). 
On 6 November Fenwick's two main papers were read before the Commons. Fenwick, called in, refused several times to speak out. The papers were voted false and scandalous; then, in a thinning house, the whigs obtained a surprise vote for a bill of attainder by 179 to 61. Fenwick's letters to his wife help explain his ineffectiveness over the next crucial weeks. Disorientated and sickened by pipe-smoking soldiers in his cell, he was denied pen and ink and almost totally cut off from outside contact. He had never had the promised copies of his papers, and was uncertain what they contained. He did not know which of them had been read out -- that, for instance, his paper on saving William's life had been suppressed before Commons and Lords. He did not know about the attainder until he was hurried to answer it. His morale was unsurprisingly low: any hope at the start of a letter can be seen draining away during it. 
Support and opposition for the attainder produced odd allies. Some knew his claims were largely true. 'Damn him!', said Marlborough's brother George Churchill, 'thrust a billet down his throat. Dead men tell no tales' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.412). But some whigs saw features -- sentences implying that the compounders were behind the assassination plot, for instance -- which did suggest a plot-forger denigrating their whole party. Many strong opponents thought badly of Fenwick -- worse than he deserved, since the government rumour mill was busy -- but were shocked at the procedure against such an inconsiderable man: in particular, the reliance on one notoriously criminal witness and the past testimony of another. The destruction of Jacobite communications after the assassination plot meant that St Germain hardly intervened directly. Once the sponsors considered dropping the bill, and the Commons third reading passed only by 189 to 156, with some government supporters opposing or abstaining. Beneath the surface convention that Fenwick was lying, there was deep unease and curiosity. 
Lady Mary was meanwhile approached by Monmouth, via the duchess of Norfolk and other intermediaries, all with their own agenda. Monmouth's aim was revenge on William and on Shrewsbury. Fenwick received from Monmouth papers suggesting lines of defence, hostile or friendly witnesses to be called, and documents to be unearthed. Although much of this was mistaken in detail, acting on it boldly provided his best chance of escape. He failed yet again to act, from a general distrust of Monmouth, a particular fear that he might be acting in concert with the persons Fenwick had named to entrap Lady Mary, and growing despair. Monmouth in revenge threw himself into supporting the bill in the Lords. His energy may have been decisive, for the third reading, on 23 December, passed by only 68 to 61. The peers and the bishops William's government had made were the bulk of its majority. Marlborough got Princess Anne's court to support the bill; Godolphin, by then out of office, opposed it throughout. Lady Mary and the duchess of Norfolk in revenge exposed Monmouth's double dealing. The Lords' inquiry in January sent Monmouth briefly to the Tower. The revelations might have helped Fenwick a month earlier; but the bill had been passed. Lady Mary's petitions, mentioning the supposed saving of William's life, had no effect. 
William passed the act of attainder on 12 January 1697. Fenwick's connections to so many noble families, his former military rank, and, perhaps, the irregular means through which he was condemned led him to be beheaded, like a peer. Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, had been one of the most violent of the bill's clerical supporters, possibly hoping for preferment. Now he obtained permission for the aged nonjuring bishop Thomas White, former bishop of Peterborough, to attend Fenwick on the scaffold on Tower Hill on 28 January 1697. Fenwick died composedly and bravely. He left a paper protesting at the injustice of his attainder and proclaiming his loyalty to King James. White, denying authorship, said that he would have included stronger reproaches, particularly against Devonshire. Ailesbury's tale that he left a letter reproaching Lady Mary with his loss of life and honour fairly certainly merely reflects Ailesbury's uneasy conscience. Fenwick's body was placed in a rich coffin and buried in the early hours of 29 January by torchlight beside his children in St Martin-in-the-Fields Church. 
On 27 March 1700 Fenwick's forfeited personal estate was granted to his wife's nephew Charles Howard, third earl of Carlisle, to satisfy Carlisle's own claims and those of Fenwick's creditors. Lady Mary Fenwick devoted her remaining years to commemorating her husband (though her biography remained incomplete) and paying off his debts from her annuity. She settled in York Minster close, in part of the Treasurer's House. She died on 27 October 1708, and was buried in York Minster under a monument she had erected to her husband and father. 
In his early life there would appear to be two Sir John Fenwicks: the able young soldier and MP defying his patrons to support local wishes; and the court debauche. Incidents like the Drury Lane riot suggest that the second took over. 'His temper was most good', wrote Ailesbury, 'but his headpiece was none of the best' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.273). He broke the convention that some political secrets, however widely shared, must not be publicly mentioned, and suffered for it. The Jacobites viewed Sir John Fenwick as a martyr. Objectively, his lack of the steadfastness much lesser figures had shown, and his willingness to confess matters liable to damage the cause, made him undeserving. What attracted sympathy was the sight of the basic rules of law being laid aside, and the whole cumbersome machinery of government and patronage being set in motion to destroy one unimportant man, against whom the king had one of his many personal vendettas. Disgust over this gave added fury to the parliamentary reaction against William after the peace of 1697. It was generally believed, after his horse Sorrel stumbled and threw him in 1702, precipitating his death, that Sorrel was formerly Fenwick's, confiscated on his attainder -- perhaps truly, but, when there remained a general belief in a guiding providence, the story indicates what many besides Jacobites thought of William's treatment of Fenwick. 
Acts of attainder were discredited by their employment against such small fry. They continued to be used, but not as substitutes for trials unlikely to produce a guilty verdict. However, his condemnation, and the imprisonment without trial of assassination plot suspects, in most cases for life, by acts automatically renewed, indicated a shift in method. The Stuarts, when they wished to strain the law, had employed the judges and courts; governments after the revolution employed parliament. 
In attainting Fenwick, the whig ministers failed to deter further allegations against members of the government. Professional false witnesses swarmed to execute variations on Fenwick's story, and, being without regard for truth, they were far harder to silence. Success in one of their false claims might have made possible a re-examination of the whole case, with the possibility of showing that William himself had suppressed knowledge of treason in high places: there were great possibilities for blackmail. Until ill health drove Shrewsbury from the country in 1700, his colleagues had to spend much time protecting him against them. Even from his enemies' viewpoint, Fenwick died largely in vain. 


@@@@@


doc= 9305


Fenwicke, George (1689-1760), Church of England clergyman, was born on 11 December 1689 at Hallaton, Leicestershire, son of William Fenwicke (died 1750), successively rector of Thakeham, Sussex, and of Hallaton and Carlton Curlieu in Leicestershire, and his wife, Cecily, daughter of Gilbert Coles, rector of Easton, Hampshire. He was educated at Winchester College and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1705 and proceeded BA in 1709, MA in 1712, and BD in 1720. He was elected a fellow of St John's in 1710 but gave up his fellowship in 1722 on becoming rector of Hallaton, on the resignation of his father. Ordained deacon by the bishop of London in 1712 he was priested by the bishop of Lincoln in 1713. 
Fenwicke's 'Thoughts upon the Hebrew Titles of the Psalms' (1749) and 'The psalter in its original form, or, The book of Psalms reduced to lines in an easy and familiar style and a kind of blank verse of unequal measure' (1759) showed that he was an able Hebraist. He quoted the distinguished Hebrew scholar Robert Lowth, provided explanatory notes, and gave variant readings. He published two devotional manuals, 'Help for the Sincere, in Plain Meditations' (1737) and 'A manual for the devout: consisting of devotions for ordinary occasions and for the holy communion: taken chiefly from Bishop Andrewes, and Bishop Taylor, and fitted for the general use' (n.d.). He also published two sermons. 
Fenwicke married three times. His first wife was Mary, daughter of the Revd Nichol of Preston Capes, Northamptonshire, and she died on 8 August 1726. His second wife, Alice, daughter of John Hickman of Malpas, Cheshire, died on 5 January 1738. Fenwicke had two sons with Alice: George, who died in 1750, and John, who succeeded his father as rector of Hallaton. A third marriage, to Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd John Yates, rector of Ayston, Rutland, and widow of Thomas White of Ayston, ended with her death on 3 January 1754. 
Fenwicke gave sets of communion silver to Hallaton church and to its chapelry of Blaston, each piece inscribed 'All for the love of Jesus'. With a bequest from a Mrs Parker he established an almshouse in Hallaton to house three poor old women or men of the parish, and he himself bequeathed two houses and some land, the income to be devoted to the rector of Hallaton, the poor of the parish, and the school. Fenwicke died on 10 April 1760 and was commemorated by a monument outside the chancel of Hallaton church, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 9306


Fenwick, John (b. in or after 1593, d. c.1670), merchant and parliamentarian army officer, was a younger son of Roger Fenwick ('c'.1566-1618), gentleman, of Bitchfield, in the parish of Stamfordham, Northumberland, and his wife, Mabel. His approximate date of birth is derived from that of his elder brother, who was born in 1592 or 1593. John Fenwick was apprenticed on 31 May 1612 to Robert Bewick of Newcastle upon Tyne, boothman. He became a merchant of Newcastle, and by 1628 had married Jane, daughter of John Hall of Newcastle. By 1633 his interests in the textile trade were worth $4000, placing him among Newcastle's wealthiest merchants. 
After returning from residence on the continent Fenwick travelled to Scotland three times between October 1638 and January 1639, and subscribed to the national covenant. Secretary Windebank ordered his arrest for this 'most notorious and base treachery' (Welford, 368), but Fenwick escaped to Scotland and his wife and servant were questioned in his absence. He returned accompanying the covenanter army at Newburn on 28 August 1640, and attended Alexander Henderson's sermons with General Leslie at St Nicholas's Church, Newcastle, during the Scots' occupation of Newcastle. 
In 1641 Fenwick denounced Thomas Morton, bishop of Durham, in his tract 'The Downfall of the Pretended Divine Authoritie of the Hierarchy into the Sea of Rome'. He drew connections between the strength of Roman Catholicism in the Newcastle area and the Arminianism of the Durham Cathedral clergy, whom he decried as 'more fit for a stage than a pulpit, and other popish Arminian Mountebancks that vend Italian wares' (Howell, 'Newcastle-upon-Tyne', 141). After the Scots' departure in 1641 Fenwick's wife, 'another Priscilla, the ornament of her sex' ('Ambrose Barnes', 133), interrupted the sermon of Newcastle's returning vicar, provoking a riot in which the mayor had to intervene to save her life. 
On 8 September 1643 Fenwick was disenfranchised from Newcastle's corporation and his remaining estate was confiscated by royalists. That year he became the publicist for Newcastle's puritan minority, admonishing the townspeople for their sins in his next tract, 'Christ Ruling in the Midst of his Enemies'. On Sir William Armyne's recommendation he was appointed master of Sherburn Hospital in co. Durham on 30 September 1644. He became a lieutenant-colonel in parliament's army, and on 18 August 1647 parliament ordered that $500 be paid to him towards his arrears during his service in Ireland. On 6 May 1650 the council of state recommended his petition that his son John should succeed him as master of Sherburn for life. 
Fenwick enrolled his sons John and Joshua as merchant adventurers of Newcastle in 1655 and 1658, but after the Restoration his son was ejected from Sherburn's mastership. A John Fenwick was listed as a non-communicant and presented at All Saints', Newcastle, in 1662. He appears to have died about 1670. 


@@@@@


doc= 9307


Feologeld (d. 832), archbishop of Canterbury, subscribed an act of the Council of 'Clofesho' in 803 as abbot of a Kentish monastery. He was elected to succeed Archbishop Wulfred on 25 April 832, was consecrated on Sunday, 9 June, and died on 30 August. He may be identical with Swithred, who appears in some early lists as archbishop at this time. 


@@@@@


doc= 9308


Ferdinand, Philip (1556-1599), Hebrew and Arabic scholar, was born of Jewish parentage in Poland in 1556. In his youth he studied the 'Talmud' in the traditional Jewish manner and, judging from his elegant Latin, his command of Greek, and his fine handwriting, also received a humanist education. After about 1580 he was in Constantinople where he consorted with the Karaites, the Jewish sectarians who rejected the 'Talmud' and the rabbinic tradition. He probably also travelled further afield in the Levant and there acquired his knowledge of Arabic and Syriac. About 1585 he converted to Roman Catholicism. Some ten years later he came to England, converted to protestantism, and made for Oxford, where he arrived in a state of penury. With the backing of the theologians Henry Airay of Queen's College and John Rainolds of Corpus Christi he gave tuition in Hebrew at various colleges, taking the oath of loyalty to the queen and university on 21 June 1596. 
On 16 December 1596 Ferdinand matriculated at Cambridge. Attached to Peterhouse, he received 40's'. from the Perne foundation to give Hebrew lessons at individual colleges and, according to a letter by William Eyre of Emmanuel College, also taught Arabic. William Gouge and Richard Montagu, both of King's College, were among his other students. Although his lessons were found tedious by most of his pupils, who 'grew soon weary and left him' (Clarke, 236), Eyre and Gouge, who stuck to him, remembered him with the utmost gratitude. 
In Cambridge in 1597 Ferdinand published his only book, 'Haec sunt verba Dei', an anthology of post-biblical Jewish writings which included a commentary on the 613 commandments of the 'Pentateuch' as collected by Abraham ben Hasan, the hermeneutic rules of Rabbi Ishmael, and Maimonides's thirteen articles of faith. The book was a compilation in an established tradition of works by Jewish converts to Christianity, yet Ferdinand made contributions of his own. He contrasted Sadducean with Pharisaic interpretations of the law and thus brought out the variety of opinions within Judaism. He was also the first scholar to introduce the English Hebraists to certain extracts from rabbinic literature. His book was accordingly influential, referred to frequently by Samuel Purchas, treasured by John Selden, emulated by Hugh Broughton, and assimilated by numerous other students of Jewish tradition. 
Despite his growing reputation, Ferdinand stayed little more than a year in Cambridge. By February 1598 he and his wife, Elizabeth, were put up and paid three halfpence a day by the Domus Conversorum in Chancery Lane in London, the hospital for converted Jews founded by Henry III. In February 1599, however, Ferdinand was invited to Leiden by the great French chronologist Joseph Justus Scaliger. 
In Leiden, where he was also supported by Joannes Drusius, professor of Hebrew at the University of Franeker, Ferdinand started by giving private tuition in Hebrew (ancient and rabbinic) and Syriac. On 1 March the university had announced that he would be lecturing in Arabic grammar in the summer term, and, on 10 August 1599, he was appointed to the newly founded chair of Arabic for a trial period of six months, at a salary of 25 florins a month with the obligation to lecture every morning at 11 o'clock. On 11 August he matriculated officially at the university. 
Ferdinand was more successful in Holland than he had been in England. He trained the Hebraist Guilielmus Coddaeus and, probably, the Arabist Adriaen Willemsz. Scaliger was heavily dependent on him in his study of Judaism. Besides drawing on Ferdinand's knowledge of the Karaites, he studied the 'Talmud' under his supervision and remained impressed by his 'astonishing' familiarity with it (Scaliger, 'Epistolae', 594). For Ferdinand, one of the first central European Jews to settle in the northern Netherlands, had a knowledge of Jewish culture which was altogether new to the scholars in Leiden. On the subject of Arabic Ferdinand published nothing, but the high praise of Eyre and the support of Scaliger, a critical and perceptive judge who had remarkable insights into how Arabic should be studied, suggest that he taught it just as well as Hebrew. 
On 6 November 1599 Ferdinand petitioned Leiden University to extend his appointment at least for a number of years, so that his students could have a greater sense of stability and he himself could bring over his family from the Domus Conversorum in London and have more money to purchase books. His petition was accepted; his professorship was extended for three years from 8 February 1600 (the end of his trial period); and he was granted 100 florins to meet his expenses and cover his very considerable debts in Leiden. Shortly after this, however, probably early in December, Ferdinand fell ill. By 21 December 1599, to Scaliger's intense distress, he was dead. 


@@@@@


doc= 9309


Ferebe, George (b. 1572/3), composer, was born in Gloucestershire and matriculated at Oxford in 1589, aged sixteen. He was a chorister at Magdalen College until 1591 and graduated BA (1592) and MA (1595). He then became vicar of Bishops Cannings, Wiltshire, where he taught young men of the parish to sing and play music. He was probably the George Ferrebe who married Bridget Dugdayle at Bishops Cannings on 23 July 1609. On 11 June 1613 Queen Anne, travelling from Bath, where she had been taking the waters, was scheduled to pass through Wensdyke in the parish of Bishops Cannings. Spotting an opportunity for royal favour, Ferebe created a little pastoral diversion. When Anne reached Wensdyke, Ferebe and his boys approached her, Ferebe wearing 'the habit of an old bard' and the rest of the group masquerading as shepherds. After they had played their wind instruments they sang a song that Ferebe had composed specially, the oddly alliterative 'Shine, o thou sacred shepherd's star, on silly shepherd swaines', and the whole thing was rounded off with an epilogue from the bard himself. The queen was charmed, and Ferebe, thereafter 'valued for his ingenuity' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti'), was later sworn chaplain to the king. The song was published, as was a sermon preached by Ferebe at St John's, Devizes ('Life's Farewell', 1615). 


@@@@@


doc= 9310


Ferg, Franz de Paula (1689-1740), painter, born in Vienna on 2 May 1689, was the son of a history painter, Adam Pankraz Ferg (1651-1729), from whom he received his first instructions in art. His father placed him under an inferior painter of the name of Baschueber, with whom he remained four years. He returned home and studied the engravings of Jacques Callot and probably Sebastien Le Clerc, whose peculiarities were of great influence in forming his style. He then studied at Vienna under Hans Graf, a painter of small landscapes with figures and gatherings such as country fairs, but more permanently under Josef Orient, a well-known landscape painter, in whose house he lived for three years, and often painted the figures for him in his landscapes. In 1718 he left Vienna and travelled to Franconia, Bamberg, and Leipzig, where he met the landscape painter Alexander Thiele. He went with him to Dresden, and worked for some time with him there. He soon gained a great reputation for small landscapes and sea-pieces with figures, and for fairs and peasant scenes in the style of Adrian van Ostade, Nicholaes Berchem, and Cornelis van Poelenburg. These were executed, often on copper, with great care and industry, and were minutely finished. About 1724 he arrived in London where he settled and where, as Vertue recorded, 'his works sold at a good price' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.81). There he found plenty of employment; he was one of the artists employed in the Chelsea china manufactory, for example. However, he drifted into depressed circumstances, which were rendered worse by an unfortunate marriage to a 'boistrous extravagant hussy' who: 'debased his genius and brought him so low, that being quite exhausted, he... dropt down dead before he got home in the street, not aged, but under forty -- and had been in England near twenty years, leaving this wife and four young children in distress. (ibid.)' Vertue considered Ferg 'a painter of uncommon genius for painting landskip & Figures in small, mixt manner of his own, his composition of figures neatly toucht... [with] a fine curious pencil in his Trees distances & decorations' and described him as 'a man of affable and easy temper' (ibid.). He died in London in 1740. There are a number of works by Ferg in the Gemaldegalerie Alte Meister, Dresden, the Belvedere, Vienna, and the Herzog Anton Ulrich Museum, Brunswick, the last holding a set of the four seasons. There are also etchings by him in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 9311


Virgilius (d. 784), bishop of Salzburg, was almost certainly born an Irishman. Both an anonymous verse epitaph and a poem by his younger contemporary, Alcuin, refer to his Irish origin, but nothing is known of his career before he appears in Francia. 
Virgilius is first attested on the continent in or shortly after 743. The earliest account of his career, in the 'Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum', written in 870 or 871, places him at the court at Quierzy of the Carolingian Pippin III, then mayor of the palace, though effective ruler, of the Frankish kingdom. He won the confidence of Pippin and was sent 'c'.745 to Bavaria, apparently with the approval of Odilo, duke of the Bavarians, despite the tense relationship between the two rulers. After the death of John, bishop of Salzburg and abbot of the monastery of St Peter there, in June 746 or 747, Virgilius became abbot-bishop, although he was not consecrated until late 748 or 749. Virgilius may have advised Pippin on issues of canon law, and may also have had a role in procuring the sanction of Pope Zacharias for Pippin's usurpation of the kingship of the Franks, and for the anointing ceremony which followed it. While he was supported by the Bavarian dukes, Virgilius maintained links with the Frankish court and is believed to have worked closely with Fulrad, abbot of St Denis and chaplain to the Carolingian kings. Close connections between Salzburg and St Denis are suggested by the script in use at Salzburg, which resembles that of St Denis, and the style of Salzburg Cathedral, commenced in 767, as well as by the entry concerning Fulrad in the 'Liber confraternitatum' of St Peter's, which was begun during the year preceding Virgilius's death. 
Initially, Virgilius performed only the duties of abbot at Salzburg, handing over the episcopal functions to his compatriot Dubdagrecus (Dub-da-chrich), who later became abbot of the monastery of Chiemsee. Virgilius spent the years following his consecration consolidating the role of the diocese and, above all, organizing missions to Carinthia and Pannonia (in present-day terms, an area extending from southern Austria to western Hungary). Among the missionaries whom he sent there, Dupliterus (Dub-Littir) certainly, and Modestus possibly, had also come from Ireland, perhaps with Virgilius. 
During the early years of his career, Virgilius had an uneasy relationship with the papal legate, St Boniface (died 754). From the correspondence between Boniface and the pope we learn that Boniface objected to the decision of Virgilius and his companion Sidonius not to rebaptize those who had been christened by a priest in Bavaria with the incorrect formula 'baptizo te in nomine patria et filia et spiritus sancti' (literally, 'I baptize you in the name fatherland and daughter and of the Holy Spirit'. Zacharias took Virgilius's side, and rebuked Boniface for his ignorance of canon law on the matter. The pope was more favourable to Boniface in a letter of 1 May 748, in which he replied to the latter's complaint that Virgilius propagated the heretical doctrine of the antipodes, which claimed that people lived on the other side of the earth, and that there were another sun and moon there. Virgilius and Sidonius were summoned to the pope, and Boniface empowered to call a synod and excommunicate Virgilius if the accusations could be substantiated. It would seem that Virgilius was vindicated, since no further references to the controversy exist, and he was consecrated bishop shortly after the date of the letter. Virgilius's long career came to an end with his death on 27 November 784, his feast day. 
In spite of his undoubted high standing, attested by his participation in synods and his involvement with the Bavarian dukes in legal transactions, both as witness and as defender of the rights of the church of Salzburg, Virgilius was forgotten at his episcopal church until his body was discovered there in 1181. His remains were then translated and his life written. In 1233 efforts to secure his canonization were successful, making him one of the few Irish saints recognized by the church. 
Since the seventeenth century Virgilius has been sometimes identified with Fergil, abbot of the Irish monastery of Aghaboe (Laois). Since the 'Liber confraternitatum' of St Peter's at Salzburg includes a list of the abbots of Iona from Columba to Sleibine (died 767), there was clearly some connection between Virgilius's see and Iona, and the repeated mention of Cainnech, the patron saint of Aghaboe, in the eighth-century life of Columba of Iona might provide a possible link between Virgilius and Aghaboe via Iona. In its entry for the year 784, the seventeenth-century compilation known as the annals of the four masters is explicit: 'Feirghil, i.e. the Geometer, abbot of Achadh Bo, died in Germany, in the thirteenth year of his bishopric'. The accuracy of the year of Virgilius's death given here, and the nature of the added information, could mean that the seventeenth-century compilers were responsible for the identification themselves, especially since the annals of Ulster give the obit of Feirgil of Aghaboe under the year 789 (almost certainly a contemporary entry), and report no connection with Germany. It has also been thought that Virgilius could be identified with Fergil, 'vir sanctus' and son of Mael Duin, who appears in the twelfth-century Rawlinson genealogies as a descendant of Loegaire, one of the many sons of the mythical Irish king Niall Noigiallach (Niall 'of the Nine Hostages'), which would place his lineage in a branch of the southern Ui Neill in Meath. 
While no work in Virgilius's own hand is extant, various texts betray his influence. The confraternity book, still in the library of St Peter's Abbey in Salzburg, was commenced just before he died in 784. The contents of this monumental work, comprising the names of many hundreds for whose souls the monks at Salzburg offered prayers, show the extent of the connections which Virgilius enjoyed. Palaeographical details in this and other Salzburg manuscripts also point to the scribes' Irish training or use of Irish exemplars. Copies of works such as 'De locis sanctis' by Adomnan of Iona, penitentials, and a litany in a prayer book later preserved at the monastery of Fleury, testify to an interest in Irish texts at Salzburg even after the death of Virgilius. He is also credited with having commissioned the first Salzburg annals and the original life of Rupert, patron of Salzburg, whose translation from Worms he instigated. The so-called 'Rupertus-Kreuz' (processional cross) may have been made for this occasion. The famous 'Tassilo chalice', now at the monastery of Kremsmunster in Austria, which is named after Odilo's successor as duke of the Bavarians (died 788) and displays both Irish and Northumbrian characteristics, may also have been used in Virgilius's cathedral. 
Scholars have also proposed that Virgilius was the author of a cosmography, written under the pseudonym Aethicus Ister, and supposedly devised as a retort to his old adversary, Boniface. Although some traces of Irish influence in the text may point to the circle around Virgilius, his authorship has yet to be proven. 


@@@@@


doc= 9312


Fergus I (supp. d. c.305 BC), mythical Scottish king, is probably first recorded in the king-list preserved by Ralph de Diceto at the end of the twelfth century, where he appears as Forgsus filius Feradach, that is, Fuirgg son of Feradach. That list, or one similar, is likely to have been among the elements forming the Scottish origin-narrative, apparently wrought by an unknown poet working in eastern Scotland in the first half of the thirteenth century, which formed the basis for John Fordun's account of the beginnings of Scottish history, composed in the mid-fourteenth century. According to Fordun, Fergus son of Ferchard was a nobleman of royal blood. Incensed by Pictish maltreatment of Scots who had crossed from Ireland to 'Albion', he led a company of young men thither and in 330 BC established himself as king, gave his subjects laws, and fixed boundaries between his own and the Pictish realms. He brought with him the marble chair which his remote ancestor Simon Brecc had carried from Spain to Ireland, and was himself crowned in it, as were all his royal descendants. His arms were a red lion on a yellow field. Later historians added that he was drowned off Carrickfergus (accordingly named from him) after a reign of twenty-five years. 
Fordun's was not the only account of Scottish protohistory circulating in the later middle ages. King-lists survive in which Fergus I is not mentioned, and he does not appear in the 'Original Chronicle' of Andrew Wyntoun, completed about 1420, where the first Scottish king is said -- with much greater historical justification -- to have been Fergus son of Erc, alias Fergus Mor (died 501). But the appeal of a regal antiquity to rival that of the English monarchy was too great for Scottish historians. Fordun had reconciled the inconsistencies between rival traditions by making Fergus Mor the restorer of a kingdom originally established by Fergus I but overthrown in the mid-fourth century, and in this he was followed by all the principal fifteenth- and sixteenth-century historians except Wyntoun. These writers often exploited Fergus for their own ideological or political purposes. Thus Walter Bower expanded on Fergus's coat of arms in order to give greater antiquity to the Franco-Scottish 'auld alliance', while Hector Boece and George Buchanan, in their concern to limit monarchic power, presented him as a king elevated by, and ruling with, the consent of his subjects. 
The anachronisms and improbabilities in all these accounts were devastatingly exposed by Thomas Innes, in his 'Critical Essay on the Ancient Inhabitants of the Northern Parts of Britain or Scotland' (1729; reprinted 1879). But by then Fergus had already received the dubious accolade of being placed at the head of the extraordinary sequence of 'portraits' of Scottish kings which Jacob de Wet produced for Holyrood Palace between 1684 and 1686; his picture was among those to be labelled with his name 'in large Characters', as that of one of 'the Kings most famous' (Laing, 330). 


@@@@@


doc= 9313


Fergus (d. 501), reputedly a contemporary of St Patrick. Such a list seems to have been used retrospectively by an annalist to enter the deaths of kings at the appropriate places, counting the reign lengths back as far as Comgall and Gabran. Their father, Domangart, and Fergus himself, were added later in different annal compilations. 



@@@@@


doc= 9314


Fergushill, John (c.1592-1644), Church of Scotland minister, son of David Fergushill, merchant and provost of Ayr, and his wife, Janet Kennedy, was educated first at Ayr School, then between about 1601 and 1604 at the University of Edinburgh. In 1604 and 1605 he spent time in France, mainly at Bordeaux, and about 1609 entered the University of Glasgow, where his name occurs among the 'incorporati' in 1611, and among the 'laureati' in 1612, when he graduated MA. Fergushill was licensed to preach as a minister of the Scottish kirk and had a charge at Ochiltree in 1614. At dates unknown he married first Agnes Eccles and second Annabel Wallace. 
In March 1620 Fergushill was cited to appear before the high commission court at Glasgow to answer for his nonconformity to the articles of Perth. Refusing to submit to its jurisdiction he was suspended and sentenced to be imprisoned in Perth. By the influence, however, of his friends Robert Boyd of Trochrig and John Chalmers the court was induced to permit his return to Ochiltree under certain restrictions. There he appears to have continued to officiate until in October 1639 he was transferred to Ayr. He was a member of the general assembly of the kirk in 1638 and was closely associated with covenanter leaders like Archibald Johnston of Wariston, Samuel Rutherford, Robert Blair, and David Dickson. He died at Ayr on 11 June 1644, aged about fifty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 9315


Ferguson, Adam (1723-1816), philosopher and historian, was born on 20 June 1723 in the village of Logierait, Perthshire, the youngest of nine children born to Adam Fergusson (1672-1754), the parish minister, and his wife, Mary ('b'. 'c'.1680), daughter of Patrick Gordon, ninth laird of Hallhead in Aberdeenshire. On his mother's side Ferguson was descended from the dukes of Argyll. Ferguson's father was the son of a smith, distantly related to the Fergusson family of Dunfallady. Ferguson chose to omit what he considered a superfluous 's' in his father's surname, 'on the ground that it was unnecessary, and therefore unworthy of a philosopher' (Fagg, c). 
Ferguson's 'singularly complete, and, for a man of letters, exceptionally eventful life' ('EdinR', 48-9) was moulded by his birthplace on the boundary between the Scottish lowlands and highlands. His upbringing introduced him to local, as well as British and European, cultural legacies. In childhood Ferguson acquired some knowledge of Gaelic alongside the Greek and Roman authors, and a taste for military glory counterbalancing a clerical bent. In later years his cosmopolitan disposition was always spiced by a keen awareness of the tension between the integrous community of the highland clans and the urban, polite, and commercial sensitivities of a modern age. 
The young Ferguson was tutored at home by his father, and then attended parish school at Logierait. It was a good start. 'We are ever discovering the traces of the influence of the parish schools of Scotland in producing its great men', a biographer wrote over a century later (McCosh, 255). Proceeding at the age of nine to grammar school in Perth, the young Adam excelled in Latin and wrote exceptionally good essays. His father intended him for the church. 
In 1738 Ferguson was sent to St Leonard's College at St Andrews, having won a bursary that provided free board at the college table. He studied Greek, and by the first summer recess read the 'Iliad' at a pace of 100 lines per day. His performance in mathematics was equally brilliant. He studied natural philosophy and attended courses in logic and moral philosophy. On 4 May 1742 Ferguson was awarded the degree of master of arts, and in November he enrolled in Divinity Hall. 
Early in 1743, however, Ferguson left St Andrews for the University of Edinburgh. There, in the city that was to become his intellectual home, he began his divinity studies under professors John Gowdie and Patrick Cumming, and possibly attended William Cleghorn's lectures in moral philosophy. Ferguson avidly read and discussed philosophy with his peers. His circle of young divinity students included William Robertson, Alexander Carlyle, Hugh Blair, and John Home, the future leading lights of the Scottish Enlightenment. A fond acquaintance with the family of the architect William Adam, whose son Robert was Ferguson's friend, expanded his social horizons to include David Hume, Adam Smith, Alexander Wedderburn, and other noted Edinburgh scholars. According to an unconfirmed report by his eldest son, Adam Ferguson, Ferguson acted during this period as private secretary to Andrew Fletcher, Lord Milton. 
The military turn in Ferguson's career took place in summer 1745. His knowledge of Gaelic, family connections with the dowager duchess of Atholl, and an urgent need in the army for loyal whigs with a highlander background, all paved his way to an appointment as the deputy chaplain of the newly formed 43rd regiment of highlanders (renumbered 42nd in 1749), famous as the Black Watch. Ferguson was to serve under Lord John Murray, son of the duchess and half-brother to James, second duke of Atholl, patron of the Highland regiment. Ferguson had completed only two out of six years of divinity studies when he was speedily examined and ordained by the presbytery of Dunkeld on 2 July 1745. 
Ferguson's alleged participation in the battle of Fontenoy (11 May 1745) was probably, as a recent biographer persuasively demonstrates, an unfounded story (Fagg, xxiii-xxiv). He joined the Black Watch during the time between his ordination on 2 July and his first sermon, preached on 11 September. Yet an anecdote told by Walter Scott and fondly repeated by Ferguson's biographers describes the young chaplain, sword in hand, leading the column of men at the battle of Fontenoy. Upon hearing his colonel's rebuke to the effect that such behaviour was incompatible with his church commission, he allegedly replied 'D -- n my commission!' and threw it towards the speaker (Scott, 19.313). Historical facts aside, the story is central to the way in which Ferguson was remembered in Scotland. It suggested that his martial spirit and love of valour typified his personality to a greater extent than his clerical calling. Judging by contemporary evidence on Ferguson's character, the story makes psychological sense. 
Ferguson's political affinities were firmly Hanoverian. As the 'Scots Magazine' was careful to point out in its obituary seventy years later, Ferguson 'is said 'even then' to have prided himself on being a 'constitutional Whig''; his classical erudition, and his family's Presbyterian 'ideas of political right', enhanced his 'love of freedom' and 'endeared the House of Brunswick' ('Scots Magazine', 418). These views echoed in his 'Sermon preached, in the Ersh language, to his majesty's first highland regiment of foot, commanded by Lord John Murray, at their cantonment at Camberwell, on the 18th day of December 1745'. The sermon was translated into English and published in 1746 at the request of the duchess of Atholl. It was, pure and simple, 'a vigorous denunciation of the Pretender, of popery, and of France' ('DNB'). 
In 1746 Ferguson was raised to the rank of principal chaplain to the Black Watch. In September 1747 he reportedly took part in the battle of Bergen-op-Zoom. He continued his service in the Black Watch until 1754, including two sojourns in Ireland. He remained in the British army for some nine years, and was proud of his military experience for the rest of his life. Not only did it help him to write a history of ancient Rome, it also touched a deep chord in his self-image as a man and a Scot. More than any other thinker of the Scottish Enlightenment, Ferguson was to insist on military valour as a corner-stone of civic virtue. 
Ferguson left the active service of both army and church in 1754. Writing to Adam Smith from Groningen in October 1754, he asked to be henceforward addressed 'without any clerical titles, for I am a downright layman' (Small, 5). Yet he retained both his military commission (until 1757) and his ordination; he acted as an elder of the Church of Scotland during the 1760s, and possibly later. David Hume was therefore justified in speaking, in 1758, of 'The still Rev. Adam Ferguson' (Mossner, 392). 
Ferguson remained on the continent for over a year longer as tutor to a Scottish law student, identified only as 'Mr Gordon', who studied first at the Dutch University of Groningen and then, from November 1754, at the University of Leipzig in Saxony. They lodged at the Leipzig home of the Frenchman Eleazar de Mauvillon, a protestant convert who had translated Hume's 'Political Discourses' into French. Ferguson complained in a letter to Adam Smith of having 'not met with any Glimmering of Taste, or very elegant Reflexions' (Ferguson to Smith, 1 Dec 1754; 'Correspondence', 1.11). Instead, he amused himself with anecdotes on Fontenelle and Voltaire purveyed by his landlord's French-speaking visitors. Mauvillon's cosmopolitan home thus allowed his young Scottish lodgers a glimpse into the witty world of the European Enlightenment. 
Late in 1756 Ferguson returned to Edinburgh, where he was to reside for almost forty years. David Hume took an instant liking to him -- 'a Man of Sense, knowledge, Taste, Elegance, & Morals' (Mossner, 254-5). Ferguson joined the Select Society, a debating club founded in 1754 by a group of literati that included his old friends William Robertson, Hugh Blair, and Alexander Carlyle. He quickly made himself part of an influential Edinburgh circle of kirk moderates and lively men of letters. 
Ferguson's activities during the late 1750s and early 1760s reflect both his own pursuit of public and academic standing, and his avid participation in the central issues of the day. Along with his friends from the Select Society he defied Presbyterian traditionalists by supporting the theatre production of 'Douglas', a play written by the moderate clergyman John Home. In an amateur staging of the play in 1756, Ferguson played the role of Lady Randolph. He proceeded to write a pamphlet in defence of the theatrical entertainment, deftly opposing Presbyterian obscurantism by evoking his countrymen's fear of cultural inferiority. The theatre, he argued, can teach virtue better than any other public diversion. Besides, it has existed 'in every civilized and polished nation' ('The Morality of Stage Plays Seriously Considered', 1757, 22). 
Literary ambition next focused on the tidings of a Scottish Homer, brought to Edinburgh by the young poet James Macpherson with his alleged translation of the poetry of a mythical Celtic bard, Ossian. In this affair, too, Ferguson was a key figure: his Gaelic background lent credibility to the project, and he was later forced into an awkward and defensive exchange with the English collector of ancient poetry, Bishop Thomas Percy, one of the most formidable critics who accused Macpherson of fraud. 
These cultural skirmishes accentuated Ferguson's most cherished cause, the Scottish militia. For many Scots the creation of a citizen militia was a symbol of national pride, which by forbidding highlanders to carry arms, parliament made impossible after the Jacobite rising of 1745. Ferguson was a central figure in the spirited, yet unsuccessful, militia agitation. His pamphlet 'Reflections Previous to the Establishment of a Militia' (1756) focused on the problems which occupied his Scottish contemporaries and challenged his own later works: is economic strength compatible with traditional public virtue? Can a nation, in his words, 'mix military spirit; and commercial policy' (ibid., 3)? 
A second pamphlet on the militia issue, targeting the haughty mistrust that typified English views of Scotland, appeared in 1761 under the title 'The history of the proceedings in the case of Margaret, commonly called Peg, only lawful sister to John Bull esq.' The title was a satirical allusion to John Arbuthnot's 'History of John Bull' (1712), with Scotland poised as Bull's hapless sister. Despite several attempts to attribute the anonymous pamphlet to David Hume (including an edition by David Raynor in 1982), it has been substantiated, and widely agreed, that Ferguson was its author. Here in his discussion of military prowess as an aspect of civic vivacity, Ferguson turned the militia campaign from a failed political cause to a fruitful opportunity for cultural reflection. He co-founded, and probably also named, the Poker Club, established in 1762 to stir up the militia issue. Outlasting its initial aim, the club remained a social and intellectual caucus of Edinburgh luminaries for over twenty years. 
During the same period Ferguson's friends helped launch his professional career. David Hume was instrumental in securing the election of Ferguson, in January 1757, as his own successor to the keepership of the Advocates' Library in Edinburgh. In October of the same year Ferguson resigned his military commission. In January 1758 he left the librarian's post, having been appointed tutor to the sons of the earl of Bute. 'Notwithstanding the Scotch are suspected by the English of possessing the gift of second sight', quips the 'Scots Magazine' obituary, '... yet it is probable that Mr Ferguson, with all his wisdom, did not foresee that the representative of this noble family would soon become the favourite of the king, and even prime minister of Great Britain' ('Scots Magazine', 420; Bisset, 431-2). By leaving his post in 1759, Ferguson may have missed an easy opportunity to enter political life. He made up for this by becoming a prominent scholar. 
In July 1759, again helped by Hume, Ferguson was called at short notice to the chair of natural philosophy at the University of Edinburgh. Ferguson cleverly managed, as Hume noted with mildly ironic admiration, to keep just abreast of his students during the first year of course work. Ferguson's prized post, which he obtained in 1764, was the Edinburgh chair of pneumatics (philosophy of the mind) and moral philosophy. As a teacher, Ferguson now came into his own. The popularity of his lectures, with both students and high-ranking free listeners, eventually increased his $100 annual salary to about $300 from fees ('DNB'). An honorary degree of LLD followed in December 1766. 
In 1766 Ferguson courted and married Katharine Burnet (1746-1795), the favourite niece of his relative, the chemist Joseph Black. It was, the sources tell us, a happy union. Four sons and three daughters were born, and Ferguson was a kind paterfamilias, if not always an easy one. Despite several prolonged journeys away from home, he evidently enjoyed life with his family. He also spent energy and expense on a farm, Bankhead, rented in 1765, where he delighted in experimenting with modern agricultural techniques. Settled, successful, and sociable, Ferguson now kept company with some of Scotland's most illustrious men. 'Amicable in his life, character, and temper' a contemporary recalled, 'he never was swayed by any difference of opinion, either religious or political... and David Hume and Henry Dundas, by turns, were entertained and visited by him' ('Scots Magazine', 420). 
In 1767 Ferguson published his masterpiece, 'An Essay on the History of Civil Society'. The book was possibly an expanded version of an earlier 'Essay on Refinement' written in 1759, but subsequently lost. Hume, who thought that the early version 'will make an admirable Book, and discovers ['sic'] an elegant and a singular Genius' (Hume to Smith, 12 April 1759, 'Correspondence of Adam Smith', 34), was somewhat disappointed with the 'Essay', perhaps because of the crucial role of civic virtue in Ferguson's theory of government. Yet the 'Essay' quickly attracted prominent admirers and numerous readers in Edinburgh, London, and abroad. 
The 'Essay' touched a chord in its British readers because it offered a detailed, colourful, non-deterministic historical account of the way nations advance morally and materially towards the state of commerce, refinement, and liberty associated with eighteenth-century Britain. A psychological introduction, 'Of the general characteristics of human nature', is followed by two historical discussions, 'Of the history of rude nations' and 'Of the history of policy and arts'. The final three parts, 'Of consequences that result from the advancement of civil and commercial arts', 'Of the decline of nations', and 'Of corruption and political slavery', present a historical-cum-moral analysis of the inherent evils that modern society must confront. 
Ferguson's diagnosis of the problems of advanced commercial society was an assertive civic version of the Scottish attempt to work out the coexistence of wealth and virtue. His 'virtue' strongly echoed the Aristotelian political virtue and the Machiavellian 'virtu'; but his economic analysis of morality was distinctly modern. The real danger in modern times, he said, was not luxury, but political laziness. Riches and material well-being did not in themselves cause or imply moral degeneration. Modern commercial success, however, encouraged the well-to-do to stay out of politics, hence away from virtuous life. What matters, then, is not the wealth amassed by members of society, but the retaining of their political personae: a trader, a craftsman, or a 'man of the world' must never cease to be a citizen. This reworking of the civic creed was Ferguson's distinct philosophical voice in the Scottish Enlightenment. 
Ferguson's 'Essay' was an important book for another reason. Like Hume's philosophical works and Smith's 'Theory of Moral Sentiments', it conveyed to a broad readership the wide-ranging insights of the Scottish Enlightenment. The Edinburgh literati, as their readers in London and Paris appreciated, were able to derive universal significance from the questions of post-Union Scottish identity. Informed by Charles-Louis Montesquieu's 'De l'esprit des lois' (1748), Ferguson rejected the legalistic accounts of the rise of states in terms of social contracts, and cast doubt on the simplistic economic and moral evolutionalism associated with theories of natural law. Instead, he followed Montesquieu by acknowledging a great variety of factors, climatic and geographic, as well as cultural and moral, affecting the rise and fortunes of polities in Europe and beyond. Ferguson's 'Essay' was a book about universal history and progress. It discussed primitive nations without naming the highlands, modern economic change without dwelling on the lowlands, and forms of government without directly referring to Scotland's recent constitutional change. Yet Scotland was clearly on the author's mind as he considered the essence of political liberty, and readers were implicitly invited to ponder the British state and its new empire when other states and empires were discussed. 
The 'Essay' established Ferguson's reputation as a British and a European historian with a Scottish edge. It enabled him to deal with questions which concerned Enlightenment thinkers throughout Europe: the nature of political society, differences between nations reflecting temporal and geographical variations, patterns of progress and decline, types of government, and the tension between the 'private' man, involved in commerce and polite conversation, and 'public' man, the politically active citizen. 
The 'Essay' made its author famous throughout Europe. It was hailed by men of letters as diverse as James Boswell, Baron d'Holbach, and Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi. Of special significance was the 'Essay''s impact on the early attempts at creating the disciplines of social sciences by Ferguson's contemporaries at the University of Gottingen. They were impressed by his comparative attitude to societies ancient and modern, and by his attack on Rousseau's concept of the state of nature. Ferguson's approach inspired a comparative ethnography that went beyond the traditional dichotomy between 'primitive' and 'civilized', and tried to map the varieties of social mores without grading them on a strict ladder of historical progress. At the same time, most of his sociologically minded readers were taken aback by his preference for classical republics over modern monarchies (Oz-Salzberger, chap. 10). 
The 'Essay' paved the way for Ferguson's subsequent works, eagerly awaited by his continental readers. His books were admired by Herder and Hamann and stirred the soul of the Romantic poet Novalis. Yet for British readers the 'Essay' remained his masterpiece: seven editions appeared in Britain prior to Ferguson's death. None were to follow until 1966. Elsewhere, English-language editions came out in Dublin, Boston, and Basel. A German translation appeared in Leipzig in 1768, and a French one in Paris in 1783. 
In 1769 Ferguson published a textbook based on his classroom lectures, 'The Institutes of Moral Philosophy for the Use of Students in the College of Edinburgh'. It offered a compact outline of philosophical issues such as human nature, the mind, the knowledge of God, moral laws, jurisprudence, and politics. Despite its terse and sometimes shorthand style, the book was successful in Britain, where it ran to three editions, and very successful in Germany and in Russia, where it became a favoured university text. Significantly, Ferguson's fame on the continent rested not on the 'Essay' but on the 'Institutes', although he and his British readers clearly saw the earlier book as his 'magnum opus'. 
By 1772 Ferguson's reputation as a political thinker attracted the attention of government circles in London. He was considered for a commission 'to regulate the disorderly state of our affairs in India'. The Scottish member of parliament George Dempster wrote that if Ferguson were elected to the commission, 'notwithstanding prejudices to our country', then 'I shall almost fancy the days of Solon and Licurgus ['sic'] are return'd. 'Redeunt Saturnia regna'' ('Letters', 75-6). 
In 1773 Ferguson was invited to act as tutor to the young earl of Chesterfield on his grand tour of Europe. The proposed annuity of $400 during the earl's minority and $200 for life was too tempting to refuse, although Ferguson's prompt departure caused an unsavoury conflict with the university authorities. For a year Ferguson and his charge travelled through France and Switzerland. At home, the ever-generous Hume successfully plotted with Adam Smith to save their friend from the town council's threat of imposing resignation from his professorship. 
One of the highlights of the journey was Geneva, where Ferguson was able to get in touch, simultaneously, with two extremities of his intellectual world. While lodging in the house of Jean Calvin and reading the manuscripts of the founder of his creed, Ferguson also paid several visits to Ferney and respectfully laughed at the blasphemous jokes of the ageing Voltaire, 'till I began to be considered', he wrote to Alexander Carlyle, 'as a person who, tho' true to my own faith, had no ill humour to the freedom of fancy in others' (Ferguson to Carlyle, 29 April 1775, 'Correspondence', 1.124). 
A timely return to Britain launched Ferguson into the American crisis, first as a writer and then as a diplomatic envoy. In response to Richard Price's 'Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty, the Principles of Government, and the Justice and Policy of the War with America', Ferguson wrote a counter-pamphlet that was published at government expense in 1776. Ferguson's piece, 'Remarks on a Pamphlet Lately Published by Dr. Price', was a balanced and uncommonly courteous reply to Price's defence of the rebels. Ferguson, who had befriended Benjamin Franklin when the latter visited Edinburgh a few years before, endorsed the colonists' complaints against parliament's narrow-minded mercantilism. Yet he strongly denounced their use of violence. Furthermore, their war against Britain was a bad historical wager. 'Is Great Britain then to be sacrificed to America... and a state which has attained high measures of national felicity, for one that is yet only in expectation, and which, by attempting such extravagant plans of Continental Republic, is probably laying the seeds of anarchy, of civil wars, and at last of a military government...? ('Remarks on a Pamphlet', 59)' The pamphlet was well received in London. In spring 1778 Ferguson was invited, probably at the suggestion of Sir William Pulteney, to accompany the Carlisle commission sent to negotiate an agreement with George Washington and the American congress. On 6 June 1778, upon their arrival in Philadelphia, Ferguson was made official secretary to the commission. He was dispatched to the rebels' pickets with a letter to congress, and flatly denied passage. The commission spent the summer in Philadelphia and New York, rejected and then ignored by congress. Ferguson may have been the chief or sole author of the maligned 'Manifesto and Proclamation', calling American individuals or states to meet the commission on separate terms (Sher, 273-4). Several months after the commission's return to Britain in December 1778, Ferguson went back to his Edinburgh professorship. He was to be remembered in America primarily as a respected author. A Philadelphia reprint of the 'Institutes of Moral Philosophy', announced in 1771, was followed by reprints of all his major works. 
Ferguson now favoured a strong military response to any act of rebellion. In 1782 he rejected an appeal from Christopher Wyvill, the leader of the Yorkshire Association, to support the cause of parliamentary reform. He cautiously distanced his own belief in civil rights and active citizenship from electoral radicalism: 'I sincerely believe that to preserve the rights of the people the Vigour of the Crown is not less necessary than their own', he wrote to Wyvill (2 Dec 1782, 'Correspondence', 2.292). 
In 1780 Ferguson suffered a major attack of paralysis, and, under the care of his relative Joseph Black, made a full recovery apart from extreme susceptibility to cold, and became a vegetarian. 'His hair was silky and white', wrote Lord Cockburn, 'his eyes animated and light blue; his cheeks sprinkled with broken red, like autumnal apples, but fresh and healthy; his lips thin, and the under one curled'; with his many layers of warm clothes, 'He looked like a philosopher from Lapland' ('EdinR', 48). 
Ferguson's regained vigour served him well during a sour exchange, in 1781, with Thomas Percy over the authenticity of the poems of Ossian. Ferguson claimed that he had seen no reason to doubt Macpherson. Cleverly shifting the argument to hint at Percy's anti-Scottish chagrin, Ferguson retorted that the Ossianic epic 'appeared to me matter of some curiosity in the history of mankind, but very little as matter of vanity to one corner of this island, much less of jealousy to any other corner of it' (Ferguson to H. Blair, 15 Sept 1781, 'Correspondence', 2.276). Like Herder, the German admirer of Ossian, Ferguson acknowledged the literary value of 'pure' primitive poems; but unlike Herder, he did not cling to them as a vehicle of modern cultural self-assertion. 
During 1782 and 1783 Ferguson helped found the Royal Society of Scotland. His three-volume 'History of the Progress and Termination of the Roman Republic', narrating the rise and fall of the republic as a story of civic virtue and its corruption, appeared in 1783. The book was warmly received in Scotland, where excerpts were published in the 'Caledonian Mercury' and the 'Scots Magazine'. It won praise from Edward Gibbon, and went through two more English-language editions in 1799 and 1813. In the mid-nineteenth century it was still favourably mentioned by John Stuart Mill and reissued in the United States, where Ferguson's spirited discussion of Rome's republican heyday appealed to two generations of readers. Two French translations appeared in Paris, in 1784-91 and in 1803-10. A German translation appeared in Leipzig in 1784-6. 
Although the fame of Ferguson's 'Roman Republic' was short-lived and eventually wholly eclipsed, it did more than any of Ferguson's books to determine its author's image as latter-day Roman, a worthy, if somewhat quaint, lover of virtue and liberty in their classical republican sense. Contemporaries and posterity came to view him as a moralist of stout but old-fashioned Stoic convictions. This image did little to keep his scholarship and political philosophy alive, but it lent the final three decades of his long life a glow of spirited integrity, not just as 'a man of the world and a high-bred gentleman', in the words of his friend Alexander Carlyle ('DNB') but as the fiery 'Scottish Cato' that friends and biographers fondly recalled. 
In 1785 Ferguson resigned his chair of moral philosophy and pneumatics, to be succeeded by his brilliant student Dugald Stewart. In order to ensure a continued income he was nominally appointed to the mathematics chair, together with John Playfair who performed the professorial tasks. The university payment, along with pensions from the government and from the earl of Chesterfield, added up to a fixed annual income of $613 (Fagg, lxxiv). In 1787 he moved to Sciennes House, on the outskirts of Edinburgh. His friends dubbed the house Kamchatka. Ferguson remained remarkably active for three more decades. He hailed the French Revolution and followed its career with great curiosity and enthusiasm which exceeded that of a detached academic onlooker. 
In 1792 appeared 'The principles of moral and political science, being chiefly a retrospect of lectures delivered in the College of Edinburgh', a two-volume philosophical work which brought together Ferguson's long years of teaching. A German translation appeared in Zurich in 1796, and a French translation followed as late as 1821. The book was treated with respect in one of the most important retrospective discussions of Scottish philosophy, Victor Cousin's 'Cours d'histoire de la philosophie morale' (1839-40). As the 'Principles' reveal, Ferguson's republican zeal had been toned down, though not abandoned, as a result of the American and the French upheavals. He strongly felt that Britain's present government, and its social and political 'status quo', were beneficial enough to override any advantages promised by hasty or violent innovations. Yet the French Revolution presented Ferguson -- to a greater extent than his fellow Scottish thinkers -- with a heady blend of national invigoration and social arousal, which his own civic beliefs could not allow him to brush aside. 
Ferguson's attitude toward the revolution, as revealed in letters and in an unpublished essay, was exceptionally favourable. He immediately hailed it as a republican outburst, and subsequently felt that both his choice of historical focus on classical republicanism and his modern analysis of national spirit were being put to the test and magnificently vindicated. With a great measure of sympathy for the revolution's spirit, if not for its style, he followed the civic, imperial, and martial drama to its apex and end. The downfall of the French 'frivolous corrupted pretenders to Aristocracy' (Ferguson to Sir John Macpherson, 15 July 1799; 'Correspondence', 2.455) hardly alarmed him. The fervour of the French people and the effect of egalitarianism on the French army greatly thrilled him. Later, however, he acknowledged that the French republic could only live by its sword, and that Napoleonic France, though still a marvel of national spirit, must be opposed. At that point Ferguson was especially keen for British patriotism to live up to the French model. 
These conclusions were not drawn from armchair reading alone. In 1793, planning a second edition of the 'Roman Republic', the septuagenarian Ferguson travelled via Germany to Rome, where he stayed for a while. On 26 September of the same year he was elected external member of the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences and Arts. He subsequently corresponded with the academy on a topic both scientific and Scottish: the properties of strontium, the metallic element discovered in the village of Strontian. Possibly during the same journey, Ferguson was also made a member of the Royal Academy of Florence, the Arcadia at Rome, and the Etruscan Society of Antiquaries in Cortona. His last European tour was cut short by Britain's entrance into the war. He was back by May 1794. 
On 23 March 1795 Ferguson's wife, Katharine, died. He thereafter moved to Neidpath Castle, near Peebles, intending to spend his last years in rural seclusion. A cold winter prompted a further move to Hallyards, a neighbouring mansion. Walter Scott visited Ferguson there in the autumn of 1797, and Ferguson took his guest to see David Ritchie, the 'black dwarf', who was to figure in Scott's tale of that name. In the autumn of 1809 Ferguson made his final change of residence, moving to St Andrews. 
Despite his deteriorating eyesight, Ferguson continued writing and led a life of social exchange and political awareness to his last day. Around his neck, a neighbour reported, he wore a miniature of Madame de Stael ('EdinR', 84n.). In 1801 he published 'Minutes of the Life and Character of Joseph Black, M.D.', in memory of his relative and friend who had died two years earlier. He continued writing essays, which remained unpublished until the late twentieth century, and letters to many correspondents. 
Ferguson's four sons all served in the British army or navy. In November 1799 he lost his second son, Joseph, who had served as captain in Bengal. Another son, James, also served in India. The youngest, John Macpherson Ferguson, was a seaman and survived the wreckage of the vessel he commanded in February 1811. When a student reading the newspaper to Ferguson unexpectedly came upon a report of the wreckage, 'Old Adam simply said, 'Go on: read that again'' ('EdinR', 84n.). Ferguson's eldest son, the future Sir Adam, was in French captivity from 1812 to 1814. 
Ferguson lived to rejoice at the news from the battle of Waterloo, read to him from the newspapers. 'The news of Waterloo', Walter Scott wrote, 'acted on the aged patriot as a Nunc Dimittis' ('DNB'). Ferguson died in St Andrews on 22 February 1816. His three daughters, Isabel, Mary, and Margaret, all unmarried, were at his bedside. His last words, 'amongst the most remarkable on record', were reportedly 'There 'is' another world!' ('EdinR', 85). He was buried in the grounds of the Old Cathedral at St Andrews. His epitaph, written by Scott, recorded the 'classic elegance, strength of reasoning, and clearness of detail' in Ferguson's works, his 'unostentatious and steady perseverance in acquiring and diffusing knowledge', and his 'practice of public and domestic virtue' ('Correspondence', 2.589). 
Ferguson's posthumous significance is no simple story. There is a telling difference between the figure he cut in his lifetime and his changing fortunes in the history of ideas. He should also be considered, from rather different angles, in terms of his Scottish, British, and European reputations. 
As one of his biographers observed with a typical Victorian slant, Ferguson's life was not 'remarkable', because he 'lived and died in the social position in which he was born' ('EdinR', 48-9). In another sense, however, Ferguson's life story was remarkable enough: as contemporaries were well aware, his doctrine and his life blended better than most. He was a thoroughly political man -- a participant in political affairs, a teacher of political virtue, and an analyst of the history of polities. 
Ferguson's immediate posterity remembered him as a highly esteemed 'character'. He was seen as a man of classical moral stature, a dignified, though 'stormy', archetype of a Scotsman, and a memorable educator. George Dempster was in the habit of calling him 'my modern Epictetus' ('Letters', 342). For an 'Edinburgh Review' biographer writing a century later, Ferguson epitomized a model character 'of the manliest type', who, although 'scarcely a man of genius... 'was' more than he 'did'', and was 'typical of the whole [Scottish] race in appearance, character, tastes, and fortunes'. He was, in sum, 'the Scottish Cato' ('EdinR', 48-9). 
Ferguson's significance in the history of ideas is a tale with several twists. In his own lifetime his reputation spanned the Scottish and English enlightenments, reached discerning readers and literary periodicals in France, Germany, and Italy, as well as university classrooms in Germany, Russia, and America. Admired by Samuel Johnson and d'Holbach, complimented by Gibbon and Voltaire, and esteemed by Hume and Smith, he was an important interlocutor in the complex web of Enlightenment discourse. 
In the English-speaking countries, Ferguson's importance waned during the nineteenth century. He was still mentioned with approbation by John Stuart Mill, but Leslie Stephen doomed him off-handedly to oblivion as 'a facile and dexterous declaimer', a third-rate eclectic and a bad stylist (Stephen, 2.182). The 'Essay', which eighteenth-century readers saw as Ferguson's masterpiece, became for Henry Gray Graham 'a superficial book' (Graham, 113, 118). 
Yet on the continent Ferguson's works made a lasting impression. In France his work inspired Victor Cousin and August Comte. For over a century after the publication of the 'Essay', German scholars made distinct and creative uses of some of his ideas. Friedrich Schiller was enthralled by his ethics and possibly by his concept of play. Ferguson's ideas of civil society and economic needs made a profound, but convoluted and not easily traceable, impact on the thought of Georg Friedrich Hegel. Karl Marx made an explicit, though ruthlessly selective, use of his notion of division of labour, considering him Adam Smith's teacher on this matter. The German sociologist Werner Sombart and his Polish colleague Ludvik Gumplowicz applauded Ferguson as a pioneer of their discipline, the latter hailing him as the father of sociology (Oz-Salzberger, 90). The amiable Enlightenment moralist thus assumed a new persona as a pioneer of comparative ethnography, an early theorist of structural social change, the first theorist of alienation, and the inventor of conflict sociology. 
It was not before the mid-twentieth century that an awakened interest in the political thought of the Scottish Enlightenment attracted attention to Ferguson's Scottish context, and -- by extension -- to his political thought (Kettler; Forbes). More recent scholarship shed light on Ferguson's place in the classical republican tradition, his fundamental debate with Hume and Smith, and the ways in which his works reflected the tensions between the competing political languages of civic humanism, natural jurisprudence, commerce, and politeness. During the last two decades of the twentieth century Ferguson was taken up by intellectual and political discussants of civic activism. His idea of civil society has a novel appeal to those seeking a 'third way', combining market economy with conscientious public commitment. Conversely, Ferguson also triggered spirited defences of the freedom to lead a wholly private life. His multi-layered intellectual persona, and his particular blend of Scottish, British, and European concerns, were thus freshly relevant to political sensibilities on the threshold of the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 9316


Ferguson, Sir Adam (1771-1855), friend of Sir Walter Scott, was the eldest son of Professor Adam Ferguson (1723-1816), historian and philosopher, and Katharine Burnet (1746-1795). At Edinburgh University he became the companion of Sir Walter Scott, who said that he combined the 'lightest and most airy temper with the best and kindest disposition' ('Autobiography' in Lockhart, 2.55). He was also one of the nineteen original members of the literary society called 'the Club', among whom he was nicknamed Linton, supposedly after a Newhaven fisherman mistook him for another of that name (ibid.). It was in Ferguson's company that Scott in 1793 first visited the scenes in Perthshire on the highland border which he afterwards described in his poems and romances. They were visiting the English Lake District together in 1797 when Scott met his future wife. 
About 1800 Ferguson entered the army becoming captain of the 101st regiment in February 1808, and afterwards serving in the Peninsular campaign under Wellington. Scott enjoyed relating that the 'Lady of the Lake' having reached Ferguson in the lines of Torres Vedras he read to his company, while lying on the ground exposed to the enemy's artillery, the description of the battle in canto VI. In a letter to Scott in 1811 Ferguson expressed the resolve, should he survive the campaign, to try his hand 'on a snug little farm' somewhere in Scott's neighbourhood (Lockhart, 2.350). He was taken prisoner during Wellington's retreat from Burgos in 1812, and was not released until the peace of 1814. 
On 8 October 1816 Ferguson went on half pay. In 1817 he accompanied Scott on an excursion, and in the following year he and his sisters took up residence in the mansion house of Toftfield, which Scott had recently purchased, and which, at the sisters' request, he renamed Huntly Burn. In the autumn of 1818 Ferguson, chiefly through the exertions of Scott, was appointed Deputy Keeper of the Regalia of Scotland, which had recently been discovered. About this time Sir David Wilkie executed for Scott the picture in which his family is represented as a group of peasants and Ferguson as a gamekeeper or poacher. In 1819 Ferguson, in the capacity of secretary, accompanied Scott's friend the duke of Buccleuch, then in declining health, to Lisbon. On 16 April 1821 he married Margaret, the widow of George Lyon of London, and daughter of John Stewart of Stenton, Perthshire (described in a humorous letter of Scott's on the ceremony; Lockhart, 5.63). After his marriage Ferguson lived on his estate in Dumfriesshire, when he was not at Abbotsford or in Edinburgh. During the visit of George IV to Edinburgh he received a knighthood on 29 August 1822. He died in Edinburgh on 1 January 1855. His obituary described him as 'brimful of Scotch anecdote' ('GM', 195). 


@@@@@


doc= 9317


Ferguson, David (b. in or before 1533, d. 1598), Church of Scotland minister, seems to have hailed from Dundee. As he was said to be sixty-five at his death in 1598, he is assumed to have been born in 1532 or 1533, though if he were indeed 'the auldest Minister that tyme in Scotland' when he died ('Autobiography and Diary of... Melvill', 437), his date of birth may have been much earlier. A glover by trade, he seems to have been self-educated and did not acquire a university training, though he had sufficient knowledge of Latin to be appointed to an assembly committee in 1574 to revise Patrick Adamson's Latin verse paraphrase of the book of 'Job'. An early reformer, he came to the attention of the authorities in 1558, when on 7 July he was summoned with others in Dundee -- a hotbed of protestantism -- to answer charges of misusing the scriptures, disputing on erroneous opinions, and eating meat in Lent and at other forbidden times. On his own testimony he was one of six who preached the message of the Reformation without the support of the civil magistrate and when stipends were unknown. 
By July 1560 Ferguson had become minister of Dunfermline; he attended the general assembly of December 1560 and was regularly present at assemblies until his death in 1598. Twice elected moderator, he presided over the general assemblies which met in Edinburgh in March 1573 and October 1578. Archbishop Spottiswoode's assessment of Ferguson as 'a good preacher, wise, and of a jocund and pleasant disposition, which made him well regarded both in the court and country' is supported by Calderwood (Spottiswoode, 3.77; Calderwood, 5.435). He received a stipend of $40 when the earl of Arran gained control of the revenues of Dunfermline Abbey at the Reformation, and in 1562 he was assigned a stipend which also took account of labours in 1561. By 1563, when his ministry extended to the care of the neighbouring parishes of Carnock and Rosyth, his stipend was $160. 
Soon after his entry to the ministry Ferguson married Isobel Durham, with whom he had five sons and four daughters: Margaret, baptized on 31 May 1562, who married David Spens, minister of Kirkcaldy, on 18 June 1581; his eldest son, William, baptized on 10 September 1564, who was a physician in Dundee and who died on 25 March 1627; Patrick, baptized on 23 June 1566; Robert, baptized on 3 October 1568; Janet, baptized on 24 September 1570, who married David Ramsay in April 1598; David, baptized on 21 January 1573; John, baptized on 19 May 1574; Grisel, baptized on 15 February 1576, who married John Row, minister at Carnock, in 1595; and Isobel, baptized on 24 February 1580. 
Responding to an attack on Knox and the reformers by Rene Benoit, French chaplain to Mary, queen of Scots, Ferguson produced 'Ane Answer to ane Epistle Written by Renat Benedict', dated at Dunfermline 26 April 1562 and printed in Edinburgh by Robert Lekprevik in 1563, in which Ferguson refuted the accusation that the reformers had sought 'the favor of the people' by showing how reformed practice subjected all who erred, regardless of status, to ecclesiastical discipline: 'where the Magistrat is godly we procure at his hand the punishment of whoredome, dronkennes, blasphemie, Idolatrie, morther, thift, and all other vices as the worde of God prescribes'; and 'where their is no Magistrat that obeyth the voice of God... we use to expell such persones as are above written, by excommunicatioun out of our Congregations and from the communion of the faithfull' (Ferguson, 9-10). Far from amassing wealth, as Benoit alleged, most ministers 'lived in great penurie, without all stipend' for many months, sustained by friends and borrowing from 'cheritable persones' (ibid., 10-11). In matters of faith Ferguson reiterated how certainty of salvation proceeds by the mere mercy of God alone and that there is no obligation to believe one jot of general councils; the Lord who is present to the end of the world is not enclosed in a bit of conjured bread; there is no transubstantiation; by partaking of bread and wine by the mouth, believers partake of Christ's body by faith; images are forbidden by God; the early fathers ought not to be followed farther than they follow Christ; the mass is idolatrous, for bread and wine are worshipped, which makes Christ's sacrifice insufficient; the priest spoils Christ of his dignity, taking upon him the office of Christ but standing with his back to the people and speaking to the wall. 
In January 1572 Ferguson preached a sermon in the kirk of Leith before Regent Mar and the nobility at the time of the convention of Leith, in which he protested at the secularization of the church's patrimony for private profit to the detriment of the ministry, schools, and the needy. The outcome was a compromise between crown and church on ecclesiastical endowment. Ferguson's evidently influential sermon was approved for publication in the general assembly which met at Perth in August 1572 by John Douglas, archbishop of St Andrews; John Erskine of Dun, superintendent of Forfarshire; John Winram, superintendent of Fife; William Christison, minister of Dundee; and John Knox. It was duly printed at St Andrews by Lekprevik in the same year. Ferguson participated in the production of the second 'Book of Discipline' (1578); was selected with others to petition the king in 1582 about the duke of Lennox's support for Robert Montgomery as archbishop of Glasgow after the assembly had approved the latter's excommunication; and in 1583 was appointed to an assembly commission for censuring bishops. In 1591 he witnessed Archbishop Patrick Adamson's recantation and submission to the church. When the synod of Fife in 1598 debated ecclesiastical representation in parliament in the light of the act of parliament in 1597 creating 'parliamentary bishops', David Ferguson was described as: 'the auldest Minister that tyme in Scotland, [who] spak gravlie, cleirlie, and at lainthe, whow the corruptiones of that office of Bischopes haid bein espyed be the Kirk of Scotland from the begining; what pean haid bein taken bathe in doctrin from pulpites and in Assemblies, for purging and allutterlie putting away thairof. And now he perceavit a purpose till erect tham of new, conveyed in sic a maner as he could compear to na thing better nor that quhilk the Grecians usit for the overthraw of the antient citie and kingdome of Troy. ('Autobiography and Diary of... Melvill', 437)' When James VI, who enjoyed debating with Ferguson, asked him 'why may I not have Bishops here in Scotland als well as they have in Ingland?', the response was: 'Yes, Sir, ye may have Bishops here, but ye must remember to make us all equall; make us all Bishops, els will ye never content us: for if ye sett up ten or twelve louns over honest men's heads (for honest men will not have your antichristian Prelacie), to knock us doune, and give them in rent more thousands (to debosh and mispend) nor honest men has hundreds or scores, we will never al be content. We are all Paull's bishops, Christ's bishops; hold us as we are. (Row, 419)' Shortly before his death Ferguson foretold that 'if our King get Ingland (as I think he will) I am persuaded that he will erect Bishops in this Kirk also, and then adieu with the welfair both of this Kirk and policie of ours' (ibid.). Ferguson died on 23 April 1598, leaving an estate of $516, including an English and a Latin 'Bible', 'his buikis of theologie and humane histories' and 'his Scottis cronicle', estimated at $100 (Ferguson, xxv-xxviii). He also left a collection of more than 900 Scottish proverbs, first published in 1641. 


@@@@@


doc= 9318


Ferguson, James (1621-1667), Church of Scotland minister, was one of the Ferguson family of Kilkerran. After graduating from Glasgow University in 1638 he 'preached his first preaching in Kilwinning, March 19 1643' and was ordained its minister in June the same year (Wodrow, 'Analecta', 3.44). In August 1648 Ferguson was one of six men called by the general assembly to vacant places in Edinburgh, but his patron, Alexander, earl of Eglintoun, petitioned against his removal. On 10 July 1649 the assembly's committee agreed 'that for the special good service that my Lord hath done in this cause, that his lordship shall enjoy his minister, Mr James Fergusin' (Fraser, 2.312-13). 
During the 1650s Ferguson's predecessor at Kilwinning, Robert Baillie, was a close associate and both supported the resolutioners. On 10 March 1651 Baillie wrote to Robert Douglass, moderator of the general assembly at Dundee: 'I have sent yow herewith a paper, called Mr James Ferguson's, which hes done good here', urging in May that Ferguson's opinions be published ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.134). In July 1651 Robert Blair wrote to Douglass that 'Mr Ja. Ferguson is a wyss and grave man: I wiss he wer joyned in attendance upon the King' (ibid., 3.559). In 1655 Ferguson was temporarily drawn towards proposals for unity which Baillie opposed, but the collaboration quickly resumed. Ferguson's practice of praying for the king made him vulnerable: 'Mr James Fergusone and Mr Alexander Nisbet, by the malevolence of some of their neighbours, were sorely persecute, and chased some weeks from their flocks, and with very much adoe obtained some forbearance of the Generall. How long we shall be spared we cannot tell. (ibid., 3.281-2)' At Edinburgh on 9 August 1655 Ferguson married Jean Inglis (died 1687). They had two sons, James and Hew, and a daughter, Mary. Robert Wodrow's father reported that according to Jean, 'ordinarily on the Friday at twelve of the clock, Mr Ferguson took his leave of her, and shutt himself up, and none had access to him till after the sabbath was over' (Wodrow, 'Analecta', 1.66). 
On 11 November 1658 Baillie reported from Glasgow that Ferguson 'was earnestly desired by the town'; he had been offered 'both a new church and a new stipend, as good as any other... most of the session was readie to have accepted it'; but Patrick Gillespie had blocked the proposal ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.383). Again in April 1659, 'Mr George Young's congregation did unanimously draw a petition to the session for a call to Mr James Fergusson' (ibid., 3.394) as Young's replacement, but a politically hostile session rejected the petition as disorderly. In 1660 Earl Alexander and his son wrote to the synod of Glasgow and Ayr to complain against its decision of 3 October summoning Ferguson to take up the chair of divinity at Glasgow; the appointment was delayed until new political conditions made it impossible. Lord Eglintoun was able to keep his minister at Kilwinning, but his power over his dependant had its limits. Ferguson was not afraid to rebuke the members and friends of his patron's family for ungodly speeches or actions, but complained also of their hard dealings: 'Ah! for unfaithfulness! Great folk are hard to deal with' (Wodrow, 'Analecta', 1.66). When the Second Anglo-Dutch War began a proclamation from London of 3 May 1665 ordered a fast; the presbyterian ministers observed the day on their own terms. For Ferguson in his sermon at Kilwinning, the need for a fast stemmed from 'threatened judgements' provoked by the 'contempt of the gospel', displayed in 'rough handling of the messengers of Christ, laying desolate multitudes of congregations, contempt of the sabbath, atheistical contempt of ordinances, gross profanity of all kinds'; God had already shown his disapproval, in signs which included the plague then afflicting England (Wodrow, 'Sufferings', 1.421). 
According to Wodrow, Ferguson was 'deeply afflicted with the fall of that worthy company at Pentland'; when visited by Chancellor Cunningham he was openly critical of the 'turning out so many minsters, by the act of Glasgow, for nonconformity' (Wodrow, 'Analecta', 3.43). His work 'A Brief Refutation of the Doctrine of Erastianism' maintained that 'there is a government appointed by Christ in his Church distinct from the civil Government' which was 'in the hands of Christ's own officers' (p. 3), who had exclusive jurisdiction in matters spiritual. It is reported that just before his death Ferguson renounced his earlier political activism on the side of the resolutioners. He died on 13 March 1667. His widow, Jean, died on 4 January 1687. 


@@@@@


doc= 9319


Ferguson, James (d. 1705), army officer, was the third son of William Ferguson of Badifurrow, Aberdeenshire, who represented Inverurie in the first Scottish parliament after the Restoration, remembered for its demonstrative loyalty as the 'drunken parliament'. James's elder brother was Robert Ferguson (d. 1714), 'the Plotter'. Nothing is known of Ferguson's early life. 
Ferguson appears to have entered one of the three Scottish regiments of the Anglo-Dutch brigade in the service of the Dutch republic, probably as a gentleman volunteer, some time during the reign of Charles II; he is either synonymous with, or closely related to, the James Ferguson recorded as a general clerk to the Dutch council of state in 1663. His first commission, that of quartermaster in Colonel Macdonald's battalion of the brigade, was dated 12 June 1677; he subsequently rose to the rank of ensign in September 1678, and lieutenant in February 1682. His battalion was one of those brought over to England in 1685 at the time of Monmouth's rebellion in which his brother Robert played a prominent role. He obtained a captain's commission in 1687 and in the following year sailed with Charles Gerard, first earl of Macclesfield, 'and several gentlemen of quality' who landed with William of Orange at Torbay ('Dartmouth MSS', 1.180). His regiment, Balfour's (later Lauder's), was one of those first landed, and soon after dispatched from London to Leith under General Hugh Mackay of Scourie. The battle at Killicrankie, where he is said to have been taken prisoner, left Ferguson a regimental major, and in March 1690 he was dispatched by Mackay at the head of 600 men to reduce the Western Isles, a service he accomplished satisfactorily with the aid of the Glasgow authorities and the co-operation of Captain Pottinger of the 'Dartmouth' frigate. Mackay described him as 'a resolute, well-affected officer', in whose discretion and diligence he had full reliance (Ferguson, 'Scots Brigade', 2.15-16). 
In 1692 Ferguson was back in the Low Countries and was present with his regiment (now Lauder's) at the battle of Steenkerke. A few days later, on 1 August 1692, he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of Monro's regiment, which at that time was in Dutch pay. Ferguson led the regiment at the battle of Landen and at the siege of Namur. On 25 August 1693 he was appointed to the colonelcy, which he held until his death. Owing to the reductions of the English brigade in Flanders after the treaty of Ryswick in 1697 the regiment was retained in the Netherlands, along with the Scottish regiments of Lord Strathnaver (John Sutherland, formerly Gordon, later sixteenth earl of Sutherland) and James Hamilton. In December 1700 Ferguson's regiment was finally transferred to the British service and was brought to Scotland. Ferguson had meanwhile married Helen, daughter of James Drummond of Cultmalindie, Perthshire, with whom he had a son and daughter but was left a widower. He had also acquired the estates of Balmakelly and Kirtonhill, on the Kincardineshire bank of the North Esk. 
Ferguson went with his regiment to the Netherlands under Marlborough in 1702. In 1703 he was in command of the garrison at Bois-le-Duc ('s-Hertogenbosch) with the rank of brigadier-general, but experienced problems with the acceptance of his orders by the English commander of Fort St Andrew. Throughout 1703 he had to fight to keep his garrison complete. One of the garrison's regiments was diverted to the defence of Bergen-op-Zoom in December, which prompted Ferguson to complain of the 'unkindness' of his overall commander, John Cutts, first Baron Cutts of Gowran ('Frankland-Russell-Astley MSS', 147). He was soon satisfied upon receiving private instructions from Cutts not to allow any British troops to depart from his garrison. A regiment from his garrison was, however, ordered to Bergen-op-Zoom in January 1704. In the campaign of 1704 he commanded a brigade which led the attack on the heights of Schellenberg, and at Blenheim shared with Rowe's brigade the protracted fighting round the strongest part of the enemy's position. About Christmas the same year Ferguson married his second wife, Hester Elizabeth, daughter of Abraham Hibelet, pastor of the Walloon church at Bois-le-Duc. In the campaign of 1705 he had a brigade at the forcing of the enemy's lines in Brabant, and afterwards commanded, with the rank of major-general, at Bois-le-Duc, where he died very suddenly -- legend has it by poisoning -- on 22 October. He was buried in the chancel of St Jan's Kerk, Bois-le-Duc, where a small tablet was set to his memory. 
According to one account Ferguson 'served in four reigns, still maintaining the character of a brave, valiant, and prudent officer, until his fame raising envy in the breast of the then commanding officer, he was cut off by very sinister means' (Snyder, 1.46). Contemporary writers are discreetly silent on this ugly story, but all agree in regretting his loss as a brave and experienced officer. At the time of his death he had just returned from The Hague, where Marlborough had promised 'to declare him major-general so soon as he got to London, but left him here this winter to command in chief all the British troops as well horse and foot on this side' (Ferguson, 'Scots Brigade', 1.513-14 n. 1). His value to William of Orange, and Marlborough, in Flanders can be gauged by the statement of one of his officers that 'he was by much the best officer we had in all the British troops. He was brave, knew the service; had great and long experience... and the Duke was so sensible of this that when he had anything difficult or of importance to do he constantly employed him, even out of his turn. ('Portland MSS', 4.265)' Ferguson's second wife survived him and married Captain Hendrik Chombach. With her Ferguson had a daughter, who in 1730 married M. Gerard Vink, advocate, Bois-le-Duc. Ferguson's son, James, succeeded him and died in 1777, having sold the estates of Balmakelly and Kirtonhill in order to buy those of Kinmundy and Coynach, Aberdeenshire. In 1888 the representative of the family, James Ferguson of Kinmundy FRS, published a short biography of James Ferguson based on family sources and including a portrait, which forms part of his 'Two Scottish Soldiers' (Aberdeen, 1888). 


@@@@@


doc= 9320


Ferguson, James (1710-1776), lecturer on natural philosophy and inventor of scientific instruments, was born on 25 April 1710 at Core of Mayen, Rothiemay, Banffshire, the second of at least six children of John Ferguson, a farmworker renting a smallholding, and his wife, Elspeth Lobban. Ferguson learned to read by listening to his father teach his elder brother the catechism. His father was 'agreeably surprised' (Henderson, 7), and taught him to write. Later he spent three months at Keith grammar school. 
Ferguson's interest in mechanics began at about the age of seven or eight, when he saw his father use a lever to raise the decayed roof of their cottage. He worked out and wrote an account of the principle of mechanical advantage, and subsequently learned that his discovery was correct, though not original. This encouraged his quest for scientific knowledge. Working as a shepherd, he studied the stars at night and during the day made models of mills and spinning wheels. Aged about fourteen, he worked for a local farmer, James Glashan, who encouraged his interest in the stars. Ferguson charted the stars' apparent positions by holding a taut thread at arm's length and moving beads along until they obscured particular stars, and then laid the thread on paper and marked their positions. He learned that the world was round, and his employer showed him a map and gave him the time and implements to copy it. A local gentleman, Thomas Grant, was impressed, and offered Ferguson a position in his household where he could be taught by Alexander Cantley, the butler, a self-taught polymath. Unfortunately Cantley left, and Ferguson returned home. There he made a globe, the first he had ever seen, from a description in a book given to him by Cantley. Thereafter he followed various employments, educating himself wherever possible. He constructed his first clock out of wood, and made a watch using whalebone as the spring. 
Aged about twenty-three, Ferguson worked for Sir James Dunbar of Durn and maintained his clocks. He painted two spheres on the gateway as terrestrial and celestial globes, with their poles pointed towards the celestial pole so that they could be used as sundials and indicate which parts of the earth were in daylight. He showed skill in copying some of Sir James's paintings, and William Baird, a relation of Sir James, invited him to use his library and taught him to paint with Indian ink. Ferguson's first portrait was a miniature of Baird (1733). Still in his early twenties, Ferguson then went to Edinburgh with Sir James's sister, Lady Dipple, for whom he had drawn embroidery patterns, to seek an apprenticeship with a professional artist in oils. He found that it would be too long and expensive to complete, so started to earn his living by limning, painting portraits in Indian ink. 
After about two years Ferguson 'took a violent inclination to study anatomy, surgery and physic' (Henderson, 37). He went home intending to practise as a doctor, but often was not paid. About two years later he returned to limning, and on 31 May 1739 he married Isabella Wilson (1719-1773). His interest in astronomy revived and he invented a cardboard instrument for showing the motions and positions of the sun and moon, including, after tedious calculation, the dates when the moon's path crossed the earth's orbital plane and hence the dates of solar and lunar eclipses. He called his instrument the astronomical rotula and sent a description to Professor Colin Maclaurin, who suggested a slight correction and volunteered to organize a subscription to enable it to be engraved and published. Maclaurin showed him an orrery, a working model of the earth-moon system's orbit around the sun. Without seeing its mechanism Ferguson constructed his own model, and Maclaurin asked him to demonstrate and lecture on this to his students. This was the first of Ferguson's many lectures for which he was to become famous. 
In May 1743 Ferguson went to London intending to become a mathematics teacher. When he revealed to his patron, the Rt Hon. Stephen Poyntz, that he was married and could not afford an apprenticeship, Poyntz commissioned miniatures of his own family so that he could recommend Ferguson as a limner. Thus he found as much work as he could manage. His thoughts returned to celestial mechanics, and he concluded that the moon's path is always concave to the sun. He devised a machine, which he called the 'trajectorium lunare', to show this, and demonstrated it to the Royal Society on 26 April 1744. He used his demonstration models at his advertised lectures at his lodgings, and his scientific reputation grew. 
Ferguson's first published book was 'The Use of a New Orrery, Made and Described by James Ferguson' (1746). Minor works followed. He continued to paint miniatures and design instruments, and he lectured widely throughout the country on natural philosophy. In October 1755 he bought copperplates and moulds for globes from John Senex, and established a business in the Strand. His first major book, 'Astronomy Explained upon Sir Isaac Newton's Principles and Made Easy for Those Who Have Not Studied Mathematics' (1756), met with immediate success. The title epitomized his approach: in the preface to 'Lectures on Select Subjects' (1760) he wrote 'I had a view... to avoid all superfluity, and to render everything as plain and intelligible as I thought the subject would admit of'. 
He sold his business to Benjamin Martin in 1757 and returned to writing and lecturing, and incorporated the various current astronomical events into his lectures. In 1761 George III granted him an annual pension of $50. 
In early 1763 Ferguson applied unsuccessfully to become clerk to the Royal Society, but later that year he was elected a fellow, with the remarkable exemption that on account of his singular merit and circumstances he should be excused the usual admission fee and the annual contribution of $2 12's'. 6died On 1 April 1764, from Liverpool, he observed the eclipse of the sun. To the Royal Society he described 'little tremulous bright specks' ('Observations on the eclipse of the sun', 'PTRS', 54, 1764, 112), which he conjectured were due to valleys in the limb of the moon. This anticipated the identification of Baily's beads in 1836. 
Ferguson's later works included 'Tables and Tracts' (1767), 'The Young Gentleman and Lady's Astronomy' (1768), 'An Introduction to Electricity' (1770), and 'Select Mechanical Exercises' (1773). His last major book was 'The Art of Drawing in Perspective' (1775). His understanding of mathematics was rudimentary. A contemporary wrote 'He often told me that he could never demonstrate one proposition in 'Euclid's Elements'; his constant method being to satisfy himself, as to the truth... with a measurement by scale and compasses' (Hutton, 1.509). His ability to simplify the apparently complex, combined with his remarkable skills as a draughtsman, made his books commercially viable until the middle of the nineteenth century. His works were so authoritative that several were used as sources for the first edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1771). 
Although Ferguson was never a commercial clockmaker he designed, among others, a 'three-wheeled' clock. This was a modification of Benjamin Franklin's own clock. Ferguson wrote of Franklin as someone 'whom I rejoice to call my friend' (Millburn, 193). Boswell records Ferguson as 'The self taught Philosopher' when he and Dr Johnson met him in 1769 (ibid., 234); in 1776 they became neighbours in Bolt Court. Ferguson was described about 1774 as having 'a very sedate appearance, face and brow a little wrinkled; he wore a large full stuff wig, which gave him a venerable look, and made him appear older than he really was' (Henderson, 463). 
Ferguson was said to be 'unhappy in his family connections' (Henderson, 462), and he legally separated from Isabella on 23 January 1773. Their first child, Agnes ('b'. 1745), was as a young woman described by a contemporary, John Nichols, as having 'elegance of her person... and... philosophical knowledge worthy of such a father' (Millburn, 153). She mysteriously disappeared when nearly eighteen. Spurious reports that she had run away with a nobleman and died in agony appeared in many publications, but these were never substantiated. Ferguson had three further children. His eldest son, James ('b'. 1748), was apprenticed to a scientific instrument maker, and Ferguson kept the wheelworks of his orreries secret for his benefit; unfortunately he died aged twenty-five. His other two sons, Murdoch ('b'. 1752) and John ('b'. 1759), received medical educations. Murdoch broke his first apprenticeship but eventually qualified as an army surgeon. John never completed his studies because his father's death left him with sufficient means so as not to have to work. 
During his life Ferguson sent thousands of pounds to an Edinburgh lawyer, John Mackenzie, to be confidentially invested. This money probably came from thrift rather than a legacy as often claimed. On his death on 16 November 1776, at his home, 4 Bolt Court, Fleet Street, London, of 'gravel and other ailments' (Henderson, 448), many were surprised at the size of his estate. Contemporary reports put this at the then considerable sum of $6000 (Millburn, 253). He was buried on 23 November, near his wife and son James, in the old Marylebone churchyard, Marylebone High Street, Westminster. 


